The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Record of Study in Aboriginal American
Languages, by Daniel G. Brinton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Record of Study in Aboriginal American Languages

Author: Daniel G. Brinton

Release Date: February 22, 2010 [EBook #31351]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RECORD OF STUDY--ABOR. AMER. LANG. ***




Produced by Julia Miller and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)





Transcriber's Note

A number of typographical errors have been maintained in this version of
this book. They have been marked with a [TN-#], which refers to a
description in the complete list found at the end of the text.




  A RECORD OF STUDY

  IN

  ABORIGINAL AMERICAN LANGUAGES

  BY

  DANIEL G. BRINTON, A.M., M.D., LL.D., Sc.D.,

  _Professor of American Archaeology and Linguistics in the
  University of Pennsylvania_


  PRINTED FOR PRIVATE DISTRIBUTION
  MEDIA, PA., 1898




  PRESS OF
  THE NEW ERA PRINTING COMPANY,
  LANCASTER, PA.




PREFATORY.


If this review of my own work in the field of American Linguistics
requires an apology, I may say that the preparation of it was suggested
to me by my late friend, Mr. James Constantine Pilling, whose admirable
volumes on the bibliography of American Aboriginal Languages are
familiar to all students. He had experienced the difficulty of
cataloguing the articles of writers whose contributions extend over many
years, and have been published in different journals, proceedings of
societies and volumes, and was impressed with the advantage of an
analytical list composed by the author himself.

With this in view, I have arranged the present survey of my writings in
this branch of science, extending over a period of two score years. They
are grouped geographically, and sufficient reference to their contents
subjoined to indicate their aims and conclusions.

  D. G. BRINTON.

  MEDIA, PENNA., November, 1898.




I. GENERAL ARTICLES AND WORKS.


     1. The Philosophic Grammar of American Languages as set forth by
     Wilhelm von Humboldt; with the translation of an unpublished Memoir
     by him on the American Verb. pp. 51. In _Proceedings_ of the
     American Philosophical Society, 1885.

     2. On Polysynthesis and Incorporation as characteristics of
     American Languages. pp. 41. In _Proceedings_ of the American
     Philosophical Society, 1885.

     3. Characteristics of American Languages. _American Antiquarian_,
     January, 1894.

     4. On certain morphologic traits in American Languages. _American
     Antiquarian_, October, 1894.

     5. On various supposed relations between the American and Asiatic
     Races. _Memoirs_ of the International Congress of Anthropology,
     1893.

     6. The Present Status of American Linguistics. _Memoirs_ of the
     International Congress of Anthropology, 1893.

     7. American Languages and why we should Study them. An address
     delivered before the Pennsylvania Historical Society. pp. 23. In
     _Pennsylvania Magazine of History and Biography_, 1885.

     8. The Rate of Change in American Languages. In _Science_, Vol. X.,
     1887.

     9. Traits of Primitive Speech, illustrated from American languages.
     In _Proceedings_ of the American Association for the Advancement of
     Science, August, 1888.

     10. The Language of Palaeolithic Man. pp. 14. In _Proceedings_ of
     the American Philosophical Society, October, 1888.

     11. The American Race: A Linguistic Classification and Ethnographic
     Description of the Native Tribes of North and South America. pp.
     392. New York, 1891.

     12. The Standard Dictionary (Indian Words in). New York, 1894.

     13. Aboriginal American Authors and their Productions, especially
     those in the Native Languages. pp. 63. Philadelphia, 1883.

     14. American Aboriginal Poetry. pp. 21. In _Proceedings_ of the
     Numismatic and Antiquarian Society of Philadelphia, 1883.

     15. The Conception of Love in some American Languages. pp. 18. In
     _Proceedings_ of the American Philosophical Society, November,
     1886.

The earlier numbers, (1-4,) in the above list are occupied with the
inquiry whether the native American languages, as a group, have peculiar
morphological traits, which justify their classification as one of the
great divisions of human speech. In this question, I have been a
disciple of Wilhelm von Humboldt and Professor H. Steinthal, and have
argued that the phenomenon of Incorporation, in some of its forms, is
markedly present in the vast majority, if not in all, American tongues.
That which has been called "polysynthesis" is one of these forms. This
is nothing more than a familiar, nigh universal, grammatic process
carried to an extreme degree. It is the _dvanda_ of the Sanscrit
grammarians, an excellent study of which has recently appeared from the
pen of Dr. H. C. Mueller.[6-1] In its higher forms Incorporation
subordinates the nominal concepts of the phrase to those of time and
relation, which are essentially verbal, and this often where the true
verbal concept, that of abstract action, is lacking, and the verb itself
is in reality a noun in the possessive relation.[6-2][TN-1]

Even extremely simple American languages, such as the Zoque, display the
tendency to energetic synthesis;[6-3] while many of them carry the
incorporative quality to such a degree that the sentence becomes one
word, a good example of which is the Micmac.[6-4] Some American and
French writers have misunderstood the nature of this trait, and have
denied it; but the student who acquaints himself thoroughly with the
authors above mentioned, will not be misled.[6-5]

The MS. of the Memoir by W. von Humboldt I obtained from the Berlin
Library. Even Professor Steinthal, in his edition of Humboldt's
linguistic Works, had overlooked it. It is a highly philosophic analysis
of the verb, as it occurs in the languages of the following tribes:
Abipones, Achaguas, Betoyas, Caribs, Huastecas, Lules, Maipures, Mayas,
Mbayas, Mexicans (Nahuas), Mixtecas, Mocovis, Omaguas, Otomis,
Tamanacas, Totonacos, Tupis, Yaruros.

In (5) I have examined the various alleged affiliations between American
and Asiatic tongues, and showed they are wholly unfounded.

In (7) I have entered a plea for more attention to American languages.
Not only for ethnographic purposes are they useful, but their primitive
aspects and methods of presenting ideas enable us to solve psychological
and grammatic problems more completely than other tongues.

In support of this, in (9) and (10), I endeavor to outline what must
have been the morphology of the language which man spoke when in the
very beginning of his existence as man; a speech of marvelous
simplicity, but adapted to his wants.

The volume, of nearly four hundred pages, entitled _The American Race_
(No. 11) was the first attempt at a systematic classification of all the
tribes of America, North, Central and South, on the basis of language.
It defines seventy-nine linguistic stocks in North America and sixty-one
in South America. The number of tribes named and referred to these
stocks is nearly sixteen hundred. Several of these stocks are defined
for the first time, such as the Tequistlatecan of Mexico, the Matagalpan
of Central America, and in South America the Timote, the Paniquita, the
Cocanuca, the Mocoa, the Betoya, the Lamuca, etc.

In the article (8) I show that, contrary to an oft expressed opinion,
the rate of change in these unwritten tongues is remarkably slow, not
greater than in cultivated languages.

When the publishers of the _Standard Dictionary_ (New York, 1895) were
preparing that well-known work, they placed in my hands all the words in
the English language derived from the native tongues of America.
Although the etymology of some of them remains obscure, I believe the
derivation of all positively traced will be found presented.

I early became convinced that the translations of books of devotion,
etc., into the native tongues gave no correct impression of those
tongues. The ideas conveyed were foreign to the primitive mind, and the
translations were generally by foreigners who had not completely
mastered the idioms. Hence, the only true reflex of a language is in the
words and thoughts of the natives themselves, in their indigenous
literature.

This led me to project the publication of a series of volumes containing
writings, preferably on secular subjects, by natives in their own
languages. That there is such a literature I undertook to show in (13)
and (14). The former was the expansion of a paper presented to the
International Congress of Americanists at Copenhagen. It contains a list
of native American authors and notices of a number of their works
composed in their own tongues. That on "aboriginal poetry" vindicates
for native American bards a respectable position among lyric and
dramatic composers.

That some of the central subjects of poetic literature--the emotions of
love and friendship--exist, and often in no low form of sentiment, among
these natives, I have undertaken to show by an analysis of a number of
terms expressing these feelings in five leading American linguistic
stocks, the Algonkin, Nahuatl, Maya, Quechua and Tupi (No. 15).

Following out this plan, I began in 1882 the publication of "The Library
of Aboriginal American Literature." Each volume was to contain a work
composed in a native tongue by a native; but those based upon foreign
inspiration, such as sermons, etc., were to be excluded. Each was to be
translated and edited with sufficient completeness to make it available
for the general student.

Of this "Library" eight volumes were issued, the first in 1882, the
eighth in 1890, when I ceased the publication, not from lack of
material, but because I had retired in 1887 from my connection with the
publishing business and became more engaged in general anthropological
pursuits.

The "Library," as issued, contains the following numbers:

No. I. The Chronicles of the Mayas. Edited by Daniel G. Brinton, M. D.
279 pages. 1882.

    This volume contains five brief chronicles in the Maya language,
      written shortly after the conquest, and carrying the history of
      that people back many centuries. To these is added a history of
      the conquest, written in his native tongue, by a Maya chief, in
      1562. This interesting account has been published separately, with
      an excellent grammatical and lexical analysis by the Count de
      Charencey, under the title _Chrestomathie Maya, d'apres la
      Chronique de Chac-Xulub-Chen_ (Paris, 1891). The texts are
      preceded by an introduction on the history of the Mayas, their
      language, calendar, numerical system, etc.; and a vocabulary is
      added at the close.

No. II. The Iroquois Book of Rites. Edited by Horatio Hale. 222 pages.
1883.

    This work contains, in the Mohawk and Onondaga languages, the
      speeches, songs and rituals with which a deceased chief was
      lamented and his successor installed in office. The introduction
      treats of the ethnology and history of the Huron-Iroquois. A map,
      notes and glossary complete the work.

No. III. The Comedy-Ballet of Gueegueence. Edited by Daniel G. Brinton, M.
D. 146 pages. 1883.

    A curious and unique specimen of the native comic dances, with
      dialogues, called _bailes_, formerly common in Central America. It
      is in the mixed Nahuatl-Spanish jargon of Nicaragua, and shows
      distinctive features of native authorship. The introduction treats
      of the ethnology of Nicaragua, and the local dialects, musical
      instruments and dramatic representations. A map and a number of
      illustrations are added.

No. IV. A Migration Legend of the Creek Indians. Edited by A. S.
Gatschet. 251 pages. 1884.

    Offers a survey of the ethnology of the native tribes of the Gulf
      States. The legend told to Governor Oglethorpe, in 1732, by the
      Creeks, is given in the original.

No. V. The Lenape and Their Legends. Edited by Daniel G. Brinton, M. D.
262 pages. 1885.

    Contains the complete text and symbols, 184 in number, of the "Walum
      Olum," or "Red Score," of the Delaware Indians, with the full
      original text, and a new translation, notes and vocabulary. A
      lengthy introduction treats of the Lenape or Delawares, their
      history, customs, myths, language, etc., with numerous references
      to other tribes of the great Algonkin stock.

No. VI. The Annals of the Cakchiquels. Edited by Daniel G. Brinton, M.
D. 234 pages. 1885.

    The original text, written about 1562, by a member of the reigning
      family, with a translation, introduction, notes and vocabulary.
      This may be considered one of the most important historical
      documents relating to the pre-Columbian period.

No. VII. Ancient Nahuatl Poetry. Edited by Daniel G. Brinton, M. D. 176
pages. 1890.

    In this volume twenty-seven songs in the original Nahuatl are
      presented, with translation, notes, vocabulary, etc. Many of them
      date from before the conquest and none later than the sixteenth
      century. The introduction describes the ancient poetry of the
      Nahuas in all its bearings.

No. VIII. Rig Veda Americanus. Edited by Daniel G. Brinton, M. D. 95
pages. 1890.

    Presents the original text with a gloss in Nahuatl of twenty sacred
      chants of the ancient Mexicans. They are preserved in the Madrid
      MSS. of Father Sahagun, and date anterior to the Conquest. A
      paraphrase, notes and a vocabulary are added, and a number of
      curious illustrations are reproduced from the original.

The edition of each of these was about 400 copies, except No. II., of
which 900 were printed. A complete set is now difficult to obtain.


II. NORTH AMERICAN LANGUAGES NORTH OF MEXICO.

     16. Lenape-English Dictionary. From an anonymous MS. in the
     archives of the Moravian Church at Bethlehem, Pa., with additions,
     by Daniel G. Brinton and Rev. Albert Seqaqkind Anthony, 4to, pp.
     326. Philadelphia, 1888. Published by the Historical Society of
     Pennsylvania.

     17. The Lenape and their Legends; with the complete Text and
     Symbols of the Walum Olum, a new Translation and an Inquiry into
     its Authenticity. pp. 262. Illustrated. Philadelphia, 1885.

     18. Lenape Conversations. In _American Journal of Folk-Lore_, Vol.
     I.

     19. The Shawnees and their Migrations. In _American Historical
     Magazine_, January, 1866.

     20. The Chief God of the Algonkins, in his Character as a Cheat and
     Liar. In the _American Antiquarian_, May, 1885.

     21. On certain supposed Nanticoke words shown to be of African
     origin. _American Antiquarian_, 1887.

     22. Vocabulary of the Nanticoke dialect. Proceedings of the
     _American Philosophical Society_, November, 1893.

     23. The Natchez of Louisiana, an Offshoot of the Civilized Nations
     of Central America. In the _Historical Magazine_ (New York), for
     January, 1867.

     24. On the Language of the Natchez. In _Proceedings_ of the
     American Philosophical Society, December, 1873.

     25. Grammar of the Choctaw Language. By the Rev. Cyrus Byington.
     Edited from the original MS. by D. G. Brinton. pp. 56. In
     _Proceedings_ of the American Philosophical Society, 1870.

     26. Contributions to a Grammer[TN-2] of the Muskokee Language. In
     _Proceedings_ of the American Philosophical Society, March, 1870.

     27. The Floridian Peninsula, its Literary History, Indian Tribes,
     and Antiquities. 8vo, cloth, pp. 202. Philadelphia, 1859.

     28. The Taensa Grammar and Dictionary. A deception exposed. In
     _American Antiquarian_, March, 1885.

     29. The Taensa Grammar and Dictionary. A reply to M. Lucien Adam.
     In _American Antiquarian_, September, 1885.

Within the area of the United States, my articles have been confined
practically to two groups, the Algonkian dialects and those spoken in
Florida and the Gulf States.

The Delaware Indians or Lenni Lenape, who occupied the valley of the
Delaware River and the land east of it to the ocean, although long in
peaceful association with the white settlers, were never studied,
linguistically, except by the Moravian missionaries, in the latter half
of the eighteenth century. In examining the MSS. in the Moravian Church
at Bethlehem, Pa., I discovered a MS. dictionary of their tongue,
containing about 4,300 words. This I had carefully copied, and induced a
native Delaware, an educated clergyman of the English Church, the Rev.
Albert Seqaqkind Anthony, to pass a fortnight at my house, going over it
with me, word by word. The MS. thus revised, was published by the
Historical Society of Pennsylvania as the first number of its "Student
Series." Various interesting items illustrating the beliefs and customs
of the Delawares of the present day, communicated to me by Mr. Anthony,
I collected into the article (18), "Lenape Conversations."

A few years previous I had succeeded in obtaining the singular MS.
referred to by C. S. Rafinesque, in 1836, as the "Painted Record" of the
Delaware Indians, the _Walum Olum,_ properly, "painted" or "red"
"score." This I reproduced in No. 17, with the accessories mentioned
above (p. 9). There is no doubt of the general authenticity of this
record. A corroboration of it was sent me in March of this year (1898)
by Dr. A. S. Gatschet, of the U. S. Bureau of American Ethnology. He
writes:

"When the Delaware delegate, Johnnycake, was here for the last time, he
told Mr. J. B. N. Hewitt (also attached to the Bureau) that some of the
Lenape Indians, near Nowata, Cherokee Nation, had seen your publication
on the _Walum Olum_. They belong to the oldest men of that tribe, and
stated that the text was all right, and that they remembered the songs
from their youth. They could give many additions, and said that a few
passages were in the wrong order and had to be placed elsewhere to give
them the full meaning they were intended to convey."

This was cheering confirmation to me that my labor had not been expended
on a fantastic composition of Rafinesque's, as some have been inclined
to think.

Some years ago I contemplated the publication of a work through the
American Folklore Society on Algonquian Mythology. Various reasons led
me to lay it aside. Part of the material was introduced into my works on
the general mythology of the American tribes,[12-1] and one fragment
appeared in (20) in which I offered a psychological explanation of the
character of the hero god Gluscap, so prominent in the legends of the
Micmacs and Abenakis. At that time I was not acquainted with the
ingenious suggestions on the etymology of the name subsequently
advocated by the native author, Joseph Nicolar.[12-2]

The Nanticokes lived on the eastern shore of Chesapeake Bay. In
collecting their vocabularies I found one alleged to have been obtained
from them, but differing completely from the Algonquian dialects. It had
been partly printed by Dr. Benjamin Smith Barton,[12-3] but remained a
puzzle. My article (21) proves that it belongs to the Mandingo language
of western Africa. It was doubtless obtained from some negro slave.

The Nanticoke vocabulary (22) was secured in 1792 for Mr. Thomas
Jefferson. I give the related terms in the other dialects of the stock.

The Natchez are an interesting people of whose rites we have strange
accounts from the early French explorers. Their language is a small
stock by itself. At one time I thought it related to the Maya (23); but
this is probably an error. In (24) I printed a vocabulary of words
obtained for me from a native, together with some slight grammatical
material.

The Taensas were a branch of the Natchez, speaking the same tongue; but
in 1881, J. Parisot presented an article of half a dozen pages to the
International Congress of Americanists on what he called the "Hastri or
Taensa Language," totally different from the Natchez.[13-1] Subsequently
this was expanded to a volume, and appeared as Tome IX. of the
_Bibliotheque Linguistique Americaine_ (Maisonneuve et Cie, Paris)
introduced by the well-known scholars Lucien Adam and Albert S.
Gatschet.

It passed unchallenged until 1885, when I proved conclusively that the
whole was a forgery of some young seminarists, and had been palmed off
on these unsuspecting scientists out of a pleasure in mystification
(28). As I have given the details elsewhere, I shall not repeat
them.[13-2]

The works of Pareja in the Timuquana tongue of Florida were unknown to
linguists when, in 1859, I published the little volume (27). In it,
however, I called attention to them, and from the scanty references in
Hervas expressed the opinion that it might be related to the Carib. This
was an error, as no such affinity appears on the fuller examination of
the tongue now possible, since Pareja's grammar has been
republished,[13-3] and texts of the Timuquana have been reproduced by
Buckingham Smith.[13-4] The language stands alone, an independent stock.


III. MEXICAN AND CENTRAL AMERICAN LANGUAGES.

     30. The Native Calendar of Central America and Mexico. In
     _Proceedings_ of the American Philosophical Society, November,
     1893.

     31. The Lineal Measures of the Semi-civilized Nations of Mexico and
     Central America. In _Proceedings_ of the American Philosophical
     Society, January, 1885.

     32. On the Chontallis and Popolucas. In the Compte Rendu du Congres
     des Americanistes, 1890.

     33. The Study of the Nahuatl Language. In the _American
     Antiquarian_, January, 1886.

     34. The Written Language of the Ancient Mexicans. In _Transactions_
     of the American Philosophical Society, 1889.

     35. The ancient phonetic alphabet of Yucatan. In _American
     Historical Magazine_, 1870.

     36. The Graphic System and ancient Records of the Mayas. In
     _Contributions to American Ethnology_, Vol. V., Washington, 1882.

     37. The Phonetic Elements in the Graphic Systems of the Mayas and
     Mexicans. In _American Antiquarian_, November, 1886.

     38. On the "Ikonomatic" Method of Phonetic Writing. In
     _Proceedings_ of the American Philosophical Society, 1886.

     39. A Primer of Mayan Hieroglyphics. pp. 152. Boston, 1895.

     40. What the Mayan Inscriptions tell about. In _American
     Archaeologist_, 1894.

     41. On the "Stone of the Giants" near Orizaba, Mexico. In
     _Proceedings_ of the Numismatic and Antiquarian Society of
     Philadelphia, 1889.

     42. On the Nahuatl version of Sahagun's Historia de la Nueva
     Espana, at Madrid. In the _Compte Rendu_ of the Congres
     International des Americanistes, 7^eme Session.

     43. On the words "Anahuac" and "Nahuatl." In _American
     Antiquarian_, November, 1893.

     44. On the so-called Alagueilac Language of Guatemala. In
     _Proceedings_ of the American Philosophical Society, November,
     1887.

     45. The Gueegueence; a Comedy Ballet in the Nahuatl-Spanish Dialect
     of Nicaragua. pp 94. Philadelphia, 1883.

     46. Ancient Nahuatl Poetry; Containing the Nahuatl Text of
     Twenty-seven Ancient Mexican Poems; With Translation, Introduction,
     Notes and Vocabulary. pp. 177. 1887.

     47. Rig Veda Americanus. Sacred Songs of the Ancient Mexicans, with
     a Gloss in Nahuatl. With Paraphrase, Notes and Vocabulary. pp. 95.
     Illustrated. Philadelphia, 1890.

     48. A notice of some Manuscripts of Central American Languages. In
     the _American Journal of Science and Arts_ (New Haven), March,
     1869.

     49. The Maya Chronicles. pp. 279. Philadelphia, 1882.

     50. The Books of Chilan Balam, the Prophetic and Historic Records
     of the Mayas of Yucatan. In the _Penn Monthly_, March, 1882.

     51. The Names of the Gods in the Kiche Myths. pp. 38. In
     _Proceedings_ of the American Philosophical Society, 1881.

     52. On the Chane-abal (Four-Language) Tribe and Dialect of Chiapas.
     In the _American Anthropologist_, January, 1888.

     53. A Grammar of the Cakchiquel Language of Guatemala. Translated
     from an Ancient Spanish MS., with an Introduction and numerous
     Additions. pp. 67. In _Proceedings_ of the American Philosophical
     Society, 1884.

     54. The Annals of the Cakchiquels. The Original text, with a
     Translation, Notes and Introduction. pp. 234. Illustrated.
     Philadelphia, 1885.

     55. On some Affinities of the Otomi and Tinne Stocks. International
     Congress of Americanists, 1894.

     56. Observations on the Chinantec Language of Mexico and the
     Mazatec Language and its Affinities. In _Proceedings_ of the
     American Philosophical Society, 1892.

     57. Notes on the Mangue dialect. In _Proceedings_ of the American
     Philosophical Society, November, 1885.

     58. On the Xinca Indians of Guatemala. In _Proceedings_ of the
     American Philosophical Society, October, 1884.

     59. The Ethnic Affinities of the Guetares of Costa Rica. In
     _Proceedings_ of the American Philosophical Society, December,
     1897.

     60. On the Matagalpan Linguistic Stock of Central America. In
     _Proceedings_ of the American Philosophical Society, December,
     1895.

     61. Some Vocabularies from the Mosquito Coast. In _Proceedings_ of
     the American Philosophical Society, March, 1891.

The _Popol Vuh_, or "sacred book" of the Quiches of Guatemala was
published by the Abbe Brasseur in 1861. The study (51) is an effort to
analyze the names of the gods which it contains and to extract their
symbolic significance.

The Chane-abal dialect of Chiapas (52) is a mixed jargon, the component
elements of which I have endeavored to set forth from MS. material
collected by Dr. Berendt.

Another language of Chiapas is the "Chapanecan." In (57) and also in the
introduction to (45) I have shown, from unpublished sources, its close
relationship to the Mangue of Nicaragua.

The Mazatec language of Oaxaca, is examined for the first time in (56)
from material supplied me by Mr. A. Pinart. It is shown to have
relations with the Chapanecan and others with Costa Rican tongues.

The article on the Chinantec, (56) a little-known tongue of Oaxaca, is
an analysis of its forms and a vocabulary from the _Doctrina_ of Father
Barreda and notes of Dr. Berendt.

The Cakchiquels occupied most of the soil of Guatemala at the period of
the Conquest, and their tongue was that chosen to be the "Metropolitan"
language of the diocess. In (53) I gave a translation of an unpublished
grammar of it, the MS. being one in the archives of the American
Philosophical Society. In some respects it is superior to the grammar of
Flores.

The higher culture of the tribes of Central America and Mexico gives a
special interest to the study of their languages, oral and written; for
with some of them we find moderately well-developed methods of recording
ideas.

Much of this culture was intimately connected with their astrological
methods and these with their calendar. This remarkable artificial
computation of time, based on the relations of the numerals 13 and 20
applied to various periods, was practically the same among the Mayas,
Nahuas, Zapotecs, Mixtecs, Chapanecs, Otomis and Tarascos--seven
different linguistic stocks--and unknown elsewhere on the globe. The
study of it (30) is exclusively from its linguistic and symbolic side.

It is strange that nowhere in North America was any measure of weight
known to the natives. Their lineal measures were drawn chiefly from the
proportions of the human body. They are investigated in (31).

Under the names _Chontalli_ and _Popoluca_, both Nahuatl words
indicating "foreigners," ethnographers have included tribes of wholly
diverse lineage. In (32) I have shown that some are Tzentals, others
Tequistlatecas, Ulvas, Mixes, Zapotecs, Nahuas, Lencas and Cakchiquels,
thus doing away with the confusion introduced by these inappropriate
ethnic terms.

No. (33) is an article for the use of students of the Nahuatl language,
mentioning the principal grammars, dictionaries and text-books which are
available.

The numbers (34), (35), (36), (37), (38), (39), (40) and (41), are
devoted to the methods of writing invented by the cultured natives of
Mexico and Central America in order to preserve their literature, such
as it was. The methods are various, that of the Nahuas not being
identical with that of the Mayas. The former is largely phonetic, but in
a peculiar manner, for which I have proposed the term of "ikonomatic,"
the principle being that of the rebus. That this method can be
successfully applied to the decipherment of inscriptions I demonstrated
in the translation of one which is quite celebrated, the "Stone of the
Giants" at Orizaba, Mexico (41). The translation I proposed has been
fully accepted.[16-1]

The "Primer of Mayan Hieroglyphics" (39) was intended as a summary of
what had been achieved up to that time (1895) by students in this
branch. It endeavored, moreover, to render to each student the credit of
his independent work; and as, unfortunately, some, notably in Germany,
had put forward as their own what belonged to others of earlier date,
the book naturally was not very well treated by such reviewers. Its aim,
however, to present a concise and fair statement of what had been
accomplished in its field up to the date of its publication was
generally conceded to have been attained.

Much of the considerable manuscript material which I have accumulated on
the languages of this section of the continent was obtained from the
collections of the late Dr. Carl Hermann Berendt and the Abbe E. C.
Brasseur (de Bourbourg).

When in Spain, in 1888, I found in the Royal Library the MS. of the
earlier portion of Sahagun's "History of New Spain" in Nahuatl. I
described it in (42).

The term "Anahuac" has long been applied to the territory of Mexico. Dr.
E. Seler, of Berlin, published an article asserting that this was an
error, and devoid of native authority. In (43) I pointed out that in
this he was wrong, as early Nahuatl records use it in this sense.

The Alaguilac language of Guatemala, long a puzzle to linguistics, is
shown in (44) to be an isolated dialect of the Nahuatl.

Nos. (45), (46), (47), (49) and (54), have been already mentioned.

The term _Chilan balam_, which may be freely rendered "the inspired
speaker," was the title of certain priests of the native Mayas. Many
records in the Maya tongue, written after the conquests, go by the name
of "the Books of Chilan Balam." They have never been published, but
copies of them, made by Dr. Berendt, are in my possession. Their purpose
and contents were described in (50).

There are reasons for believing that previous to the arrival of the
Cakchiquels in Guatemala its area was largely peopled by Xincas. Of this
little-known stock I present in (58) three extended vocabularies, from
unpublished sources, with comments on the "culture-words."

Some apparent but no decisive affinities between the Otomi of Mexico
and the Tinne or Athapascan dialects are shown in (55); and in (59) the
ancient Guetares of Costa Rica are proved, on linguistic evidence, to
have been members of the Talamancan linguistic stock.

The Matagalpan is an interesting family, first defined in _The American
Race_, and in (60) more fully discussed, as they survive in San
Salvador.

In (61) some unpublished vocabularies from the tribe of the Ramas, on
the Mosquito coast, place them as members of the Changuina stock, most
of whom dwelt on the Isthmus of Panama.


IV. SOUTH AMERICAN AND ANTILLEAN LANGUAGES.

     62. Remarks on the MS. Arawack Vocabulary of Schultz. In
     _Proceedings_ of the American Philosophical Society, 1869.

     63. The Arawack Language of Guiana in its Linguistic and
     Ethnological Relations. In _Transactions_ of the American
     Philosophical Society, 1871.

     64. Studies in South American Languages. pp. 67. In _Proceedings_
     of the American Philosophical Society, 1892.

     65. Some words from the Andagueda dialect of the Choco stock. In
     _Proceedings_ of American Philosophical Society, November, 1897.

     66. Vocabulary of the Noanama dialect of the Choco stock. In
     _Proceedings_ of the American Philosophical Society, November,
     1896.

     67. Note on the Puquina Language of Peru. In _Proceedings_ of the
     American Philosophical Society, November, 1890.

     68. Further Notes on the Betoya dialects. In _Proceedings_ of the
     American Philosophical Society, October, 1892.

     69. The Linguistic Cartography of the Chaco Region. In
     _Proceedings_ of the American Philosophical Society, October, 1898.

     70. Further Notes on Fuegian Languages. In _Proceedings_ of the
     American Philosophical Society, 1892.

     71. On two recent, unclassified Vocabularies from South America. In
     _Proceedings_ of the American Philosophical Society, October, 1898.

The library of the American Philosophical Society contains a MS. copy of
the Arawack vocabulary of the missionary Schultz, the same work,
apparently, which was edited from another copy by M. Lucien Adam in
1882. A study of this MS. led me to discover the identity of the
so-called "Lucayan" of the Bahamas, the language of Cuba, fragments of
which have been presented, and the "Taino" of Haiti, with the Arawack.
They had previously been considered either of Mayan or Caribbean
affinities. The results are presented in (63).

The "Studies" in (64) are ten in number. No. I. is on the Tacana
language and its dialects, and is the only attempt, up to the present
time, to determine the boundaries and character of this tongue. Texts
and a vocabulary in five of its dialects are given. No. II. is on the
Jivaro or Xebero tongue, and is entirely from unpublished sources. A
grammatical sketch, texts and a vocabulary give a moderately complete
material for comparison. No. III. presents the first printed account of
the Cholona language on the River Huallaga, drawn from MSS. in the
British Museum. In No. IV. is a discussion of the relations of the Leca
language spoken on the Rio Mapiri. No. V. contains a text of some length
in the Manao dialect of the Arawack stock, the original MS. being in the
British Museum. The Bonaris are an extinct tribe of the Carib stock. No.
VI. contains the only vocabulary which has been preserved of their
dialect. On a loose sheet in the British Museum, among papers on
Patagonia, I found a short vocabulary in a tongue called "Hongote,"
which I could not locate and hence published it in No. VII. It
subsequently proved to be one of the North Pacific Coast languages. The
same "Study" presents a comparative vocabulary in fourteen Patagonian
dialects, with notes (Tsoneca, Tehuelche, Puelche, Tekennika (Yahgan),
Alikuluf, etc.). In Study No. VIII. are discussed the various dialects
of the Kechua or Quichua tongue of Peru, with an unpublished text from
the Pacasa dialect. No. IX. examines the affinities which have been
noted between the languages of North and South America, especially in
the Mazatec and Costa Rican dialects of the northern Continent. Finally,
No. X. aims to define for the first time the linguistic stock to which
belong the dialects of the Betoyas, Tucanos, Zeonas and other tribes on
the rivers Napo, Meta, Apure and their confluents. Further information
on this stock is given in (68).

The Choco stock extends widely over the northwest angle of the southern
continent. In (65) and (66) I have printed short vocabularies of some of
its dialects secured for me from living natives by Mr. Henry G.
Granger.

The Puquina language of Peru was quite unknown to linguists when, in
1890, I published the article (67) containing material in it from the
extremely rare work of Geronimo de Ore, entitled _Rituale Peruanum_
(Naples, 1607). Since then an extended essay upon it has been written by
M. de la Grasserie.

In the "Further Notes on the Fuegian Languages" (70), I have printed an
Alikuluf vocabulary of 1695, with comparisons, and given a vocabulary of
the idiom of the Onas, pointing out some affinities with the Yahgan.

Few linguistic areas on the continent have been more obscure than that
called "El Gran Chaco," in northern Argentina and southern Bolivia. In
(69) I have mapped the area from 20 deg. to 30 deg. south latitude and 56
deg. to 66 deg. west longitude, defining the boundaries of each of the
seven linguistic stocks which occupied it, to wit, the Ennima, Guaycuru,
Lule, Mataco, Quechua, Samucu and Tupi, with discussions of some uncertain
dialects, as the Calchaqui, Lengua, Querandi, Charua, Payagua.

In (70) recent vocabularies of the Andoa and Cataquina tongues are
examined and their linguistic relations discussed.

Many of the above articles, written previous to 1890, were collected by
me in that year and published in a volume entitled "Essays of an
Americanist" (pp. 489. Philadelphia). For the convenience of those who
may wish to refer to them I add here a complete list of the essays which
it contains.

     PART I.--ETHNOLOGIC AND ARCHAEOLOGIC.--A Review of the Data for the
     Study of the Prehistoric Chronology of America. On Palaeoliths,
     American and others. On the alleged Mongolian Affinities of the
     American Race. The Probable Nationality of the Mound-Builders of
     the Ohio Valley. The Toltecs of Mexico and their Fabulous Empire.

     PART II.--MYTHOLOGY AND FOLK-LORE.--The Sacred Names in the
     Mythology of the Quiches of Guatemala. The Hero-God of the
     Algonkins as a Cheat and Liar. The Journey of the Soul in Egyptian,
     Aryan and American Mythology. The Sacred Symbols of the Cross, the
     Svastika and the Triqetrum in America. The Modern Folk-lore of the
     Natives of Yucatan. The Folk-lore of the Modern Lenape Indians.

     PART III.--GRAPHIC SYSTEMS AND LITERATURE.--The Phonetic Elements
     in the Hieroglyphs of the Mayas and Mexicans. The Ikonomatic Method
     of Phonetic Writing used by the Ancient Mexicans. The Writings and
     Records of the Ancient Mayas of Yucatan. The Books of Chilan
     Balam, the Sacred Volume of the Modern Mayas. Translation of the
     Inscription on "The Stone of The Giants" at Orizaba, Mexico. The
     Poetry of the American Indians, with Numerous Examples.

     PART IV.--LINGUISTIC.--American Aboriginal Languages, and why we
     should study them. Wilhelm von Humboldt's Researches in American
     Languages. Some Characteristics of American Languages. The Earliest
     Form of Human Speech, as Revealed by American Languages. The
     Conception of Love, as expressed in some American Languages. The
     Lineal Measures of the Semi-Civilized Nations of Mexico and Central
     America. The Curious Hoax about the Taensa Language.


FOOTNOTES:

[6-1] _Beitraege zur Lehre der Wortzusammensetzung._ Leiden. 1896.

[6-2] In this connection I would refer students to an instructive
passage of Heinrich Wrinkler on "Die Hauptformen in den Amerikanischen
Sprachen," in his work _Zur Sprachgeschichte_ (Berlin, 1887) and to his
essay on the Pokonchi Language in his _Weiteres zur Sprachgeschichte_,
(Berlin, 1889).

[6-3] See my remarks on this tongue in the _American Anthropologist_,
August, 1898, p. 251.

[6-4] Interesting examples in the Preface to S. T. Rand's _Micmac
Dictionary_ (Halifax, 1888).

[6-5] Notably with Steinthal's _Charakteristik des hauptsaechlichsten
Typen des Sprachbaues._

[12-1] _The Myths of the New World_ (third edition, 1896); _American
Hero Myths_ (1881).

[12-2] _Life and Traditions of the Red Man_ (Bangor, 1893).

[12-3] _New Views of the Origin of the Tribes of America_ (Philadelphia,
1798).

[13-1] _Actas del Congreso Internacional de Americanistas_, Tom. II.,
pp. 310-315.

[13-2] See the article "The Curious Hoax of the Taensa Language," in my
_Essays of an Americanist_, pp. 452-467. (Philadelphia, 1890.)

[13-3] In Tome XI., of the _Bibliotheque Linguistique Americaine_.

[13-4] Privately printed, 1867.

[16-1] See Garrick Mallery in _10th Annual Report of the Bureau of
Ethnology_, pp. 133, sqq. (Washington, 1893).




INDEX.


  Abenakis, 12

  Abipones, 6

  Achaguas, 6

  Adam, L., 13, 18

  Alaguilac language, 17

  Algonkin, 8, 11

  Algonquian mythology, 12

  Alikuluf, 19, 20

  American Authors, Aboriginal, 8

  American languages, 6

  American Race, the, 7

  Americanists, Congress of, 8

  "Anahuac", 17

  Andagueda, 18

  Andoa, 20

  Anthony, A. S., 11

  Antillean languages, 18

  Arawack, 18, 19

  Asiatic analogies, 7


  _Bailes_, 9

  Barton, B. S., 12

  Berendt, C. H., 15, 17

  Betoya, 6, 7, 19

  Bonaris, 19

  Brasseur, E. C., 15, 17

  Byington, C., 10


  Cakchiquels, 9, 16

  Calchaqui, 20

  Calendar, native, 16

  Carib, 6, 13, 19

  Cataquina, 20

  Chaco, el Gran, 20

  Chane-abal language, 15

  Changuina, 18

  Chapanecs, 15

  Charua, 20

  Chiapas, 15

  Chilan Balam, 17

  Chinantec, 15

  Choco, 19

  Choctaw Grammar, 10

  Cholona, 19

  Chontallis, 16

  Cocanuca, 7

  Costa Rica, 7, 18

  Creeks, 9

  Cuba, language of, 18


  Delaware, 9, 11

  _Dvanda_, the, 6


  Ennima, 20


  Floridian Peninsula, 13

  Fuegian languages, 20


  Gatschet, A. S., 9, 11, 13

  Gluscap, 12

  Gods, names of, 15

  Granger, H. G., 19

  Grasserie, R., 20

  Guatemala, 15, 17

  Guaycuru, 20

  Gueegueence, 9

  Guetares, 18


  Haiti, language of, 18

  Hale, H., 9

  "Hastri" language, 13

  Hongote, 19

  Huasteca, 6

  Humboldt, W. von, 6

  Huron, 9


  "Ikonomatic" method, the, 16

  Incorporation, 6

  Iroquois, 9


  Johnnycake, 11

  Jefferson, T., 12

  Jivaro, 19


  Kechua, 19

  Kiche myths, 15


  Leca, 19

  Lenape, 9, 11

  Lenape Dictionary, 11

  Lenape Conversations, 11

  Lencas, 16

  Lengua, 20

  Library of Aborig. Literature, 8

  Lineal Measures, 16

  Love, Conception of, 8

  Lucayan, 18

  Lule, 6, 20


  Maipure, 6

  Manao, 19

  Mandingo language, 12

  Mangue, 15

  Mata co, 20

  Matagalpan, 7

  Maya, 6, 8, 16

  Mayan Hieroglyphics, 16

  Mayan Inscriptions, 14

  Mazatec, 19

  Mbaya, 6

  Measures, lineal, 16

  Mexican, 6

  Micmacs, 6

  Mixes, 16

  Mixteca, 7, 16

  Mocoa, 7

  Mocovi, 7

  Mohawk, 9

  Morphology of Amer. Langs., 6

  Mosquito Coast[TN-3]

  Muller,[TN-4] H. C., 6

  Muskokee, 11

  Mythology, American, 12

  Myths of New World, 12


  Nahuatl, 6, 8, 10

  Nahuatl-Spanish jargon, 9

  Nanticoke, 12

  Natchez, 12

  Nicaragua, 15

  Nicolar, J., 12

  Noanama, 18


  Omagua, 7

  Onas, 20

  Onondaga, 9

  Ore, G. de, 20

  Otomi, 7.[TN-5] 16, 17


  Pacasa, 19

  Paniquita, 7

  Pareja, F., 13

  Payagua, 20

  Pilling, J. C., 4

  Pinart, A., 15

  Poetry, Aboriginal, 8

  Polysynthesis, 6

  Popolucas, 16

  Primitive speech, 7

  Puelche, 19

  Puquina, 20


  Querandi, 20

  Quiche, 15

  Quechua, 8, 19, 20


  Rafinesque, C. S., 11

  Ramas, 18

  Rand, S. F., 6

  Rate of change, 7

  Rebus writing, 16

  Red Score, the, 9, 11

  Rig Veda Americanus, 10


  Sahagun, 10, 17

  Samucu, 20

  Schultz, Rev., 18

  Shawnees, 19

  Smith, B., 13

  Standard Dictionary, the, 7

  Steinthal, H., 6

  "Stone of the Giants", 16

  Svastika, the, 20


  Tacana, 19

  Taensa, 13

  Taino, 18

  Tamanaca, 6

  Tarascos, 16

  Tehuelche, 19

  Teknnika, 19

  Tequistlatecan, 7

  Timote., 7

  Timuquana, 13

  Tinne, 18

  Toltecs, the, 20

  Totonaco, 6

  Triquetrum, the, 20

  Tsoneca, 19

  Tucanos, 19

  Tupi, 6, 8, 20

  Tzental, 16


  Ulvas, 16


  Verb, the American, 6


  Walum-Olum, 9, 11

  Winkler, H., 6

  Written language, 16


  Xebero, 19

  Xinca, 17


  Yahgan, 19, 20

  Yaruro, 6

  Yucatan, 14


  Zapotecs, 16

  Zeonas, 19

  Zoque, the, 6




Transcriber's Note


The following misspellings and typographical errors were maintained.

        Page   Error
  TN-1    6    The marker for footnote 6-2 was not printed and has been
               inserted based on context.
  TN-2   11    Grammer should read Grammar
  TN-3   23    Mosquito Coast should read Mosquito Coast, 15, 18
  TN-4   23    Muller, should read Mueller
  TN-5   23    Otomi, 7. should read Otomi, 7,





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Record of Study in Aboriginal
American Languages, by Daniel G. Brinton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RECORD OF STUDY--ABOR. AMER. LANG. ***

***** This file should be named 31351.txt or 31351.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/3/5/31351/

Produced by Julia Miller and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
