The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mighty Dead, by William Campbell Gault

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Mighty Dead

Author: William Campbell Gault

Release Date: March 9, 2010 [EBook #31577]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MIGHTY DEAD ***




Produced by Greg Weeks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









  the
  mighty
  dead

  _by William Campbell Gault_

  ------------------------------------------------------------------
  _What would it be like to live in a world which has conquered the
  near planets but abolished all literature? Bill Gault gives us a
  look at a world like this--in a not too distant future which finds
  all our pressure groups united to rule the roost._
  ------------------------------------------------------------------

    On its surface the choice was an easy one--Doak Parker's
    career in Washington against a highly suspect country girl
    he had just met.


Doak Parker was thinking of June, when the light flashed. He was
thinking of the two months' campaign and the very probable probability
of his knocking her off this week-end. It was going to be a conquest
to rank among his best. It was going to be....

The buzzer buzzed, the light flashed and the image of Ryder appeared
on his small desk-screen. Ryder said, "Come in, Doak. A little job for
the week-end."

_No_, Doak thought, _no, no, no! Not this week-end. Not this
particular triumphant looming week-end. No!_ He said, "Be right
there, Chief."

Ryder was sitting behind his desk when Doak entered. Ryder was a man
of about sixty, with a lined, weary face and a straggling mustache. He
nodded at the chair across the desk from him.

Ryder depressed a button on his desk and the screen beyond him began
to glow. Ryder said, "An electronic transcript of a phone call I
received this morning from former Senator Elmer Arnold. You know who
he is, I guess, Doak."

"Author of the Arnold Law?" Doak smiled. "Who doesn't?"

Then the image of former Senator Arnold came on the screen. He didn't
look any more than a hundred and ten years old, a withered and thin
lipped man with a complexion like ashes. He began to talk.

"Ryder, I guess you know I'm no scatterbrain and I guess you know I'm
not one to cry wolf--but there's something damned funny going on in
the old Fisher place on the Range Road. You better send a man down
here, and I mean quick. You have him contact me."

The image faded, the rasping voice ceased. Doak sighed and looked at
his nails.

"Senile, you're thinking?" Ryder said quietly.

"I wasn't thinking at all, Chief," Doak said.

"Not even about that new one, that June?" the Chief asked, smiling.

Doak looked up, startled. "Is there no privacy? Are there no
sanctuaries?"

"Not from Security," Ryder said. "But don't be disturbed. There's no
law against _that_ yet excepting some of the old ones--and who has
time for the old ones?"

"As long as we're being frank," Doak said, "he mentioned the old
Fisher place and a road as though you should know them. Friends of
yours?"

"Friends? That's our home town. Senator Arnold was very instrumental
in my Department climb." Ryder paused. "And no crackpot."

"I'll buy that," Doak agreed. "He was the man who first saw the power
in combining pressure groups. He surely made some strange bedfellows."

"Any lobbyist would be a strange bedfellow, I've been told," the Chief
answered. "The Arnold Law has saved us one hell of a lot of work,
Doak, and saved the Department money."

"Yes, sir," Doak said. "I'm to understand this couldn't be put off
until Monday?"

Ryder nodded.

"And no other Security Officer would do?"

"No other."

Doak rose. "Anything else--_sir_?"

Ryder smiled. "Just one. As a guess, what do you think it is, in the
old Fisher place, on the Range Road?"

"Readers," Doak answered, "or why would the--uh, Mr. Arnold be so
worried."

Ryder chuckled. "I can see them now, in the curtained room, huddling
over an old railroad timetable. I think your guess is sound, Doak." He
rose. "And there'll be other week-ends. That girl can wait. She isn't
going to spoil."

"But _I_ might explode," Doak said. "Well, it will be triple-time.
That's some consolation. Enough for a new video set--I need one in the
bathroom."

It was still a half hour to quitting time and Doak went back to his
desk. He sat there, trying to remember the history of Senator Arnold.
It was all on the tape in the Biography Center, he knew, but he didn't
want that much information.

_Subversive_ kicked around in his memory and the phrase "free press."
And then he remembered the Censors. The religious, the political, the
scientific, the capitalist, the communist, the ridiculous and the
absurd.

Arnold had unified the Censors and they had made strange bedfellows.
For where one bit of ink and paper might be anti-Christian, the next
might be anti-anti-Christian and the next anti-anti-anti--ad
absurdium. And sex? Where couldn't one find sex in print, even among
the prissy writers? For wasn't a large part of it boy meets girl? And
they didn't meet to exchange election buttons--that much was certain.

Well, there were the P.T.A. and the N.A.M. and the fine if disguised
hand of the Lenin lovers and the S.P.C.A. who didn't like dogs to play
a sub-human part in the world of letters. All these, fighting each
other, until Senator Arnold came forth.

The Senator had never enjoyed a favorable press and had a habit of
saying things that looked silly, three years later, in print. The
Senator was the new spokesman for the Censors.

And those who loathed sex or Christians or Republicans or Democrats or
the Big Ten or the small snifter were unified under this noble man who
read with his lips.

They were for him. And they established the biggest lobby ever to
crawl out of the woodwork in Washington. They had their day.

The printers fought a little but were offered jobs in Hollywood. The
paper manufacturers were promised all the government map-work plus a
new sheaf of picture magazines. The publishers were all rich and ready
to retire anyway.

The writers? They were disorganized because some were rich and some
weren't, the game being what it was, and the difference in viewpoint
between a rich and a non-rich writer makes McCarthy and Malenkov look
like brothers.

_There shall be in that area of the galaxy under American control
no material of a literary or non-literary, educational or
non-educational, pertinent or impertinent nature, which is printed,
written, enscribed, engraved, mimeographed, dupligraphed,
electro-graved, arti-scribed, teleprinted...._

That wasn't the exact wording, but close.

Simple enough--how can there be subversive literature if there is no
literature?

There were still sex, Democrats, Lenin lovers, some religion and two
Republicans (on Venus). There was, of course, no Post Office
Department, nor need for any.

On Connecticut Ave (S.E.) there was a girl named June waiting for a
call from Doak. She had been in a negative frame of mind for two
months, but the week-end ahead had shown promise of bringing matters
to a head and maybe, considering everything, well, what the hell....

Doak looked at the newsscreen over the water cooler and saw,
_Stormy and some rain. Temp. 93. 1730._

A gong sounded.

The other wage-slaves rose with assorted sighs, looking forward to the
week-end. Doak dialed June's number.

His outside screen lighted up and there she was, her hair in curlers
but luscious as a peach. "Hi," she said. And then frowned at the
seriousness of his smile.

"Look, June," he said, "I--I've got to go out of town."

"I'll _bet_," she said.

"So help me, kid, it's...." Well, he couldn't say what it was. "I'll
phone you, though, as soon--"

His screen went blank. He dialed again, and again. The screen stayed
blank.

Ryder came out from his office, his hat on, looking weary. He managed
a smile for Doak. "You'd better get to the cashier before he closes,
if you haven't already."

"Yes, sir," Doak said. "Dubbinville, wasn't it?"

"Dubbinville," Ryder said. "My old Wisconsin home. You'll find it
beautiful this time of the year. You'll love it, Doak."

"Yes, sir," Doak said.

The cashier was just getting ready to close when Doak came to the
window. "Week-end trip," Doak said. "Secret."

"How much?"

Doak faced him squarely. "Two thousand."

The cashier seemed to wince but Doak's gaze didn't relent. He was only
three years behind in his taxes now and this extra moola on the
swindle-sheet could bring him two months closer. Anyone who was only
two years behind on his taxes was considered a very solid citizen.

The cashier reached down to pull up four packets of twenties. "Well,"
he said quietly, "it's not _my_ money." He tossed the two thousand out
to Doak and yawned. "Remind me about it Monday if I forget, will you?
I'm not much good the end of the week."

_Or any other part of the week_, Doak thought. He said, "If I'm back,
Monday. If I'm not I'll scream for more."

"You do that well," the cashier said and reached up to turn off the
light overhead.

It was hot outside. The sun seemed to be imprisoned in the white
corridor that stretched for miles between the government buildings and
the ashment of the parking lot glittered like broken glass.

       *       *       *       *       *

From the mines of Mars the ashment came, the best paving surface known
to man. And what was Mars but mines? With all their grand talk, who
wanted to leave Mother Earth? What was Venus but a sanctuary, a
vacation spot, and what was Mars but mines? When a big cog like the
Chief could send a lonely man all the way to Dubbinville because of a
neighbor's summons, how could they expect little cogs to grow up to
galactic thinking?

Dubbinville and the heat of a Wisconsin summer--and June waiting in
the apartment on Connecticut (S.E.). Doak swore quietly and
thoroughly and stepped into the oven that was his Chev.

The cooling system started with the motor and the interior was
comfortable by the time he pulled into the stream of home-bound
traffic. It was a fourteen-lane highway and jammed to the curbs.

       *       *       *       *       *

There were only two signals in eight miles but traffic moved in fits
and starts at this time of day. He could see the first light when he
was a hundred yards from it and was sure he could make it.

But it turned amber when he was still fifteen yards from the corner
and the force-field actuated his traffic-servant and he heard the
brake control click. Well, it avoided accidents but it sure as hell
was rough on brake linings. He skidded to a stop.

Cars, cars, cars for miles. And the glittering ashment and all the
boys and gals going home to plot the week-end. No magazines, no books,
no papers with their social columns, so the girls would be out and
looking around.

And the men would be out and looking around and what more did you
need?

The light changed and his brake was released and he moved out at the
head of his line, thinking about Dubbinville, trying to imagine it,
some hamlet tucked away in a Wisconsin hill, dreaming of yesterday.
Great, fine, dandy!

In his apartment all his video sets yammered at him and he stopped in
the doorway, staring. They should have turned off when he'd thrown the
master switch this morning.

In the hallway, he checked the switch, and it read _off_. Must be
shorted....

He went from dinette to kitchen to bedroom to living room, turning off
each set individually. All of them had the same program, Milton Berle
IV. He liked that better than wrestling though not much.

In his chrome and plastic kitchen he dialed June's number.

Her hair wasn't in the curlers. It was golden and braided and high on
her classic head. She said, "Your picture isn't coming through. Who is
this, please?"

Doak said in a falsetto, "Guess."

The screen went blank.

Doak snapped the video switch to _on_ and dialed Lateral-American. A
brunette with vivid blue eyes came into view.

"A priority to Dubbinville, Wisconsin, first trip possible," Doak said
and gave her Security's code number.

"Dubbinville?" she said and frowned. She consulted a station box out
of his view and looked up again. "You'll have to take surface
transportation from Milwaukee. It's only about twenty miles from there
in Waukesha County."

"Good enough. And when's the first to Milwaukee?"

"At nineteen hundred, ramp eighty-seven. Kindly pick up your ticket at
Booth sixty-two." The screen went blank.

The ticket wasn't really though the name had persisted. The 'ticket'
was a coin. Doak looked in his refrigerator and there was nothing
worthwhile in there. He'd eat at the airport.

He looked at the phone and decided against it. He went into the
bedroom and threw some shirts and socks and a pair of clean pajamas
into his durapelt bag.

Dubbinville--and June out looking around. What a lousy deal!


II

The great ship lay sleekly quiet under the slanting sun, the
passengers like ants measured against its giant hull. Clink, clink,
clink went the coins into the counting box, the light over each seat
going on with the clink of the coin.

Then they were seated, the lights all on, and the tractor was pulling
the giant to the channelled runway, guarded by the blast walls.

_Milwaukee, here I come._

The whirr of the rolling wheels, the reverberations from the blast
walls, a crescendo of sound, and they were free of earth. An
accelerating, effortless flight, a faint tremor as they passed the
sonic barrier, then no sensory impressions at all.

Flight as free as the wind's passage but more silent. Through the
visacrys windows a blur of blue-green. Speed without strain, power
without tumult.

Doak relaxed and for the first time since the Chief's summons he
wasn't thinking of June. He was thinking of Man, from the cave to
Venus, from the wheel to free flight. And something out of his
childhood memory came to mind.

    _Studious let me sit_
    _And hold high converse with the mighty dead_

Where had he heard that? Some Scotch poet, it must have been, for his
mother recited only the Scotch poets. _Studious let me sit_--in front
of a video set, to watch the wrestling?

_And hold high converse with the mighty dead_--not in this world where
there was only tomorrow, not in this world of no books. There were no
writers on television--they had no need to attract an audience. They
_had_ an audience. An audience that would watch wrestling would watch
anything.

So the ad men took over the duties of the semi-writers who had
prepared the radio programs. Ad men offended nobody, even those with
denture breath. That could be cured and so could acne, B.O., straight
hair and seam squirrels.

_Hey!_ he though suddenly. _Watch where you're thinking, Doak Parker._

A government man, a Security Officer, he straightened in his seat as
the stewardess came along the aisle.

She smiled at him, "Everything all right, Mr. Parker?"

"Dandy," Doak said. "Great, fine! Why?"

She paused, disconcerted "I beg your pardon?"

"Why shouldn't everything be all right? Lateral-American, the skyway
to the stars, right?"

She smiled "Absolutely correct."

"_And_ Milwaukee," Doak added. "Do you only handle the earth runs?"

"Until next year," she said. "I'm new."

"I'm old," Doak said. "Is there anything to drink on board?"

"Water, Mr. Parker."

"I'm not _that_ old," he said.

She glanced at her watch. "We'll be in Milwaukee in six minutes. And
that's the beer town."

But he had no time for a glass of beer. The limousine took him to the
elevated station and the last car for Dubbinville was leaving in three
minutes.

It was a nine-minute trip. He'd picked up an hour, coming west, and
used but thirty-three minutes. It was still only seven o'clock when
the huge elevated car hissed to a stop in front of the Dubbinville
station.

There was a smell to the place, a smell of sun-warmed grass and fruit
blossoms, of lilacs and quiet rains. Doak stood on the platform,
surveying the winding main street leading up into the gentle hills.
People on porches and teenagers in front of the drugstore. A
reddish-brown setter padded past on some secret business of his own.

There was no whiz, no whir, no clank, no squeal, no grind. This was
Dubbinville, U.S.A.

The station agent was picking up a pair of film boxes, as Doak walked
over. He smiled at Doak. "Beautiful evening, isn't it?"

"It certainly is. Is there--a place to stay in town, a hotel?"

The station agent shook his head. "No hotel. But you could stay at
Mrs. Klein's. She takes in boarders." He pointed with a bony
forefinger. "That grey house with the blue shutters, right on the
curve there."

"Thank you," Doak said. "What's the population here?"

"Around eight hundred, last census, though we had a couple families
move in since then. Hasn't changed much the last hundred years."

"Retired farmers, mostly?" Doak asked.

"Mmmm, I guess. Just--people."

People.... Which meant nothing and everything. Doak had turned away
before he remembered. Then he turned back. "Oh, yes, and Senator
Arnold? Where does he live?"

"Big house, over the hill," the agent said. "Only big house around
here--you can't miss it. Got a high stone fence all around it and two
vicious dogs. God knows what he's scared of." This was a different man
from the one who had remarked on the beauty of the evening.

"Thanks," Doak said. "Thanks again."

Political resentment--or some local feud? Doak went along the platform
to the single step that led to the street.

There was a breeze from the east, cooling the warm air. He turned in
at the drug store and could scarcely believe his eyes.

Bent wire chairs and marble-topped tables with bent wire legs. No
toasters, video sets, geiger counters, ray guns or portable garbage
detergents.

But dim and cool and with a high marble fountain. "A lime-ade," Doak
said, "with a sprig of mint."

The man behind the fountain wore a blue jacket over his white shirt.
He had a thin face and a high-domed head and intelligent blue eyes.

Doak sat on one of the high wire stools and lighted a cigarette. "Hot
day, was it?"

"Hot enough. But we get the night breeze. Stranger in town?"

"From Milwaukee," Doak said. "Out to visit Senator Arnold."

"Oh." The man set the drink in front of Doak.

"Trying to talk him into leaving some money to the University," Doak
added. "Guess he's a pretty hard man to get money from."

"I hear he is. I wouldn't know about it. He--doesn't shop in town."

The drink was freshly flavorful, cool as springwater. Doak rubbed the
beaded moisture with a thumb. "Pretty town," he said. "Pretty country
around here."

"Peaceful," the man agreed. "I've never been anywhere else, so I
couldn't judge it right, I guess--but then I've never had the urge to
go anywhere else, so it must be all right."

"These days," Doak said, "a man doesn't need to go anywhere else. They
bring the world right to you."

"I guess. Hear they're having a hard time getting Venus populated. I
guess people aren't as rootless as the planners figured."

By "the planners" the man undoubtedly meant THAT WASHINGTON CROWD.
Doak finished his drink and went up the street to the grey house with
the blue shutters on the curve.

There was a woman sitting on the front porch, a short and heavy woman
with dark hair and brown eyes. She smiled at him and said, "Good
evening," without rising.

"Mrs. Klein?" Doak asked and she nodded. He said, "The station agent
told me you rented rooms and served meals. My name is Doak Parker."

"A pleasure, Mr. Parker. If you'll go through the living room and take
that door at the east end of it, you'll come to a hall. The room at
the back of the hall's the one, if you'd like to look at it." She
didn't move from her chair.

He went into the dim living room and through the door and down the
hall. A mahogany bed with a patchwork quilt for a spread, a mahogany
dresser and a huge wicker chair, upholstered in a bright chintz. It
was a chintzy house.

       *       *       *       *       *

He looked out the back window and saw a neat lawn, bordered with
flowering shrubs. He put his grip on the floor and came back to the
living room.

There were windows along the front of this room and they were open. He
could see Mrs. Klein in her chair and a girl standing next to her.

There was no reason for him to pause but he did. He'd heard Mrs.
Klein say, "Another meeting tonight, Martha?"

"Yes." The girl's voice was defensive.

"Why--why, Martha? Don't you realize the danger of--oh, Martha!"

"Mother, please. There's no danger. We're careful."

Doak coughed and walked out again onto the porch. The girl standing
there was as dark as her mother but slim and long-legged and vividly
beautiful.

Mrs. Klein said, "My daughter Martha, Mr. Parker. You liked the room?"

"It's fine," he said and to Martha, "How do you do?"

"How do you do, Mr. Parker? You've had supper?"

He nodded and lied, "In Milwaukee. I'm up here to try and get some
money out of Senator Arnold. I wonder if this might be a good time to
see him."

Mrs. Klein said, "I doubt if anytime is a good time to see him. You're
a salesman, Mr. Parker?"

"No, no. It's philanthropy I'm concerned with. Mr. Arnold's old enough
to start thinking about his benefactors."

"He'll probably leave it all to the dogs," Mrs. Klein said. "And you
be careful of them, Mr. Parker."

"That I will," Doak said. "I think I'll walk up there now. Not much of
a walk, I understand. Just over the hill, isn't it?"

It was the girl who answered. "That's right. I'm going that way
myself. I'll be glad to show you the house."

Mrs. Klein said, "You're leaving so soon, Martha?"

"Right now. I'll be home early. Don't fret about me, Mother."

They went down the walk together, Doak and Martha, and he had
forgotten June and the Department and all the girls who would be out,
looking, tonight in Washington.

She walked easily at his side, poised and quiet.

He said, "Do you work in town?"

She nodded. "For an attorney. I was going to law school myself until
Dad died."

"Oh," he said.

He wondered at his lack of words, and the strange sense of--almost of
inferiority glimmering in him. She hadn't said anything or done
anything to place him at a disadvantage but he knew this was no lass
for the casual pitch.

They came to the crest of the hill and saw the dying sun low in the
west. The quiet was almost absolute. About a hundred yards on the
other side of the ridge was a road leading off to the south. On the
right side of this road was the big house with the high stone fence.

Doak said quietly, "There's a few sentences that have been bothering
me all day. I wonder if you'd recognize them. They're, 'Studious, let
me sit and hold high converse with the mighty dead.' One of the Scotch
poets probably."

"Thomson," she said, "from his _Seasons_." She looked straight ahead.

"I'm not sure I understand exactly what he meant," Doak said.

"He meant--reading." She turned to look at him. "This is Senator
Arnold's house, Mr. Parker. You might ask him what Thomson meant."

Her smile was brief and cool. She walked on.

Behind the fence, the dogs started to bark. In the huge gatepost was a
pair of paneled doors about three feet high, the lower edges about
four feet from the ground. A sign read, _Visitors, kindly use this
phone_.

Doak opened the double doors and lifted the phone. As he did so a
scanning light went on in the weatherproof niche. Someone said, "Yes?"

"Officer Parker of Security. I believe I'm expected."

"One moment, sir."

Silence, except for the sniffing dogs. And then the sniffing stopped
and he heard the pad of their feet, as they raced for the house and
the voice in the phone said, "The gates will be open soon, Mr.
Parker."

They opened in less than a minute. At the far end of the gravel drive
a turreted monstrosity loomed, a weathered wooden structure that had
undoubtedly once been white.

It was now as ashen as the face of Senator Arnold, bleak against the
skyline, set back on a dandelion-covered lawn. Behind the wrought-iron
fence, to the right of the house, the dogs watched him approach.

They were German Boxers, formidable creatures and great slobberers.
They drooled as he walked up to the low porch but uttered not a sound.

The man who opened the door was fat and needed a shave. He wore a
shiny, duraserge suit. "Follow me, please, Mr. Parker."


III

Doak followed him through a high musty living room into a small room
off this. There was a small hynrane heater in here, and the room was
stifling.

Senator Arnold sat in a wheel chair, his feet elevated. He wore a
greasy muffler around his thin neck and a heavy reefer buttoned all
the way up.

The fat man left, closing the door behind him. Arnold looked Doak over
from head to feet and came back up. "It's about time. Your
credentials?"

Doak handed over his wallet. There was, he saw, no chair in the room.
Evidently, he was supposed to stand through the interview.

The old man handed the wallet back. "The place is right up that road
to the south. First house, only house in sight."

Doak put his wallet in his pocket. "Just what kind of business do you
think is going on up there, Senator?"

The old man seemed to spit the word. "Readers."

Doak exhaled, saying nothing.

"And maybe more," the old man said and his eyes were unholy. "Maybe--I
wouldn't be surprised if they're--they're _printing_ something up
there." He coughed.

Sweat poured off Doak as the glowing hynrane heater made an oven of
the windowless room.

The old man closed his eyes. "In my home town, the vermin, in my own
town! They always laughed at me here but, by God, that was before the
state saw fit to send me to the Senate. The last laugh's been mine.
But now--right under my nose, you might say!" He opened his eyes and
glared at Doak.

"Subversive reading, you think?" Doak asked.

The old man stared at him. "Is there another kind? I shouldn't have to
ask that of a Security Officer. What kind of men is the Department
hiring these days?"

Doak thought of something to say and decided not to. He said, "I
wondered about how dangerous they were. If I'd need additional men."

"For readers? Young man, there must be some red blood in your veins.
By God, if I was two years younger, I'd go along just for the joy of
smashing them." He was trembling, leaning forward in his chair. "Go
now, go and trap the filthy scum."

Doak went. He left the hot and odorous room and went out through the
cool and odorous room to the front hall and out the front door. There
his nausea quieted a little under the sun-warmed air from the east.

Behind the wrought-iron fence the dogs slobbered and watched, only
their heads moving. As he went down the gravel drive to the heavy gate
he was conscious of their stares and a coldness moved through him. The
gates opened when he was twenty feet away.

It was growing dark and the breeze seemed stronger. On the road to the
south, the Range Road, the house identified as the old Fisher place
revealed one light in a first-floor room. There were two cars in the
yard.

Doak turned back toward town but paused over the crest of the hill and
sought cover. There was a small grove of hickory and oak to his left.
He walked into their shelter until he was out of any passerby's range
of vision.

Readers wouldn't be any trouble. But printers? If the old mummy was
right in his guess Doak could have more trouble than one man could
handle.

He put his back up against the rough bark of an oak tree and sat
hugging his knees, waiting for the darkness. _Studious let me sit...._
Oh, yes.

Printers--and what would they print? Had any poets been born since the
Arnold Law, any writers? Was there some urge to write in a readerless
world? In the Russian homes, he'd heard, under the machine gods, the
old religion persisted, from parent to child, by word of mouth.

But writers without an audience? An art that persisted without
followers?

That girl, that lovely poised girl-creature had been quick to identify
Thomson and he wasn't one of the giants. If there were others with
equally fertile memories, and they got together, it would be like a
small--what was the word?--a small library.

They could write or print or type the remembered offerings of all the
readers and have a book. Or at least a pamphlet.

It grew darker and he thought of June and wondered, if her memory were
searched, just what would be dredged up. He'd bet it would be one
word--_no_.

And now it was dark enough and he rose and made his way back over the
hill, toward the Fisher place, following the field instead of the
road, keeping to the tall grass, conscious of the crickets and the
night breeze and the light in the first floor room of the Fisher
place.

There was another car in the drive now and he could see a few people
in the room. He could see Martha and next to her an aged man with a
beard like snow. He went past the window and around in back of the
house.

There was an unlatched rear door and he entered a dark rear hall and
put on his infra-scope. Now he could see the three steps leading to an
open door and he went up the steps to the kitchen. There he could hear
their voices.

Martha was talking. "As Dan has told you there's nothing to fear from
an injection of lucidate. It's a perfectly harmless drug with no
serious aftereffects that promotes total recall. Total recall is what
we need unless we get a much larger group of donors than we have
presently.

"Readers are no problem. We've had more requests for our magazine than
we can fill. Our biggest problem, more important than getting memory
donors, is to find someone who can contribute significant original
work. For that kind of man we're still searching. Or woman."

Doak moved quietly, very slowly, past the kitchen sink and along the
short hall that led to the dining room. There was a swinging door
here, closed, but the upper half was glass and he could see through
the dining room into the lighted living room. He took off the
infra-scope glasses.

Nine people were in the room, seven men and two women. The men ranged
in age from about twenty-three to the old gent with the beard, who
seemed ageless. The other woman was a gray-haired lady of about fifty
with fine features and a rich contralto voice.

She was saying, "I'd like to be the first to go under the lucidate."

Next to a maple fireman's chair a man who looked about forty nodded
and the woman came forward to sit in the chair. He had a hypodermic in
his hand and she extended her arm.

On the far side of the room Martha was wheeling up a small recording
machine.

Now the woman's eyes were closed and the others sat back, watching
her. The contralto voice was clear and resonant.

  "'... 'tis but thy name that is my enemy
  Thou art thyself though, not a Montague.
  What's Montague? It is nor hand nor foot,
  Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part
  Belonging to a man. O, be some other name!
  What's in a name? that which we call a rose,
  By any other name would smell as sweet...'"

The rich voice, the flowing rhythm, the silence--was it Burns she
quoted? No--he knew all of Burns--but this was some giant of the past;
this was almost up to vintage Burns.

He left his vantage point and went quietly back to the kitchen,
donning his infra-scope once more. In some of these old houses there
was a back steps, leading to the second floor.

Another door leading off the kitchen, another hall--and the steps.

They would undoubtedly creak. But they might not creak loudly enough
to disturb that circle of mesmerized individuals listening to the
contralto magic.

There was only one small creak, halfway up.

Three rooms led off a narrow hall. One held a cot and a dresser and a
straight-backed chair. The second room he entered had a strange smell.
A smell he didn't recognize. Ink? Was that a mimeograph machine?
Something stirred in his memory, some picture he had seen of a
duplicating machine somewhere. This other dingus was undoubtedly a
typewriter--and this small gadget on the desk a stapler.

And here, on a small pine table, was a sheaf of four mimeographed
pages, stapled together.

The heading read, _The Heritage Herald_.

That was the name of their magazine. Printers, under the technical
interpretation of the law. A typewriter and a duplicating machine and
stencils and ink--and words.

Shakespeare, whoever he was, and Robert W. Service and Milton and an
original by S. Crittington Jones.

The original was a short-short tale about a wrestler and a cowboy and
a video comedian, a space-farce. There was a piece headed _Editorial_
by Martha Klein. It had a sub-heading--_For Those Who Are Willing To
Fight_.

It was a stirring and vigorous call to arms against the Arnold Law. It
was as subversive as anything Doak had seen in his Department career.

He folded the magazine, and put it into an upper jacket pocket. He
went to the third room and saw the paper stacked there and the bottles
of ink and new stencils.

He went back to the stairs, and quietly down them. From the living
room, he heard--

  "'... From scenes like these old Scotia's grandeur springs,
  That makes her loved at home, revered abroad;
  Princes and lords are but the breath of kings,
  An honest man's the noblest work of God!'"

This was more like it, except for that last line the bard had
borrowed. This was the true giant, and who was quoting him? It was
not the contralto voice. Who?

He moved out to the kitchen and back to his vantage point. He took off
the infra-scope and looked into the living room. It was the old gent,
with the beard. And who else could it be? For wasn't he the cream of
the lot, the most obvious scholar, the most evident gentleman?
Scholarship and breeding seemed to flow from every hair in his beard.

  "O Scotia! my dear, my native soil!
  From whom my warmest wish to heaven is sent,
  Long may thy hardy sons of rustic toil
  Be blessed with health and peace and sweet content!
  And, O, may heaven their--"

Doak felt a stirring in him and tears moved down his cheeks and he
turned, quickly and silently, and went out the back door. He was no
child at his mother's knee, he was no mewling kitten--he was a
Security Officer and this was subversion.

Outside the stars were bright in a black sky. He stood in the back
yard, breathing heavily, ashamed at the sudden surge of feeling that
had moved through him. Some streak of adolescence, he thought, stirred
by the words he had remembered from his mother's lips.

He walked slowly back toward town. He could call in local help and
round up the gang back there in the house. He could wash this up
tonight and be back in Washington tomorrow morning. With June.

The prospect of being with June had lost its flavor somehow. And if
this was a widely published magazine, he had a larger duty than merely
apprehending the gang. All of the magazine's readers were breaking the
law and a real operative comes in with a complete, clean case.

Mrs. Klein still sat on her front porch. "Any luck?" she asked, as he
came up to sit on the glider near her chair.

"Some. I'll see him again tomorrow."

Her voice was dry. "One of our most prominent citizens, the Senator.
The other's Glen Ryder. I guess you know who he is."

He stiffened, trying to see her face in the dark. "Ryder? Oh, yes, in
the Security Department."

"That's right. Glen isn't anything to be ashamed of really. But that
Senator Arnold--my, the stories my mother told me about him!"

"I've heard," Doak said, "he was pretty wild as a young man."

"Wild?" Mrs. Klein sniffed. "Degraded would be a better word. If his
father didn't have all the money in the county he'd have gone to jail
more than once, that man. And then the people of this state sending
him to the Senate."

Doak said nothing, staring out at the quiet night.

"Would you like a little snack?" Mrs. Klein asked. "I've some baked
ham and rolls out in the kitchen."

"No thanks," Doak said. "I'm not very hungry. Was Glen Ryder a friend
of Senator Arnold's?"

"Not until Glen went to work for the government. I don't think the
Senator had any friends except those who could profit by it."

"This Ryder was something of an--opportunist?"

"If that means what it sounds like, I guess that would describe Glen.
He wasn't one to overlook any opportunity to better himself and he cut
it pretty thin at times."

Doak looked over but could not see her face in the darkness. He said
slowly, "I guess we all have to look out for ourselves and the devil
take the hindmost."

"I suppose," she said placidly. "Though it would depend on what you
wanted out of life. Here in Dubbinville I think we're a little more
neighborly than that."

"It's a nice town," Doak said. "A real nice town."

In front a car was stopping on the other side of the road. Someone got
out from the door on the far side and the car moved on.

"That would be Martha, I guess," Mrs. Klein said. "She'll want some of
that ham, I know. You may as well have a cup of coffee with us
anyway."


IV

Doak had some coffee and some rolls and ham. And some talk with both
of them in the bright comfortable kitchen. They talked about the
ridiculous price of food in the city and how cool the house was after
the heat of the day and what was it like on Venus?

Neither of the women had ever been to Venus. Doak told them about the
lakes, the virgin timber, the glareless warmth that came from the
generative earth.

And about the lack of communication facilities.

"There isn't enough commerce to make any video installations
worthwhile," he explained, "and the only information transmission is
by amateur radio operators. But nobody seems to miss it. It's got
enough vacation facilities without video."

Martha looked at him evenly. "The--Arnold Law applies there, too,
doesn't it?"

Doak met her gaze. "Of course." And then, "Why do you ask?"

She smiled. "I was thinking it would be a good place to curl up with a
book." Her chin lifted. "Or establish a newspaper."

He didn't answer. He took another roll and buttered it.

Mrs. Klein said, "Martha's too young to know what a newspaper is--or a
book. And so are you, Mr. Parker. I say we're not missing much."

He grinned at her. "Bad, were they?"

"There was a paper in Chicago so bad you'd think I was lying if I
tried to describe it to you. And all the books seemed to be concerned
with four-letter words."

He carefully put a piece of ham between the broken halves of the roll.
"Even Bobbie Burns? From what my mother told me he was quite a lad."

"He was dead before your mother was born," Mrs. Klein said. "All the
good ones were, all the ones who tried to entertain instead of shock
or corrupt."

Martha said lightly, "Mama's an admirer of Senator Arnold, the way it
sounds."

"I'll thank you not to mention his name while I'm eating," Mrs. Klein
said acidly. "And I'm not forgetting why _he_ hated the printed word.
But that's looking a gift horse in the mouth."

Doak sipped his coffee. His voice was casual. "Why did he hate the
printed word?"

"He couldn't read anything but the simplest words. The tutors his
father hired and fired to get some learning into that man! He was just
hopeless, that's all."

Doak smiled. "Well, he seems to have done all right without it. I'd
like to have his money."

"And his brain?" Martha asked.

"Just his money," Doak said. "And maybe I'll get some of it before I
give up on him."

He happened to glance at Martha after he finished saying that. Her
face was coldly skeptical and he had an uncomfortable feeling that his
lie hadn't registered with her at all.

In his room, as he undressed, as he hung his clothes in the small
closet, he felt the folded thickness of the dupligraphed magazine in
his jacket pocket.

What more did he need? Tomorrow he'd take the first train back to
Milwaukee and the first plane from Milwaukee. Here was evidence and he
realized now it wasn't something he would be wise to tackle alone. A
few weeks' work by a half dozen operatives and the entire
publisher-reader organization would be spotted and ready for one
unified move.

Local authorities were subject to local loyalties and one leak could
scare off the whole organization. He could be back in Washington
before noon, which would give him a full day and a half of free time,
of June time. To say nothing of the nights.

Why should he hang around this whistle stop for a wasted week-end,
holding kitchen conversations with the unmighty living?

But that Martha, that lovely, that proud and knowing gal.... The
crickets helped him to Dreamland.

The morning sun was bright on the quilted bedspread when he opened his
eyes. There was no sound of meal preparation in the house, no
dialogue. Was it early?

It was ten o'clock. Not since he was a child had he enjoyed as long
and satisfying a sleep as this.

When he came out of the bathroom Mrs. Klein was in the hall. "About
five minutes?" she asked.

"Make it two," he told her and winked. "I'm starving."

Martha had already gone to work. Doak sat down alone to popovers and
oatmeal, eggs and Canadian bacon. And real coffee. He had an almost
animal sense of well being. His decision to go back to Washington,
which had seemed so final last night, was fading under the Dubbinville
spell.

After breakfast he walked down to the station and inquired about
Milwaukee-bound trains.

"There's one due at noon," the agent told him. "Stops on signal. You
want me to stop it?"

"That's kind of early," Doak said. "When's the next?"

"At six tonight. A local. Doesn't need a signal."

That would be soon enough. Doak left and walked slowly up the main
street of Dubbinville. He was walking past the bank when the beard
caught his gaze.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was the Burns quoter of last night. He was sitting behind the
biggest desk in the open portion of the bank, and there was a sign on
his desk.

The sign read, _Malcolm S. Sutherland--President_.

Lordy, Lordy, Lordy--the president of the bank! That showed the strata
this subversion was reaching. Didn't the man realize what a risk he
was taking?

In the drugstore he saw another of the faces he had seen last night.
It was the man who had administered the hypodermic. He was talking to
the druggist. Doak turned and went in.

"All right, Doctor," the druggist said. "I'll have it about one
o'clock. Will that be all right?"

"Fine," the doctor said. He went out.

Doak bought a package of cigarettes. "Was that Doctor Ryan by any
chance?"

"No. Doctor Helgeson. I don't recall a Doctor Ryan. Doctor Helgeson's
the only medical doctor in town."

"This Ryan's a Ph.D." Doak said. "Senator Arnold told me about him.
Beautiful day, isn't it?"

"Beautiful," the druggist agreed.

Walking back to the house Doak wondered if this couldn't be handled
without punitive measures being taken. The only doctor in town and the
president of the bank--and they were probably only a small part of the
picture. It could disrupt this town if Senator Arnold had his way.

And what was their crime? Reading. A law as stupid as the ancient
prohibition law had been, pushed through a bewildered Congress under
much the same conditions. Supported by a strange blend of the divine
and ridiculous, the naive and the clever, the gullible and the
knowing.

Well, was it his business? _He_ didn't make the laws--he only helped
to enforce them. It was a logical answer and why didn't it satisfy
him?

He had a job, a good job at the public trough in a woman-heavy city, a
security that was as solid as his country. Why should he fret over a
gang of law-breakers? Unless it was that cow-town cutie, that Martha.
Unless he was so dame-happy he'd sell out the Department. That corrupt
he certainly wasn't--at least, not yet.

And they weren't readers anyway--they were publishers. He had almost
forgotten that. Inciters to violence, instigators of strife, polluters
of the mind ... Good Lord, he was beginning to sound like
crack-brained ex-Senator Arnold!


V

Mrs. Klein was shaking out a rug on the front porch. She smiled at
him. "Not much to do here, for a city man, is there?"

"I'm not bored," he said, "for some reason. You have a beautiful
daughter, Mrs. Klein."

"I'd feel happier about her looks if she'd marry somebody," Mrs. Klein
said dryly. "Seems to me they're wasted this way."

Doak sat on the glider. What was it someone had said about marriage?
Oh, yes--that it combined the ultimate in temptation with the ultimate
in opportunity.

He said, "I'm surprised she isn't married. The men around here must be
blind or mute."

"Oh, she's had enough offers," Mrs. Klein answered. She laid the rug
over the porch railing. "But she's a fussy stubborn girl." She sat in
her chair. "You a married man, Mr. Parker?"

He shook his head. "Never had the time nor the money--and besides they
all said no to me."

"I'll bet. With that hair of yours and that fine head, with those
eyes, I'll _bet_ they said no."

"Why, thank you!" Doak said. "You have a number of good points,
yourself, Mrs. Klein."

"My popovers and my coffee, maybe," she agreed. "And my figure wasn't
bad, a decade or two back. But I never had Martha's looks. That's from
her dad's side of the family."

"Handsome, were they?"

"Oh, yes. High falutin' people, scholars and beauties who owned half
the land in the county, at one time. Old Wisconsin Germans. I'm Irish
myself."

Bright scintillating dialogue, stirring the quick response. But he
felt as relaxed as though he had hay in his hair. He looked out at the
deserted road, at the fields beyond, at the clouds on the clear
horizon. Rural summer--a quiet Saturday morning in the agricultural
Midwest only nineteen minutes from Chicago.

People spoke of other worlds and here was one, nineteen minutes from
Chicago. And last night, under the lucidate, the town banker had gone
to another world, three hundred years away, had gone back to the magic
of Burns.

A great lad for the ladies, Bobbie Burns, and a great love for the
people. A poet with revolutionary leanings, all heart, a bleeder and a
believer. Studious, Doak sat, on the front porch in another world.

Were the people so stupid they couldn't be trusted with words? They
could be misled with words and confused and stirred to unrighteous
anger. And informed with words and guided and ennobled and solaced and
stirred to high destiny.

How had wrestling ever taken the place of words?

Someone said, "Dreaming, city-man?"

He looked up quickly to see Martha standing there. Mrs. Klein had
evidently gone into the house without his being aware of it.

"Dreaming," Doak admitted. "Holding high converse with the mighty
dead." He smiled at her. "Through for the week?"

"Through." She took the chair her mother usually occupied. "Five and a
half days of whereas and wherefore earns me a day and a half for
myself. At the risk of seeming forward would you like to go swimming
with me this afternoon?"

"I can't think of a better way to spend it," Doak answered. "How about
transportation?"

"It's only a little over a mile. We can walk." She paused. "Or did you
plan to see Senator Arnold?"

"I'd rather go swimming," Doak said.

Which they did. In the waters of Lake Memahbin, in the small cove that
harbored the entire recreational facilities of Dubbinville. Doak
rented some trunks there and they swam out to the raft.

There weren't too many adults in the water this afternoon but the kids
were everywhere. Noisy splashing running kids--but very few of them
ventured out to the big raft.

There was a park running the length of the beach and a variety of
games--table tennis, horse-shoes, shuffleboard. There was a small
group around the table in the grove who seemed to be just sitting.

Doak saw the beard and the lady who had quoted the unknown poet, last
night. He and Martha lay on their stomachs on the raft, looking back
toward the shore.

Doak said easily, "That gang in the glade doesn't seem to be having
much fun."

"Solid citizens," Martha said. "That lady is the principal of the high
school and the man with the beard is president of the bank. You
couldn't expect them to run and shout, could you?"

Doak said nothing.

She turned over on her side to look at him. "Any luck with the
Senator?"

"Not much so far. I'll get him, before Monday, though."

She stood up and he felt a stirring in him at the sight of her taut
fully-feminine figure. She poised on the edge of the raft and then her
tanned body went slanting toward the water.

She came up directly beneath him and splashed a handful of water into
his face. "Sun worshipper," she mocked. "The trip out do you in?"

He made a face at her and she went under.

He looked over at the group in the glade. High school principal,
custodian of young minds--and a reader. Worse than that, a partner in
a publishing venture.

Corruption? What kind of mind would it take to believe there was
corruption in that group? A Senator Arnold kind of mind. Rebellion,
yes. Oh, very definitely rebellion--under the Arnold Law.

But how could--

Somebody had his feet and he was being pulled head over toes into the
waiting water. He came up spluttering to see Martha laughing at him
from the edge of the raft.

He started to climb up and she dove off the further side. He went
after her. Much laughter and great sport. An excuse to grab her, here
and there, to feel the firm, warm smoothness of her, to quicken to the
challenge of her body.

In the glade the watchers sat, missing nothing.

Doak said, "I'm not sure the solid citizens approve of your maidenly
frolicking. They seem to be frowning our way."

"Studious types," Martha said, "but not necessarily disapproving."

Doak was silent, staring at the water.

"Bored?" Her voice was light.

He looked up. "I've never been less bored. Martha, I...." He shook his
head in vexation.

"It's a little early for a pitch," she said, "though you do give it a
warming amateur earnestness. Or wasn't it going to be a pitch?"

He looked at her steadily. "What else?"

"A warning maybe?" a break in the light tone.

"What kind of warning?"

It was her turn to look at the water--and to color? It seemed so,
faintly, under the tan. She said, "To warn me that you're married or
poor or uninterested." She looked up, smiling. "I'm such a simple
country girl."

"Yes," he said. "Sure." He looked over at the watchers. "Are they
friends of yours?"

"Yes." Her eyes wide and searching, her face and body taut. "Why?"

"Wondered. Am I being played for a patsy?"

Silence while she studied him. Silence while the raft gently rocked,
and the world. "Patsy?" she asked.

"Forget it. You have a great charm and an unholy animal attraction for
me, Martha Klein, and maybe we'd better get back to shore and have a
quiet cigarette."

They had a cigarette and a hot dog with a skin on it, the first Doak
had ever seen. They had grape pop and a few laughs. Fun in the sun at
Dubbinville, U.S.A. Wouldn't the gang at home get a belt out of this?
And where was June's bright metallic laughter being heard this golden
afternoon?

They walked back to town quietly, exertion-spent, sun-calmed. They
came up onto the porch, and Mrs. Klein looked from Martha's face to
Doak's and frowned--and sighed.

"Fun?" she asked.

"Wonderful," Doak said. "And Martha surprised me by being able to
swim. None of my other girls can swim a lick."

"Martha's no girl," Mrs. Klein said. "She's twenty-seven."

Martha laughed. "Why, mother, you'll never get rid of me that way."

Mrs. Klein said, "I almost forgot. Mr. Arnold called. Wants to see
you, Mr. Parker, tonight."

"Well, maybe he is sold. Wonder how he knew I was here."

"There isn't much he doesn't know about what's going on in town,"
Mrs. Klein said. "I'd wager there isn't _anything_." She looked at
Martha as she said that last.

Martha's face was blank.

"Maybe I can put it off until tomorrow," Doak said. "It's been a
pretty good day up to now."

He called the Senator from the drug store in town. He told him,
"Nothing definite, yet, Senator."

"Don't give me that," Arnold said raspingly. "Get up here right away,
Parker."

Doak stopped at the house on the way back. He told Mrs. Klein, "I
might be a little late for supper. I think I'll run up and see the
Senator now and get it over with."

"We'll hold it," she said. She looked around to see if Martha was
within hearing. Then, "You're not trifling with my girl, Mr. Parker?"

"Not for a second," Doak assured her. "Though I have an uncomfortable
feeling she's trifling with me, but good."

Mrs. Klein shook her dark head. "Not with that sick-calf look on her
face. The girl's smitten. You watch your step, Mr. Parker."

"I promise," he said. "I'll be back as soon as possible."

The hot room, the face like ashes, the cracked voice. No chair again
for Doak. Arnold said, "You went up there last night, I know. Well?"

"I'll make a full report to my superior," Doak said. "I'm not
permitted to discuss Department business with _anybody_, Senator."

Arnold's thin lips were open, his bony jaw slack. "Well, I'll be
damned. Do you know who you're talking to, young man?"

"An _ex_-Senator," Doak answered.

"That's right--and the man who put your superior where he is. He'd
still be peddling papers if I hadn't got him into the Department."

Doak said nothing.

"I could get your job in a minute," Arnold went on. "I'm a hell of a
long ways from dead, Parker. You'd better wake up."

Doak had no words.

"Well, damn it, man, are you dumb? What have you got to say?"

"I've said it, sir," Doak said quietly.

For long and silent seconds, Arnold glared at him. And then he said,
"All right. I'll get my report from Ryder--and your job. Now get out."

Fine, _great_! Hero Doak Parker, of Security. Lion bearder,
hair-splitter, cutter-of-his-own-throat, lover of a country lass. And
man without a future, it looked like now.

       *       *       *       *       *

The dogs slobbered and watched, the gravel grated under his feet. The
great gates swung open and Doak took a deep breath of the warm clean
air. Why did he feel so free?

Martha was sitting on the front porch. She looked up and smiled as he
came near and he stooped to kiss her.

"Hey!" she said. "Watch it, city man." But she hadn't taken her lips
away for a few seconds.

From his jacket pocket he took the _Heritage Herald_ and tossed it in
her lap. She looked down at it for seconds, then up to read his face.
He said nothing.

"Last night," she said, "you got it. I missed it when I went upstairs,
last night, but I thought someone else might have taken it."

"_I_ took it--last night."

Her eyes searched his wonderingly but there was no evident tension in
her. Doak sat on the glider.

She said, "I was too forward to be believed this afternoon, perhaps?
Did you listen last night?"

"I listened. I'm from Security, Martha--or was. I'm resigning."

"Oh? To fight the good fight?"

He nodded. "But legally--or what is known as legally. Through the
pressure-group pattern. I know my way around Washington, Martha. I
think, in time and with the right people behind me, I think I
could--oh, hell!"

"Yes," she said. "Oh, hell! When you were swimming this afternoon we
could have got this, Doak. I told them to wait. I told them I thought
you had the makings of an honest man."

"Why?" He stared at her.

"I don't know why. Maybe your curly hair. I'm admitting nothing along
that line, not yet, Doak. I want to see what kind of fighter you are,
how much man you are."

"I wish I knew," he said quietly. "One thing I'm sure of, I'm going to
enjoy the battle."

"You're going to enjoy both battles," Martha said. "And probably win
both. But oh, the bastards we're going to have to fight."

He smiled and looked out at the shadowed lawn. This would be a place
for the historians, the _writing_ historians, Dubbinville, U.S.A. And
why should a man be happy, looking forward to so damned much trouble?


    _Mr. Gault has just presented us with a wholly plausible if
    highly terrifying view of a reasonably near future. Such
    things could, conceivably, come to pass. And prophecy, from
    the time of Jules Verne to the present, has long been one of
    the several spinal columns of science fiction. Yet is it
    possible for anyone to predict an unvisited future? We are
    inclined to think not. Gadgetry to come, as repeatedly
    demonstrated by Verne, is easy. But no one yet has been able
    to tell what human beings are going to do from day to day,
    much less years and years ahead of time._


TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE

This etext was produced from Fantastic Universe Aug-Sept 1953.
Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
copyright on this publication was renewed.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Mighty Dead, by William Campbell Gault

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MIGHTY DEAD ***

***** This file should be named 31577.txt or 31577.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/5/7/31577/

Produced by Greg Weeks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
