The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Portal of Dreams, by Charles Neville Buck

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Portal of Dreams

Author: Charles Neville Buck

Illustrator: Frank Snapp

Release Date: April 9, 2010 [EBook #31927]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PORTAL OF DREAMS ***




Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, Mary Meehan and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









                        _The_ PORTAL OF DREAMS

                       by CHARLES NEVILLE BUCK

      _Author of_ "THE KEY TO YESTERDAY" "THE LIGHTED MATCH" etc.

                     _Illustrated by_ FRANK SNAPP


NEW YORK
W. J. WATT & COMPANY
PUBLISHERS

Copyright, 1912

_Published September_




[Illustration: "Sit down!" he thundered.]




CONTENTS


       I. A VISION UPON A WARNING

      II. PURSUING A WILL-O'-THE-WISP

     III. I EMBARK ON A FOOL'S ERRAND

      IV. SOME PASSAGES FROM A DIARY

       V. PREMONITIONS BECOME REALITIES

      VI. THE END OF THE "WASTREL"

     VII. IN STRANGE CIRCUMSTANCES

    VIII. NATURE INDULGES IN SATIRE

      IX. A PORTRAIT AND A TEMPLE

       X. I SEEK ORCHIDS

      XI. I FIND MYSELF A DEMI-GOD

     XII. PORT AND STARBOARD LIGHTS

    XIII. ENTER THE INFANTRYMAN

     XIV. THE "ASH-TRASH LADY"

      XV. TWO DISCOVERIES

     XVI. AN INTERVIEW AND A CRISIS

    XVII. WE GO TO THE MOUNTAINS

   XVIII. A CHAT WITH A DICTATOR

     XIX. A VOLLEY FROM THE LAUREL

      XX. A CAVALCADE FROM THE LAUREL

     XXI. I GO WALKING AND MEET ENEMIES

    XXII. I FAIL TO RETURN HOME

   XXIII. THE OFFER OF PAROLE

    XXIV. MY DAY IN COURT

     XXV. BEING LAUGHED AT




List of Illustrations


"Sit down!" he thundered.

A young woman was sitting before a counter, with her back to the street,
trying on gloves.

"Frances! Frances! Frances!" I declaimed with the deep profundity of a
ritual.

"You are a great traveler, aren't you, Mr. Deprayne?" she suggested when
the silence had begun to be oppressive.




THE PORTAL OF DREAMS




CHAPTER I

A VISION UPON A WARNING


The doctor was so small and frail that his narrow face was rescued from
inconsequence only by a trimly cropped Van-Dyck with a dignified
sprinkling of gray. I always felt that, should I ever see him in a
bathing suit, I would have to seek a new physician. I could never again
think of him as sufficiently grown-up to practise an adult vocation. Yet
when the doctor spoke his mentality issued out of its small habitation
of flesh and expanded to commanding proportion.

The little doctor was in fine a very great doctor, and on this occasion
he was bullying me with the large authority of a Bonaparte.

"But, Doctor--" I began protestingly.

He raised a small hand which suggested the claw of a delicate bird and
fixed me with quizzical eyes that had the faculty of biting sharply
through a man's unspoken thoughts.

"Don't assume to say 'but' to me," he sternly enjoined; and since we had
long known each other, not only as physician and patient, but also as
men who breakfasted at the same hour and the same club table, I
momentarily heeded.

"Once upon a time," he continued, "the German Kaiser presumed to
question a pilot on his imperial yacht. Do you recall the result?"

"No," said I, "I don't, but----"

Again the doctor eyed me, basilisk fashion, across the bacon and eggs of
our belated morning meal, as he continued:

"He very properly reminded the Emperor that upon a vessel in the high
seas, a pilot acknowledges no superior this side of Eternity. In matters
of health I take the bridge. You obey."

"But--" I weakly insisted.

"You presume to think because you house your nerves in a well-muscled
body that they are infallible," he implacably continued. "I've seen
rotten motors in excellent garages. I've seen unhappy wives immured in
palaces, and I've seen finer figures of men than you in lunatic
asylums."

"My nerves are simply of the high-strung type," I argued.

"Those are the kind that snap," retorted the sage. "If you were a
racehorse, it might be a matter of reasonable pride to you to be bred in
the purple. Being a man with no avocation except the spending of
unearned money, it means that you are perilously over-sensitized."

"What unpleasant pedantry are you leading up to?" I demanded. "Out with
it."

"I mean to. You have the artistic temperament which, without genius, is
worse than useless. You choose to regard yourself a failure and grow
morose because you have found the law uncongenial and because editors
earn their salaries by returning your manuscripts. The durability of
your nervous system depends entirely on how you utilize the next five
years."

"Go on," I encouraged him, "don't mind me. Sentence me to death if it
amuses you."

"It won't be death, but unless you fortify those nerves," he calmly went
on, "there probably will be disaster. It may take any one of several
forms."

"As, for instance?" I inquired, with pardonable curiosity.

"Oh, arterio-sclerosis, paralysis, insanity, something of that sort."

"Thank you kindly," I murmured, as I reached for the matches. "Can I
have my choice of the lot?"

"However," went on the big little doctor, "if you devote the next few
years to a program of diversified travel, you ought to lay up an account
of nerve-strength upon which you can draw _ad lib._ for forty or fifty
years to come. You should even have a surplus against the unfortunate
exigency of living on when you are old and useless."

"But I have traveled," I argued. "I've been to----"

He interrupted me with a snort, and swept my declarations aside,
unfinished.

"You have dabbled at travel, like a school-girl nibbles at chocolates.
Get out on the hike and stay out for a year or two. Build into your
artificial self something of the out-door animal. You have a fair
start--you were once an athlete." He rose to go down to his motor, and I
shouted after him contemptuous and profane criticism. Nevertheless
within the week I booked passage for the Mediterranean.

I found once more that Europe and the African fringe of the land-locked
sea have to offer to the hunger of the wanderlust only a stereotyped
table-d'hote. Shortly it cloys. Within several weeks one thing only had
promised to break the stagnant surface with a riffle of interest. And
that one thing puzzled me in no small degree, since it was not such a
matter as would ordinarily have challenged my attention. I have passed
with a glance many beautiful women, and felt no need to turn my head for
a further inspection. I am not of the cavaliering type, and yet here I
was finding myself interested, in a strange and indefinable way, in a
woman whose face I had not seen, and whose name I did not know. That, I
told myself, was the secret of it. It was exactly because she was
elusive, mysterious in fashion, that I found my flat interest piqued. I
never had more than the swish of her skirt or a glimpse of her
retreating figure, until it came about that sheer inquisitiveness gave
her an augmented importance. At all events, she had eluded me over
southern Europe from Genoa to Constantinople, and thence into Egypt, and
I wanted to see her face. It was at Naples that I had my first hasty and
imperfect view of her. I was hurrying through the Galeria Umberto, on my
way to a luncheon appointment for which I found myself late. As I passed
Merola's a young woman was sitting before a counter, with her back to
the street, trying on gloves. I could appreciate the gypsy grace of her
figure, which was slender, because one of the avocations into which I
have essayed without distinction is painting. The single thing at which
I have not failed, except the success of having selected parents who
bequeathed me money, is an appreciation of the beautiful. That
appreciation, despite my hurry, brought me to a stop for a full glance
at her; but there was no mirror at any part of the shop which gave me a
reflection of her averted face, and as my appointment was imperative, I
refrained from going in to buy gloves. But there was something so
exquisite in her bearing, and in the tasteful lines of her simple
traveling gown, that I caught myself thinking of her. Then as I went
down to the quay a day later to say farewell to some friends, just as
the gangplank of an outgoing steamer was about to be drawn up, I saw her
hurrying across it. Her face was still averted. I strained to catch a
feature, but a wayward gust of bay breeze wrapped a filmy veil about the
profile which was for a moment turned my way--and hid it. She did not
house at the deck rail but disappeared as the gangplank came up and cut
off pursuit. But I had added to my first impression the knowledge that
she did not merely walk. She soared as though her feet were the sandals
of Hermes, and she carried herself with the splendid grace of a slender
young queen.

[Illustration: A young woman was sitting before a counter, with her back
to the street, trying on gloves.]

The luncheon appointment, which had thwarted my impulse to turn into the
glove shop, and so end the mystery in its incipiency, brought a long
trail of complications and caused me to envy those fortunate men who are
not handicapped by the possession of relatives. I have sometimes thought
that the truly ideal existence would be to be born an orphan unhampered
by cousins, aunts or any of those human beings who are privileged to
make demands upon our times and thoughts.

From the moment when I watched the skyline of New York sink slowly
behind the horizon until I reached Naples I had at least been a free
agent. But hardly had I signed my guest card at Parker's Hotel and
strolled out to hail a crazy Neapolitan hack when the angular and
purposeful figure of my Aunt Sarah loomed up in the near foreground
and--saving her grace--eclipsed the picturesqueness of the town and the
distant cone of Vesuvius. I had known vaguely that this estimable lady
was beating her way about Europe, guide-booked and grimly set upon
self-improvement, but I had hoped to keep the area of two or three
monarchies between us.

I knew that from one to the other of the Cook's Agencies she would be
flitting with the same frantic energy that characterizes the industry of
the ant. That I should myself pass within hailing distance of her party
or be recruited in her peregrinations was a disaster which I had not
anticipated. None the less the blow had fallen and I had walked unwarned
into the ambuscade of her fond embrace. Aunt Sarah would now converse
voluminously of cathedrals and old masters, and all the things upon
which tourists are fed to a point of acute mental dyspepsia.

She had ordered me to luncheon with much the same finality as that with
which royalty commands the attendance of guests at court. I had gone
meekly though doing so involved passing Merola's and opened up a series
of events which were destined to alter for the worse my immediate
future. But the luncheon had been only the beginning, and greater
misfortunes were to follow in due order.

I have never since been able to understand precisely what form of
paresis seized upon me, and paralyzed my normally efficient power of
lying, when she instructed me to attach myself to her party for a motor
trip to Villefranche and Nice. I do know that no available mendacity
occurred to my shocked brain and I found myself murmuring an acceptance.
The acceptance was again meek and spineless. I had discovered at
luncheon that Aunt Sarah, with that motherly obsession which appears to
characterize many maiden ladies of fifty and beyond, had under wing a
party of three young ladies who were capping off their educations with
the post graduate "advantages" of the grand tour. That these young
ladies possessed all the homely virtues, I have not the slightest doubt.
Their faces and figures attested the homeliness and their virtue was
such that they seemed always wondering whether their halos were on
straight. Theirs was an insatiate greed for intellectual feeding. They
browsed through their Baedeckers with a seeming terror lest something
erudite escape them. They pursued and captured and assimilated every
fleeting fact which might improve their minds. Until my captivity they
had no man with their party. That was probably because Aunt Sarah had
made the strategic mistake of permitting all those, whom she might
otherwise have annexed, to see her girls. She should have enlisted her
male escort first and held back the introductions until desertion was
impracticable. At all events, I had, like the imbecile I was, "fallen
for it," and surrendered my liberty. When the boat bearing the unknown
divinity set sail I was merely a satellite of Aunt Sarah's constellation
and no longer a free agent.

Because I happened to be, in a superficial way, familiar with the
tourist-tramped sections of the Continent, I became a sort of gentleman
courier, without recompense, and because I had once undertaken to be a
painter, I was expected to give extemporaneous lectures on the art
treasury of the museums. We walked several thousand miles, or maybe it
was millions, over those peculiarly hard floors which make art galleries
penitential institutions. I saw the three plain faces in every phase of
soulful rapture that can be elicited by the labors of the masters, from
Michelangelo to Murillo.

When this had gone on for several centuries, or maybe it was aeons, I
discovered that every art gallery has two or three truly interesting
features, though the full enjoyment of these was denied me. I speak of
the exits. Perhaps to the unintimidated mind of the outsider it may
appear that whatever agonies I underwent were the deserved result of my
own abjectness. It is easy to say that I might have pleaded other plans
and gone on my way enfranchised. To such a critic my only and sufficient
reply is that he or she does not know my Aunt Sarah. My Aunt Sarah says
to whomsoever she chooseth, "Go," and he goeth; "Come," and he cometh.
She knew perfectly well that I had no other plans. She correctly assumed
me to be a derelict floating without purpose and with my chart lost
over-side. She virtuously resolved that for once I should be made of
use, in assisting to improve the minds of the three plain young ladies.
Lying would have been quite futile. Consequently she said, "Come," and I
came. When I learned that we were to make the tour to the Riviera towns
by motor, I welcomed the suggestion as a less evil than cathedrals and
art galleries. At least we should be out of doors and in the
exhilaration of rapid motion one might hope to forget the three young
ladies at brief and blessed intervals. One could not at the same time
think of the culture-pursuing trio and anything rapid.

It has been my curse in life that I have dabbled at so many things that
I can be made of smattering use in almost any circumstance. Our
chauffeur discovered this three and one-half minutes after the
occurrence of our first blow-out, when Aunt Sarah, taking pity upon his
sweating and dust-grimed brow, told me off to help him patch the
puncture. After that it was impossible to feign ignorance as to the
interior workings and deviltries of motor cars.

The Upper Corniche Road is perhaps the most charming driveway of the
world--and I say this with due reverence to Amalfi. By a road as white
as a fresh tablecloth and as smooth as a bowling alley one speeds to the
purring of his motor along the way thrown up for the tramping feet of
Bonaparte's battalions. From a commanding height the traveler looks
down, as from the roof of the world, with close kinship of peaks and
clouds, upon a panorama a-riot with breadth and depth and color.
Fascinating road-houses of stucco walls curtained behind a profusion of
clambering roses tempt one to pause and take his ease to the tinkle of
guitars and mandolins. But Aunt Sarah and the girls, ever bent upon
reaching the next cathedral with a stained glass window or the next
dingy canvas of a saint sitting on a cloud, were scarcely amenable to
the lure of road-house temptation.

They seemed to regard Europe as a transitory effect which might fade
like the glories of sunset before they had finished seeing it, and
anything savoring of the dilatory aroused their suspicion.

Far below us lay the outspread Mediterranean, blue beyond description
and upon her placid bosom sailboats shrunk to the size of swallows and
yachts seemed no larger than nursery toys.

One gracious afternoon, while I was occupying the front seat beside the
driver, I almost attained a state of contentment. I was pretending that
I had forgotten all about the human freight in the tonneau. My eyes were
drinking in the smiling beauty framed by the wide horizon, when suddenly
the droning of the motors fell quiet and with no warrantable reason the
automobile slid to a halt and declined to proceed farther.




CHAPTER II

PURSUING A WILL-O'-THE-WISP


Aunt Sarah and the girls were much annoyed and their annoyance did not
grow less when, after a half-hour of diagnosis, the chauffeur emerged,
grease-stained and exhausted from under the car, shaking his head. He
frankly admitted that his worm's eye view had failed to enlighten him as
to the trouble. Aunt Sarah turned upon me eyes mirroring a faith
sufficient to move even stalled motor cars.

"I am sure, my dear," she said, sweetly, "your mechanical aptitude can
find a remedy for this difficulty."

It was, of course, an order to burrow into the confined space between
the road bed and the bottom of the car, and of course I burrowed. For a
time I was out of touch with all matters transpiring in the great outer
world, but finally I saw the inverted face of our chauffeur gazing in
upon me and heard his bellowing voice. I have hitherto neglected to
mention that our chauffeur was neither French nor Italian, but Irish.
He was, in fact, an excellent fellow, and the only member of our party
whom I found companionable.

"Sure, sor," he yelled, "there's another car in trouble just around th'
turn av' th' road."

I supposed that he was imparting this information only out of the
assumption that misery loves company, and inasmuch as my reply was
profane, it need not be quoted. In a moment more, however, his grinning
visage reappeared at the road level. "They wants to know if you can't be
afther lending 'em a tire-iron?"

"What do they think this is?" I roared back, squirming far enough to
clear my face for utterance, but not far enough to see what was going
on. "This isn't a repair crew."

It was hardly a gracious response to a fellow motorist in trouble, but
my point of view was oppressed with the weight of a paralyzed car, and
Aunt Sarah and the girls, and I was misanthropic to the degree of
sourness. From my position whatever conversation ensued was merely an
incoherent babble of voices. Palpably, despite my discourtesy, Mr.
Flannery had supplied the inquirers with whatever they needed, and they
had gone their way. I, in the course of the next few minutes, emerged
from my hedge-hog isolation, tinkered with the carburetor, and crawled
back again into concealment. Then someone returned the borrowed
tire-iron. I did not have the opportunity to speak to the Someone, and I
should not have seen the Someone at all had I not happened to catch the
shouted words of Mr. Flannery. Mr. Flannery had so accustomed himself to
pitting his voice against machinery that even in moments of quiet he
hurled his words like the roar of a bull. So, as he spoke now to the
unknown person, I recognized an allusion to myself. The words which set
me to extricating myself as speedily as possible from my humble position
were as follows:

"Sure, ma'am, th' boss would be afther bein' more polite to yer, only
the car is layin' a little heavy on his stummick, and it gives him a bit
of a grouch."

The word which excited me was the "ma'am," and my excitement was no
means allayed when I stood clear in the road and saw just disappearing
around a curve a figure which I recognized. It could be no other figure,
for no other figure that I had ever seen could walk with the same
triumphant and lissome grace. Again the face was turned away from me,
and about her hat floated a confusing cloud of veil. But she had been
there within a few feet and possibly had even heard my surly responses
to her request for assistance. Possibly she had seen my wriggling feet
while I, who would have esteemed it the greatest possible privilege to
have assisted her in any way, had lain there surrounded by dust and
profanity. I was seized with a mad impulse to run after her, but I knew
that the return of my iron signified that their tire-mending was
finished and they were on their journey.

My own repairs were not finished, and I stood there with streaks of
grease across my face, caked with dust and by no means presenting the
appearance with which a man might hope to appear acceptable in the eyes
of divinity. Aunt Sarah and her bevy of young intellectuals, I found,
had withdrawn to the greater comfort of a near-by road-house, and could
give me no information, while Flannery's description was on the whole,
unsatisfactory. The idiot had not asked her name, and in answer to all
my questions could only assure me vaguely that the young lady was "a
peach." One thing he had noticed. The car, which had passed us a quarter
of an hour before was a large blue touring car, of high horse-power. It
is strange what details impress certain minds and what goes unseen. So
again I had missed my chance, and the incident had not served to
reconcile me to my serfdom.

Several days later I had succeeded in gaining a brief leave of absence
from my duties as courier, and was spending an interval of sadly needed
rest.

I had the hope that the unknown girl and her party would be stopping for
a while in one of the closely grouped towns along the coast: Nice,
Cannes, Mentone, Monte Carlo--it mattered little which one it might be.
If she was in any of these, I should eventually find her, and I haunted
the dazzling whiteness of the Boulevard des Anglais, with a buoyant
pulse beat of expectancy. At any moment I might again catch a glimpse of
her in a shop or cafe, and if I did, I meant that it should be more than
a glimpse, and that she should not again escape until I had at least
seen her face. I spent most of my time wondering what she was like.
Would the full view bring a greater sense of fascination or the pang of
disillusionment? It might be that when I saw her I should find myself
harshly awakened from a dream, but at all events, there would be
certainty, and an end to the tantalizing sense of following a
will-o'-the-wisp which constantly eluded. She gave me one very anxious
afternoon. I had been taking a horseback ride near town when I came upon
a wrecked and empty automobile. The physical facts showed clearly what
had happened. The car had evidently skidded while speeding, in an effort
to turn out for some passing vehicle, and had tried to climb a stone
wall. There must have been a very ugly moment, as the twisted front
wheels and crumpled hood attested. What frightened me was the fact that
it was a large, blue touring car of the same sort, if not identical,
with the one described by Flannery. I was commencing my ride when I saw
it, but I turned back at once to town and began an investigation. I
finally learned that the chauffeur for a local garage had taken a party
of his own friends for a joy ride, and that the expedition had come to
summary grief. My effort to trace the history of that particular car for
a week or two past resulted in nothing. I was informed that it had been
hired many times and to many unrecorded persons, usually for the
afternoon or day.

Several nights later I was sitting at a roulette table in Monte Carlo's
_Cercle des Etrangers_. I had fallen in with a coterie of chance
acquaintances, who for some reason held faith in my luck and insisted
upon my crowding into a vacant place at the wheel. My function was to
submit to the issue of fortune not only my own stack of _louis d'or_,
but also the considerable purse that they had raised among them.

My table was near the center of the main _salle_, and at my elbows
crowded the little party of men and women whose interests hung upon my
success or failure. It was the same old scene; the same old life that
one sees year after year in this chief cathedral of the gods of chance.
Men and women from both hemispheres stood or sat in the tense absorption
of eyes riveted on dancing ball and whirling disc. At my right was a
regally gowned woman whose delicate features were now as hard as agate
and whose eyes were avid. At my left was a saturnine Spaniard who smiled
indifferently, but who did not know his cigar had died to a stale
coldness. I was experiencing the sense of disillusionment which
invariably comes to me afresh when I enter the Casino of Monaco. I
always ascend the stairs of the palace which the principality-supporting
syndicate has provided for its patrons with a mild elation of
expectancy. I always take my place at the tables with the realization of
disappointment. The sparkle of jewels is there; sometimes the beauty is
there, but the spirit that rules is not a spirit of gaiety; and the
glitter of eyes makes me forget the diamonds. The cold lust of greed
flashes in the hard brightness of set faces.

Between the droning announcements of the croupier insidious thoughts
force themselves. I think of the management's efficient ambulance
services; of the exhaustive arrangements by which unknown patrons may be
promptly identified; and the sinister discoveries of the beach. These
things were in my mind now as the stack of gold pieces at my front
alternately piled and dwindled under a fitful sequence of petty losses
and gains.

I may have been at the table an hour when I began to have the insistent
feeling of someone in particular standing at my back. Of course, there
were many people behind me. Besides my own party was the crowd of idle
onlookers as well as others who were impatiently waiting to seize upon
vacant places about the board.

And yet, just then I could not turn my head. My system involved leaving
the winnings upon the table for three successive spins of the wheel. I
had played a group of numbers in the black, cautiously avoiding the
alluring perils of the greater odds, and twice my little pile of _louis
d'or_ had drawn in its prize money. On the third spin we stood to lose
the entire amount of our augmented stake or see our pile swell
commandingly. While I waited for the croupier to close the betting and
touch the button, I twisted my head backward, to determine whose
presence in the throng had so subtly announced itself to my
consciousness. But the barrier of faces that pressed close against my
chair cut off all who stood further back. The wheel raced; the ball
danced madly about its rim; the crowd stood bating its breath; and the
scattered piles of gold lay in doubt on the green baize diagram.

It was over. The croupier sang out the winning number, column and
combinations. The rake was extended to push over to me a fairly imposing
pile of French gold. I was conscious of coming in for more than my
individual share of interest. Luck had been with me, and at Monte Carlo,
the lucky man is the man of moment. But the sense of some personality
above the many personalities was now borne in upon me with irritating
force. I was impatient to rise and push back my chair and look about me,
but as I attempted to do so, the men and women whose capital I had
increased raised a chorus of remonstrance. I reluctantly resumed the
place which I had been about to abdicate and once more laid out my
stake. This time I pushed the entire pile out onto the green cloth in a
pyramid on the black. I knew if I lost it they would willingly surrender
my services. Even at that cost I wanted freedom.

For, in the moment that I had been standing there, I had caught a
glimpse of a retreating figure, which disappeared through the door,
almost at the instant that my eyes identified it. It was the figure of a
woman in evening-dress, or rather, I should say, of _the_ woman in
evening-dress. There was the same graceful majesty of bearing, the same
slim grace--and the same averted face. But because I wished to leave the
table fortune pursued me. Spin after spin doubled, tripled, quadrupled
my swelling pile of money. Finally I told them that I would remain for
three more tests of chance--but no more. I could hardly abandon these
enthused men and women without warning, but as soon as I had fulfilled
the obligation, I rose, and I fear there was more of precipitate haste
than of courtesy in my manner of shouldering my way through the press of
onlookers, to the door and the wonderful embroidery of flower beds
before the casino. Eyes followed me, for my luck had held and I was a
momentary sensation. It was still early, as hours go in a place where
the major activity belongs to night life, and for two hours I haunted
the cafes and boulevards without result. The next day proved equally
fruitless, but that night, as I was idling with my after-dinner cigar,
along the Boulevard de Condemine, I saw strolling at some distance ahead
of me, a young man and a girl. It was she, and I had only to hasten my
steps to overtake and see her. I could guess that the man with her was a
Frenchman. The cut of his clothes and the jaunty swagger of his bearing
were distinctively Gallic. My imagination could read the title "fortune
hunter" as though it were embroidered on his coat-tails.

I was resentful, and hurried on, but as usual I was destined to
disappointment. An untimely and inconsequential acquaintance loomed up
in my path, and when I attempted to brush hastily by him, he slapped me
on the back and hailed me with that most irritating of all conceivable
forms of address, "Well, how is the boy to-night?"

He did not find the "boy" particularly affable that night, but with an
accursed and persistent geniality he succeeded in delaying me for the
space of a few precious moments. At a distance, I saw her disappear into
a lighted doorway against which her face and figure showed only in
silhouette. Again I had lost her. I could hardly pursue her into the
entrances of private houses, but I noted the location and went back to
my apartments in the Hotel Hermitage with the comforting thought that we
were in the same town and that by rising early the next morning, and
searching tirelessly till midnight, I should ultimately be able to see
her.

Before sleep came to me a telegram was brought to my door.

Aunt Sarah had succeeded in becoming involved in some ludicrous
difficulty with the Italian customs officials. She implored that I come
at once to her rescue. How she had achieved it, was a matter of
inscrutable mystery. I had always found the politeness of Italian
customs officers as gracious as a benediction, but Aunt Sarah was a
resourceful person. I rejoined her detestable cortege long enough to
extricate her from her newest difficulty, and to discuss with her her
plans for the immediate future. I found that she and her young ladies
were yearning for the sepia tinted walls of Rome where, under every
broken column and crumbling arch their hungry souls might drink deep
draughts of improving tradition and culture. I knew that they would
waste no time musing by moonlight in the shadows of the Colosseum, but
that with Latin dictionaries they would decipher in the broad light of
day the inscriptions on the arcs of Titus and Constantine. None the
less, I encouraged their idea and enlarged upon the suitability of this
time. I looked up the train schedules and wired for hotel reservations.
Every moment that they hesitated I was excitedly quoting, though not
aloud, lines that came back from the days of a less-mature literary
taste:

    "'Why dost thou stay and turn away,
    Here lies the path to Rome.'"

I thought it the part of wisdom to refrain from mentioning until the
actual moment of their departure that my own way lay in an opposite
direction. But when I had seen them settled in their first-class
compartments and the accommodating guard had reassured me by locking
them in, I turned with a sigh of contentment and fled back to Monte
Carlo. I had been absent only a few days, but I returned to a dusty and
desolate town. Perhaps the numbers of gamblers and pleasure-seekers had
not actually diminished. Perhaps they had even increased, but a day's
search satisfied me that the unknown lady had gone, and for me the town
was empty.

What idiosyncrasy drove me to the Holy Land, I cannot say, unless it was
that after my exhausting term of cathedral inspection I felt a desire to
have a look at that temple which, except for the Taj Mahal, has always
appealed to me as the world's most beautiful place of worship--the
Mosque of Omar.

Riding one day on a donkey around the walls of Jerusalem, I had a
glimpse of Her standing on the ramparts above me by the gate of the
Needle's Eye. But as I looked up, the sun was full in my eyes and I
could distinguish only the lashing of her skirts in the wind, and a
halo-like aura of gold about her head, which was uncovered. At that
distance her face was a featureless oval. Until night came with its
howling of a thousand dogs I visited the places to which guides most
frequently conduct their charges. But in the Temple of The Sepulchre, on
the Mount of Olives, at the Jews' Wailing Place and among the vaulted
bazaars, there was only failure for my quest. For two days I hunted, and
while I hunted she must have gone down to Jaffa or departed for the
overland trip to Syria.




CHAPTER III

I EMBARK ON A FOOL'S ERRAND


I was sitting on the terrace at Shepheard's Hotel on the evening of my
arrival there. I was finding life flat, as one must who can discover no
fascination in Cairo's appeal to the eyes, nostrils and ears. Before me
was the olla-podrida of touring fashion and fellaheen squalor; the smell
of camels and attar of roses; the polyglot chatter of European
pleasure-seekers and the tom-toms of Arab pilgrims.

Then once more I saw her. But still I did not see her face. I suppose
there were other persons with her. I did not notice. I did notice the
salient thing. She was boarding a motor 'bus, presumably for the
Alexandria train, and was followed by the usual Cairene retinue of
tarbooshed porters and luggage-bearers.

My glimpse of her was again only in exit. My baggage had just been
unpacked, and I also could not catch the Alexandria train. I had been
foolish enough to announce my coming by postcard from Jerusalem to an
acquaintance at the Turf Club and had found awaiting me at Shepheard's
on my arrival a note informing me that George Clann, a friend of past
days, had invited a few army officers and native men for dinner that
evening to meet me. The note added that no excuse would be accepted. I
had called up the club and signified my acceptance. That was before I
had seen the departing goddess, but I was due in the Sharia el Magrabi
an hour hence and so was once again completely anchored.

Had I seen her in entrance instead of in exit only, I should perhaps
have remained in Egypt and fanned into rebirth a languid interest in
sarcophagi and cartouches and camel-riding and scrambling up the
comfortless slants of pyramids.

As it was I began to subscribe to the Oriental idea of an inevitable
destiny. I admitted to myself that it was written that for me this lady
was to remain as unseen as though she belonged to the latticed and
veiled seclusion of some pasha's harem. I told myself that had my first
glimpse been a full one I should have gone on my way with prompt
forgetfulness and that a curiosity so strange and fantastic must
influence me no further.

I sought out an empty place on the terrace where unintentionally enough
I overheard an earnest conversation between a fair-haired and
enthusiastic young Englishman and a grizzled fellow in middle life. They
were talking business in one of the writing-rooms which give out through
open windows upon the terrace, and the enthusiasm of the younger gave a
carrying quality to his voice.

He was, it appeared from his solicitude, seeking a billet which it lay
in the power of his elder vis-a-vis to bestow. From the discussion which
neither of them treated as confidential I learned that there is
somewhere in the Pacific Ocean a perfectly useless island from which
certain ethnological data and exhibits might be obtained. It further
appeared that the British Museum was deficient in these particular
curios and that the glass cases were yearning to be filled. The youth
had been employed in Soudanese excavations and research. Now that work
had ended and with it the pay, the necessity for other work and pay had
not ended.

"The billet down there," suggested the elder man, "will be no end
beastly, I dare say. A tramp steamer sails from Port Said in three days
for Singapore, Sandakan and the South Seas. The pay will be one hundred
and fifty pounds for the job. The fare will probably be maggoty
biscuits--still, if you feel game to have a dash at it----" The speaker
finished with a shrug which seemed to add, "It's never difficult to find
a fool."

But the young man laughed with a whole-hearted enthusiasm, that
entirely missed the under note of contempt in the manner of his
benefactor. "Well, rather," he declared. "And I say, you know, its jolly
good of you, sir."

Later I made the acquaintance of the young Briton in the American bar
where over Scotch and soda we discussed the project, to the end that I
nominated and elected myself an assistant forager for the British
Museum, serving at my own expense. There was something likeable about my
new and naive acquaintance, who was so eager to shoulder his futile way
across a third of the globe's circumference in search of crudely
inscribed rocks and axe-heads and decaying skulls. My own experience in
life had been even more futile. I had learned to speak five languages
and had completely failed of gaining a foothold in five useful
professions: Art, Law, Literature, Music and Contentment. Possibly the
appeasement of my Salatheal hunger, the curing of the curse, did not
after all lie along the routes of Cunarders and Pullmans. Maybe I was
still nibbling at travel as the school-girl nibbles at chocolates.
Perhaps his method of taking the long and empty trail was the heroic
medicine my itching feet required. At all events, I sententiously quoted
to myself, "I think It will kill me or cure, and I think I will go there
and see."

When I informed young Mansfield, for that proved to be his name, that I
meant to be his traveling companion, his almost childlike face took on
an incredulous expression. He was a great two-hundred-pound chap whose
physique should logically have been the asset of a pirate or a pugilist,
but the visage which surmounted it had a rosy pinkness and his blue eyes
wore the guileless charity of essential innocence. With his physical
power went a long-suffering good nature, and as he talked of the widely
scattered places he had seen and the things which should have made him
wise in his generation it seemed to me that his soul must have worn a
macintosh, from which the showers of experience had been shed off
without leaving a mark. I have seen mastiffs with eyes full of
wistfulness because Nature has denied their affectionate temperaments
the gentle lives of lap dogs. Mansfield struck me the same way. Why a
man, by his spare and simple standards as rich as Cr[oe]sus, should care
to ship with him on a voyage promising maggoty biscuits, was quite
beyond his mental process. He confessed, in all frankness, that he did
it merely for the money--the pitiful hundred and fifty. There was a girl
back in England, probably as devoid of surprises and complications of
character as a lane-side primrose. I pictured her to myself as a
creature of pink and shallow prettiness. The day to which his ambition
strained as the ultimate goal was the day when he could become a curator
in the British Museum and transplant her to decent London lodgings. He
longed to placard and arrange scarabs in a plate-glass case and to
classify Chimbote pottery and on bank holidays to push a go-cart in the
park.

I was glad, however, when I went over the rust-red side of the _Wastrel_
that Mansfield went with me. We had known that we were shipping on a
mean vessel, and one shouldered out of more orderly chartings, because
of her unworthiness. Liners did not ply the tepid waters for which we
were bound: waters ridden by no commerce save the peddling of copra and
pearl shell and beche-de-mer. Yet even the warning had not prepared me
for what I found, as I first stepped upon her unclean decks and had my
initial view of her more unclean crew. Perhaps there are other corroded
hulks shambling here and there among the less frequented ports of the
seven seas as uninviting in appearance and as villainously manned as was
the _Wastrel_, but on this point I stand unconvinced. A glance told us
that her sea-worthiness was questionable and that her over-burdening
cargo pressed her Plimsoll mark close to the water line. We were to
learn by degrees that her timbers were rotten, her plates rust-eaten and
her engines junk. Her officers were outcasts from respectable seafaring,
none too cordial in their relations with admiralty courts. They had
fallen back on the hazardous command of such a vessel as this not from
choice, but necessity, precisely as other types of unemployed and
hopeless men fall back on vagrancy and crime. Her crew was picked from
the dregs of scattered ports. They were Lascars, Kanakas, Chinese and
non-descripts from here and there; haled forth and signed from dives
where human garbage trickles down to the sea. At first they interested
me as new and roughened types of men, yet as I say, I was more than
grateful for the shoulder touch of at least one being of my own sort.
From our arrival, none of them except the captain and officers took the
slightest pains to conceal that they regarded us as unwelcome
interlopers and even the courtesy of the after-guard was short-lived
enough. In that desert of taciturnity Mansfield babbled like a brook and
overflowed with young sentimentality.

The first leg of our journey ended at Borneo, leaving us as unacquainted
with officers and seamen, save in the surface details of personal
appearance, as we had been at Port Said. Now we were dropping Sandakan
harbor over the stern. Already the sprawling, hillside town, framed in
its mangrove swamps, was lost around the buttress of the harbor's
sentinel rock. Ramparts of sandstone were burning with a ruddy glow in
the sunset.

A sense of isolation settled on us. As we had nosed our way outward
Mansfield had been leaning silently on the after rail. His eyes had
dwelt lingeringly on the green gardens and white walks of the British
Consulate which sits upon its hill. Now we had seen the last of that and
of the bay's flotilla of matting-sailed junks. Off the port bow were
only beetling sandstone and the countless gulls, flashing white as they
tilted the snowy linings of their wings into the sun. He talked for a
time, in low tones of the girl in Sussex as men will talk when they are
homesick, and then he rather shamefacedly produced from somewhere and
opened at random a much battered blank-book, written in a woman's hand.

"I dare say," he hesitantly told me, "I have no moral right to read
this. It's quite personal, yet it's unsigned. Invasion of privacy can't
apply to anonymous persons, you know." He paused for a minute and
indolently watched the screaming hordes of Sandakan birds as if awaiting
my agreement, but I said nothing.

"You see," he continued, "I've been living lately in a cheap _pension_
at Cairo and, before that, in beastly Soudan inns, so when I drew a bit
in advance I resolved to treat myself to a day or two at Shepheards. You
remember how full the house was? They had to give me a small room on the
roof. It was really a sort of servant's room in less crowded times, I
fancy. A beggar of an Arab used to pray on his rug in front of my
door.... In rummaging about I found this." He held up the blank-book. "I
looked for an address, meaning to post it to its owner but there was no
address and only given names--there's not a surname between these
covers. Some servant must have found it in a vacated room and later left
it in the one to which I had fallen heir. Seems to have been some girl's
desultory but intimate diary. Just an entry now and then, with evidently
long gaps between. You see the first writing is immature, almost
childish--and the last is dated at Cairo."

I nodded my head, but said nothing. He appeared deeply interested but
his simple punctilio required the reinforcement of my approval, before
he could quite clear the skirts of his conscience in the matter of
having sampled its contents.

"You see," he half-apologized, "my first glance was disinterested, I was
merely seeking to identify ownership. But from just a few lines, read in
that fashion, I saw that it was--" his voice became serious, almost
awed--"well that it was rather wonderful. Some girl has been putting her
heart into words here--" he tapped the blank-book--"and she's written a
genuine human document." Again he paused, drumming on the rail with the
fingers of one hand.

"From a half-dozen bits of Chimbote pottery," he reflected, "I can read
a great deal of the habits and life of the Incas. I can restore an
extinct mammal from some fragments of skeleton, but I find it jolly
difficult to understand anything about a woman. If a fellow means to
marry he ought to try to understand. That's why I'd like to have a dip
into this. Do you think I might?"

"Do you think," I countered, smiling, "that you would have the right to
read somebody's unsigned love-letters?" A certain magazine editor had
once witheringly opined that I would never succeed in literature until I
acquired some insight into the feminine riddle. But he had not pointed
me to diaries. He had bluntly advised me to fall in love with a few
variant types.

Until a man had found blond or dark hairs on his coat shoulder, said the
editor, he could not hope to write about heartbeats. If he had found
various kinds, and that often, he could write better.

Young Mansfield was giving my question a graver and more literal
consideration than it merited.

"I rather think," he said seriously, "that one might read such letters.
Unless the offense is against some definite person there is no offense
at all."

"Perhaps you are right," I admitted, with a listless avoidance of
argument, and in a moment more he had opened the book at random and was
reading aloud.




CHAPTER IV

SOME PASSAGES FROM A DIARY


Mansfield was right. The pages of this diary struck the essentially
human note of frank self-avowal. They were as fragrant as May orchards,
their sweetness of personality made one think of brave young dreams
among dewy blossoms. But I confessed to him the feeling that we were
trespassers into these secrets, and after that he either laid the book
by altogether or read it only when alone.

The _Wastrel_ was cruising at her cripple's pace southeast by east,
through those hot waters which lie directly above the equator. After
some days we sloped across the line, but still clung to the hideous
swelter of the next meridian. Our course lay among groups of lush
islands which simmered in steam and fever, and the merciless, overhead
sun beat upon us, as if focused through a burning glass until the pitch
oozed from the deck cracks, and the sweat from our pores, and the
self-control from our curdled tempers. Faces that had been sullen at
Sandakan grew malevolent and menacing at 150 degrees, east, where, if I
remember rightly, we crossed the equator.

The scowls of the men dwelt hatefully upon Captain Coulter as he paced
the bridge. From scraps of information picked up here and there in
fo'castle disparagement, I pieced together a lurid abstract of his
history. I knew how wild and unsavory were the reputations of many of
the men of the eastern beaches. I had listened to tales of _lanai_ and
_bund_, but even in such company our skipper stood out as uniquely
wicked.

The sheer and hypnotic force of his masterful will lay over and silenced
the ship. From the first, he dominated. But if he had dominated at the
latitude of 120 he domineered at 150, and to this domineering he brought
all those extremes of tyranny which lie at the hand of a ship's captain
on the high seas. At times the sheer, undiluted brutality of this
control compelled my unwilling admiration. Every pair of eyes that met
his from the fo'castle, were eyes of smoldering hatred and fear, and
though he assumed scornful unconsciousness of this attitude, he knew
that his security was no greater than that of the lion-tamer, whose
beasts have begun to go bad. He must appear to invite attack, and upon
its first intimation of outbreak, he must punish, and punish memorably.

Captain Coulter was little above the average in physical pattern and he
walked with a slight defect of gait, throwing one foot out with an
emphatic stamp. His face was always clean-shaven, and it might have
served a sculptor for a type of the uncompromising Puritan, so hidden
were its brutalities and so strong its note of implacable resoluteness.

Over a high and rather protrusive forehead, long hair of iron gray was
always swept back. Bushy and aggressive brows shaded eyes singularly
piercing and of the same depth and coldness as polar ice. His nose was
large and straight, and his lips set tight and unyielding like the jaws
of a steel trap. The chin was square and close-shaven. Our captain was a
silent man, yet in his own fashion bitterly passionate. Heffernan, the
first mate, was a tawdry courtier, who studiously considered his chief
in every matter, and maintained his position of concord by ludicrous
care to risk no disagreement. In the stuffy cabin where three times a
day we sweltered over bad food Mansfield and I studied the attitudes of
the officers.

Coulter grimly amused himself over his eating by making absurd
statements for the sheer pleasure of seeing his next in command, fall
abjectly into agreement. The second mate, however, was impenetrably
silent. He was without fear, but a life which had evidently brought him
down a steep declivity from a lost respectability, had taught him
consideration for odds. If he did not contradict the dogmatic utterances
of his chief in table conversation, he at least refused to agree.

Mansfield and I were convinced that if this prematurely gray fellow with
the dissipated face, cut in a patrician mould, could ever be brought to
the point of personal narrative, he would have a stirring story to tell.
We also knew that he would never tell it.

Once before the feud between after-watch and fo'castle drove the
officers into an alliance of self-defense. A grave clash between the
captain and the second mate seemed inevitable. It was a night of
intolerable heat, and a sky spangled with stars hung over us low and
smothering. Lawrence, the second mate, was off watch, and joined us,
carrying a violin. Then under the weird depression and melancholy
lassitude which burdened us all, he began to improvise. Mansfield and I
listened, spell-bound. Under his touch the catgut gave off such strains
as could come only from the sheer genius of a gifted musician who had
suffered miserably. It was almost as if he were giving without words the
story which his lips would never tell, and into the improvised music
crept infinite pathos and somber tragedy. No one could have listened
unmoved, but the manner in which Captain Coulter was affected was
startling.

He came over with an advent like that of a maniac. The lame foot was
pounding the deck with the stressful stamp that was always his
indication of rage. He halted before us with fists clenched and his eyes
glittering. Upon Lawrence he vented an outpouring of blasphemous and
unquotable wrath.

"Throw that damned fiddle overboard," was the command with which he
capped his fierce tirade. "Don't let me hear its hell-tortured
screeching on my ship again."

For a moment Lawrence stood silent and cold in a petrifaction of anger.
Then he laid the instrument carefully on a hatch and stepped forward.
Obviously it was in his mind at that moment to kill the captain, but
after a pause he thought better of it. The odds against him were too
heavy.

"I'll stow the violin in my box, sir," he said with a voice so quiet it
was almost gentle, "but so help me God, if ever we meet after this
voyage is ended, I mean to kill you." Coulter laughed disdainfully and
strode away, but for ten minutes Lawrence sat silent, his breath coming
in deep gasps while he wrestled with the murder madness. We learned
later that the captain was one of those persons whom music frenzies, and
from that time on we did not even permit ourselves the consolation of
whistling a favorite air.

Of all the restless men in the fo'castle, Coulter most keenly watched
one John Hoak, a gigantic seaman from Liverpool, in whom he
instinctively recognized a potential ringleader of mutiny. One evening
Hoak vindicated this appraisement by defiantly and loudly playing a
music-hall tune on an accordion. A strain of it reached the bridge and
Coulter, who was on watch, ordered the offender forward. After a violent
and profane denunciation, under which the giant writhed in silent fury,
Coulter lashed out to the sailor's mouth with his clenched fist and sent
him sprawling to the deck. But lest this conduct should appear too
irresolute, he added the punishment of twenty-four hours in irons. A
fellow seaman plucked up the heroism to demand that the incident be
entered on the log for admiralty investigation and Coulter's only reply
was to send the insurgent into the inferno of the stoke hold for an
extra shift at the shovels. In the stokehold the thermometer registered
130 degrees Fahrenheit, and the white and brown torsos that strained
under the trembling dials were black with the sooty sweat of their
effort and red with the pitiless glare from the grates.

From these beginnings the cloud on the horizon of our affairs steadily
gathered and blackened until an ominous pall of impending mutiny
overhung us. Only an occasional coral reef or atoll now broke the
monotony of a dead and oily sea. No shred of cloud relieved the
emptiness of a devitalized sky. Mansfield and I went about in canvas
shoes and pajamas. The ship was more disheveled than we, and its
discipline more slovenly than its dress. The churlish silence of the
fo'castle was met by the braggart autocracy of the officers. Conditions
grew tenser and thicker with each day, yet no specific rupture came to
fire the waiting explosion. Slowly it brewed and gathered menace, while
the air hung pulseless and heavy under its shadow. Mansfield and I knew
it needed only a lightning flash to loose all the artillery of the
thunders and set them about their hell's fury. By tacit consent we did
not often talk of it, but we remained close together and placed our
revolvers, belts and sheath-knives where they could be readily caught
up. Under the silent horror of foreboding our nerves became raw and our
tempers, like those of the others, short and raspy. On one sultry
afternoon when the trade wind was dead, I came upon Mansfield sprawling
in the shadow of a life-boat, diligently reading entries from the
unknown girl's diary, touching the incidents of her sheltered and
untroubled life. He glanced up shamefacedly, then began in exculpation:

"See here, you know you're quite wrong about the guiltiness of reading
this. I'm sure she wouldn't mind. She's not that sort. Here we are
menaced by the inferno of a mutiny. We are no better than mice waiting
the pleasure of a cat, which means to crush them.... The atmosphere
will drive us mad. This book is like a breeze off the heather.... I tell
you it helps."

In abnormal times men entertain abnormal ideas and warped notions. I sat
cross-legged on the deck beside him and stuffed tobacco into my pipe. I
said nothing.

"It's all getting on my nerves. I'm losing my grip!" he admitted. "Last
night I dreamed of a nasty row and all day a bit of rhyme has been
running through my brain." He paused a moment, then quoted:

    "''Twas a cutlass swipe or an ounce of lead
    Or a yawning hole in a battered head,
    And the scuppers glut with a rotting red.

    "'And there they lay while the soggy skies
    Dreened all day long in upstaring eyes,
    At murk sunset and at foul sunrise.'"

He broke off and laughed at himself unsteadily.

"Get your mind off it," I commanded shortly. "Fetch out the blank-book.
Let's read about her debut party."

But the passage at which the book fell open dealt with a time prior to
debuts. At the head of the page was pasted a newspaper clipping hinting
at personalities but giving no names.

"One of the most beautiful and popular members of the younger set in the
summer colony" had been capsized while sailing in the harbor. The youth
who accompanied her had been seized with cramps and she had kept not
only herself but her helpless escort above water until the tardy arrival
of help. Beneath, in her own hand, was scrawled:

"Did they expect me to drown him? I had to stand by, of course. What
else could a fellow do? But I spoiled a dress I look nice in. I'm sorry
for that."

Appended to this was a postscript so badly written that it was hard to
decipher. I could guess that her cheeks had colored as she wrote it.

"Maybe after all, I am a grandstander. I did get awfully tired--and I
pretended that _he_ was looking on, and was swimming out to help me."

"By Jove" snorted Mansfield, "she's a ripping good sort. I wonder who
she pretended was looking on."

"Turn back," I suggested. "It may tell."

But it was only after some searching that we found him duly catalogued,
and even then she gave him no name. Yet in trailing him through the
pages, we came to know her quite well, and to render sincere allegiance.
She was not at all conventional. She was one of those rare discoveries
upon which the prospector in life comes only when he strikes an El
Dorado. She dared to think her own thoughts and did not grow into the
stereotyped mold of imitation. We felt from the clean, instinctive
courage of her tone and view-point that if ill chance had marooned her
with us on this imperiled ship, she would bear herself more gallantly
than we could hope to do, and that she would tread these filthy decks
with no spots on the whiteness of her skirts.

In her early writings she had shown for something of a tomboy and there
were hints of elderly exhortation to tread more primly the paths which
were deemed maidenly. Yet from these tattered scraps of life and
outlook, we could piece together some concept of her soul fabric. This
girl was woven of pure silk, but not of flimsy silk; there were strength
and softness--resoluteness and tenderness--a warp and woof for the loom
of noble things--and charm. Often I felt as though I were invading a
temple in which I had no place as communicant, and into whose fanes and
outer areas I should wish to come reverently, with the shoes of my
grosser soul in my hands. One night she had been sitting in the
moonlight on the beach, and the sea had talked to her. What she wrote
that night was pure poetry. I shall not try to reproduce it from my
faulty memory. My heavy masculine hand would mar its gossamer beauty.
One might as well undertake to restore the iridescent subtleties of a
broken bubble. On this occasion she was thinking of the mysterious man
she had so quaintly idealized. Had the lucky beggar, whoever he was,
read those lines he must have felt that, in the lists of life, there
rested on him the sacred obligation to bear a spotless shield and a true
lance. She transcribed as one to whom the magic and delicate nuances of
life are revealed. Besides these passages there were others sparkling
with the merriment of spontaneous humor. Our writer was no Lady
Dolorosa. She was as many-sided and many-hued as the diamond whose
facets break light into color. She frankly admitted to these pages,
intended only for herself, that she was beautiful, though she wished
that her eyes were blue instead of gray-brown, and that her type were
different. Evidently she had cut her teeth on compliment and fed from
childhood on that type of admiration which beauty exacts. She seemed to
be a little hungry for tributes of a different and deeper sort. In her
society days, as in the more youthful period, we found frequent
references to the unnamed man who still held his undeserved and
paramount place as an idealized personality; a human touchstone by which
she tested the intrinsicness of other men--always to the detriment of
those on trial.




CHAPTER V

PREMONITIONS BECOME REALITIES


At last, running back to the start, we tracked him down and with his
discovery came disappointment. I had realized that she had been dressing
a mere lay-figure in garments of idealized manhood and endowing an
unknown with a panoply of the chivalric to which he could probably lay
no rightful claim. Still it was disconcerting to realize that he had, in
the flesh, contributed absolutely nothing to the picture. She had simply
devised from the whole cloth of imagination a collaborative sum of
Galahad the Pure and Richard the Lion-Hearted. She had seen him only
once in later years--from the sidelines of a Yale-Harvard football game.
He was playing with the crimson and she was at the impressionable age.
There was the whole and meager foundation for his apotheosis. She did
not state the year, but she gave the score, and by that I identified the
occasion.

"I devoutly pray," I confided to young Mansfield, "that she never meets
him. She has fed herself on dreams. I hope she doesn't wake up."

Mansfield promptly took up the unknown hero's defense. He invariably
held a brief for the idealist.

"Why do you assume that he's a bounder?" he demanded almost resentfully.
"He may be all she thinks."

"I don't assume anything," I retorted, "but I happened to play on that
team myself and I am compelled to admit, though with chagrin, that we
had among us no knights from Arthur's Round Table. Warriors of ferocity
we had; young gentlemen who played the game to the lasting glory of John
Harvard; but this letter-perfect type of chivalry, valor and gentleness
well, I'm afraid he failed to make the team."

You remember the story of Bruce and the spider? In his ermine,
surrounded by his stalwart barons, Robert would probably have learned no
lesson from the weaving of filmy webs. Alone and in peril, it taught him
how to conquer. To us, alone and in peril, this diary assumed an epochal
importance entirely out of kelter with its face value.

Of course, there were many topics which we might have discussed to
divert our minds from morbidly watching the cloud of impending mutiny
spread and grow inky. But the cloud was present and human, and the diary
was present and human, and we were present and human. Whether or not we
were creatures of atrophied brains and distorted vision is an academic
question. The fact remains. For us there was genuine relief in turning
from the miasma of brooding doom which overhung the _Wastrel_ to the
spiced fragrance of this self-revealed personality. It was a clean
breeze into our asphyxiation. It was a momentary excursion out of a
noisome dungeon into an old-fashioned garden, where roses nod and
illusions bloom.

One steaming night when darkness had stopped our reading, the two of us
were lying flat on our backs--and silent--in the enveloping shadows of
the forward deck near the capstan. A group of men who were off watch had
gathered near us, seeking the gratefulness of the uninterrupted breeze.
With no suspicion of our proximity, they fell into a low-pitched but
violent conference.

Hoak held the floor as spokesman, and his deep whispering voice was raw
with bitterness.

"We hain't no bloomin' galley-slyves," he growled. "Blyme me, I say,
let's make a hend o' the 'ole bloody mess once and for hall."

"How?" came the natural question from one of the more conservative.

"'Ow?" retorted the ringleader, "W'at's the odds 'ow? Any way will do.
Rush the cabin. There's a stand of rifles at the for'ard bulkhead. Kill
hoff the bloody lot of hofficers. Navigate the bloomin' ole 'ooker back
ourselves and report whatever damn thing we like."

"How about these passengers? They'd snitch," suggested the same
questioner.

"Aw no," sarcastically assured Hoak, "they won't snitch. They won't 'ave
no more charnce to snitch than Coulter 'isself--damn 'im."

For a moment I felt a steaming throb in my throat. Then came a new
sensation, something like relief that at last the clear outline was
looming through the fog of maddening uncertainty. It did not seem to
matter so much what the certainty was, so long as it brought an end to
the suspense. There was some discussion in hushed voices. Caution had
its advocates who opposed so desperate a course.

"Think it hover till to-morrow," said Hoak at last. "But hif you don't
stand by me Hi'm going to cut loose a boat and tyke to the water. To
'ell with the _Wastrel_ an' her rotter of a captain."

There was a sudden hush followed by a sort of low chorused groan. Around
the superstructure of the forward cabin appeared Captain Coulter, his
first officer and the chief engineer. For an instant they stood
silently, flashing electric torches into the terrified faces of the
conspirators who, like schoolboys caught denouncing their teacher,
shuffled their feet and remained speechless.

Hoak, alone, took a step forward. His face was working spasmodically in
the bull's-eye glare which exaggerated the high lights on his snarling
teeth and the black shadows of his scowl. He wavered for an instant
between his personal dread of Coulter, and the knowledge that, with so
much already known, caution was futile. While he hesitated the other men
tacitly grouped themselves together at his back and stood sullenly eying
the officers. Coulter and his two subordinates slipped their hands into
their pockets. It was a tense moment and a noiseless one. When the
captain broke silence his voice was cool, almost casual.

"Mr. Kirkenhead," he ordered the chief engineer, "take this man Hoak to
the stokehold, and keep him there until we reach port. Give him double
shift and if he makes a false move--kill him."

The giant made a passionate start forward, and found himself looking
down the barrel of Coulter's magazine pistol. From the glint of the
raised weapon he bounced backward against the rail, where he leaned
incoherently snarling like a cornered dog.

"Hi didn't sign as no blymed stoker," he growled at last. "Hi won't
go----"

"The stokehold or hell, it's up to you." Coulter's reply came in an
absolute monotony of voice strangely at variance with the passionate
stress of their labored breathing. Back of the tableau gleamed the
phosphorescence of the placid sea. "There's thirty seconds to decide.
Mr. Kirkenhead, look at your watch."

For a seeming eternity there was waiting and bated breath. We could hear
the muffled throb of the engines, and the churning of the screws.

Then Kirkenhead announced, "Twenty seconds, sir."

A moment more and Hoak turned, dropping his head in utter dejection and
shambled aft toward the engine-room companionway.

"Mr. Heffernan," came the captain's staccato orders, "instruct the
ship's carpenter to scuttle all the boats, except the port and starboard
ones on the bridge. If we are to have any little disagreements on board
we will settle them among ourselves. No one will leave in my boats
except by my orders. And"--he wheeled on the men--"whenever you vermin
feel inclined for trouble--start it."

So that incident passed and went to swell the cumulative poison of
festering hatred. We knew that the eruption had merely been delayed;
that it must inevitably come and that now its coming would be soon.
Between forward and aft war had been declared. Later that same evening I
made bold to remonstrate with Captain Coulter as to the order
concerning the boats. The conversation took place on the bridge--and it
was brief.

"Mr. Mansfield and myself," I said, "are passengers who have paid full
fares and we are entitled to full rights. We demand protection. This
hulk is rotten and unseaworthy. When you scuttle her boats you are
throwing the parachute out of a leaky balloon."

Coulter looked me over for a moment and replied with absolute composure.

"Mr. Deprayne, rights are good things--when you can enforce them.
Consulates and courts of admiralty are a long way off. The intervening
water is quite deep. If you don't like the _Wastrel_, leave it. I'm
sorry I can't spare you a boat to leave in."

Mansfield and myself went that night in the miserable cabin which we
shared oppressed with the conviction that the breaking point was at
hand. Mansfield had suddenly sloughed off his boyishness and become
unexpectedly self-contained, giving the impression of capability. The
prospect of action had changed him. Once more he began to quote his
ghastly verses, but now without shuddering, almost cheerfully.

    "''Twas a cutlass swipe or an ounce of lead,
    Or a yawning hole in a battered head--
    And the scuppers glut with a rotting red.'"

Then he remembered that sometimes men survive strange adventures, and he
wrote a letter to the girl in Sussex which he asked me to deliver in the
event that I, and not he, should prove such a survivor. I fastened it
with a pin into the pocket of my pajama jacket. For hours after we had
turned into our berths each of us knew that the other was not sleeping.
We heard the crazy droning of the sick engine; the wash of the quiet
water; the straining of the timbers.

We had not, on turning in, followed our usual custom of blowing out the
vile-smelling oil lamp which gave our stateroom its only illumination.
Neither of us had spoken of it, but we left the light burning probably
in tacit presentiment that this was to be a night of some portentous
development, and one not to be spent in darkness. Mansfield pretended to
sleep in the upper berth, but after vainly courting dreams for an hour,
I slipped out of mine and crept to the fresher air of the deck.

When I returned to the cabin, still obsessed with restless wakefulness,
I found the diary, and throwing myself into my bunk, spent still another
hour in its perusal. I had long ago laid by my early scruples and now I
found in its pages a quality strangely soothing.

Singularly enough, in all our fragmentary reading between these limp
covers, we had never pursued any consecutive course and though certain
passages had been re-read until I fancy both of us could have quoted
them from memory, there still remained others upon which we had not
touched. For me in my present condition of jumping nerves they offered
fields of quieting exploration. Now, for a time, I skipped about,
reading here and there passages in no way connected. There was a highly
humorous description of a certain Frenchman who had insistently shadowed
the course of the girl's travels about the Continent, inflicting on her
an homage which it seemed to me must have been more offensive than
actual rudeness. She did not give his name, but her description of his
appearance and eccentricities was so droll and keenly appreciative that
even my strained lips curled into a grin of enjoyment in the perusal. He
had a coronet to bestow and she likened his attitude and bearing to that
of a crested cock robin. "To-night," she wrote, "_monsieur le comte_
proposed for my hand--to Mother. I was in the next room and heard it. To
hear one's self proposed to by proxy is quite the most amusing thing
that can happen. When he asks me I shall inform him that I've already
given my heart to another man--a man who hasn't asked me and may never
ask me. Yes, he will, too. He _must_. It is in my horoscope. 'The
Heavens rolled between us at the end, we shall but vow the faster for
the stars.' This little Frenchman needs an heiress and it might as well
be me--but it won't be."

This was the first intimation that the unknown author of these pages was
possessed of wealth as well as beauty. In a vague way I found myself
regretting the discovery, although I could not say why. Through these
pages breathed the distinction of a piquant and subtly charming
personality--the fact that she had fortune as well, could add nothing.
But as I read the paragraphs devoted to her odyssey across the continent
and around the borders of the Mediterranean, shadowed always by this
persistent suitor with his picayune title, it struck me that her
itinerary and the order of her going tallied with my own wanderings. Yet
that might have no significance, since the routes of European touring
are distressingly devoid of variation.

The finger of destiny had seemed to concern itself in the fashion in
which I had always just missed the lady of Naples, Monte Carlo and Cairo
by a margin of seconds and of untoward circumstance. If my Fate were
playing with me in this manner it appeared consistent with its policy of
tantalizing evasiveness that she and the writer might be the same. When
I had given up the pursuit and come away to this remote quarter of the
globe it might still be decreed that I should not escape her influence.

Having skipped about for a time in such haphazard fashion, the idea
seized me of going back to the beginning and reading from the
commencement down to the present.

In the first pages of course I encountered a certain immature crudity of
composition and yet, in spite of these things, there was much here of
the charming fascination of childhood and the beginnings of character.
If the later sections were as fragrant as flowers, the earlier passages
were like the annals of rosebuds and blossoms. I believe I have already
mentioned that in her childhood she had been something of a tomboy. Her
interests had seemed to include many things which might quite naturally
have belonged to the enthusiasms of her brothers. Also one read between
the lines that her charming sense of humor and self-containment had
developed upon overcome tendencies toward passionate temper. A certain
passage had to do with her experience at a girls' boarding-school when
she was probably not more than ten or eleven. One of the teachers--an
unimpeachable lady of great learning and little human perception, it
would seem--had aroused her intense disfavor. There were various
references to this feud and also, even so early, to the mysterious
person vaguely alluded to as He. The principal of the school harbored a
bull terrier of rather uncertain temper. This brute, save for total
fealty to his mistress and to the writer of the diary, seemed to hold in
his nature only distrust for humanity, and among those specially singled
out for his antipathy was the aforementioned teacher.

One day the writer and the dog had met the preceptress on the avenue.
The girl had set down with great glee, the terror with which her enemy
had appealed to her for protection against the onslaughts of the dreaded
Cerberus.

"I told her that I would hold him," naively related the entry, in a
sprawling, childish hand, "and I did hold him until she was _almost_ at
the gate--but when I let him go I gave him a little sound advice and he
took it."

There followed a vivid description, done into mirth-provoking humor, of
the somewhat strenuous events of the next twenty or thirty seconds. A
section of black alpaca skirt remained with the dog as a memento.

"Of course," commented the writer, "I couldn't laugh freely until I got
back to the house, but I am laughing now. She looked so absurd! As I
came in I saw Him ride by on horseback. I'm afraid he wouldn't approve."

The description of that teacher had reminded me strongly of my good Aunt
Sarah. The explanation that the dog had been the child's friend merely
because she had refused to be afraid, was so convincingly put that I
found myself in guilty accord with her point of view. In a dozen ways,
despite this single instance, she showed that her pity and tenderness
were very genuine and sensitive, and easily reached by any true appeal.

This going back to the beginning enabled me to meet, on the occasion of
his first appearance, the man who had exercised such a strong influence
upon her subsequent life. In this I was pleased, for it showed that
however imaginary may have been his aura of ideality, none the less it
had basis in something more substantial than a glimpse of a football
game. There was, too, an element touching and almost pathetic in this
earliest self-confessed love. He was when she first saw him, eighteen or
nineteen, and she half as old. This disparity in age had put a chasm
between them which it did not occur to her that the years would bridge.
He was just at that self-sufficient age, when he regarded himself as
very much a man and short-skirted, pigtailed females as very far beneath
his mature devotion. Yet, in his patronizing way, he had been decently
kind and had jeopardized his standing as a man-of-the-world by
impersonal courtesies to a little girl. His influence had accordingly
grown strong and permanent, though he had not known of its existence.
She had enviously watched him with girls a few years her senior and had
admired his frank, sportsmanlike attitude and freedom from callow
freshness--and his courage. She said quite frankly in the diary that she
did not suppose he had remembered her at all.

And so, as I lay sleepless and oppressed by presentiment of disaster, I
read from childhood to young womanhood her chronicle of ideals until,
under the soothing of the document, I at last fell into a doze.




CHAPTER VI

THE END OF THE "WASTREL"


When sleep came to me it was fitful with a thousand nightmare
impossibilities, I saw, in my dreams, the face of the stale sea and sky
translated into a broad human visage paralyzed and smiling unendingly in
that hideous grin which stamps the tortured teeth of the lockjaw victim.
Then the monster of the dream broke out of its fixity and with a shriek
of hurricanes aimed a terrific blow at the prow of the _Wastrel_. The
ship shivered, trembled and collapsed. With a stifled gasp I woke. Our
sickly lantern was guttering in a sooty stream of smoke. Young Mansfield
stood in the center of the cabin buckling his pistol belt. From
somewhere came a sound of rushing water and a medley of shouts and oaths
and pistol shots. A dingy rat scuttled wildly out from between my feet
and whisked away through the crack under our bolted door. While I stood
there stupidly inactive, hardly as yet untangling fact and dream,
Mansfield handed me my belt and revolver.

"Slip on your shoes and fetch along a life-belt," he commanded steadily.
"It has come."

We jerked open the door and groped along the alley-way in darkness, and,
as we guided our steps with hands fumbling the walls, water washed about
our ankles. The lights there had gone out. With one guiding hand on the
wall and one on Mansfield's shoulder, I made my labored way toward the
deck ladder.

Without a word and as of right, the young Englishman, who had heretofore
lacked initiative, now assumed command of our affairs. We needed no
explanation to tell us that the pandemonium which reigned above was not
merely the result of mutiny. A hundred patent things testified that this
shambling tramp of the seas had received a mortal hurt. The stench of
bilge sickened us as the rising water in her hull forced up the heavy
and fetid gases. The walls themselves were aslant under a dizzy
careening to starboard.

She must have steamed full front on to a submerged reef and destruction.
It was palpably no matter of an opening seam. She had been torn and
ripped in her vitals. She was dying fast and in inanimate agony. In the
rickety engine-room something had burst loose under the strain. Now as
she sank and reeled there came a hissing of steam; a gasping, coughing,
hammering convulsion of pistons, rods and driving shafts, suddenly
turned into a junk heap running amuck.

It is questionable whether there would have been time to lower away
boats had the most perfect discipline and heroism prevailed. There was
no discipline. There were no available boats, except the two hanging
from the bridge davits, and about them, as we stumbled out on the decks,
raged a fierce battle of extermination, as men, relapsed to brutes,
fought for survival.

I have since that night often and vainly attempted to go back over that
holocaust and arrange its details in some sort of chronology. I saw such
ferocity and confusion, turning the deck into a shambles in an
inconceivably short space, that even now I cannot say in what sequence
these things happened. I have a jumbled picture in which certain
unimportant details stand out distinctly while great things are vague. I
can still see, in steel-black relief, the silhouetted superstructure,
funnels and stanchions; the indigo shadows and ghostly spots of white
under a low-swinging half-moon and large softly-glowing stars. The sky
was clear and smiling, in the _risor sardonicus_ of my dream.

I have sometimes felt that all the difference between the courageous and
craven lies in the chance of the instant with which the numbers fall on
the dice of life. To-day's coward may be to-morrow's hero. For an
instant, with an unspeakable babel in my ears and a picture of human
battle in my eyes, I knew only the chaotic confusion that comes of
panic. Then I caught a glimpse of one detail and all physical fear fell
away from me. I found myself conscious only of contempt for the
struggling, clawing terror of these men who were as reasonless and
ineffective as stampeding cattle. The detail which steadied me like a
cold shower was the calmness of young Mansfield as he waited at my side,
his face as impersonally puzzled as though he were studying in some
museum cabinet a new and strange specimen of anthropological interest.

We both stood in the shadow of the forward superstructure as yet unseen.
All the ferocity of final crisis swirled and eddied about the bridge
upon which we looked as men in orchestra chairs might look across the
footlights on a stage set for melodrama. Apparently the crew had already
discovered to its own despair that Coulter's inhuman orders for
scuttling the boats had been carried out, and that of all the emergency
craft carried by the _Wastrel_, only those ridiculously insufficient
ones hanging by the port and starboard lights of the bridge offered a
chance of escape. At all events, the other boats hung neglected and
unmanned. That the whole question was one of minutes was an unescapable
conclusion. One could almost feel the settling of the crazy, ruptured
hull as the moments passed and each time I turned my head to glance
back with a fascinated impulse at the smoke-stack I could see that its
line tilted further from the vertical.

Heffernan was in charge of the starboard boat, already beginning to run
down its lines, and over that on the port side, Coulter himself held
command.

It seemed that when the moment of final issue came, a few of the
foremast men had preferred entrusting their chances to obeying the
captain, whose effectiveness had been proven, to casting their lots with
their mates. These were busy at the tackle. On the deck level howled and
fought the mutineers. Already corpses were cluttering the space at the
foot of the steep ladder that gave--and denied--access to the bridge.
Probably the revolver shots we had heard as we groped our way from our
cabin had been the chief officer's terse response to the first mad rush
for that stairway. Now as he awaited the lowering away, Coulter stood
above, looking down on the sickening confusion with a grim expression
which was almost amusement. The fighting went on below where the
frantic, terror-stricken fellows swarmed and grappled and swayed and
disabled each other in the effort to gain the ladder. But when someone
rose out of the maelstrom and struggled upward it was only to be knocked
back by the ax, upon which, in the brief intervals between assaults,
Coulter leaned contemplating the battle-royal. The revolver he had put
back in his pocket. It was not needed, and he was conserving its
effectiveness for another moment.

In telling it, the picture seems clear enough, but in the seeing, it was
a thing of horrible and tangled details, enacted as swiftly as a
moving-picture film run too rapidly on its reel.

There were shouts and quick staccato orders piercing the blending of
terrorized voices--an oath snapped out--a shriek--a struggling mass--a
desperate run up the ladder--hands straining aloft to pull down the
climber and clear the way--a swift blow from above, a thud on the deck
below--a sickening vision of slaughter. Over it all pounded the
hammering racket from the disorganized engines. Soon came the stench of
smoke and out of one of the after hatches mounted a thin tongue of
orange flame, snapping and sputtering vengefully for a moment, then
leaping up with a suddenly augmented roar. The twin elements of
destruction, water and fire, were vying in the work of annihilation.

I turned my head for an instant to look back at the new menace, and
clutched Mansfield's arm. Aloof with folded arms against the rail,
making no effort to participate in the riot, stood young Lawrence. The
fast-spreading flames lit up his face. His attitude and expression were
those of quiet disgust. His lips were set in scorn for the superlative
excitement of his fellows. He was the stoic awaiting the end, with a
smile of welcome for the acid test which held, for him, no fear. It was
as though the rising rim of water brought a promise of grateful rest. He
saw ahead nothing except release from all the wild turmoil and misery
which had spoken itself without words that evening when Coulter had
silenced the improvisation of his violin.

But if the end was a thing of quiet philosophy to Lawrence, it was not
so to others. The lurid flare, which turned the impassioned picture in a
moment from a silhouette of blacks and cobalts to a crimson hell, seemed
to inflame to greater madness men already mad. There was a rush for the
rails. We saw figures leaping into the sea. There had been some hitch on
the bridge, due no doubt to the miserable condition of everything aboard
the disheveled tramp. The boats were not yet launched, but now the men
were embarking. Coulter himself was the last to leap for the swinging
boat, and a moment before he did so Hoak appeared. He had miraculously
made his way alive out of the engine-room's inferno, and his coming was
that of a maniac. His huge body, bare to the waist, sweat-streaked and
soot-blackened and fire-blistered, was also dark with blood. His voice
was raised in demented laughter and every vestige of reason had
deserted eyes that were now agleam only with homicidal mania. From the
companionway to the bridge, his course was as swift and sure as a homing
pigeon's. He brandished the shovel with which he had been shamefully
forced to feed the maws of the furnaces. The struggling men fell back
before his onslaught. But Hoak had no care for self-preservation. His
sole mission was reprisal.

The fight about the ladder's foot had waned. With a leap that carried
him half-way up and an agility that knew no thwarting the madman made
the upper level. The tyrannical despot of the vessel, standing poised
for his swing to the boat raised the pistol which had already halted
other mad rushes during the last sanguinary minutes. At its bark Hoak
staggered to his knees, but was up again and charging forward with the
impetus of a wounded rhinoceros. He had one deed to do before he died
and would not be denied. The flying shovel narrowly missed the captain's
head as he jumped for the boat, but the seaman with his lips parted over
the snarl of clenched teeth fought his painful way to the davit,
gripping a knife which he had brought in his belt. His eyes glowed with
the strange light that madness lends and his muscles were tensed in the
brief exaggerated strength of a supreme effort. He hurled himself to the
out-swung support and seizing the stern line began hacking at its tarred
tautness as he bellowed ghastly laughter and blasphemies. Coulter from
his place below sent two more bullets into the great hulk of flesh that
hung tenaciously and menacingly above him, but, as the second spat out,
the rope, none too good at best, parted and the boat, held only by its
bow line, swung down with a mighty snap, spilling its occupants into the
sea like apples tossed from an overturned plate. We had a momentary
glimpse of the captain clinging to the gunwale, his legs lashing out
flail-like. Then his hold loosened and he fell with a splash into the
phosphorus water where the sharks were already gathering. And at the
same moment, his mission performed, Hoak slowly slid around the curving
davit and dropped limply after him.

Young Mansfield's voice came vaguely to my ear. "They've overlooked the
life-raft," he said. "Let's have a try at that. There's not much time
now."

The starboard scuppers were letting in sea water and the flames were
creeping close, as we turned together, holding to the shadows of the
superstructure, and ran forward.

We were tearing our fingers raw over stiffened knots when a rush of feet
interrupted us. The next instant I saw my companion lashing out with the
butt of his pistol, and surrounded by a quartette of assailants. In the
moonlight he loomed gigantic and heroic of proportion. I, too, was
surrounded and conscious only of a wild new elation and battle-lust, as
I fought.

Suddenly there came a terrific shock, preceded by a wildly screaming
hiss in the bowels of the _Wastrel's_ hull. The torn shell quivered in
an insensate death-rattle, and under a detonation at once hollow and
loud a mass of timbers shot upward amidships. The boilers had let go and
we hung wavering for the final plunge, yet it did not come at once. Then
I suppose I was struck by falling debris. With a dizzy sense of stars
dancing as lawlessly as rocket sparks and dying as quickly into
blackness, I lost all hold on consciousness.




CHAPTER VII

IN STRANGE CIRCUMSTANCES.


Pongee pajamas and a revolver belt constitute a light equipment even for
the tropics, but that was the least pressing of my concerns.

How long I had remained insensible I can only estimate, but often there
come back to me, from that time, wraith-like shreds of memory in which I
seem to have drifted down the centuries. I recall for one thing a
stunned and throbbing aching back of the eyes and a half-conscious
gazing up at rocking stars.

At all events, when rational understanding returned to me, the sun was
glaring insufferably from a scorched zenith. I began to patch together
fragments of memory and to call loudly for Mansfield. There was no
answer, and when I attempted to rise I found myself roughly lashed to
the life-raft by several turns of a line so tightly drawn that the
sensory nerves in my legs gave no response to my movements.

My support was rocking in its lodgment between two weed-trailing
boulders, stained like verdigris and licked smooth by the lapping of the
sea. Off to my front stretched waters, so quiet that they seemed almost
tideless, though at a distance I could hear the running of surf. To look
behind involved a painful twisting of my neck, but I made the effort,
and was rewarded with the sight of land. A quarter of a mile away smooth
reaches of white sand met the water in a graciously inviting beach.
Beyond it and mounting upward from palm fringe to snow-cap rose the very
respectable proportions of a volcanic island. The coral rocks which had
caught my raft were outposts of many others that went trooping
shoreward, breaking, here and there, the surface of jade-green shallows.

From the deep turquoise of the outer sea to the white rim of the sands
ran a gamut of colorful beauty. The mountain, as symmetrically coned as
Fuji-yama, stood over it all in grave dominance. Off to the left
sponge-like cliffs broke steeply upward from the level of the beach and
about their clefts circled endless flights of gulls. There I knew the
rising tide would thunder and break itself to pieces in a thousand
plumes of spray.

But how had I reached this place and what had become of Mansfield? It
must have been he who had lashed me to the raft. From no one else on the
_Wastrel_ could I have expected better treatment than "a cutlass swipe
or an ounce of lead." Palpably, he had emerged from the battle victor,
and, save for myself, sole survivor. I conjectured that when he had
floated the raft from the partly submerged deck, he had found the spark
of life still lurking in my pulses and had made me fast upon its
timbers. Perhaps an over-trust in his ability to remain afloat had made
him less careful of himself. Possibly he had lost consciousness as we
drifted and had been washed over-side, to fall prey to the prowling
sharks. I could not hope to know what his end had been, but I wished
that I might have shared it with him.

I fumbled at the soaked knots of my rope with fingers that had grown
numb. When, at last, I was free and had to some extent restored the
circulation in my stagnant veins, I began the task of freeing my oarless
craft from its wedged position so that the insetting tide might carry me
to the shore.

In the pocket of my pajama jacket, soaked with salt water and almost
reduced to a pulp, I found the letter which I stood charged to deliver
to the girl in Sussex. I laughed. I knew that I was not in reality the
solitary survivor of the _Wastrel_. I was merely the latest survivor. I
was to die more slowly than my fellows. This sun, at the end of my
lingering, would beat down on my bones, whitened, disjointed and perhaps
vulture-plucked. The revolver in my belt was already clouding into red
rust under the washing of the night's salt water. I experimentally
turned the cylinder and found that the corrosion had not yet attacked
the mechanism. One cartridge could cheat my sentence of slow death, yet
I did not fire the shot.

Life had heretofore been a thing I would have willingly surrendered.
Now, I found myself standing precariously on the narrow and very
slippery edge of existence, and with Death advancing on me I no longer
wished to die. The very odds against me brought a dogged desire to cling
until my feet should slip and my fingers could no longer hold their
life-grip. Meantime I should probably go mad, but that lay hereafter. At
present I had only to wait for the tide. Since I could not hurry the
ocean pulse, I must lie there thinking.

From the sea I could look for rescue only by a miracle. What had been
Coulter's course or destination he had not confided, but I knew that we
had for days been in imperfectly charted waters where our screws had
perhaps kicked up a virgin wake. We had passed atolls marked, on the
chart, P. D. and even E. D. ("position doubtful" and "existence
doubtful"), and to hope that some other wanderer might shortly follow
would be taxing coincidence too far.

Only God knew what type of human, animal and reptilian life the island
held. I could view it across the accursedly beautiful waterway and
speculate upon its nature, but I could beat up no confidence in its
treatment of me. Its aspect would have been magnificent had its lush
greenery not wrapped and softened every commanding crag and angle, but
it was a loveliness which suggested treacherous menace; the deceptive
beauty of the panther or of the soft-gliding snake that charms its prey
to death.

Isolation here would sap my mental essence and atrophy my brain, unless
some device could be found by which I could side-focus and divert my
trend of thought. Even had the young girl's diary remained to me, I
might by it have kept myself reminded of life in those civilized spots
which I could hardly hope to revisit; and so I might die sane. A single
book would have helped. I had been credited with a sense of the
ludicrous so whimsical as to be almost irresponsible. If now I could
invoke that facetious quality to my salvation I might hope to be
regarded as a consistent humorist.

At length I saw that the tide was setting in, carrying my raft with it,
and realized that I was hungry. When I had once more under my feet the
feel of solid earth, the sun was hanging near the snow-capped crater of
the volcano. I left for to-morrow all problems of exploration, and
stripping to the skin, ran up and down the soft sand of the beach until
the blood was once more pulsing regularly through my naked body. Then on
hands and knees I pursued and devoured numbers of the unpalatable crabs
that scuttled to hiding under slimy tangles of sea weed. My throat was
hot and sticky with the parch of thirst, but as night fell the jungle
began to loom darkly, a forbidding hinterland, and no fresh water came
down to my beach.

The melting snow was a guarantee of springs and a man can endure three
days without drinking if he must. I stretched myself between two large
rocks just upward of the high-tide line, cursing stout Cortez and all
those perniciously active souls who insisted on discovering the Pacific
Ocean.

Sleep did not at once come to my relief. I saw the stars, close and
lustrous, parade across the night, and instead of planning while I lay
awake practical things for the morrow, as a good woodsman might have
done, I was thinking futilely of the psychological features of my
predicament. Possibly the doctor's prediction of insanity had lain
dormant in some brain cell from which it was now emerging to frighten
me. I feared less for the hunger of my body than for the impossibility
of feeding my mind. It occurred to me that keeping a record of my
emotions would at once serve to fight back atrophy and leave an
interesting record for those who might, but almost certainly would not,
come in after days to the island. Then I recalled that in my penless and
paperless plight I was as far from the possibility of writing as from
the power to ring for a taxicab and drive home.

Yet the idea of a diary fascinated me. I wished to write in frankness
what it felt like to die at the foot of an undiscovered volcano. There
came to my mind an example I wished to emulate. I had come upon a report
made public by the Naval Department of Japan in which was quoted a
letter written by Lieutenant Sakuma, from the bottom of Hiroshima Bay,
where his submarine had struck and failed to rise again.

Most of his crew lay dead in the sunken vessel, and he himself was
slowly and painfully succumbing to strangulation. He devoted to a note
of apology addressed to his Emperor those hours spent in dying, and
expressed the hope that his message might, in future, be of value in the
avoidance of similar fatalities. He praised the gallantry of his
subordinates.

The letter, read in the Mikado's palace a week later, when the submarine
had been raised with its dead, was in the stoic style of the race and
severely official. It culminated in a broken sentence.

"It is now 12:30 P. M. My breathing is so difficult and painful--I
thought I could blow out gasoline but I am intoxicated with it--Captain
Nakano--it is now 12:40 P. M.--I----"

There it ended. It seemed to me that if I could busy myself in faint
duplicate, with so human a record of approaching the ferry, I could be
in a measure consoled. Then gazing at the Southern Cross, before sleep
brought respite, I found myself thinking once more of the elusive lady
who had so often escaped my inquisitive glance and whose face I should
now never see.




CHAPTER VIII

NATURE INDULGES IN SATIRE


Though I am not giving authorship to this narrative with a view to its
general perusal, I am determined so to write it that if other eyes do
chance upon it they may read the true records of a man's emotions under
those circumstances.

I shall never be able to coax myself into any illusion of heroism in my
adventures and I shall set down my most abject terrors in equal and
impartial degree with the few occasions in which the instinct of
self-preservation enabled me to rise to the need and bluff
magnificently.

The case of the submarine commander of Nippon was different. He wished
to leave behind him such a message as an Emperor might read, and with
exalted devotion to his object, he left it. Still, had some miracle
brought his vessel to the surface before the end, who knows but that, in
the confessional of his own memory, he might have acknowledged a very
delirium of terror? Who knows but that between the period of one
unflinching paragraph and the capital of the next, there may have been
intervals of wallowing in the trough of physical despair?

At least with me there were many fears. The night went by a road of
nightmare and thirst which led to no haven of rest. I slept fitfully and
in terror, and awoke at its end to a feeling of exhaustion. For a while
I dreaded to rise and face the possibilities of a new day. It was only
the burning torture of thirst that finally outweighed panic and drove me
in search of water. I held timidly to the shore, distrusting the jungle
and dodging furtively from rock to rock, with straining eyes and ears.
Climbing among the ragged boulders which were strewn like fragments of
fallen masonry at the foot of the cliff, I shortly came upon a thread of
clear water, where I lay and slaked my thirst. After that came a renewed
freshness and a sudden return of vigor. I began also to feel a healthful
hunger, and when, in clambering to the top of a steep rock, I frightened
a shrieking gull from her nest, I fell avidly on the eggs she left
behind.

As the sun climbed, a tepid humidity freighted the air, but the
trade-wind, rising steadily and freshly, tempered it and stirred the
delicate fronds of palm and fern.

The cliff was honeycombed with small irregular caverns and rifts. Some
were mere grottoes, but others went back into somber recesses deeper
than I, with no means of lighting my steps, cared to explore. For my
dwelling place I selected one that broadened from a twisted and narrow
fissure to a crude chamber large enough for a wolf's den, or at need a
man's refuge. A fern-fringed brooklet trickled across the opening.

For my door yard I had a small plateau with a sheer wall of cliff at my
back and a steep drop at the front. One must climb to reach the place
which is an advantage where the tenant may desire to roll stones down
upon the heads of his visitors.

The _Wastrel_ must have gone to the bottom near by, for incoming tides
from time to time deposited on my shore strange and satirical scraps of
flotsam. The sardonic humor of the sea mocked me by delivering on my
beach a tattered fragment of old newspaper and an empty biscuit tin.

It was two days after my arrival that I discovered some bulky thing
lodged, as my raft had been, upon the near-by rocks. The two days had
told upon me. My pajamas were in ribbons; my canvas shoes torn, and my
flesh bruised. My feet, too, were cut and blistered and my hands raw. I
had already tired of talking aloud to myself and more and more often I
caught myself turning with a sudden start to peer apprehensively at the
fringe of the forest. To my growing morbidness it seemed that over the
beauty of the place hung an impalpable but certain curse. I waded out
eagerly to the fresh bit of salvage and found a seaman's chest with
quaintly knotted handles of tarred rope. It was of stout workmanship and
its heavy locks and hinges had endured without injury the buffeting of
the sea. The name of J. H. Lawrence still legible upon one end brought
back with startling vividness the memory of a man waiting with stoical
amusement the coming of death. Laboriously enough I dragged it in,
halting often to pant and wipe the sweat out of my eyes with my forearm.

The sun was sinking over the shoulder of the mountain when I at last
arrived, exhausted but still tugging at my prize, upon the plateau of my
cliff apartment. I lay a long while, my heart pounding with exertion,
before I was equal to the task of attacking its lock with a stone and my
sheath knife, and after that it was some moments before the lock yielded
and I raised the heavy lid. First there met my eyes a scattered
collection of souvenir postcards, much discolored and faded, but
sufficiently preserved to awaken a clamor of protest and longing. There
were tantalizing pictures of the Cafe de Paris and Trafalgar Square and
the _bund_ at Hong Kong.

Young Mr. Lawrence must have been a confirmed souvenir-buyer. I could
trace his odyssey by trivial things he had picked up here and there.
Two curved daggers with turquoise settings in the hilt had come from the
bazaars of Damascus or Jerusalem. A copper incense-burner with a package
of scented tapers had been brought from Tokio or Nagasaki. Equally
useless things filled package after package.

No mission chest piously outfitted at home ever carried to the remote
heathen a more useless assortment of unnecessaries than this one brought
to me. There was not a shirt, not an article of utility, only trinkets
as serviceable as doll-babies to a prizefighter. At last, however, I
came upon two packages carefully wrapped in sail-cloth. So painstaking
and secure had been their packing that when I took off the first
covering and the second, I found that the contents had suffered no
wetting.

The first bundle contained the violin which had incensed the captain and
several packages of extra strings. As I took it out, I seemed to hear
again its plaintive, wordless song and I laid it down reverently. It
seemed a part of the dead man's soul--something intimate and wonderful
which had outlasted his mortality.

In the second package was something wrapped in tissue paper and very
soft to the touch. I opened it and spread out on the sand a gorgeously
wrought Mandarin kimono. Its silk was of the heaviest and richest
quality and its design flamed with the unstinted opulence of Chinese
embroidery. On the flowing sleeves and bordered panels were storks of
blue and silver flying among poppy-like flowers of crimson purple. There
were also delicately worked streams and reeds and moons, all tangled up
with ranting dragons of gold, gazing fiercely out from eyes of inset
jade. Gold thread, silver thread, silk thread, cunningly combined to the
making of its dazzling pattern.

Some celestial dignitary had once ordered its embroidering and, perhaps,
had ridden upon his palanquin garbed in its splendor with the pride of a
peacock in his narrow, slanting eyes. It seemed to me, kneeling there in
my torn pajamas, my knees and elbows bruised, my stomach rebelling
against rank food, that I could see the whole picture of which this
garment had once been a brilliant detail. There were shouting coolies
running ahead with huge bamboo staves to clear the way. The grandee's
chair, crusted with carving, was borne along in state. I could picture
paper lanterns swinging from slender poles and plum blossoms awave and
smell the heavy reek of burning incense, and at the thought of all this
arrogant luxury I suffered as though I were struggling through a
nightmare. The young derelict of the _Wastrel_ had, in all likelihood,
bargained for it and haggled over its cost in an Oriental shop. He had
finally bought it for a gift to a wife or sweetheart, and even with
capable bargaining it must have been a purchase beyond his means. Now
in futile magnificence it lay outspread before me who was sea-wrecked
and fighting hunger. In the same package, however, I found my first
useful articles: a small block of those miniature matches that one may
buy in the Chinatown sections of San Francisco or New York, which burn
with an odious reek of sulphur. It was doubtless because they partook of
the quality of a curiosity that he had preserved them.

There was also one of those slung-shots such as may be bought along
water fronts where seamen foregather: a small leather sack, loaded with
shot and suspended from a wrist-strap.

At the extreme bottom of the package, carefully preserved between two
sheets of thick cardboard, lay a page torn from a newspaper. It was on
that heavy, glossed paper which some journals use for their pictorial
sections and was covered with miscellaneous illustrations.

I was on the point of throwing the thing away, when some impulse led me
to turn it over. What I saw altered and remoulded all my life from that
moment forward.

A curtain of dusk was beginning to fall upon the hinterland at the edge
of the forest. The fringe of cane and palm was filling up with shadow
and the peak of the volcano was brooding against a sky of burnished
copper.

When I turned the sheet it was as though I had come face to face with an
actual personality where a moment ago there had been nothing animate.
Of course it was only because the art of photographer and engraver had
ably abetted each other, but the portrait which worthily filled the
seven columns of glazed paper was a marvel of lifelike presentment--and
of indescribable loveliness.

There are authenticated cases, in plenty, of men who have loved a face
seen only in a picture. The Mona Lisa of da Vinci has laid over many
beholders the hypnotic spell of the long-dead woman immortalized upon
its canvas. Pygmalion loved his Galatea. I fancy that, if the truth were
told, I loved in that first flash of view the lady who smiled out at me
from the lifelessness of ink and paper. The margins of the sheet had
been so close trimmed at the top that no date or caption remained, but
beneath, the scissors had left two words: "Miss Frances--" and with
these two words I must content myself.

But for the picture itself.

I have already confessed my passionate reverence for beauty. Here before
me was beauty of the purest type I have ever been privileged to see. It
was not the brush magic of a gifted painter who has caught from a lovely
model the charm of line and color and canonized them with idealization.
It lacked all the fire with which the palette might have kindled it. It
recorded nothing more than the lens had seen, yet its flawlessness
required no aid of art and asked no odds of color.

Her clear, young eyes smiled out at me with a miracle of graciousness.
Her perfectly curving lips were graver, and if possible sweeter than her
eyes. Her chin and throat were exquisitely modeled. Her hair was
abundantly massed and heavy. I could guess from the photographic tones
that its coils and escaping tendrils of curl, varied in shifting lights
between the red warmth of gold and the amber of clear honey.

But what most made this a remarkable photograph was its living quality.
So vital was the effect as one looked, that it seemed a palpitant
personality of breath and soul. The lips might be trembling on the verge
of speech and in the quiet smile hovered a delightful hint of whimsical
humor. The whole bearing was queenly with that gracious pride which we
characterize as royal when we speak of royalty as something inherently
noble. For the accolade of a smile from those lips, in the flesh, a man
might undertake all manner of folly. The young woman was in evening
dress and at her throat hung a rope of pearls.

Suddenly a transport of rage and a bitterness of contrast possessed me.
My hair was matted, my arms and hands raw and blackened with blood and
grime. I was the picture of abandoned misery. The satirical gods now set
Tantalus-wise before my eyes a picture of beauty and ease and
shelter--a pretty woman in the charming fripperies of evening dress.

But while I scowled, her eyes smiled back into my own, challenging in me
the vagabond spirit of the whimsical, until I too smiled.

I bowed to the picture.

"You are quite right," I said aloud. "Since it is impossible to alter
the situation, the only sane course is to recognize its humor. While we
are together here, I shall regard you as a living person. It shall be
our effort to turn this poor jest on the high gods who are its authors."

It almost seemed to me that the lips parted and the eyes danced
approvingly.

"Frances," I added, "I may call you Frances, may I not, in view of the
informality of our circumstances?--you are gorgeous. It was good of you
to come to keep me company. I needed you."

The air held a twilight stillness upon which my words fell clamorously.
I realized that I had not before spoken aloud for more than a day. Into
the ensuing silence came a new and alarming sound. It was half human and
incoherent, like a number of voices at a distance. I felt my muscles
grow rigid and choked off a half-animal growl that rose involuntarily in
my throat. Instinctively I was whipping the revolver from its holster
and slipping forward, crouched in the protection of a rock, my eyes
turned toward the jungle. Vaguely lurking in the gathering fog of
shadow, where the palms began, were some eight or ten figures. It was
impossible in the waning light to make out what sort of creatures they
were, but they moved with a soft prowling tread that was disquieting.
After a little while they melted out of sight, but until past midnight I
sat my eyes alertly fixed on the tangled dark, while the low-hung stars
paraded across the sky.




CHAPTER IX

A PORTRAIT AND A TEMPLE


The night, however, passed without event and morning came bathing the
empty edge of the forest with crystal freshness. The scene I still had
to myself. My morning journey down to the water's edge for food and
bathing was made with the most painful caution and I ate without relish.

My world had altered overnight. I was no longer merely shipwrecked but
shipwrecked among savages who might adhere to that perverted
epicureanism which esteems human fare for its flesh pots. Stories of
cannibalism had been plentiful at the captain's table on the
_Wastrel_--the value of white heads for decorating native huts had been
touched upon. My defense was limited to the six cartridges in the
chambers of my revolver and the newly discovered slung-shot.

Meantime I was hideously lonely. I turned the chest on end near the
opening of my cavern and spread the newspaper portrait upon it for full
inspection. The two upper corners I fastened with the curved and
jewelled daggers from Jerusalem.

The days which immediately followed marched slowly and were much alike.
It was only in my own state of mind that there was any element of change
or development.

The lurking figures did not reappear at the edge of the jungle and I
began to hope that they were members of some itinerant band from the
opposite side of the island who had chanced upon this locality in their
wanderings and might not again return. I was not even positive that they
had seen me.

Slowly, weirdly, while I dwelt in uncertainty and suspense the influence
of the lady in the picture grew upon me and compelled me. It may have
been at first, and doubtless was, a form of auto-hypnosis. Already the
seed for such an influence had been planted in the dependence which
young Mansfield and myself came to feel for the unknown girl's diary.
Now, in utter isolation, I was doubly in need of something to avert my
thoughts from channels which go down to madness and despair. The
lifelike quality of the portrait made it easier to talk aloud, and as
the spell grew I found myself talking with the softness of the lover.

There is a power in the spoken word. The mere act of giving audible
expression is a spur to thought. Sitting alone and debating how
uncertainly the wretched spark of life sputtered at the wick of my
being, I was the craven. When I talked to the picture whose lips smiled
as though all the world were brave, I grew ashamed of my terror.

Leaving my cave in the morning to forage and reconnoiter with the pistol
at my belt, I would carry with me, as a fragrant memory, the gracious
smile of her lips and the royal fearlessness of her eyes. Her image
nerved me to endurance; gave me a shoulder touch on normal thought, and
enabled me to hold in memory the world for which her evening gown and
pearls were symbols--and in deeply morbid moments this saved me from
losing my grip. Certainly, it was all an artificial stay--a ludicrous
pretense--but it served--and that is the final test of any love or any
creed. It served.

As these forces worked, I, at times, forgot that the picture was that of
an unknown. Its reality was so strong that it came to stand for some one
I had left behind, whom I must live to rejoin; some one inexpressibly
dear whose love hung over me and safeguarded me like a powerful
talisman. Often, in my broken sleep, I would dream that I was sore beset
by a thousand dangers and had fled to my cave as animals have fled to
caves since the world began, and that I stood huddling there miserably,
awaiting the end. Then, in the dream, she would come out of the
picture, as Galatea stepped down from the lifelessness of granite into
rosy and animated warmth. My assailants always fell back before her
coming and I, despite my terror, would attempt to meet her gallantly.
She would open a hidden door in the side of the rock, and lead me
through it. And always, in this repeated and unvarying dream, beyond the
door we stepped into a brilliantly lighted room where men and women
chatted carelessly in evening dress and danced to the tinkle of stringed
instruments.

By these degrees the illusion grew until my pretense became a vagary and
obsession and to me ceased to be a pretense. I fell back on occultism
and told myself that I had succeeded by mere concentration of mind in
forcing her to project her astral self across the world, until I had
with me her picture and her essence of soul.

Many of life's most sacred and permanent institutions are only fictions,
long entertained. My fiction became so real to me that for periods I
forgot to question it--then sometimes, at a moment when the illusion was
strongest, some impulse of reason would strike in upon and chill me,
like a sluicing from a cold bucket. It would come upon me to think of
myself as I should have appeared to any unwarned stranger, who had found
me talking, even lovemaking, with a sheet of lifeless paper. And from
that impersonal view-point I would wonder if my brain had already
crumbled to madness and imbecility. The cold sweat would bead my
forehead. My finger would creep to the trigger of my pistol and linger
there, twitching with the itch of self-destruction. But soon the smiling
lips would reassure me; the mood would pass and again I would surrender
myself to the pretense which was grateful where the truth was austere
and desolate.

I discovered in my tramps about the island's edge that this spot seemed
to be the most favored home of the orchid. This monarch of flowers
bloomed at the jungle's margin, in an infinite variety of flaunting
petals, soft colors and deeply glowing life. No other flower is so
ethereal and illusively lovely. None could be more fitted for a tribute
to as impalpable a love as I acknowledged. It became a part of my daily
program to bring back with me as I returned to the cave, masses of these
splendid blossoms which I heaped before her shrine.

I had reached the age of thirty-five and had heretofore been immune to
feminine fascinations. I had even been characterized as a woman-hater,
though this was an injustice. This new obsession, bewitching--whatever
you may choose to term it--was not momentary. In defense of my
consistency I declare that the thing required two weeks at least for its
accomplishment. And in those two weeks other affairs were developing.

Of course, I had been told, as has every traveler in the south seas,
that there is not an atoll or island left for discovery. I had been
informed that on every coral speck in the reef-strewn ocean, there is or
has been, a white man. I knew now that this was a fallacy. My island was
marked by a volcano tall enough to proclaim itself as far as a glass
could sweep the horizon from a ship's lookout, and if no pearl shell or
beche-de-mer trader, no blackbirder of the old days, no windswept vessel
of the present had hitherto sighted that peak, it must lie too far off
the course of rambling traffic, to expect a visit now. I knew that we
had dropped down-world for days before the wreck, and I had heard
grumbling, because of the mysterious course being steered. I was the
firstcomer--and yet the faint and struggling instinct of hope urged the
setting up of a tattered flag or two of sail cloth along the beetling
heights.

From my eyrie in the rocks, the coast line went away in a succession of
broken and porous cliffs which I had explored for a distance of perhaps
two miles. That two miles held all I had learned to know of this island
which was clearly a large one. What the interior had behind its curtain
of palm and moss and cane--back in the impenetrable jungle--belonged to
the mystery of an unopened book. I did know that off to the left as one
faced the sea, separated from me by four or five miles of precipitous
coast line, loomed a headland from which a flag waving by day would be
observable--if ever a vessel came across the shoulder of the world. To
reach the point and return would be a day's journey, for the path I must
take led over a trail more suited to a mountain goat than a man who had
until lately been civilized.

One morning I set out carrying tightly wrapped one of the pieces of
sail-cloth which had come out of the mate's chest. My resolution to set
my flag flying had filled me with a sort of specious exaltation. The
venomous beauty of the place was beyond description, and in a measure I
yielded to its lure and walked almost buoyantly. The sea to its skyline
was blue with a depth of sapphire. The tangle of the jungle was aflash
with vivid and sparkling color. Small, harmless snakes slid brightly
aside, as multi-hued as shreds of rainbow. I had climbed and crawled for
several hours, and was beginning to suffer keenly from weariness and
stone bruises on my poorly protected feet, when I came to a sort of path
running upward. This led me to a more commanding eminence than I had
before reached and gave me a view inland over an endless blanket of
green, unbroken forest. Ahead of me was a still greater height, and
after a short rest I made my way to the point from which I could look
across its crest. Then I halted dead in my tracks and stood fingering my
revolver. A cold sweat came out on my forehead and my knees trembled,
threatening to fail me. It was as though a curtain had risen on a stage
set to terrify the beholder.

The high ground fell steeply away into a basin whose slopes were roughly
broken into rising tiers. These tiers commanded a sort of amphitheatre
two hundred yards in diameter, through which ran a small thread of water
cascading from the interior elevation. A quarter of a mile away began
the background of timber and tangle.

The bottom of the basin had been worn smooth by much treading. A boulder
some four feet tall and probably of an equal thickness rose, pulpit
like, at the center. Its top was hollowed out into a bowl and its sides
were inscribed with crude hieroglyphics. Near it were a half-dozen
upright poles, surmounted by what seemed to be cocoanuts. In a dozen
places under rude stone ovens were the ashes of dead fires. Scattering
piles of human bones--but nowhere a skull--told me that I had stumbled
on a _kai-kai_ temple--a place of cannibal observances and feasting. I
did not at once venture into the hollow for closer scrutiny. It was not
such an institution as one would care to invade carelessly. Over the
whole place hung a horrible stench. Flies buzzed about it in noisy,
filthy swarms. After a long interval of listening and reconnoitering I
became convinced that this place of special observance was to-day as
neglected as are many churches in Christian lands on week days.

I crept tremblingly down into the abominable pit and made my way toward
the stone altar prepared now for any atrocious sight. But the climax of
discovery came when I had crawled half way and the cocoanuts on the
poles resolved themselves into withered, human heads, sun dried and
yellow fringed.

These mummied skulls were for the most part trophies of old battles, but
lying at the top of the rock was another which must have surmounted its
living shoulders only a few days ago. The frizzled hair was tied into
dozens of kinky knots. The facial angle was low and slanting and the
coarse lips were hideously twisted in a snarl of death and defiance. On
the scalp, which a war club had crushed, sat a very beautiful head-dress
of gull feathers, brilliantly dyed in green and crimson and orange. The
victim had worn to his obsequies such a decoration as might have crowned
a princess of the Incas. He had been a warrior of rank and now, as
befitted his station, his head lay drying out on a mat of yellow and
brown wood pulp.

A stifling nausea assaulted the pit of my stomach. My retreating steps
reeled drunkenly, and when, near the rim of the basin, I turned for a
final gaze in the fascination of horror, I no longer had the place to
myself.

Two human figures stood at the farther rim of the amphitheater, silently
regarding me. Both were thin, pigmy-built men with long arms and low
foreheads. Their faces, grotesquely disfigured with bone and shell
ornaments spiked through noses and ears, were bestial yet not stupid.
Their eyes were beady and sharp, and just now their thick lips hung
pendulous with wonderment. For an instant I was incapable of motion;
then, as they stood in equal petrification, I remembered and acted on
the counsel of an east-side gang member whom I had once been privileged
to know in New York. I had inconsequently inquired whether, in his
acrimonious career, he never came eye to eye with fear.

"Sure thing," he had promptly replied, "but when a guy gets your
goat--stall. If you makes de play strong enough it's a cinch you gets
his goat too."

By that rule this was my moment to "stall." I drew myself up to the
limit of stature and threw out my chest in the best semblance of
arrogance I could assume.

They were decked like the head of their sacrificial victim, in brilliant
feather work, beautifully and harmoniously wrought. Their flint-tipped
spears were elaborately carved and their necklaces were fashioned of
shells and teeth. Some of the teeth were human. For perhaps thirty
seconds we held the strained tableau, then I glanced over my shoulder.
Between me and retreat stood a third figure. Compared to his gaudiness
of decking, the raiment of the others was mean and sober. One bare
shoulder and arm was covered with festering ulcers. His monkey-like
face had the same slant of brow and heaviness of lip, but it worked
constantly with a keen and twitching play of expression which argued
speculative thought. As I turned he was leaning on a knotted war-club,
and regarding me with profound gravity.




CHAPTER X

I SEEK ORCHIDS


Internally I was quaking, and thinking very fast. The first shock of
their astonishment was dissipating, and two of the three faces were
clouding into a glowering scrutiny which augured darkly for my escape.
The gaze of the third held a grave perplexity, touched with awe, and in
the interval of overcharged silence the other eyes dwelt questioningly
on his.

I knew from their spell-bound attitudes that I was the first white man
they had seen and an apparition. Measured by their pigmy standards, I
was a gigantic being of a new type and order, possibly I was even
immortal.

As a man they had no fear of me. The revolver which I had slipped from
its holster and cocked had not impressed them. They knew nothing of its
death-dealing quality. That was a point in my favor. It would afford, if
need be, six miracles of mortality, but the jungle that had disgorged
them could disgorge hundreds of others like them--perhaps thousands.
Gods must carry themselves, when they walk among men, with a godlike
scorn of mundane dangers. I turned to the one man who was above the
others, exposing my back to the two spears, as though safe in my
consciousness of immunity. I extended one arm with a gesture intended to
epitomize great majesty. It was a pose borrowed from some old sculptor's
conception of the Olympian Zeus--albeit shamefully exaggerated.

It was an anxious moment. Should he, to whom I made my commanding plea,
lift his finger in signal, the spears from behind, poisoned spears
perhaps, would strike me down. But as I strode forward, with one hand
still pointing heavenward, I commanded him in a mighty voice to stand
aside.

He on his part eyed me dubiously, never shifting his attitude or raising
his club from the earth, but he permitted me to pass from the
amphitheatre unmolested. I went, deliberately, holding my gaze rigidly
to the front and using every ounce of self-control to curb the impulse
of my feet to run, and the impulse of my neck to crane. A vestige of
misgiving, a note of human anxiety, would have destroyed me.

My peril was superlative, and yet as I look back on the occasion, I can
see that it overdid comedy and became pure farce. I was defending my
life with burlesque. My audience would not be impressed by finesse, and
impressing it was a matter of life and death. In the words of the
east-side bruiser, I was "makin' it strong."

At all events my bearing, in a situation without precedent of etiquette,
found sufficient favor to cover my retreat and I went down to the sea
unfollowed. I had none the less seen enough to set me thinking and
thought brought little solace. Were I accepted on the basis of my own
divine assumption, and regarded as a being from another world, the story
would travel fast among their villages. Its wonder would be promulgated
and men would burn with curiosity to behold me. Among those who came as
pilgrims would be some demanding proofs and miracles. I was now
committed to a permanent policy of bluff. I had always been regarded as
a facetious individual. Now my life depended on attaining a supreme
flippancy of attitude on pain of sacrifice to rites for which I had no
reverence. When at sundown I reached the place where the portrait smiled
whimsically at me from its post of honor, I sat for a while looking into
the comprehending eyes and my thoughts took more cheerful color. Before
me lay a situation in which I was to pit my legacy of human development
against the brute odds of minds lighted only to the mistiness of dawn.

"Frances," I said, "you smile. Of course since you are fixed in print,
you can't do otherwise than smile. I wonder--" I broke off and became
suddenly and unaccountably serious. "I wonder if you would smile, were
you here with me in the flesh as well as merely in the spirit. I wonder
if you would."

Then with a feeling which was tremendously real, I added fervently and
aloud, "Thank God you are not here in the flesh--but I am grateful for
your smiling. Somehow I find it reassuring."

After a little reflection I summarized the entire situation to the lady
with whom I discussed my affairs.

"You see, my dear," I informed her, "to their untutored and man-eating
minds I present a dilemma. I am either a great immortal, whom it would
be most unwise to heckle--or I am very good eating, in which case it is
a pity to let me grow thinner."

"It shall be our care, dear lady," I added, "to maintain this status of
godship and to that end we must arrange a little program of simple
miracles from time to time. You see," I explained, "it won't be long
before they will be coming here and demanding what manner of deity I am,
and what is my immortal name. Do you know what I shall tell them?"

I paused and grinned into the smiling eyes and the lips that seemed
trembling on the verge of speech.

"I shall tell them," I assured her, "that in me they behold the great
god Four-flush."

If I concede to the cold logic of material reasoning that this
dependable companionship and love of a man for a portrait washed up by
the sea was merely the aberration of a brain unseated by solitude, I
must also believe that a series of totally incredible coincidences
subsequently befell me. But if it be that certain things are written in
the stars and certain passions are irrevocably decreed, my life is freed
of grotesqueness and becomes logical.

While I lived under the sword of the problematical to-morrow, suspended
by the hair of an uncertain to-day, my dependence upon her grew greater.
The brave man is said to die once and the coward often, but the line
between the courage and cowardice is not absolute. There were periods
when I felt that I could play the game and die if I must, with the
detached philosophy of a Socrates. At other times I wallowed in the pit
of foreboding and died several times a day. In these moods I wished for
the moment of crisis which should put my resolution to the touch, and
end the matter.

The savages did not approach my cave, but sometimes when evening fell
and the jungle spread itself in a fringed blanket against the moonlight,
I could make out skulking patches of shadow at its edge. In my rambles
too I had a sense of being endlessly watched by unseen eyes, and once
bending over a sunlit pool to drink, I was startled by the haggard face
which looked up from it with streaks of white in its long, tangled hair.
Each day I brought fresh orchids from the jungle's edge and heaped them
before my intangible lady.

"They are more beautiful, Frances," I told her, "than any I could buy
you along the Champs Elysees or Fifth Avenue--and all they cost is a
ship and crew and cargo."

One morning I discovered that where the growth of cane and moss and
vines had formerly been thick and unbroken there were now several
clearly defined alleyways, made by the coming and going of the blacks,
bent on observing me. A few inquisitive steps into one of these trails
revealed, at a little distance, a pool of water. Its basin was of mossy
rock, and its edges were choked with ferns. A slender waterfall fed it,
and through the cloistered half-light of the forest interior fell a few
fervid dashes of sunlight like gold leaf on the somber tones of
greenery. The air hung wet and steamy like the atmosphere of a hot
house. But the marvel of it was the orchids. They climbed and trailed
and illumined the place with a dozen varieties of weird and subtle
beauty. One could understand why men take their lives into their hands
and penetrate fever-infested jungles in search of newer types. Their
delicacy was unearthly and splendid. They were not, it seemed, flowers
growing on dirt-fed stems, but blossoms of the gods. Each one was like
the blooming of some human soul freed from the grossness of the flesh.
Here was a bloom as ethereally pure and pale as the reincarnation of
some flawless virgin spirit; there were flaming petals of such
magnificent color as might have sprung from the heart of a conqueror. I
saw epitomized in petal and stamen, all the poetry of the world's dead
dreams. I took as many as I could carry back to the portrait, and on the
following morning I returned for more.

They lured me strangely with their fox fire of sheer beauty, until I had
penetrated the jungle to the distance of a quarter of a mile and stood
in a small opening where I plucked an armful of their blossoms.

Suddenly, as I started back, I felt a biting pang in my left shoulder,
and knew that I had been speared, though the tangle of the jungle
revealed no human form, and its silence remained unbroken. The spear,
which had come from nowhere, as it seemed, fell to the ground, but not
before it had gashed my flesh and left upon the tattered remnants of my
jacket a tell-tale smear of blood.

I believed myself to have been mortally poisoned by the javelin, and my
one wish now was to escape, with the semblance of greatness still upon
me, and die unseen. I went with as much dignity as possible toward the
beach, backing through the tangle to keep my flow of blood concealed. I
had no doubt that many unseen eyes followed my exit and even if it were
for a brief time, I wished to go with the seeming of divine
invulnerability. I even forced a loud and derisive shout of laughter
which rang weirdly through the silences. Wicked pains shot in white-hot
currents through my blood and racked my muscles. I was weak with
nauseating pain and dizziness swam in my brain. At last the merciful
rocks gave me concealment. I dropped on my knees, my teeth gritted, and
dragged myself back to my cave where I turned my face to the rock wall
to die.




CHAPTER XI

I FIND MYSELF A DEMI-GOD


Yet I did not die. While I lay waiting to do so the insistent ache of my
bones, the racking of my wound and the sodden numbness of my brain,
slowly blurred me into apathy. That passed and the delirium came on a
swelling tide of temperature. Centuries trampled roughshod over me and
demons of pain scourged me through the seven hells of fever. Scorching
wastes of time were broken at long intervals by little oases of lucidity
when I crawled to the opening and drank, but even these were clouded by
shreds of nightmare horror, and remembered hallucinations.

Once, waking to momentary sensibility, I found the narrow cave still
ringing with the echoes of my tortured and delirious shrieks.

When, at last, I came fully to myself, painfully weak and scalded with
the fever, but sane, I could see the stars spangling my scrap of sky. My
adventure had occurred in the morning, but whether hours or days had
played out their scores I did not know. I drank and slept again. I next
woke to the glare of forenoon. The clouds in my brain had been swept
away, and the hand I lifted fell weakly back on a forehead which was
cool and moist. The battling life spark had triumphed over the native
poison. But when I tried to drag myself to the mouth of my grotto, my
weak head began rambling again, so that real and unreal things wandered
strangely together. My side was lacerated by the pistol which had been
at my belt as I tossed in the fever. A twist in the fissure brought me
to the point where I, still concealed in the dark shadow, could see the
primitive terrace of my plateau, and there were such things as brought
back upon me an avalanche of terror, rage and violence.

The lady still smiled from her post of honor with her gracious and
fearless eyes. The curved damascus daggers still held the enamelled
sheet in place, but beyond her I saw death. Against a background of
intense sea and sky under the glare of a fiercely brilliant sun, stood
grouped a human ensemble of indescribable color and savagery. Upon
scores of black and sweating torsos; upon gorgeously dyed feather work
and shell ornaments, the light fell in color gone mad. They stood massed
and silent, their spears and bows and clubs for the moment idle. Their
faces mutilated with spiked ears and nose ornaments and dyed teeth, were
unspeakably hideous. Every eye was just now intent on the portrait of my
lady. At the front stood the three whom I had supposed to be priests at
the amphitheatre, and with them was a man very aged and white haired,
but erect and gorgeously appareled.

Slowly one of the priests approached the portrait and put out an
ulcerous hand to touch the face. A tidal wave of unspeakable fury caught
me up and swept me back into the realm of insanity. I was transplanted
in an instant to the nightmares of my delirium. I saw instead of a
lifeless picture the slender, breathing figure of the woman I worshiped
contaminated by this profane touch. I attempted to rush out and die like
some Mad Mullah devotee in fanatical battle with her assailants, but my
strength was not equal to my impulse. I stumbled to my knees and my
right hand fell upon the hilt of my pistol. I whipped it out and fired.
In my agued hand it should have been harmless enough, but the range was
short and I had once been a marksman. I saw the man crumple forward with
a short, strangled groan. I saw those at the back crowding one another
over the cliff in the panic of their disordered flight. They had not
seen me. They knew only that bolts of death were striking them down. I
heard endless thunders as the pistol report sent its echoes beating and
rebounding against the confined walls of the fissure. Blue and slender
lines of spiraling smoke went drifting out into the air. I caught a
glimpse of two bolder spirits stopping to drag away their dead. Then I
collapsed and lay for hours where I had fallen.

Once more I awoke with a moist forehead and a hunger which gnawed at the
pit of my stomach. Only the gods knew how long I had been without food.
The air fanned me with the soft, reviving breath of night. The moon,
riding up the east made an irregular diagram of silvered light across
the ledge, and fell with a reassuring touch of ivoried white, on the
newspaper sheet and the portrait.

I was too famished and spent to stand, but I made the journey down to
the beach on hands and knees, and when I had eaten my fill of unsavory
crabs I lay for a time in the grateful coolness of the wet sand and drew
new strength from its healing. My sickness was ended. The pitiable
weakness that had made the downward journey a torture was the heritage
of hunger. I had needed no medicine but food, and now I found myself
able to walk back upright. That night I slept sweetly and dreamed once
again of the familiar door beyond which lay luxury and security.

The sun was high when I awoke with a sense of great refreshment and
recovery. The slit of sky framed in the rift was not yet hot, but
tenderly blue with a color of promise. The fronds of fern and palm
stirred to the land breeze. I went down to my surf bath and breakfast
with an almost buoyant step. A half-hour after my return, when I turned
to look at the jungle edge a sight greeted me which demonstrated the
decision of the natives that our intercourse was not so soon to become a
closed incident.

This time, however, their coming was characterized by a more gratifying
element of respect. They swarmed out of the bush, not in paltry dozens
nor scores, but in their panoplied hundreds. Gorgeously decked chiefs
and the club-bearing warriors smeared with indigo halted in the open,
leaving a satisfying interval between their position and mine. With
great and conspicuous show of peace the warriors discarded their spears
and shields and raised their weaponless hands for me to behold as I
looked down from my high place. The white-haired king broke a spear,
gazing up at me the while, then dropping the pieces knelt and bowed his
slanting forehead to the sands. At his back bent the priests, trailing
their bright feathers in the dust. No one could misunderstand their
pantomime. Men of their tribe had offended the deities. A nation had
come in humility and supplication for forgiveness.

While they made obeisance in relays a group of young men approached the
priests, bearing armfuls of orchids. The king and priests and
orchid-bearers moved forward for a few steps and halted, gazing up
inquiringly at me. This performance was several times repeated before I
understood that they were seeking my consent to approach nearer. Then I
bowed and pointed inward. A rigorous order of precedence was observed,
the aged king keeping his place at their head and his followers their
positions of relative rank. The weight of his years made the royal steps
so slow that the colorful pageant crept like an army of snails.

Suddenly it dawned upon me that if I were to be a god receiving a
delegation of mortals, I should receive it in some suitable degree of
state. They were sending to me the mightiest men of their villages. The
kinky head of their king was abased. Aged Merlins were coming on their
marrow bones, resplendently trailing their feathered finery along the
white and flaring sands. I stood awaiting them in a raveled, mud-smeared
suit of pajamas which at their best had never been ostentatious. The
thing seemed unfit. Evidently these folk inclined to the splendor of
pomp. Jeffersonian simplicity would be lost on them. Their pageant
should be met with pageantry. There had been some who had doubted and
denied me. Of a surety if I were to play this nabob from the skies; if I
were to turn the averted tragedy into a screaming and cheerful farce,
it was my duty to dress the part.

With a signal of raised hands, I signified that they were to await my
reappearance. Then I bowed with profound dignity, and stepping from
their view, disappeared.

A few minutes later I emerged from my cave, a transmogrified being. I
was no longer the derelict of rags and tatters. Mine was the opulent
splendor of a High Mandarin of China. About my fever-wasted frame fell
and flapped the gorgeous folds of the embroidered kimono. In my hands I
carried a violin and bow. It is true I was unshaven, and through holes
in my canvas shoes protruded eight or ten toes, but what mortal can
assume to criticise such eccentricities as may be the part of godhood?

When I took my stand once more on my pedestal of mountain, I found them
patiently awaiting the nod of deity. The sun fell resplendently on my
silver storks and gold dragons and silk poppies. The lessening land
breeze fluttered the embroidery-crusted folds and splintered light from
my person. I listened with satisfaction to the incoherent sound that
went up from many throats; a chorused gasp of profound awe and
admiration and wonderment.

I signaled my immortal readiness to receive them. As the ludicrousness
of the farce broke over me I had to bite back unsolemn roars of
laughter. A spirit of deviltry and vaudeville possessed me. As their
high priests in deadly earnest marched on all fours with faces as rapt
and fanatically sober as those of Mecca pilgrims, I drew the bow across
the catgut and, lifting my voice, proclaimed myself in ragtime.

I informed them in the words which were new only to them and solemn only
to them that I had rings on my fingers and bells on my toes, and as I
sung they became hushed with awe and approached with a deeply moved
sense of their great honor and responsibility.

When they were only a little way off, I went down to meet them, and with
a condescension which I trusted would not injure my prestige, lifted the
aged chieftain to his feet and permitted him to walk. He, however,
remained deferentially two paces in my rear. It was evident from their
straining upward gazes, that deeply as they were moved to reverence by
my own exalted spectacle, there was some greater revelation which they
awaited above. This disquieted me since I had in reserve no added climax
to offer. I had given them a display savoring of the circus but I had no
grand spectacle to advertise in the main tent after the regular
performance.

When we had reached the plateau, however, I understood and was relieved.
To me they had come kneeling, but before Her portrait they threw
themselves on their faces and groveled. They sprinkled sand and pebbles
upon their hair and their voices, even to me who understood no syllable,
carried such depth of humility and supplication as filled me with
wonder.

They would rise from their suppliance only long enough to glance at the
face of the picture, then fall again and renew their paroxysms of
ungainly prayer. From the hands of the orchid-bearers they took the
heaps of blooms, and piled them at a distance from the shrine. The young
men who had been so signally honored withdrew from the holy of holies.
Only the high priests and the king were left with me in the sacred
arena.

For a time I stood dumbly looking on, then the idea percolated into my
confused understanding. I realized that at best I was only a demi-god,
perhaps a sort of super-high-priest, but no god. These ambassadors
extraordinary had come not to me but to The Lady of the Portrait.

I lifted up my voice for attention, and from their kneeling postures
they regarded me with grave reverence. I took my place, with bowed head,
before the portrait and addressed the lady in tones of deep solemnity.
It seemed to me that her delicate mouth line quivered with amusement, as
though she and I had between us a delicious secret.

"Frances! Frances! Frances!" I declaimed with the deep profundity of a
ritual. "I have failed totally and signally at the god job. There is in
all this world of sky and sea and of my heart but one deity. It was you
who struck down with a thunderbolt the sacrilegious, false priest. It
was you who saved me from death and raised me to the high estate of your
vicegerent." I paused and went on more seriously: "It is you whom these
people worship with idolatry--and of them all, none worships you so
wholly as I, your priest!" And though I was declaiming before a lifeless
image to impress ignorant cannibals, I meant it. When I had finished
there rose a devout murmur from the blacks, and with a motion to them to
remain, I went into the cave and came out again with the small Japanese
burner and a taper of incense. As the heavy fragrance of the burning
stuff spread itself upon the air, their wonder grew.

[Illustration: "Frances! Frances! Frances!" I declaimed with the deep
profundity of a ritual.]

At length I wheeled and pointed back to the jungle. Slowly, reluctantly,
but with perfect obedience, the wild bush men took up their backward
journey to relate the unbelievable tale of their reception.




CHAPTER XII

PORT AND STARBOARD LIGHTS


There are men whose lives develop in gradations of gentle growth. Decade
merges into decade by unstartling evolution. Variations of thread and
color run smoothly into the life-pattern. With me it has been otherwise.
The constantly recurring dream of the portal in the cliff was in a
fashion symbolical of my life. The dreamed-of rescue never came by
degrees, but by the abrupt opening of a door where there had been no
door before and by the sudden changing of worlds in a step across the
threshold. For me epoch had followed epoch with sudden breaks and few
connecting threads. One day I was a bored tourist lounging under the
striped awnings of Shepheard's Hotel. The next day found me on a
disreputable ocean tramp bound for the Ultima Thule. That voyage had
ended as suddenly as it began--with a quick curtain of unconsciousness
on a tableau of violence. Mansfield, too, dropped out of my life with
more instant suddenness that he had entered it. Now, presto! with the
sudden trickeries of a mountebank the sprite who played with my
destinies ushered in another unprefaced era. Across an invisible line I
stepped into days of luxury and prosperity.

It is told that the Inca god-kings breakfasted each morning on fruit
fresh plucked from growing-places a hundred miles away. In a horseless
land relays of runners, each dashing his appointed distance, saw to it
that a perishable dainty outlived its journey across a mountain range.
This gives a key to my mode of existence, for several months following,
though my luxury was of a lesser scale. In those months I mastered some
vocabulary--and in so crude a dialect vocabulary suffices. I lacked
fluency, of course, and had trouble with their consonant-locked
syllables and gutturals, but in a fashion I could talk. Day followed day
with a monotony of ease. I was no longer satisfied with the noisome
flesh of disgusting crabs, and gull eggs far advanced toward the
hatching. Delicacies of fish and flesh and hitherto unheard-of fruits
were served up to me to satiation. My tattered pajamas gave way to
garments of cocoa-fiber and feathered finery for ceremonial wear. The
necessity of entering into the lives of the natives brought repulsive
revelations which I endured as best I could since if I were to influence
them I must proceed with a nice diplomacy. My "fluttered folk and wild"
could not be hurriedly herded into new folds. Departing spirits, they
believed, followed the sun into the west. Gods visited mortals though
usually in invisible forms and were fond of the flesh of enemies slain
in battle. Fetich and superstition took a hundred phases. Their gusty
and savage minds were childishly susceptible and in their quickly roused
affections they were as demonstrative as collies. I began shortly to
look about for some simple miracle wherein the new goddess might
manifest herself as a deity of benefaction as well as of condign
punishment. The opportunity came in a fashion most unexpected and the
result hardly made for a reform of enlightenment. I was told that there
dwelt in stilt-supported villages of grass on the far side of the island
a warlike tribe, with whom my people were hostile.

My folk were bushmen and dreaded the sea, but these enemies were
salt-water men, who could with axe and adz scoop from the solid tree
outrigger canoes and who were terrible in their strength. Their king was
lord over several villages and about his house went (this they told me
with bated breath) a row of many round stones, and each stone stood for
an enemy slain and eaten. For many seasons there had been peace, but one
day there arrived at my plateau a delegation of grief-torn warriors. A
small village had been attacked and two heads taken to swell the row of
stones around the canoe house. They had now come to propitiate the deity
bearing fruits and exquisitely wrought spears. They besought the
forgiveness of my Gracious Lady, because they could offer no enemies'
flesh--the most god-satisfying of sacrifices. This omission, however,
they swore to remedy, if victory were permitted to hover over them in
fight. Among the most devout of the petitioners was Ra Tuiki, the aged
chief with white hair. They urged me to accompany them to their
principal village and lay the hand of blessing on their clubs and
spears.

Through dense tangles of palm and fern, mangrove and moss I was borne in
a rough hammock of fiber. Great soft-winged butterflies flapped across
the course of our march. Brilliant birds fluttered off, twittering and
screaming. I should have preferred walking, but my position prohibited
it. To condescend meant to become a mere man.

In their squalid villages of grass hovels I found filth and the
excitement of battle preparation. It was my first view of their home
life--and my last. I was taken to the house of a chief or sub-king, who
lay mortally hurt of an arrow wound, and who wished to have the blessing
of the highest priest that his spirit might take its course honorably,
and without curse, to the west. He lay on his mat dying, and was older
and more repulsive to the eye than Ra Tuiki. His ears had been
stretched by many huge ornaments, and the cartilage of his nose was torn
and ragged where the chances of battle had pulled out rings and spikes.
His eager eyes gazed up at me out of a face stiffened and set with
elephantiasis, and by his mat lay, unwrapped from their fiber coverings,
that they might comfort his passing spirit, two excellently preserved
negroid heads. I shuddered, but I laid my hand on his slanting
forehead--and I have seen men die with less dignity.

As night brought the closing in of choking jungle shadows, a half-dozen
red fires leaped up to drive their ribbons of red flare into the
blackness. They wavered fitfully and grotesquely upon twisting, leaping
bodies, which were paradoxically preparing for the ordeal of the morrow
by hideous orgies and dances and fatigue and nerve waste. But when the
first light of sunrise attacked the reek of dew that veiled the jungle,
while the dying fires still smouldered into gray ash and my throat
labored in stifling gasps of wet, they trailed out silently into the
bush. They were a long line of shadow shapes whose footfall made no
sound, and whose pigmy bodies melted into the tangle as impalpably as
the dissipating mists. My bearers carried me back to the shore. Two days
later their delegation came chattering in hysterical delight and
bringing in native triumph the head of the king who had three hundred
stones about his house.

About this time I instituted an important policy. By night I had signal
fires kept burning on every high place along the coast. I disingenuously
told my people that where a great shrine is, there must also be at
nightfall mighty banners of flame. They liked the idea. Despite their
hideous ferocity, they liked everything which might have appealed to the
imagination of a child. They liked music, they liked color. The greatest
privilege that their warriors could earn, was that of coming, to the
number of a dozen at a time, to my plateau by night and after due
reverence of squatting for hours on their haunches, while I coaxed from
the violin airs from opera or music hall.

On the point above us blazed one of our signal fires, and between the
reddened crevices of rock its flare struck down and yellowed our
gathering. The portrait would catch the light and leap from its shadow.
Over us were the stars. In a circle of silent absorption sat dark
immovable figures, with high lights gleaming, here and there, on the
mahogany of cheek-bone or forehead. Some fantastic painter might portray
these gatherings on canvas. He would need a bold brush. I find no words
for its description, but fantastic it was and strange. Under the fetich
of the starlight I would find myself drifting away into realms of
storied romance with the woman I loved and had not seen. Then my bow
would all unconsciously drift into love songs. I would find myself
singing--"Ever the wide world over, lass"--and oftentimes when my voice
rose to the strain I could fancy that She joined me in its singing. Her
voice sang in my brain definitely and with the sweetness of the beloved
and familiar. I had, of course, never heard a syllable from her lips,
and yet I was sure that could I hear her voice in life I should
instantly recognize it, though blindfolded. I thought of it as a richly
sweet contralto. It never for a moment occurred to me to fancy it might
be anything else.

Once for a week the sky ceased to smile, and grew black. The jungle was
lashed and stripped with hurricanes and on several occasions the earth
trembled. The sea pounded our porous coast and boiled into a tremendous
tide. I knew that if the cyclonic scope was general, ships were having
trouble, but in that thought lurked a vague hope. If any power were to
drive a vessel to my rescue it would be a power which carried sailors
out of their ordered courses. One night, some six months after the wreck
of the _Wastrel_, when the skies were serene again I found myself more
than ordinarily adrift on the tide of imagination. The march of the
stars showed that midnight had passed, and yet the natives sat
unhurried, and I, as unhurried as they, was still absorbed with the
violin.

My eyes traveled out to sea, absently and without reason. Suddenly the
bow stopped half-way across the strings with a rasping gasp of the
catgut. The instrument itself fell from my hands and I sat rigid and
staring like a man suddenly stricken. The other eyes followed mine and
also remained riveted. Leagues away over the phosphorescent waste of
water, but clear and unblinking, glowed the green spot of a ship's
starboard light. I tried to speak, but for the moment my grasp on their
dialect slipped from me and left me dumb. I was trembling with
heart-bursting excitement, and at sight of my emotion they began to stir
uneasily with a threat of panic.

As suddenly as it had left me my self-possession returned. With a
sweeping gesture I pointed to the myriad stars that gemmed the heavens
and told them that one of these had come down to the sea, bringing other
demi-gods like myself. I adjured them to build up the fires of welcome
until the island might seem a mountain of flame. Their strongest men
must feed, as never fires had before been fed, and all others must go to
their huts and await the morrow.

Alone on my plateau I saw the fires leap up in a coast-wise line of
beacons that dyed the night vermilion. The tiny point of seaward green
was crawling snail-like on the sea and at last my gaze was rewarded by a
slender flowering spray of rocket fire, followed by another and
another. Then the point of light ceased crawling and stood still. I let
my head fall forward in my palms and my breath came in spasmodic gasps.

But as I raised my eyes they fell on the smiling lips of the portrait.
It seemed to me that Her lips and eyes, still gracious, even
congratulatory, held a touch of wistful sadness which had not been there
before. They seemed such lips and eyes as say, "_Bon voyage_ and
farewell."

The glow of wine-like exultation died in my arteries and a chill settled
on my heart. There, in the world of tangible things and unrelenting
facts, what room would there be for such a companionship? Was this
strongest love of my life to melt into nothing now that I no longer
needed its support? Was it a dream? If so it was a dream from which I
should awake to an empty life. No! I would set out to find her in the
flesh. I halted my reflections with a start. And when I found her--what?
I sat there in the midst of silences, and the sweep of essential things.
About me lay leagues of sea, miles of rock, an infinity of sky. They
brooded gigantically over me and whispered that there are mysterious
influences greater than man's cold facts. Man's thought became only a
fluttering stir in a center of protoplasm. I was as near to the
beginnings of things as to the present. It was as easy to believe in the
love of souls that had not met as in other matters.

"No--no!" I cried out, bending before the face, "Whatever it be, there
are loves great enough to burn into miracles. This is not the first time
I have loved you--nor the last. Through aeons of reincarnation a love
like this runs on." I paused awhile, then added, with an effort to
smile. "Don't you remember even one or two former lives, dear?

    "'... happy we lived and happy we loved
    And happy at last we died;
    And deep in the rift of a Caradoc drift
    We slumbered side by side.
    The world turned on in the lathe of time,
    The hot sands heaved amain,
    Till we caught our breath from the womb of death
    And crept into light again.'"

My eyes were fixed so tensely on the portrait that it grew blurred.
Slowly it seemed to me to vanish and in its place stood a real and
living figure. I could give no detail of its dress or coloring, but it
was a figure of marvelous beauty, and it gazed into my eyes and shook
its head. Then it faded and I was looking again at the portrait. There
was a choke in my throat, and, falling to my knees, I kissed the printed
lips.




CHAPTER XIII

ENTER THE INFANTRYMAN


The morning would bring by rescuers and the breaking up of housekeeping
in my cave. I had no wish that profane eyes should look upon the
portrait or the devout worship of my beloved cannibals. Now that I was
leaving them I realized that they were beloved. In my memory loomed a
hundred acts of simple courtesy. The portrait I took down from its
shrined position; the Damascus daggers I put again into their places,
and the Mandarin's kimono I folded carefully into a package. On all
these things, as on the era for which they stood, I dropped the lid of
the mate's chest.

The morning came on brilliant and fresh with the cleansing sweep of the
trades. Sky and sea sparkled in a diamond clarity, and below me on the
beach patiently waited the dignitaries of my tribe in festal regalia.
Since this was our parting, I too came out decked in the finery of bird
plumage. I did not allow them to climb to the now empty shrine, but led
them down with me to the beach, where shortly a boat came bobbing over
the water.

A queer enough spectacle we must have made, like a flock of blackbirds
patched with the oriole's vermilion and the cockatoo's rose. I myself,
burned out of my Caucasian birthright, differed from them only in my
size.

For a time the handful of white men on the boat hesitated to risk the
chances of landing and being _kai-kai'd_. As they circled at a distance
I made my throat raw, shouting reassurances in English, while my
wondering blacks contemplated with deep awe this talking of the gods.

At last the rescuers rowed in, and I waded out waist deep to meet them.
The officer in command was a colossal Scotchman with a ruddy face and an
honest mouth as stiffly sober as though it had never yielded to the
seduction of a smile. He gave me a detail of two kanakas whose brawny
arms carried down the chest and its contents.

At last came the moment I had dreaded. I must break the news to these
waiting children that the priests from the stars had not come to bring
them new and permanent wonders, but to take back to the lands of mystery
their goddess and myself. I wished then for a full knowledge of their
tongue, that I might soften the tidings, but I could not bring myself
to the mendacity of promising a return, though they pleaded. When it
came to parting with Ra Tuiki, I forgot my quasi-divinity and seized the
old head-hunter's hand in an ungodlike, Anglo-Saxon grip.

Their island would now be charted. Missionaries would come to them with
teachings of a new faith, but treading on their heels would come men of
another sort, and as I thought of these I wished that we might be able
to leave the place unchronicled. The contract trader would soon arrive,
supported if need be by the authority of his flag's navy, bringing to my
cannibals, or some of them, long terms of peonage under hard plantation
masters.

"What, if I may ask," suggested the solemn-visaged Scot at the helm,
when the bow was turned outward and the boat crew was bending to the
oars, "was all the demonstration of th' niggers?"

"They were saying good-bye," I explained, "We came to have a very
satisfactory understanding."

He pondered my answer for a time in sober silence, then dismissed the
matter with a single observation.

"They took it cruel hard, sir."

Over the side of the _Gretchen_ I went to a kindly reception. I told all
of my story that I wished to tell, admitting that I had posed as a sort
of demi-god, but breathing no hint of the godship which was over my
priesthood.

A week of hurricane and storm had tested the ship's endurance, exhausted
the crew, and driven the _Gretchen_ into unknown waters.

"If it hadn't been for your signal fires," the captain told me, "we
might have gone to smash on the outlying needles. Your lights probably
saved us as well as yourself."

This was no larger ship than the _Wastrel_, but when one went to his
berth at night it was with confidence that his sleep would not be
interrupted by the sudden necessity of getting up to die. She had
carried a cargo of trade stuffs south and was returning to Singapore by
way of Brisbane, laden with copra and pearl shell. Her direction lay
westerly while I wished to go east, but that was secondary. At the
Australian port, I could reship. Indeed, I was told our course might
shortly cross that of a regular line of steamers between Brisbane and
Honolulu. For a few days it was satisfying enough to pick up the lost
ends of the world's stale news. While I had been marking time the world
had been marching; a hundred paragraphs had been lived into history.

On the fourth day a slender thread of smoke rose over the western
horizon which grew into a clean-painted and white-cabined steamer. As
the gap closed white-clad men and even women stood crisply out against
the deck-rail. Then with much signaling from the halyards the two
vessels had converse of which I was the subject, and I with my chest
went over the side of the _Gretchen_. I told the steamer's purser as
much of my story as I had told on the _Gretchen_, and when that evening
I appeared at the captain's table transformed by bathing in a real tub
and submission to a real razor in the hands of a real barber, it was to
find that my story had traveled forward and aft.

St. Paul was a very good man. He had piety and fervor, but also in a
superior and godly fashion he was a man of the world. Perhaps he gained
a firmer grip on his following by reason of his ability to say to the
youth of his generation, "I have been twice stoned and thrice
shipwrecked." I had been only once shipwrecked, yet a ready-made
audience awaited entertainment.

It was on the second afternoon that Captain Keller appeared in the
smoke-room. He was a man of about my own build and almost as bronzed,
but fair haired and his carriage proclaimed the soldier before he
introduced himself. I was idly enjoying the comfort of wicker chairs and
windows which framed white decks and dancing seas. The few other
occupants of the place were lounging about in pongee and linen, chatting
lazily of those things which make talk among men coming out of the
East: tribal risings in Java, the late race-meet in Melbourne. The
military-looking young man dropped into a seat at my table and signaled
to the spotless Jap, who officiated as smoking-room steward.

"Left you alone yesterday," he began by way of introduction. "I saw you
didn't relish being treated like the newest and strangest animal in
captivity. I guess they're accustomed to you now. What will you have?"

"Brandy and soda," I decided; then I added, "Perhaps after being rescued
I ought to make myself more volatile and amusing, but the fact is I'm
readjusting. Did you ever happen to spend six months on an undiscovered,
cannibal island?"

He shook his head and laughed with a pleasant gleam of strong, regular
teeth.

"Then," I assured him, "you don't understand the desire to sit still for
a while. You don't understand the sheer wonder of a soft chair, white
woodwork and the regular throb of engines and the sight of
white-skinned, white-clad men and women. Look there." I held out my
copper-colored forearm.

He smiled again and nodded. "I'm going back to the States," he said,
"after three years in the Islands, capped with two months in India and
Australia. I'm Keller of the 23rd Infantry."

He paused, then went on in a matter-of-fact way. "I've been in the
jungle three months on end. I know what it means. This is my second term
of Philippine service and it's the first time I've gone home quite sane.
After the first three years the melancholia had me. When the transport
left Manila, and I thought of the three weeks before I could see the
Golden Gate, it took three good huskies to keep me from jumping
overboard. It touches one here." With a finger at the temple, he paused,
then added gravely: "And I know some fellows who weren't stopped in
time. One must readjust slowly."

I nodded, puffing with a sense of supreme luxury at the Cairene
cigarette he had offered me, and listening to the tinkle of ice in my
tall glass.

There were some days of almost pure creature contentment and as we sat
under deck awnings or burned cigars in the smoking-room our
acquaintanceship ripened to intimacy. The engines with their muffled
throb were churning out their fifteen knots an hour and the timbers
creaked their complaint to the rise and fall of the prow. Of course all
the time during those days was not spent chatting with the infantryman,
and of course the point of intimate confidence was not at once
established between us. Indeed, I, at first, let him do the talking, and
though he was a modest man he had much to tell. But in the hours I
spent alone I found my thoughts revolving about many things which I
could not generally share. A man may admit to himself without shame that
he has fallen in love with a woman of whose very existence he is
uncertain, but he hesitates to announce it to another. Now, although the
picture which had given me companionship and protection was packed away
out of sight; though I was no longer a dweller in fantastic
surroundings, I still had that presence with me. Whenever I closed my
eyes I saw again the smiling lips and gracious eyes. I knew that I was
henceforth destined to scan all faces until I found hers.

So, being unable to discuss matters that were distracting me I found
need of an outlet, and sought it in transcribing this diary. Of course
the impulse that had stirred me on the island to write down my emotions
each day was one I could no longer gratify. Now I must do the thing in
retrospect and my pen would lack the force which an impending shadow of
fatality might have given it. I had emerged from that pall only to pass
into the shadow of something quite as important. I was dedicated to a
quest. When I found Her I wished to have the story ready to present in
as convincing a form as possible. Sometimes at night Keller and I hung
elbow to elbow over the after-rail, watching the broken phosphorus of
the wake.

We were standing so on the night before reaching Honolulu where Keller
was to spend a few days while I made immediate connection for the
States. He was telling me many things about himself. There was a baby,
born after he had left God's country, now old enough to chatter, and do
wonderful things, whom he was to see for the first time when he reached
'Frisco. His confidence invited mine, and over our pipes, I told him the
whole and true story of my experiences and of how an unknown goddess had
safeguarded me.

"You spoke of the loneliness," I said at the end. "You know now why it
didn't slug me into insanity."

For a long time he stood musing over the recital. He had seen enough of
life's grotesqueries to understand it. Finally he asked:

"Will you read me some of your diary?"

I took him to my cabin and for an hour he listened while I read the
hastily scrawled pages that I had set down. Of course I read them with a
certain diffidence because it had occurred to me that certain phases
might strike a man living in civilization as the vagaries of a brain
touched with sun and isolation. Indeed, I was surreptitiously watching
his face from time to time as a man might watch a jury box when he is on
trial for lunacy, but I was reassured to find there no politely veiled
judgment against my sanity.

"It's decidedly interesting," he said at last, "though it's one of the
things we would rule out as too improbable to believe if we didn't
happen to know it was true. In the first place I have been reliably
informed by many expert witnesses that the South Seas have long since
given up their last secrets as to undiscovered islands."

"I was also convinced of that," I admitted, "until I was cast up on one.
I am now prepared to believe there are many others. Whenever I live six
months in a place I am ready to admit its existence."

He refilled and lighted his pipe, then he said, "I don't want to invade
private precincts, but after hearing that I'd like to see the portrait.
May I?"

I delved into the mate's chest, and unwrapped the newspaper page.

For some moments he gazed at it, and I began to wonder whether it held
the same magic infatuation for every one else that it did for me. His
expression was enigmatical and his voice, when he spoke at last, was
puzzled.

"It's very hackneyed," he said, "but we must go on saying it. The world
is an extremely small place."

"What do you mean?" I demanded.

He was still looking at the picture and he spoke reflectively as though
I had not been present.

"The loveliest girl in Dixie. They all said so."

"In Dixie," I echoed eagerly, "Do you mean you know her?"

"I've danced with her a dozen times," he answered, "and yet I can't say
I know her. I remember that all the men were paying court, and I fancy I
should have been smitten like the rest except that my wife had just
accepted me, and I had only one pair of eyes."

"For God's sake," I said very quietly, "let me have all that you know
about her--name--address."

"It was four years ago," he explained. "We were all at Bar Harbor. She
was visiting at one of the cottages there. I was so engrossed with my
own courtship that other girls, even this wonderful one, didn't count
with me. I don't know where she lived, except that she was from the
South. Her name was Frances." He broke off and an expression of extreme
vexation clouded his face.

"I know her first name," I urged him. "It's the surname I need."

"Yes," he responded, "of course. Her surname was----" Again he halted
and an embarrassed flush spread over his cheeks and forehead. Then he
spoke impulsively. "You must bear with me. It's ludicrous, but the name
has slipped me. It's just at the tip of my tongue, yet I can't call it.
This thing is inexcusable, but ever since that first trip to the Islands
I've been subject to it. Names which I know perfectly, elude
me--sometimes for a few moments, sometimes for weeks."

"Can't you remember it," I demanded insistently, "if you cudgel your
brain? I don't care how mercilessly you cudgel it. I must know."

He nodded. "I quite understand. It has slipped me. I shall remember it
by morning, but--" his voice became graver.

"But what?" I inquired.

"I'm afraid it's too late to help you. We heard just before leaving the
place that she was to marry some man at home. It hadn't been formally
announced, but I think it was quite definite."

I suppose he said good-night and that I replied. I don't remember his
leaving the stateroom. I recall standing some time later alone on the
deck and seeing a white-clad officer tramping the bridge. His noiseless
feet seemed to be treading upon me. The one honeymoon couple on our
passenger-list passed and halted to comment on the rare quality of the
air and the splendid softness of the stars. The little bride laughed
delightedly. "Oh, Mr. Deprayne," she enthused, "it was under skies like
this that Stevenson wrote,

    "'The world is so full of a number of things,
    That I feel we should all be as happy as kings.'"

I smiled. "Yes," I murmured, "a number of things. Possibly too many
things."

There was running through my memory a passage from the diary written by
the unknown girl. It was one of those passages that had stuck in my
memory through the shipwreck and the island days, a note of optimism
which I had liked, partly because it was rather too imaginative to be
accepted as fact. Now it mocked me.

"It's not just to-day's wonderful things that make life fair," she had
written, "but it's knowing that there is to be a to-morrow, and that
that same to-morrow will be lovelier than to-day. I know (I can't say
why unless it's just that some voice keeps singing it to my heart), that
some day he will come walking into my life as into a place where he has
the right to be and our lives will after that be one life. That is the
to-morrow I am waiting for."




CHAPTER XIV

THE "ASH-TRASH LADY"


But when we parted at Honolulu the name was still eluding Keller's
memory and I had to continue on my way uninformed.

I was at first all for breaking my journey and remaining with him until
some flash of memory should bring back the one word I needed, but he
pointed out to me that little would be gained by this course. I think he
was, in fact, so sensitive as to the mental quirk which had survived his
attack that the idea of a man's shadowing him, waiting for him to
remember, was unwelcome and would have taxed his self-respect. I felt
bound to regard his whim, inasmuch as he promised that if I would wait a
while, two or three weeks at the most, he would arm me with information.
Even if his memory continued to play truant, a word with his wife, when
he met her, would set him straight, and he would at once communicate
with me.

At all events, as we shook hands, looking out across the sapphire bay,
we both pretended that the lapse of his memory was a trivial thing. I
did not affect indifference for its subject, but I assured him that
inasmuch as I had still some days of voyage ahead of me it was quite
probable that the name might come to his memory again before I landed in
'Frisco, and I made him promise that if such was the case he would cable
the important surname to the St. Francis. There was still the bare
chance, he reminded me, that the rumored engagement had not after all
resulted in marriage. He fell back on those adages calculated to convey
last hope to the forlorn, and since there was nothing else to be done I
accepted his lame comfort in the spirit that prompted it. Possibly now
that I had before me the prospect of learning the identity of the lady I
really welcomed a few days of uncertainty. At least while they lasted I
should have the shred of possible hope and could be shaping my
resolution to face the answer. Long after one has told himself that
there is no longer a chance of hope he none the less clings to a shred,
and when I arrived at the hotel St. Francis and inquired for a
cablegram, I think that relief outweighed disappointment as the clerk
ran through the miscellaneous sheaf of messages and shook his head. "I
don't find anything," he said, and strange as it may seem, I felt like a
reprieved man who still faces dreaded news but has not actually received
it.

Before that breakfast at the club my life had been merely prefatory; a
sum of dilute emotions. At Harvard I had taken my degree and won my "H"
on the gridiron. Since then I had gone through my days just missing
every goal. There had been little even of innocuous flirtation and
nothing of grand passion.

I had tried to paint, and my masters discovered promise which came to
nothing. I adventured into the practise of law and went briefless. I
essayed music without distinction. I finally decided that my genius was
seeking its goal along mistaken avenues. It should be mine to move men
and women to smiles and tears by the magic of pen and ink and printed
word. But the editors were on duty. They received my assaults on a
phalanx of blue pencils. They flung me back, defeated and unpublished.

Perhaps had I fallen in love, it might have been different. Had some
woman kindled the sleeping fires in me I might not have remained an
extinct volcano of a man. Perhaps, so energized, I might have incited
juries to tears--and verdicts. Possibly I might have stormed the
editorial outposts and set my banner of manuscript at the forefront of
literature. Be that as it may, I had heretofore never loved.

Now I did. Now I was the most quaintly tortured of men; wholly,
unqualifiedly and to the depths, stirred by the worship of a woman I
had never seen. Moreover she was probably some other man's wife and the
mother of his children.

She had come to me over the sea, bringing with her my destiny. She had
smiled on me and saved me. She had taken tribute of my soul. Now it was
ended. I had worshiped her among crags of coral, under the dome of a
volcano. I had come to think of her as a splendid and vivid orchid which
a man might hope to wear very proudly at the heart of his life. To what
end had the Fates lured me into this cul-de-sac?

I made the rest of the journey in a fog of sullen misery, and emerged,
at its end, from the Pennsylvania station a morose and hopeless man. As
a taxicab bore me to my club I felt a tremendous suspense. Doubtless
there was a message there. If Keller's memory had flashed back to him,
as memory sometimes does, the name in which I was so vitally interested,
information should have arrived before me in New York. Since it had not
intercepted me in San Francisco I judged that the blank had not, up to
that time been filled. Supposing that he had remained in Hawaii a week,
he would have left there a day after I arrived in 'Frisco, and then for
the six days at sea I should hardly expect him to communicate with me.
But I had stopped two days in the coast city, arranging financial
affairs by telegraph, since I had landed stripped of everything but my
chest and my borrowed clothes.

I had also crossed the continent, and by this time he should also have
arrived in the States, unless his sailing had been again delayed. Of
course I recognized that he had many things close to his own heart, but
this service to me involved only the asking of a single question, which
his wife could answer in one word. I was sure that he would not prove
laggard in the matter, and so I braced myself at the door of the Club to
receive tidings which might put hope to death, or might by bare
possibility, give it new life.

And yet my mail held only the accumulation of unimportant things. Old
advertisements and invitations and bills, many of which had come while I
was out there at the edge of things.

Could it be, I asked myself, that Keller had forgotten me, too? Had it
been possible that the card upon which I had so carefully written my
address had been misplaced? I had been willing to put off the moment at
San Francisco. Now I found myself eagerly impatient for the answer.

In the breakfast-room I encountered the doctor, who was dallying over a
cup of coffee and a morning paper. He glanced up and for a moment his
eyes lingered.

"Hello," he said, "how long have you been gone?"

"Little less than a year."

"You went away a youngish sort of man and you return with distinguished
white temples." He summarized. "There must be a story locked up in you."

I glanced impatiently at the card and called for eggs.

"I haven't been nibbling at life this time," I retorted with some touch
of asperity.

"I didn't instruct you to gluttonize," he reminded me.

I gave him only a partial history. Even the revised version of my
adventures, which I had by this time learned to tell glibly enough to
conceal the fact that I was omitting the major part, was sufficiently
beyond the rut of things to beguile a half-hour in the eventless walls
of a Manhattan club. But my table-companion eyed me with his customary
and disquieting sharpness, and finally fell into his old habit of
diagnosis.

"Something is lying heavily on your mind, Deprayne," he announced, "and
it's not merely the memory of cannibals and exposure. Dangers of that
sort become pleasant reminiscences when we view them through the
retrospective end of the glasses. There's something else. What is it?"

I laughed at him over my raised coffee-cup. This was one man above all
others in whom I should not confide the facts. He would promptly have
prescribed a sanatorium.

"Nonsense!" I scoffed, and just as I said it a bell-boy arrived at the
table with a telegram on a small silver tray.

"A message for Mr. Deprayne."

I was totally unable to control the violent start that caused the cup to
drop on the tablecloth with a crash, and doubtless made my face
momentarily pale. My effort at regained composure did not escape the
doctor. I saw his eyes narrow and heard him murmur, "Nerves. Shaken
nerves."

I took the telegram, calmly enough. I had had my moment of excitement
and was again calm. I even held the missive unopened as the dining-room
boys spread a clean napkin over the coffee stains. Then with a murmur of
apology I tore the end and drew out the blank. I don't think the doctor
detected the disgust of perusal.

"Have just arrived from Florida. If in town call and see me. Aunt
Sarah."

Aunt Sarah was one of those disquieting persons who loathe telephones
and note-paper. Her city messages came by wire with the insistence of
commands.

The end was that the doctor decided I must get my mind active, and after
vainly trying to bully me back into literary effort he took a new tack.

"Are you too surly and apathetic to combine a small service to friends
with the augmenting of your own fortunes?" he demanded, and before I
could reply he fell into the discussion of a matter which just now lay
at the front of his interests. There was a Kentuckian in town, with
glowing projects for fortune reaping along the ridges of the
Cumberlands. He was not a mere promoter, but a man of large means and
ability, who was also much the gentleman. His present scheme of things
required the enlistment of additional capital, and he had come to men
who had interested the doctor as well as themselves. The Kentuckian had
suggested, however, that before committing themselves in the matter they
send one of their own number with him to look over the options. None of
the others, as it happened, could go. Here, declared the doctor, was my
opportunity to try the novelty of useful occupation.

The man, whose name was Weighborne, was to lunch with him. Would I meet
him and talk it over, and if I was favorably impressed accompany him to
the Kentucky mountains?

We were sitting by a Fifth Avenue window as he outlined the matter with
persuasiveness. The sky was drear with the ash gray of autumn. 'Busses,
motors and taxis were trailing along in the same old hopeless monotony.
At the thought of remaining here I sickened. Until a letter or message
could arrive from Keller I could do little, and this trip would take
only ten days or two weeks. I now inferred that Keller had awaited the
next steamer. If that were so there would still be the six days at sea.
At all events Kentucky is on the telegraph lines. His word could follow
me there without loss of time. Then he had said, "the loveliest girl in
Dixie." South of Mason and Dixon's line I might be closer to my
discoveries when the name arrived. But above all that, I must fill in
the time of waiting with some sort of action. There in the hills I
should at least be away from the scenes which, in the few hours since my
return, had begun to spell insufferable _ennui_. Yes, I said I would
meet Mr. Weighborne. Why not?

Having promised to be on hand at two o'clock, I began a strange quest
that came to nothing. In Times Square and Park Row I spent several dusty
hours running through newspaper files, and going back to dates five and
six years old. I was hunting for a pictorial section of the same general
style as that which bore the portrait. I found one or two printed with a
like make-up on similar paper, but not even of the exact size, and
although I followed these through the Sundays of several years, I came
in the end only to the conclusion that the paper had been printed
outside of New York.

Weighborne impressed me. In physique and mind and energy he was big and
virile. One could glance at him in his carelessly correct clothes and
know that he would be equally at home in drawing-room or saddle. The
Kentuckian had to cut short his visit with us, since he was leaving the
same day for the South, and what talk we had was limited in its scope.
Yet his personality charmed me and compelled admiration. He was that
type of man who escaped the preliminaries with which the average
promoter of large schemes must convince his hearers. His own bearing and
breadth carried with it an assurance of trustworthiness and energy. His
steady gray eyes had a compelling and purposeful clarity, and I could
not help thinking as we talked what such a companionship would have
meant in those other days of loneliness and danger. Weighborne was the
sort of fellow one would like to have at his back in difficulties. I
agreed to meet him in Lexington three days hence and accompany him to
the properties which he hoped to develop.

There was a minor element of personal risk, he warned me. We should
perhaps encounter the dislike of certain men who were of the feudist
type. He spoke lightly of this feature, but as a matter concerning which
it was only the part of fairness to inform me.

Later in the day while glancing over the papers I came upon the
announcement that a new play was to have its premiere that evening at a
Broadway house, and in the name of the author, I found my interest
piqued. Bob Maxwell was an old friend. He had fought a long fight for
success and had found the goddess cold and offstanding. We had been
fellows in literary aspiration, and he had been, when I last saw him,
still floundering for support in the unstable waters of newspaperdom. If
his play succeeded, he was made. I tried vainly to reach him by 'phone,
and went that evening to the theater to lend my applause.

From the unpainted side of the stage-sets I listened to the salvoes of
handclapping that were waves lifting him to success.

When at last the ordeal was over and my friend's triumph assured, he led
me along the whitewashed walls to the star's dressing room. In response
to his rapping, the door opened on a scene of confusion. The young woman
whom the coming of this night had made a star turned upon us, from her
make-up mirror, a triumphantly flushed face.

The place was aglow with elation. The spirit of success showed even in
the movements of the quiet little French maid as she gathered and stored
the beribboned linen which still littered the green-room. Grace Bristol
herself took a quick, impulsive step forward and placed a grateful hand
on each of the author's shoulders. For me, when I was presented, she had
only a hurried nod of greeting.

"Thank God, Bobby!" she exclaimed with a half-hysterical catch in her
throat. "Thank God, it's over. My knees were knocking so while I was
waiting for my entrance cue that I wanted to run away and hide."

"I know," he said. "I was watching you. You were green under the paint,
Grace."

"If you'd spoken to me just then, I'd have screamed and had spasms," she
laughed, "but now--" she pointed victoriously to a maze of roses on her
dresser--"there are the flowers that glow under glass, tra-la! You wrote
me the bulliest part I ever played, old pal. You made me a star." I had
come to-night simply to congratulate. I had known something of my
friend's struggles and I wished to be among those who were there to say
"well done." My own thoughts were coursing in channels far away from the
life of theaters and green-rooms, where this young woman, undeniably
pretty, beyond doubt talented, was enjoying her moment of high triumph.
In her delight was that hysterical touch which stamps moments of
reaction. She had been through the ordeal of a "first night" and now she
knew that the experiment was successful. Bobby too must have had the
same exaltation, though his masculine nature did not break so frankly
into emotion. I felt that I was the extra person, entirely superfluous,
so I murmured some good-night and started to leave the place. But my
friend stopped me.

"I want to talk with you later, old man," he said, and I remained to be,
as it developed, catapulted into a new discovery.

Bobby helped Miss Bristol into her coat and the two of us gathered up as
many of the flowers as we could carry and made our way with her through
the stage-entrance and out into the street. As we hailed a taxi' at the
curb, the night life of never-sleeping places was racing at full tide
along Broadway, and swirling in an eddy about Longacre Square. It bore
on its crest its gay flotillas of pleasure--and its drift of derelicts.
To me it pointed all the miserable morals of contrast.

"Where to?" inquired Bobby. "Do you show yourself in triumph at Rector's
grill, or go home to dream of applauding thousands?"

The lady shrugged her shapely shoulders.

"Me for the hay!" she announced with prompt decisiveness. "Jump in,
boys," she invited in afterthought. "I may as well drive you down to
your rooms and drop you first. I need a breath of air to quiet my
nerves."

Out of the garish color and clangor of Broadway, we swept into the
tempered quiet of Fifth Avenue, stretching ghostlike between the twin
threads of electric opals.

"We must both be pretty tired," he suggested when Washington Arch loomed
ahead. "We haven't spoken since Herald Square."

"I'm too happy to talk," she answered. "For ten pretty rough years I've
been building for to-night." She sighed contentedly, then went on, "I
began about the usual way ... musical comedy ... in tights ... carrying
a spear. My first promotion was to the front row. I wasn't fool enough
to kid myself into the notion that it was because I was a Melba or a
Fiske. If I used to go to my hall bedroom every night and cry myself to
sleep it was nobody's business but my own." She must have felt Maxwell's
eyes on her, for her voice took on a note of the defiant as she added,
"And if I didn't always go straight to my hall bedroom, maybe that was
my own business too." She seemed to be reviewing her struggle as she
leaned restfully back against the cushions with to-night's roses in her
lap. Her lids drooped contentedly. "But to-night," she added, "well,
to-night I felt all that was paid for and the receipt signed. How do you
feel, Bobby?"

"Glad it's over," said the man. "I'm tired."

"It hasn't been just exactly a snap for you either," she sympathetically
conceded. "When I first knew you, you were haunting Park Row for a cheap
job, and getting canned by office boys. It's been a long way, we've
come, boy, but we kept plugging when the going was bad, and now, thank
God, we've arrived."

The taxi' drew up before the door of the house where Maxwell had his
quarters. It was a dingy building which has harbored under its roof the
beginnings of a half-dozen literary reputations.

"Bobby," said the young woman suddenly, "have you any Scotch in your
rooms?"

He reflected.

"I believe there's some Bourbon left in the bottle," he admitted.

"'Twill have to do," she said with a grimace. "I believe I'll climb the
steps and have a highball. We ought to toast the piece, you know. It's
been good to us."

"I thought you were too tired," suggested the author in surprise. "We
might have stopped where they had champagne."

"I didn't want wine. But I need a quiet little chat to work off this
nervousness."

In his sitting-room Bobby announced, "I've got to pack. I'm leaving in
the morning. Deprayne will entertain you with traveler's tales."

Miss Bristol paused with her hands raised and her hatpins half drawn.
Her face, for a moment, clouded.

"Where are you going?"

"Out west for a month or two."

"Oh," she said slowly. "What's the idea? Girl?"

He shook his head.

"Rest," he enlightened. "I'm tired."

The smile came again to her lips.

"Oh, very well," she said. "Get out your bag. I'll help you pack it."

Maxwell went in search of glasses and bottles.

A shaded lamp on the table left the corners of the book-lined walls in
shadow. In the open fireplace a bank of coals glowed redly. The young
woman took her place before it on the Spanish-leather cushions of a
divan, drawing her feet under her and nestling snugly back with her
hands clasped behind her head. Her lips were parted in a smile and her
eyes, fixed on the coals, were deep with reflection. The face became
again the face of a young girl, bearing no trace of the experience which
had made up ten years of war with Broadway. To me she paid not the
slighted attention. Shortly he returned and handed us glasses. She
raised hers, smiling.

"To you," she said--"the author!"

They clinked rims.

"To you," he gravely responded,--"the star!"

After that neither of them spoke, until the girl broke the silence with
a laugh.

"Some day, Bobby" she asserted, "you must tell me the story you haven't
dramatized--the story of your life."

"Why do you think it would prove interesting?"

She regarded him for a time with close scrutiny.

"Well, I don't quite get you, Bobby. You are rather a riddle in a way.
Sir Galahad on Broadway--doesn't that strike you as a funny
combination?"

"Rather paradoxical," he admitted, "the environment might fit Don Juan
better. But why Sir Galahad on Broadway?"

"That's what they all call you. You are notoriously unattainable. The
only man in this game who hasn't had an affair with any ash-trash."

"With any what?" he questioned, puzzled.

"Ash-trash; actress," she enlightened. "The title is a little conceit of
my own--poor but original. You know perfectly well that Stella Marcine
simply threw herself at your head during the rehearsals. And she told me
that you never even asked her out to supper."

"Why should I?"

She smiled.

"Everybody else does. Most men marry her, at one time or another."

"Oh."

"Of course," she went on thoughtfully after a pause, "it's very
charming to remain naive after years of this life, unless, as stage
gossip says, it's merely a pose."

"It's not a pose," replied the man quietly.

"I know that," she hastened to assure him. "But what I want to know is
this. What's behind it? Who is she?"

"Why should there necessarily be any She?" he demanded. "Can't a man
live his own life independently of prevalent customs--merely because it
is his own life?"

She shook her head and flecked the ash from her cigarette. She seemed to
be pondering the matter before hazarding judgment. Then her words came
positively enough.

"Don't pull that old line on me, about being the captain of your soul,
Bobby; I know better.... Oh, I used to believe all those pretty things.
I wanted to go on believing them, but there wasn't a chance."

"What did you find?"

"Just what the fool sailor finds who has the idea that he's bigger than
tides and gales; who fancies he can sail his little duck-pond boat in
the gulf stream, through reefs and hurricanes and bring it out with the
paint fresh." Her voice had perceptibly hardened. "You probably know a
lot of girls, Bobby, who wouldn't invite me to tea--certainly not if
they knew all my story. Nevertheless when we line up for the big tryout,
I guess the Almighty will take a look at their untempted innocence, and
a glance at me--and somehow I'm not worried about what He'll say. No
woman would muddy her shoes if we all had Walter Raleighs to spread
coats over the puddles."

The man lighted a cigarette and said nothing.

"But get the angle on me right, Bobby," she hastened to amend. "I
haven't loafed. Now, I've made good. From this on I _can_ be the captain
of my soul--and you can be pretty sure I will."




CHAPTER XV

TWO DISCOVERIES


Bob Maxwell was standing before the fire. He turned abstractedly and set
his untouched glass on the mantel shelf.

"You've got a grouch, Bobby," lectured the young actress, "at a time
when you ought to be all puffed up and chesty. Aren't you glad we made
good in the same piece? It would be nice of you to say so."

He turned on her a face strangely drawn and his words came swiftly in
agitation.

"Triumph, did you say? Don't you know that it's only when you get the
thing you've worked for, that you realize it's not worth working for?
That's not triumph--it's despair. Triumph means laying your prize at
somebody's feet--" he broke off with a sort of groan. "To hell with such
success!" he burst out with sudden bitterness. "To hell and damnation
with the whole of it!"

For a long while the girl held him in a steady scrutiny. They had both
forgotten me, silent in my corner. Her cheeks paled a little, and when
finally she reiterated her old question, her steady voice betrayed the
training of strong effort.

"Who is she?"

"Listen, Grace," he said. "I've got to talk to some one. You have come
here, so you let yourself in for it.... Ten years ago I was reporting on
a paper for a few dollars a week. It was a long way from Broadway. There
was a dusty typewriter and dirty walls decorated with yellowed
clippings--but ... There was wild young ambition and all of life ahead.
_That_ was living."

"Who was she?" insistently repeated the actress, when he paused.

"What can it matter how big a play one writes," demanded the author, "if
he presents it to an empty house? The absence of one woman can make any
house empty for any man. I'd give it all, to hear her say once more--"
He broke off in abrupt silence.

"To hear her say what, Bobby?" prompted Grace Bristol, softly.

"Well," he answered with a miserable laugh, "something she used to say."

"I suppose, Bobby--" the girl spoke very slowly, and a little wistfully,
too--"I suppose it wouldn't do any good to--to hear any one else say
it?"

He shook his head.

"Do you remember, Grace," he went on, "the other evening, when we were
sitting in the cafe at the Lorillard and the orchestra in another room
was playing 'Whispering Angels'? The hundred noises of the place almost
drowned it out, yet we were always straining our ears to catch the
music--and when there came a momentary lull, it would swell up over
everything else. That's how it is with this--and sometimes it swells up
and slugs one--simply slugs one, that's all." He broke off and laughed
again. "I guess I'm talking no end of rot. You probably don't
understand."

She raised her face and spoke with dignity.

"Why don't I understand, Bobby? Because I'm a show-girl?"

My old friend's voice was contrite in its quick apology.

"Forgive me, Grace--of course I didn't mean that. You're the cleverest
woman on Broadway."

She laughed. "I'm said to be quite an emotional ash-trash," she
responded.

It seemed inconceivable that Maxwell should miss the note of bitter
misery in her voice; yet, blinded by his own quarrel with Fate, he
passed into the next room oblivious of all else.

She crossed to the table which lay littered with the confusion of his
untidy packing, and took up a shirt that he had left tumbled. She
carefully folded it, then with a surreptitious glance over her shoulder
to make sure that she was not observed, she tore a rose from her belt
and, holding it for an impulsive moment against her breast, dropped it
into the bag. My face was averted, but through a mirror I saw the
pitiful pantomime. From the table she turned and stood gazing off
through his window, with her face averted. From my seat I could also
catch some of the detail that the window framed. Below stretched
Washington Square, almost as desolately empty as in those days when,
instead of asphalt and trees and fountain, it held only the many graves
of the pauper dead. The arch at the Avenue loomed stark and white and
the naked branches of a sycamore were like skeleton fingers against the
garish light flung from an arc lamp. The girl had thrown up the sash and
stood drinking in the cold air, though she shivered a little, and
forgetful of my presence clenched her hands at her back.

From the bedroom, to which Bobby had withdrawn, drifted his voice in the
melancholy tune and words of one of Lawrence Hope's lyrics:

    "Less than the dust beneath thy chariot wheels--"

The girl at the window turned with a violent start and her exclamation
broke passionately from lips, for the moment trembling.

"For God's sake, Bobby, _don't_!"

"What's the matter with my singing?" demanded his aggrieved voice from
beyond the door.

She forced a laugh.

"Oh, nothing," she said carelessly enough, "only when anybody pulls one
of those Indian Love Lyrics on me, I pass."

He returned a moment later to find her still standing by the window. At
last she turned back to the room and took up her hat. She lifted it to
her head as though it were very heavy, and her arms very tired.

"I guess, Bobby, I'll be running along," she announced.

"Grace," he said earnestly, "it's good to know that from this time on
you are a star."

She laughed.

"Yes, isn't it?" she answered. "I'm a real ash-trash now. No--don't
bother to see me down. Mr. Deprayne will put me into the taxi'."

Outside the threshold she paused to thrust her head back into the room,
and to laugh gaily as she shouted in the slang of the street:

"Oh, you Galahad!"

But her eyes were swimming with tears.

As I climbed the creaking stairs again, I was pondering the question of
contentment. Here were three of us. One had raked success out of the
fire of failure and had written what promised to be the season's
dramatic sensation. One had earned the right to read her name, nightly,
in Broadway's incandescent roster. I myself had been preserved from
cannibal flesh-pots. All of us were seemingly brands snatched from the
burning, and all of us were deeply miserable. I wondered if the fourth
was happy; the woman who had once said to Maxwell the things he now
vainly longed to hear? And She--the lady I had never seen; what of her?

I found the author gazing off with a far-away reminiscence which was
mostly pain. The taxi' was whirring under the arch, but he had already
forgotten it and its occupant.

"Do you want to unbosom yourself, Bobby?" I questioned.

He shook his head.

"To you?" he inquired with a smile. "You're a woman-hater."

But a moment later he came over and laid his hand affectionately on my
shoulder, fearing he had offended me.

"I guess, old man," he explained, "there's no balm in post-mortems. I
loved her, that's all, and I still do."

"She married?" I inquired.

"She is now Mrs. William Clay Weighborne of Lexington. It's a prettier
name than Fanny Maxwell, and looks better on a check. I was number
three, that's all."

"Mrs. Who?" I repeated, in astonishment. "You don't mean the wife of W.
C. Weighborne?"

"Why?" he asked suddenly. "Is the gentleman an acquaintance of yours?"

"Since this morning, yes. He is even a business associate."

"How you birds of a financial feather do flock around the same pabulum,"
he coolly observed.

"I was rather well impressed with him," I admitted idiotically enough.
"He seemed a very decent sort of chap."

Maxwell lighted a cigarette. His voice was a trifle unenthusiastic as he
replied.

"So I am informed."

A few days later I arrived at Lexington and Weighborne, who met me at
the station with his car, announced that I was to go to his home on the
Frankfort turnpike. But at this arrangement I balked. Despite a certain
curiosity to see his wife, the lady who had left such a melancholy
impress on the heart of my friend, there were considerations which
outweighed curiosity. My own peculiar afflictions bore more heavily on
me than those of my acquaintances and I had no yearning for the effort
of socializing.

So Weighborne protestingly drove me to the Ph[oe]nix, and armed me with
a visitor's card to the Lexington Union Club. I could see that he was
deeply absorbed. His mind was so tensely focused on coal and timber
development that it was difficult for him to think of other matters. My
apathy lagged at the prospect of following his untiring energy over
hours of close application to detail. I would put it off until
to-morrow. Yet I had hardly taken my seat at table in the dining-room of
the Ph[oe]nix, when a page called me to the telephone booth and
Weighborne's voice came through the transmitter.

"Hullo, old man, did I drag you away from food? Sorry, but there are
some papers here I'd like mighty well to have you look over. I might
bring them in, but if you don't mind running out it would be better."

Of necessity I assented.

"I'll have my chauffeur call for you at 8:30," he arranged, "and
meanwhile I'll be getting things into shape here. By the way"--his voice
took on a reassuring note--"you sidestepped my rooftree this evening,
and I gathered that you were not in the mood for meeting people."

I murmured some insincere assurance to the contrary, which did not
beguile him.

"We shall have the house quite to ourselves," he said. "All the family
are flitting off to a dance at the Country Club."

An hour later his car turned in at a stone gate, and up a long
maple-lined avenue. From the windows of a generously broad, colonial
mansion came a cheery blaze of light, throwing shadows outward from the
tall white columns at the front. I could not help thinking of Maxwell's
lodgings in Washington Square, and reflecting that, all prejudice aside,
the flower of his worship had not chosen so badly in transplanting
herself here.

Weighborne met me at the entrance of a hall over which hung the charm of
ripe old portraits and wainscoted walls. Furnishings of unostentatious
elegance made the place a delight. We passed into a large library where
a wide hearth dispensed the cheer of blazing logs and our feet sunk deep
in Persian rugs.

Yet even here, although instinctively hospitable, my host was plainly
immersed in thoughts of coal and timber, for as soon as he had done the
honors he plunged me into a litter of statistics.

I, poor business man that I was, had, time after time, to force my mind
back from its undisciplined straying. As he talked of coal veins, I
would find myself thinking of coral reefs. When he enlarged upon
advances in timber tracts I would be seeing in my memory a circle of
mahogany-skinned pigmies squatting silently about a portrait spiked to a
sailor's chest with a pair of Damascus daggers.

At last Weighborne began sorting through the papers for some misplaced
and necessary memorandum. He crossed the room to a desk at one corner
which he found locked, and his ejaculation was one of deep annoyance.

"My wife has locked the desk and Heaven only knows where she has put the
key," he complained. "I'll have to call the Country Club and ask her."

His words must have carried to the next room, for at once a voice
answered. It was a richly musical contralto, and at its first syllable
my heart stood still, and the room commenced to whirl about me. I had
never heard it and yet I _had_ heard it--singing in a wilderness of
coral and orchids. Surely after all the big, little doctor was right, I
was becoming a lunatic.

"Billy," called the voice, "you needn't 'phone. I'm here. I'll unlock
it."

My host turned in surprise and walked over to the door.

"Hullo, Frances!" he exclaimed. "Didn't you go to the Club?"

"I had a headache," replied the voice. "I sent the others off, and
stayed at home. I'll come in just a moment."

I stood waiting, my pulses pounding turbulently. Had my host not been
just then dedicated to a single idea he must have noticed my pallor and
wondered at the fascination with which I came to my feet and stood
gazing at the door.

And as I gazed she appeared on the threshold, the blaze from the logs
lighting her and throwing a nimbus about her hair of gold and honey. I
placed both my hands on the top of the table and braced myself as a man
may do when the executioner whispers the warning "ready!"

She might have stepped from the picture herself. Again she was in
evening dress, which clung to her in soft lines of unspeakable grace. At
her throat hung a string of pearls--the same pearls--and as she paused
and our eyes met, I could have sworn that her muscles grew momentarily
taut, and her lips twitched in a gasp. She put out one hand and steadied
herself against the door jamb; then with the gracious recognition of a
half-smile for a guest not yet duly presented, she went over and
unlocked the desk.

I stood looking after her. I was conscious of a numbness of spirit--a
sickening of hopelessness. The question was answered. The Frances of my
Island, the Frances of Maxwell's heartbreak, the Frances who had married
my business associate, were, by a monstrous sequence of hideous
circumstances and coincidence, one and the same. She stood ten feet and
twenty sky depths away from me.




CHAPTER XVI

AN INTERVIEW AND A CRISIS


As I stood there all immediate things were apparitions seen vague and
distorted through a chaos of wild emotion. I had assumed that for an
experimenter in the unexpected I could qualify as tried and seasoned.
Now it seemed that all prior assaults upon my equanimity had been mere
kindergarten exercises in control.

Weighborne, still too self-absorbed to see that worlds were crumbling in
his library, turned suddenly to us with an apologetic laugh.

"Frances," he said, "forgive me, I entirely forgot to present our
guest." Even then he did not present me, but turned to me to add, "We've
talked of you so much here, Mr. Deprayne, that I had overlooked the fact
that introductions were in order. I'm the unfortunate type of one idea
at a time. After all, I hope you'll feel that, having crossed the
threshold you are one of us, and that further formalities may be
dispensed with." Then as I bowed, somewhat incoherently mumbling my
acknowledgments, he turned his back upon the room and busied himself
again with the rubbish that claimed his interest at the desk.

I wanted to leap for his throat. I, who had presented her as a goddess
to a people under skies that rose from the ocean and dipped again to the
ocean, needed no presentation. The casual fashion of his amenities was
in itself an affront.

Of course all this was insanely unfair to my host, and even while my
thoughts seethed in this unamiable vortex--so strong is the grip of
artificial conventions--I was attempting to smile with the agreeable
inanity of a drawing-room smirk.

But as she stood there I could read in her face also the record of the
strange agitation that had evidenced itself at the door. Her spirit too
was in equinox. The lips I knew so well, though only in one expression,
were now grave and a little drawn, and her eyes held a wild questioning,
as though my coming brought a startling riddle.

In a moment she was again the perfectly poised mistress of herself. She
came over and offered her hand and as I took it she met my eyes smiling,
though she must have read in them the rising hunger of a man for a
woman--a hunger which in me was so poignant that my soul was the soul
of a wolf. The touch of her fingers electrified me and the tremor of my
own hand, before I withdrew it, must have telegraphed whatever my pupils
failed to mirror.

That wordless message told her how my sanity reeled on the brink of
seizing her and holding her in wild defiance of this man, across the
room, whose name she bore.

"I won't interrupt business," she was saying with perfect serenity. "But
later I hope to see you again."

I bowed. "I hope so," I answered politely, while a wave of anger swept
me.

She would not interrupt! She who had snapped all the thread of life and
let my soul go plunging down the abysses.

She would not interrupt!

The grandfather clock against the wall stood at nine twenty-four. At
nine twenty I had been stolidly puffing one of Weighborne's Havanas and
listening to his disquisitions on courts of appeals decisions and
squatters' rights. The cigar which I had dropped on an ash-tray at the
first sound of her voice still held its ash and sent up a thin spiral of
smoke. It had outlived me.

My host plunged afresh into his papers. He might as well have been
reading me ukases from the Romonoff Czar in the undiluted Russian. But
as the clock ticked off the half-hour I seemed to freeze out of the
eruptive and into the glacial stage. I felt my lips drawing into a stiff
smile. I even contrived to nod my head in sedulous and ape-like
agreement when he raised interrogative eyes to mine. So rapidly had my
volcanic lava of spirit hardened to clinkers that when the telephone
called him to a barn, where some accident had befallen a thoroughbred
colt, I was able to turn a conventionally masklike countenance on
Frances, who came to chat with me till his return. She sat in a great
leather chair, and I, standing on the hearth, looked down on her, braced
for whatever might develop. I was resolved to make amends for my
self-revelation of a half-hour ago; I should at least prove myself the
capable mummer; yet I found that I was fettered by an unaccustomed
silence.

There was only one topic on which I could find words for talk with this
woman and that topic was forbidden. She, too, for some unaccountable
reason, seemed hampered by a diffidence which her bearing told me was
foreign to her normal nature. So, for a while, our conversation lagged
and faltered and fell into fitful fragments and puerile tatters, while
my gaze devoured her. There was no flaw in the perfection of her beauty
from the coils of her amber and honey hair to the white satin toe of her
small slipper. I had given opulent scope to my painter's fancy in those
island days and had imagined her, in the color of life, as a being
expressed in the souls of orchids. Now I realized, with a terrible
yearning, that I had not done her justice.

Step by step I went back over the record of the last year and found it
painfully distinct and clear. I had, with my imagination built a house
of cards which had tottered. I had been lonely and morbid and had
pretended a picture was a woman. It had come to mean a great deal--clay
idols have come to mean immortal gods to poor creatures who have had no
better deities. I had told myself that the finger of Destiny had traced
through my life a thread of gold linking my life to hers. After all it
had been nothing more than a series of inconceivable coincidences. I had
no more part in her cosmos than in that of any woman whose photograph I
might have admired in a miscellaneous collection. It behooved me to
scourge out of my brain the mischievous chimeras I had harbored there.
As for her momentary excitement--the something vague and deep and
disturbed in her pupils as she stood at the door and later when we
touched hands; that was only the psychic realization that this guest of
her husband was staring at her out of insanely wild eyes.

I started to speak, then halted, perplexed over a ridiculous point. How
should I address her? On the island I had called her Frances, and now I
could no more compel my rebellious tongue to frame the title "Mrs.
Weighborne" than I could have forced it to utter an epithet. So I said
nothing at all.

"You are a great traveler, aren't you, Mr. Deprayne?" she suggested when
the silence had begun to be oppressive.

[Illustration: "You are a great traveler, aren't you, Mr. Deprayne?" she
suggested when the silence had begun to be oppressive.]

I had always been accounted a talkative man. One could read in her face
that she had the wit to sparkle in conversation like champagne in cut
glass, yet under the constraint that had settled over us, we labored as
platitudinously as a knickerbockered boy and a school-girl entertaining
her first caller.

"I have traveled a little," I answered.

"And encountered unusual adventures?"

"No--just traveled."

"Billy says," she went on as graciously as though I had not rebuffed
every conversational advance, "that you were shipwrecked in the south
seas and wounded by savages."

"Billy!" My bruised consciousness flinched under the familiarity of the
title and I fell back upon shameless churlishness.

"A nigger stuck me with a spear," I admitted shortly.

She glanced quickly up with perplexity. Her eyes seemed to read that I
was not at heart a boor and her graciousness remained impervious to my
ruffianism.

"I wish," she said slowly, "you would tell me about it, or are you one
of the men who tell women only empty and pretty things?"

There was a vagrant hint of wistfulness in the tone of the question. I
wondered if she had been fed, like the girl of our diary, too much on
sweetmeats, and wanted a more nutritious fare.

"It wouldn't interest you," I apologized, melting at once to penitence.
Then for a moment came a wild up-sweep of emotion. It was one of those
impulses which master men and, when the trend is violent, make the eyes
swim with blood and the hand rise to murder. With me it swept to
sentiment, and carried me uncontrollably in its undertow.

"I wish," I said with an intensity which must have carried a note of
wildness, "I wish to God I were back on that island now!"

The perplexed questioning of her eyes steadied me again into
self-command.

"I crave your pardon," I said with a disingenuous laugh. "It's the call
of the wild."

"Perhaps I understand something of that call," was her enigmatical
reply.

I wondered. Could she understand? This woman with the perfect
drawing-room poise; this creature of exquisite art? Even if I were
absolutely free to tell her the whole story, from Suez to the Golden
Gate, how much and how little would it mean to her? Could she comprehend
a passion fired with no touch of the physical, painted horizon-wide
against a canvas of cobalt sky? Perhaps not, but I wished as I had never
wished any other thing that I might have been privileged to learn.

Her personality, even in silence, wove an aura of subtle magic about
her. She wore at her breast several hot-house orchids. They were pale
and exotic, quick wilting and artificial. Already the edges of their
petals were curling and darkening. Was she like them? Could she have
carried her splendid shoulders with the same grace through jungles and
over mountains? Could she bloom with the wild splendor of those other
orchids in the sterner environment of God's great out-of-doors?

She smiled as she questioned me.

"You are sceptical of my power to understand things, aren't you?"

"I was wondering," I answered, "just what you meant by it."

"I meant," she said slowly, as her eyes clouded again with that
wistfulness which had a few moments before cost me my self-control,
"that civilized women lead even narrower lives than civilized men.
Maybe they feel even more strongly than men the longing for wider, freer
things."

"But in these times," I inanely suggested, struggling to maintain the
pretense of conversation, "woman has a full measure of liberty."

She tossed her head with an airy contempt for my reasoning and bent her
eyes for a moment on the tip of her satin slipper. "About as much as a
canary in a cage," she announced, "and we are expected to sing joyously
for our cuttle bone and hemp seed. I wonder that it never seems to occur
to you men that we women may want something more than that; that we may
not be satisfied after all to hear affectionate things chirped through
the cage wires--that even human canaries may be able to conceive of some
horizon broader than a window-sill with a pot or two of geraniums to
give it color."

I loved this woman. Why in all conscience did my heart leap almost
triumphantly at the hint that she was restive in captivity? Was it
merely because it was not I who was her captor? Was it jealousy feeding
on the crumbs of a misery shared? There was a long silence.

She had been toying as she talked with a slender gold chain, and under
an involuntary emphasis of her fingers it had given way. She was now
trying to close the broken link with her teeth. I stepped forward and,
without realizing that I was doing it, caught her hand in my restraining
fingers. She looked up quickly.

"I beg your pardon," I said hastily, "but don't bite that with your
teeth."

"If I bite it at all," she replied with impervious logic, "I must bite
it with my teeth."

I took it from her and began the simple work of repair. The contact of
my fingers had left me vibrating, and as I bent my face over the chain,
my hands were trembling.

"Why," she demanded in a soft voice, leaning back and clasping her hands
behind her head, "won't you tell me the story of your island?" Into the
question crept a teasing note of whimsical insistence.

"Because," I answered, "there is a part of it which I couldn't tell
you--and without that there is nothing to tell."

"Will you tell me some other time when you know me better?" she inquired
as naively as a little girl, pleading for a favorite fairy tale.

At every turn she flashed a new angle of herself to view. At one moment
she was impressively regal, at the next an appealing, coaxing child; at
one instant her eyes hinted at heart-hunger and at the next her lips
knew no curves but those of laughter.

And yet there was a thing about it all that hurt and disappointed me.
With nothing tangible, there was still, in a subtle way, much which was
sheer coquetry of eye and lip. It was invitation. Why did she challenge
me to forbidden things so easy to say, so impossible to unsay? She must
know that from the moment I saw her I had stood at a crisis; and that
this was true only because I loved her. Such things need no words for
their telling.

"I'm afraid I shall be denied the privilege of knowing you better," I
said slowly, "I leave for the mountains to-morrow morning."

"You won't be there forever," she retorted, "sha'n't we see you on the
return trip?"

I shook my head.

"I must hurry back East."

"I'm sorry," she answered with sweet graciousness. Any woman in the
country houses about her would probably have spoken in the same fashion,
but to me it was a match touched to powder.

"I will quote you a parable," I said, and although I attempted to smile,
that the speech might be taken lightly, I had that rigid feeling about
the lips and brow which made me conscious that my face was drawn and
tell-tale.

"Icarus was the original bird-man, and he came to grief. His wings were
fastened on with wax, but they worked fairly well until he soared too
close to the sun. Then they melted ... and the first aviation disaster
was chronicled."

She looked at me frankly and level-eyed, but her face held only
mystification.

"I'm afraid," she said, "you must construe the parable."

I shook my head gravely. "I'm glad you don't take its meaning."

"I don't understand," she repeated, yet we both felt that we were
standing in the presence of dammed-up emotions which might at any moment
break over and inundate us. She might yet have no realization of it, but
I knew by an occult assurance, in no way related to egotism, that I
could make her love me. My fable was false after all. I had already
fallen and been broken; my pinions were trailing and blood-stained.
There was yet time to save her. During our silence Weighborne opened the
door and our interview was ended.

It had lasted a few minutes, yet during their continuance I had been
several times perilously near the brink. I saw her rise and smile and
leave the room, and I caught or fancied I caught a glance from her eyes
and a miraculous curve of her lips at the threshold. The expression was
subtle and challenging, seeming to say to me, "You will tell me many
things before I am through with you." Of course, that, too, was my
disordered imagination, yet for the moment it was as though she had
actually spoken words of self-confidence and conquest. And I knew that
if I saw her again I should say many things--forbidden things.
Resentment and bitterness and utter heartache possessed me, and I heard
my host's voice in a maddeningly matter-of-fact pitch as he commented,
"Now I hope our interruptions are over."

As I went to my room at the hotel that night a telegram was handed me. I
did not at once open it. I presumed that it was from Keller, and it was
all of a piece with my grotesque ill luck that the answer should come
just after I had myself in the most painful possible way solved the
problem. In my room, however, I read, under a San Francisco date, "Name
Weighborne, not Carrington. Keller." It was evidently a telegraphic
mistake and should have read "Weighborne nee Carrington." Keller had
told me who she had been before she married Weighborne, the man whose
name, in the words of my fellow unfortunate, Bobby Maxwell, "looked well
on a check."




CHAPTER XVII

WE GO TO THE MOUNTAINS.


Weighborne was at the station on the following morning when, five
minutes before train time, I arrived. He was clad for his mountain
environment in high lace boots, corduroy breeches and flannel shirt, and
in this guise he loomed bigger and stronger of seeming than in
conventional clothing. His level, straight-gazing eyes held the cheery
satisfaction of facing, after a good breakfast, a prospect of action. He
was meanwhile willing to fill the interim of railroad travel with
conversation. I, on the contrary, knew that sleeplessness had left me
haggard, and met his advances, I fear, with churlish taciturnity.

In the smoking compartment, when we were under way, I sat gazing out of
the car window at fleeting fields still a-sparkle with frost crystals on
wood and stubble.

"You and Frances didn't just seem to hit it off," commented my companion
with a proffer of his cigar-case, "or rather Frances liked you all
right, but you--" He broke off with an amused smile and busied himself
with the kindling of a panatella.

A man can hardly explain to his fellow-man, "I was rude to your wife
because I love her. I worship her in a way your prosaic little soul can
never understand. It is only because civilization is all distorted that
I don't murder you and carry her off in triumph to my cave--where she
belongs."

So I mumbled some foolish contradiction. I thought her charming; I was
merely not a woman's man. I was still part savage. My unfortunate
temperament must be my apology.

Weighborne studied me for a moment in some perplexity. He knew I was
lying, but he had no suspicion why I lied and he could hardly argue in
her defense with me, a stranger. He changed the topic, but there was a
hurt expression in his face as though he were unable to understand my
subtle hostility, as he construed it, for a person entirely lovely. If I
did not like Frances there must be something abnormal about me, and the
expression was quite eloquent though wordless. I had no difficulty in
reading it. It was as though he wanted to say to me and was saying to
himself, "After all, our relations are those of business, and your
personal preferences and prejudices do not concern me, but we won't
speak of Her again. It shall be a prohibited topic between us." In this
tacit attitude I found an element of relief. If I were to be forced into
his daily companionship I must not be specifically reminded at every
turn that he was the husband of his wife. I had stepped knee-deep into
this miserable Rubicon of financial venture as the agent of others, and
turning back was impossible. Afterward.... But at this point I stopped.
I could not yet bring myself to think of any afterward.

Inasmuch as Weighborne and I were for a time to travel the same trail
and since, as my reason insisted, he was guilty of no injury to me
except an injury so fantastic that only destiny could be blamed, and
since, too, he was all unconscious even of that, there must be truce
between us.

Yet there rose insistently before me the lissom beauty of his wife. The
light that tangled itself in her hair blinded and tortured me.

The deity I had built out of fancy and under the influence of the
tropics, laid itself in parallel with the woman I had seen last night.
The goddess I knew. The woman I loved and doubted. Was she only the
coquette who wanted to lead me chained at her chariot wheel for the
cheap joy of conquest? My goddess had not been that sort. What had she
to offer me in return for such a tribute to her vanity? Was I merely to
flit in the background of her life giving all that the heart has,
receiving nothing but the occasional condescension of a smile? Does
great beauty so preempt a woman's soul as to drive out even the homely
virtues?

These questions bored insistently into my brain until it ached with
perplexity. Then came the memory of her momentary wistfulness; her
craving for something more than life had given her, or something
different.

What was that? At all events, I knew that to fall again within the scope
of her personality would mean to be swept rudderless from my moorings.
Whatever her object, be it exalted or petty, I must inevitably bow to
it, in unconditional surrender, if such were her good or evil pleasure.
Consequently the one end of all my thinking was the resolve that I
should not again see her.

The journey was progressing with more surety than my reflections. It
whisked us through the richness of Bluegrass pasture lands, and the
opulent ease of Bluegrass life into a barer country where the color of
the soil grew mean and outcropping rocks lay bare. The landscape, as
though in keeping with my mood, dropped down a scale of bleakness.

The cleanliness of dignified mansions, spacious barns and whitewashed
fences gave place to less pretentious farm-houses in disrepair, and
these in turn dwindled to log cabins that were hardly better than
shanties, and choking undergrowth instead of clean meadows.

We roared through foothills where the vivid green of young cedars dashed
the gray tangle of naked timber and scrub. At last we climbed into the
mountains themselves, lying in dreary ramparts of isolation under skies
that had grown sodden and raw. Here were the barriers of the Cumberland
heaping up gigantic piles of raggedness under bristling needle points of
timber.

We passed through anomalous villages where the nation's most primitive
and quarantined life was rubbing shoulders with the outriders of
capital's invasion. Shaggy men ridden in from distant cabins on shaggier
horses; men who probably nursed guilty knowledge of illicit stills,
gazed at the passing train out of humorless and illiterate eyes.

At last we left the train at a station over which the November dusk was
closing, where the coke furnaces glared in red spots along the shadowed
ridges. A four-mile drive brought us to the tawdry hotel, and after
attacking our eggs and ham we went to our rooms. I on a feather bed,
with the reek of a low-turned lamp in my nostrils, lay for hours gazing
at the patched and dirty wall-paper, and at last fell asleep to dream of
a wonderful lady who opened a door in a wall of rock, and led me through
it to things which could never be.

The next morning as we waited for the wagon which was to take us twenty
miles into the hills, Weighborne showed me the dingy court-house whose
weatherbeaten walls had in other days been penetrated by the gatling
guns of the militia. He pointed out boyish-looking figures whose eyes
were young and mild, yet who had more than once "notched their guns." He
showed me spots where this marked man or that had fallen, shot to death
from the court-house windows, by assassins who had never been
apprehended or prosecuted.

"That is all changing," he said. "When capital comes the feud must go."

Stolid groups of mountaineers, clad in butternut and jeans, eyed us with
mild curiosity. Here and there a father whose face was as stupid and
uneducated as that of a Russian peasant, walked side by side with a son
dressed in the season's ready-made styles. Between parent and child
yawned the gulf of schooling, which the younger generation had acquired
in a college "down below" or in the new schools at home, presided over
by "fotched on" teachers.

We traveled at snail's pace over twisting roads where our wagon strained
and creaked in tortuous ruts almost hub-deep, and where the scraggly
horses lay against their collars and tugged valiantly at the traces.
Quail started up before us with their whir of softly drumming wings and
disappeared into the thick cover of timber. Squirrels barked and
scampered to hiding at our coming. Occasionally a fox whisked out of
sight with a contemptuous flirt of its brush. Once only in twenty miles
we encountered another traveler. An old man, riding bareback on a mule,
drew up in the road and awaited us. Despite the cold, a gap of sockless,
dust-covered ankle showed between his rough brogan uppers and the
wrinkled legs of his butternut breeches. Across his mule's withers
balanced a rifle. His face was bearded and sad.

"Mornin' Rat-Ankle," drawled our driver, halting the team for converse.

"Mornin', Pate," came the nasal reply.

There was a long interval of silence while the mounted man contemplated
us with an unabashed stare. Finally he spoke again.

"Mornin', strangers," he said.

There followed a protracted series of questionings between the native
born as to the health and well being of their respective families.

I thought I saw the mountaineer's eyes glitter with sudden interest when
Weighborne's name was given him, but the light died quickly out of his
pupils, leaving only the weariness and sadness of his dull life.

At times the climbs were so steep that we had to trudge alongside,
lending a hand at the wheels. The last two miles of the journey, said
our driver, would be impassable for a wheeled vehicle. He would have to
deposit us and our luggage at Chicken-Gizzard Creek. A little later,
while we were walking up a steep incline, Weighborne drew me back out of
earshot of the teamster.

"I'd better post you on a few details," he said. "Ever hear of the
Keithley assassination?"

I shook my head.

"Keithley was the prosecuting attorney in some rather celebrated murder
trials. He was shot to death one afternoon as he came out of the
court-room."

"Yes?" I questioned.

"Six months later Con Hoover was shot from the laurel on this road. He
had allied himself with those who sought to avenge Keithley."

I nodded my head.

"There were Cale Springer, Bud Dode--I could enumerate other victims,
but that is all unnecessary detail. What concerns us is this. Jim Garvin
is county judge. In a rough way he is the political boss of the region
and he has built up a fortune. His own gun is unnotched, but a
half-dozen men who have incurred his displeasure have come to abrupt
ends. The newspapers in Louisville and Lexington have intimated that
besides being at the head of fiscal affairs and operating a general
store the judge also issues his orders to a murder syndicate."

"Why," I demanded in some disgust, "hasn't it been proven?"

"It is difficult to prove things of this sort--when the defendant is
more powerful than the law and when juries walk in terror," Weighborne
reminded me. "He has twice been tried for complicity. A company of state
guards patrolled the court-house yard to reassure venire-men and
witnesses. The only result was the defeat, at the next election, of the
judge and prosecutor who had made themselves obnoxious."

"Why," I inquired, "aren't such malefactors taken into a civilized
circuit, on a change of venue, and tried where jurors are not
intimidated?"

"They have been--with the same result," affirmed my informant. "You see,
while the jurors were freed from fear, the witnesses knew they must
return home."

"Shall we be likely to meet this highly interesting character?" I
questioned.

"The store where our wagon turns back," said Weighborne, "is his place."

"Then I am to be careful not to form or express any opinion adverse to
judicious homicide? Is that the point?"

Weighborne smiled.

"Our plans involve bringing a branch railroad along the way we have been
traveling," he replied, "and the coming of that railroad means the
death knell of Jim Garvin's power. What is still more to the point, our
attorney here and the man for whose house we are bound is the Hon.
Calloway Marcus. He was Keithley's law partner, and he is a marked man.
He it was who prosecuted Garvin--and lost his official head. His actual
head he keeps on his shoulders by riding at the center of a bodyguard. I
tell you these matters so that you may watch your words."

"Shall we encounter open hostility at this place?" I inquired.

Weighborne shook his head. "On the contrary, we shall be most
courteously received. Politeness is highly esteemed hereabouts. The fact
that a man means to 'lay-way' you to-night, with a squirrel gun, is not
deemed sufficient reason for relaxing his courtesy this afternoon."

An hour later our conveyance drew up at the junction of two ragged roads
where thin, outcropping ledges of limestone went down to the rim of a
shallow stream. Beyond the water rose a beetling bluff. One could
imagine that when summer brought to this hollow in the hills its
richness of green, and its profusion of trumpet flower and laurel and
rhododendron, there must be an eye-filling beauty, but now it was
unspeakably raw and desolate.

Two houses were in sight and both were of depressing ugliness. In the
fork of the road where the ground was trodden hard stood the "store." It
was a one-room shack built of logs and boarded over, but innocent of
paint. A leanto porch, disfigured by a few advertising signs, gave
entrance to a narrow door. The second house set back and higher up the
slope of the mountain. Its solidity was that of mortised logs and its
windows were protected behind solid shutters. Inside there was plainly
an abundance of space, as befitted the dwelling-place of the district's
overlord. A clump of white-armed sycamores partly masked its front, but
through the naked branches one could see that for a hundred yards about
it, in every direction, lay unbroken clearing, and that for all its
civilian seeming it might, if need arose, stand siege against anything
less formidable than gatling guns.

Stamping the cold and cramp from our feet, we settled our score with the
liveryman, and turned into the store.




CHAPTER XVIII

A CHAT WITH A DICTATOR.


Inside Judge Garvin's store we came upon a group of slovenly loungers.
Had my mind been free enough of its own troubling thoughts to spare a
remnant of interest, I should have found this new and strange scheme of
things engrossing. I was in a scrap of America which the onrushing tide
of world advancement had left stranded and forgotten. Here a people of
unmixed British stock lived primitive lives, fought feudal wars, and
shrined every virtue high except regard for human life.

These four narrow walls in part epitomised that life. The shelves back
of the counters displayed what things they held essentials: rough
crockery, coarse calicoes, canned goods, barrels of brown sugar,
brogans, stick candy and ammunition.

About a small stove loafed some eight or ten men and several
"hound-dogs." The shoulders of these men slouched; their hands were
chapped and coarse; their clothes muddied, but when they walked it was
with something of the catamount's softness, and their eyes were alert.

Behind the counter stood a man of fifty. I knew, without waiting for
Weighborne's greeting, that this must be Garvin. There was something
pronounced yet hard to define which gave him the outstanding prominence
of a master among minions.

He was a large man and inclined to stoutness. His hair and moustache
were sandy and his florid face was marked with a purplish tracery of
veins in which the blood appeared to bank and stand currentless. His
neck was grossly heavy and bovine, but his forehead was broad and his
eyes disarmingly frank and blue. His mouth, too, fell into the kindly
lines of a perpetual smile.

His clothing was rough and his neck collarless, but one forgot this and
noted only the suavity of his bearing and the ingratiating quality of
his voice. Such was the man who should have gone long ago to death or
imprisonment for the orders he had issued to his assassins.

"Judge Garvin," said my companion, "my name's Weighborne. I met you once
in the court-house. You probably don't remember me."

The gigantic reprobate smiled affably.

"Sure, I remember you," he affirmed. "I mighty seldom forget a man." He
came out from his place of office behind the counter and proffered his
hand. It was not, like those of his henchmen, a calloused hand.

I had leisure to glance about the faces of the group as this colloquy
occurred. They had been stolidly silent, gazing at us with unconcealed
curiosity. When Weighborne introduced himself there was no overt display
of interest, and yet unless I was allowing my imagination to run away
with me I sensed from that moment forward that the lazy indolence of the
atmosphere was electrified. The men lounged about in unchanged attitudes
and from time to time spat on the hot stove, yet each of them was
carefully appraising us.

"I reckon you gentlemen came up to look over this here coal and timber
project?" Garvin's voice seemed to hold only a politely simulated
interest in our affairs.

Weighborne nodded.

"Do you think, Judge, as a man in good position to gauge the sentiment
of the people, that we shall have their sympathy in our efforts?"

I studied Garvin's face closely, but if there was a spark of interest in
his eyes, my eyes could not detect it. He smiled noncommittally and
shook his head.

"Well, now, as to that," he replied judicially, "I couldn't hardly say."

"We want to develop the coal and timber interests of the section,"
summarized Weighborne briefly. "It will mean railroad facilities, better
schools and fuller enforcement of the law."

Garvin nodded in a fashion of reserved approval. There was no betrayed
hint of his perfect understanding that it meant other things as well: an
end of "Garvinism," a period to his baronial powers; the imminent danger
which lurked for him in courts no longer afraid to try, and witnesses no
longer terrified into perjury.

"That sounds purty promisin'," he agreed. "It sounds purty good."

"Then why would the people not cooeperate?"

Garvin gave the question deliberate consideration.

"Well, now," he finally said, "that ain't such an easy question to
answer just right off. The people hereabouts have been livin' purty much
the same way fer nigh onto a hundred years. They're satisfied."

"Are they satisfied with a reign of terror?" Weighborne was treading the
thin ice of local conditions. I fancied he was trying to force Garvin
into committing himself, but it was a dangerous experiment.

"What's anybody terrified about?" inquired the Judge with entire
blindness.

Weighborne, totally checkmated by this childlike query, changed ground
and laughed.

"Oh, we hear a good deal of talk down below," he explained, "about the
shot from the laurel and all that sort of thing."

Judge Garvin laughed heartily.

"Oh, pshaw!" he exclaimed in high good-humor. "There ain't nothin' in
all that. Them newspapers down below's jest obliged to have somethin' to
talk about. We're all neighbors up here. We're simple sort of folks.
Sometimes we has our little arguments, but--" the lips still smiled
genially; he paused and his voice was like a benediction as he went
on--"but I hope we ain't got in no such serious fix that we needs
regulatin' from outside. They do say that most of them fellers that got
killed needed killin' pretty bad. I've lost two brothers, but I ain't
kickin'."

Weighborne saw that a withdrawal from debate would be advisable, but
that this withdrawal must not seem precipitate.

"However, as a matter of argument," he suggested, "is any man competent
to decide that his enemy needs killing?"

The judge went into his trousers-pocket and produced a twist of tobacco
into which he bit generously before replying.

"Well," he drawled, "your enemy's the man that's goin' to decide whether
you need killin'. Why don't it work both ways?"

Weighborne made no reply. One cannot argue with a set opinion. The
loungers were saying nothing, but their eyes dwelt admiringly on their
spokesman. At last Garvin smilingly inquired:

"You'd have to condemn rights-of-way, I reckon?"

"Only where we couldn't make individual trades," answered my companion.

"That procedure ain't apt to be no ways popular," reflected Judge
Garvin.

"You gentlemen understand I ain't criticisin'," he assured us when we
made no reply. "If condemnation suits are brought in my co'te I ain't
got no personal interests to serve. I'm jest namin' it to you, because
you asked about the people's notions, that's all."

"At least," fenced Weighborne, "you yourself see the advantages of
development?"

It was putting a question which was almost a challenge to this leader of
the old, lawless order whose baronial power we threatened. He answered
it with no flicker of visible interest in his pleasant drawl.

"Well, as to that, what little property I've got would be benefited, but
as an officer of the law, I reckon it wouldn't hardly be proper for me
to take no sides." A moment later he hospitably added, "If there's any
courtesy I can show you gentlemen just call on me. Where are you goin'
to stop at?"

I gazed on this lord of lies with compelled fascination. Under a crude
exterior and a suavity which gave the impression of stupid good-nature
he was masking bitter and intense feeling. Here was a tyrant talking
with men who represented the new order and he knew as well as we that if
we succeeded his carefully built scheme must topple. Our success and his
could not both have life. One must perish. The power that had enriched
him, a power built on murder and stealth, must go from him, leaving him
only the contempt of his fellows--or he must thwart our designs. One
might have expected such dissimulation in a polished diplomat moving the
strategic pieces of the chessboard of some European power, but here it
seemed inconceivable.

"We are on our way over to the Calloway Marcus place," explained my
companion in a casual voice.

There was no change of expression on the face of the storekeeper, though
the name was one he venomously hated. One or two of the more unguarded
loungers scowled in silence.

"How did you calc'late to git thar?" asked Garvin. "It's all of two
miles an' they're rough miles--mostly straight up an' down."

"I suppose we shall have to walk," said Weighborne.

"I'd like to take you over thar," said the judge thoughtfully, "I sure
would, but the fact is me and Cal Marcus ain't got much in common
an'--well, you understand how it is?"

We thanked him for his solicitude and at the same moment one of the
henchmen drew him aside and spoke in a low voice. Garvin came back and
addressed us again.

"Curt Dawson says Cal Marcus went past here this mornin', goin' to'rds
town. It's an hour by sun now--he'd ought to be comin' back this way
before long."

I have spoken at length of Garvin and have given only collective notice
to the group of mountaineers who loafed about the dingy store, because
aside from their more savage qualities they were much like the indolent
loungers one may see in any cross-roads grocery. Even viewed as
feudists, and I was so new to the country that I was inclined to
discount the somber and murderous stories of their ways, they were still
merely the members of a human wolf pack and much alike. Only this shrewd
leader stood out in personal relief.

But to this generalizing there must be one exception, and that was to be
found in the person of Curt Dawson. Until he came forward and drew his
chief aside, I had not noticed him and he had not emerged from his seat
in a darkened corner while we had chatted. When he did come forth it was
with a step at once indolent and suggestive of power. His movements were
all unhurried, even graceful, but every flexing and tensing of his
muscles carried a hint of potential swiftness and power. His face was
unshaven and dissolute, but it retained a keen and instinctive
intelligence. His gray eyes had a light in them that seemed to come from
some inner source.

Curt Dawson could hardly have been more than thirty and was in the full
prime of his youthful strength, hard as hickory and in the same rough
fashion as the pines among which he had grown, commanding in appearance
and pungent in personality. I found my eyes dwelling on him, and later
on this scrutiny bore results. No one who had once seen this young
desperado could fail to recognize him on second meeting. His manner of
addressing the judge carried the assurance of the confidential man, and
a certain arrogance of demeanor.

We had left our bags outside and I took up a position near the door
where I could watch the twisting ruts of the drab road. We talked, as we
waited, of the outside world and Garvin astonished me by his grasp on
general affairs.

At last Marcus arrived and his coming made a strange picture which
dwells still in my mind. The western sky was all ash of rose and the
higher clouds were dark masses edged with gold. The hills were gray and
frowning ramparts with bristling crests. Against this setting, around
the shoulder of the mountain, appeared a grotesque cortege.

A half-score of rough men mounted on unkempt horses came slowly and
gloomily into view. They maintained, as they rode, the slovenly
formation of a hollow square and across their pommels lay repeating
rifles. The battered rims of their felt hats drooped over sharp-featured
faces.

The only unarmed member of the group rode at the center of the square.
He was tall and unspeakably gaunt. One looked at his worn and rugged
face and thought of the earlier portraits of Abraham Lincoln; the
portraits of lean and battling days. The collar of his threadbare
overcoat was upturned, but at the opening one had the glimpse of a
narrow black necktie slipped askew. The clean-shaven line of his mouth
was set in relentless determination.

The bodyguard rode with hanging reins, and each right hand lay in
counterfeited carelessness on the lock of its rifle.

"Thar he comes now," commented Garvin. "You must excuse me if I don't go
out to introduce you. He's a bitter kind of feller. You understand how
it is."

At Weighborne's signal his attorney halted and the men of the bodyguard
drew rein, keeping their places about him. We walked out to the middle
of the road, and while we talked to the rawboned, life-battered man in
the center of the hollow square, his attendants shouted greetings to the
loungers on the porch of the store. These greetings partook of the
nature of pleasantries and the only note of frank hostility came from
the throats of the hounds. They bristled and growled with an instinct
which was softened by no artificial code of hypocrisy. Still, so long as
the halt lasted, the two parties kept their eyes alertly fixed on each
other. It needed little penetration to discover that the geniality was
shallow and temporary, like that between the outposts of hostile armies
lying close-camped, across an interval soon to be closed in battle.

"You made a very unfortunate mistake in stopping here," said Marcus to
Weighborne, in a low voice. He nodded to two mountaineers who rode on
the far side of the cavalcade. They slipped from their saddles and
allowed us to mount in their stead while they trudged alongside,
carrying our bags.

As we started forward, Weighborne answered.

"I didn't halt at Garvin's place from choice. The wagon could go no
further. I don't suppose there was any actual danger, and after all I
wanted to see how he would talk."

Marcus nodded and drew his mouth tighter.

"It turns out all right," he said, "but don't do it again."

After a moment's silence he burst out bitterly.

"No danger! My God, man, do you suppose I ride like this--surrounded by
armed men, because it pleases my pride?" He swept his talon-like hand
around him in a circle. "Look at them! Do you reckon I do that for pomp
and display? Do you suppose any man likes to say good-bye to his
children when he leaves home with the thought in his mind that it may be
a last good-bye?"

"Is it as bad as that?" I questioned with the stranger's incredulity.

He turned his hunted eyes on me. "Worse," he said briefly. "I dare not
go unguarded from my house to my barn, sir. Keithley used to carry his
two-year-old child into court in his arms. Even they would not shoot a
baby. One day he went without the child. That day he died."

I looked at the face which was turned toward me. It was a face from
which had been whipped the knowledge of how to smile. We rode for a
half-mile in silence with only the cuppy thud of hoofs on the soft
earth, the creaking of stirrup leather and the clink of bit rings.

"Why," I asked at last, "don't you leave such a country and establish
yourself where you can have security?"

His angular chin came up with a jerk. His eyes flashed.

"Go away?" he repeated. "Do you think a man wants to be driven from the
country where he and his parents and his children were born? Besides,
sir, my mother belongs to the old order. I was the first to be educated.
She still smokes her pipe in the chimney-corner. She is of the
mountains. She must stay here." He paused, then his words began again
dispassionately, and gathered, as he talked, the fiery resonance of the
instinctive orator.

"If the men who love war, leave lawless countries, who in God's name is
to do the work? The order is changing. What does Kipling say about the
men who blaze trails?

    "'On the sand-drift, on the veldt-side, in the fern-scrub we lay,
    That our sons might follow after by the bones on the way.'

"These men have made a mockery of the law. It is my desire to punish
them with the law. It is my purpose to do so unless they kill me first.
Why am I representing your company? For the fee? No, sir!... God knows I
need the fee, but I shall also have a bigger compensation. When the new
order comes I shall see Garvin's power crumple. I shall send him to the
gallows or to the penitentiary. That will be my reward." His voice was
again passionate. "The filthy assassin realizes my motive and he sees in
you my allies. Watch him, and safeguard your steps."




CHAPTER XIX

A VOLLEY FROM THE LAUREL.


When we reached the attorney's house the reality of feud conditions
gained corroboration from a hundred small details. Like Garvin's, it
stood in an area stripped of trees and undergrowth. It was a large cabin
of logs and to its original two rooms rambling additions had from time
to time been made. Everywhere a note of the poor and primitive stood out
in uncouth nakedness. The men of the guard were all impoverished
kinsmen, who lived like parasites upon the lawyer's strained and meager
bounty. Several of them slept on pallets in a loft gained by a ladder,
and others dwelt in near-by cabins. The room turned over to us served as
guest chamber and parlor, and here alone in the house was there any hint
of concession to appearances. Through the cracks of its uncarpeted floor
chilly gusts of wind swept upward, and sent us hovering quail-like as
close as possible to the stone hearth of the broad chimney place. A huge
four-post bed in one corner was decorated with stiff pillows upon which
purple paper showed through coverings of coarse lace; patches of
newspaper stopped the widest wall cracks. A cheap cottage organ stood at
one side and rush-bottomed chairs completed the furnishings. A small
cuddy-hole housed the attorney and his wife. His mother, an ancient
crone-like woman of withered, leathery face, and all her brood of
grandchildren slept in two beds in the large, murky room which also
accommodated dining table, cook stove and pantry accessories.

One saw a profusion of firearms, and unlike the make-shift of less
important things these were modern and effective. Before lamp-lighting
came the barring of heavy shutters, and as time passed we grew
accustomed to other evidences of that caution which was daily routine
with these people living in a practical state of siege. We were fed, in
relays, by the flickering light of a coal-oil lamp. The women declined
to partake of food until we were through, and busied themselves
incessantly between stove and table. As we withdrew to the draughty room
which was ours for sleeping, but common ground until bedtime, the
retainers shuffled into the places about the table which we had just
vacated, for supper, eating, as suited henchmen, after their betters.

We were not a merry party as we huddled in a semi-circle around the
hearth where the blaze burned our faces while the gusty air chilled our
backs. Weighborne and Marcus argued over an opened copy of Kentucky
Reports. The old woman, with a face shriveled like that of an aged
monkey, crouched in her chair and sucked with toothless gums at a clay
pipe.

When an hour had thawed the shyness of the mountain folk into general
conversation and I had been forced to tell many traveler's tales, Marcus
arose and with a rough tenderness wrapped a shawl around the shivering
shoulders of the old woman.

"My mother," he said with no note of apology, "has never been to
Louisville or traveled on a railroad train. She is afraid of accidents."
He turned and shouted into her deaf ear, "Mother, Mr. Deprayne here has
crossed the ocean. He's been to the Holy Land."

The old woman lifted her wrinkled eyes and gazed at me, in wonderment.

"Well, Prov-i-_dence_!" she exclaimed. It was her single contribution to
the evening's conversation.

Once a dog barked, and with silent promptness two or three of the
younger men melted out into the night to reconnoiter.

The visitor proved to be only a neighbor seeking to borrow some farm
implement and he announced himself from afar with proper assurance that
he came as a friend. We heard his voice drawing nearer and shouting:
"It's me. I'm a-comin' in."

I was for the most part a listener, offering few contributions to the
talk. I was thinking of other matters, but before the evening came to an
end I had heard, in plain unvarnished recital, stories which began to
make the spirit of the vendetta comprehensible. I spoke of Curt Dawson
and asked our host for a biography. The mountain lawyer's rugged face
grew dark with feeling.

"I have twice prosecuted him," he said bitterly. "And in the chain of
evidence I wove around him there was no weak link, but a conviction
would have been a personal defiance of Garvin. That required courage.
Each time the foreman of the panel came in with perjury on his lips and
reported 'not guilty.'" He paused and then went on. "When Keithley fell
in the court-house yard, and while the rifle smoke was still curling
from a jury-room window, I rushed into the place and I found this boy
there. He was wiping gun grease from his hands, and he testified that he
had heard the shot while passing and had come in to detect the assassin.
Of course, he was the murderer. He has other crimes of the same type to
his damnable discredit. He is Garvin's principal gun-fighter. Garvin has
never fired a shot in accomplishment of his crimes. His men have all
been slain by proxy. Curt Dawson has become so notorious that of late
Garvin has kept him as much as possible out of sight. I am a little
surprised that he mentioned Dawson's name to you. He has of late rather
pursued the policy of holding ostensibly aloof, and he might have
inferred that you would repeat the circumstances to me." Marcus rose and
paced the cabin floor for a few turns, then came back and took his seat
once more in the circle about the fire.

"You mean," suggested Weighborne, "that the implication of Dawson was
coming too close to identifying the master hand?"

The lawyer nodded. "It is well understood that Dawson is merely a part
of Garvin. That makes it unwise to give him great prominence. If he has
been called back it means something."

"And you think that something is--?" Weighborne left the question
unfinished.

"I think that when the buzzards come there is apt to be carrion." The
thin, close lips of the attorney closed tightly.

"I have always understood that this man is to be my executioner some
day. Maybe the time is closer at hand than I anticipated."

"Is this fellow totally illiterate or has he, like Garvin, a shrewd
knowledge of things?" I inquired.

"He has had only scant and primary schooling, but he has learned a great
deal that is not in books. He has seen the outer world as a railroad
brakeman and when still a boy went to the Klondike.... Let me impress
this on you both. At any time you see him don't fail to tell me at once
the full particulars ... I had supposed him to be in Virginia. If he's
here now he will bear some watching."

The two hours between early supper and early bedtime dragged along
tediously. The old woman sat dozing and nodding while two of the
retainers sang to the accompaniment of the cottage organ, strange songs,
half-folk lore, in weird, nasal voices that rose high and shrill. This
singing was without musical effect, for the mountaineer alters his voice
in song and unconsciously adopts the tradition of the Chinese stage,
achieving a thin falsetto. It was a relief when the men climbed their
ladder and our host bade us good-night.

Early morning found me awake, but already someone had hospitably kindled
our fire, and when we went out on to the porch, where a tin basin and
gourd dipper supplied the only bathing facilities, a small tow-headed
boy was there before us with hot, water in a saucepan. The mountaineer
is averse to cold water and sparing with hot. It was presumed that we
shared this prejudice.

Frost still hung thick on the stubble and the mists lingered in the
valleys when we climbed into our saddles and trailed out to inspect one
of the tracts in which we were interested.

I was not a happy man nor one bearing a blithe spirit, for my own
discoveries crowded too closely and heavily on my heart, to be lightened
by the mere novelty of fresh surroundings. Yet even in my shadowed state
of mind, I could not help drinking in the splendidly unpolluted air with
deep breaths that made my lungs feel new. From frost-rimmed earth to
infinity it seemed to stretch in clean and filtered clarity. The
mountains were no longer ragged piles of chocolate and slate. The fresh
vigor of morning had folded them in the softening dyes of a dozen
inspiriting colors. Distance merged the leafless trees into veil-like
masses of dove browns and grays where shadows of violet lurked and
deepened. The woods wore a brave, if ragged, coat of russet and burgundy
and orange with a strong hint of that purple which is the proper garb of
kings and hills. As we rode along ridges we looked down into vast basins
of variegated country, rough but essentially beautiful. On the lips of
the young day was a silent bugle-call of color. Above and about us the
high-piled barriers of the mountains clambered steeply into space where
the sky was blue and tuneful.

I understood why Marcus had so resentfully repudiated the suggestion of
turning his back on this country. I knew that a man whose eyes had first
opened on such scenes would not wish that their last gaze should be
exiled. Rough and hard as life among these peaks might be, there brooded
a spirit here which would make flight impossible. The roots of the
laurel would hold the native son planted where his life had come to bud
and leaf. The eagle's brood would not go down to seek the easy security
of prim orchards and smooth meadows.

We rode sometimes for hours on end without seeing a cabin. Then we would
come upon a rude habitation of logs and pause to pass greetings with a
gaunt man in butternut brown, and would catch a glimpse of tow-headed
children and slatternly women.

So civil were all these salutations; so at variance with any idea of
violence that the elaborate precautions of Marcus (the very fashion in
which we were now riding armed and _en cortege_) began to assume a
ludicrous grotesquerie.

Of course, I argued with myself, the attorney knew his own country and I
did not, yet I was morally certain that Weighborne and I could have gone
about our business unescorted and as secure as though we were inspecting
suburban lots under the guidance of a real-estate dealer. I suggested
something of the sort to Marcus and his only response for the moment was
a grim smile. Then he patiently began to explain.

"At this moment," he said, "Jim Garvin knows just where we are and just
what we're doing. We have spoken to three men. Of that three at least
two have notified the store of our passing. There is a 'phone at Chicken
Gizzard, you know."

It seemed rather too exaggerated a system of espionage for probability.

"And telephoning in this country," went on the attorney, "is not so
simple a matter as you might suppose. We have no general system and no
universal exchange. There are telephones or 'boxes' as they are locally
called, connecting three or four houses into separate groups. A
telephone message from my house to Lexington, for example, would have to
be repeated and relayed through a half-dozen 'boxes' before it reached
its destination."

And yet during all that day's ride and all of the next three days there
was never, to my eye, an indication that any man interested himself in
our goings or comings. On the fourth day it was otherwise.

We had covered some twenty-five or thirty miles since breakfast over
roads that were full of climbs and other places where there were no
roads at all. Our spent horses plodded wearily, though the sun hung
close enough over the western highlands to warn us that, unless we
increased our pace, we should be benighted.

We were riding with our ever-present squad of gunmen and our road dipped
to the valley where we should cross that branch of Chicken Gizzard which
bounded the Marcus place at the back. We shook our jaded mounts into a
shambling trot and reached it at that hour which ushers in the short
November dusk. The woods were still and the bark of a belated squirrel
going home from forage broke the silence with a seeming of noisiness.

The creek was shallow and fordable, but to reach the crossing it was
necessary to follow a dizzy bridle path steeply downward and in single
file, between thick growing saplings and laurel. Back of the mountains
the sky held a pale afterglow against which the higher timber sketched
itself starkly. The body of the woods was a dark mass out of which only
the white-barked sycamores showed themselves with any clearness of
individuality.

Beyond the ribbon of water lay Marcus's rotting and weed-choked division
fence. The smoke from his chimney, and the glint at the crack of a
lighted window were visible a half-mile distant.

Our front horses had splashed fetlock deep into the water and halted the
cavalcade to drink when a sudden staccato outbreak ripped the silence.
Three thin jets of rifle fire blinked out with acrid sharpness from the
laurel through which we had just come. The men who had ambushed us must
have lain so close to our passing line that we might almost have touched
them from our saddles as we rode down the declivity.

There was instantly a confused, snorting, splashing stampede for the
cover of the opposite shore. I, who chanced to be riding third in line,
followed my two leaders and made the timber in safety. I slid from my
saddle and found refuge in a tangle of drift at the roots of a sycamore
which overhung the water. My armament was limited to an automatic
pistol, small enough for the pocket, and it hardly warranted intrusion
into a debate with repeating rifles. As chance would have it, just as
our cavalcade had halted, and the instant before the volley was fired, I
had half-turned in my saddle to gaze back, at the two-color effect of
the slate-gray hills and lemon sky. Every other face was looking
forward, and I alone saw a figure standing above, in the brief
illumination of a rifle flash. It was the figure of Curt Dawson. Those
of our party who found themselves in the rear and hampered, in their
escape, by the confusion ahead, dismounted in the stream and began
maneuvering to the opposite shore at an angle which gave them protection
behind the bodies of their mounts. As they came they fired with random
aim at the points from which had spurted the ambuscading fire. But over
the hill had settled a sudden and profound quiet. The darkness had
spoiled markmanship which was presumably selected for its efficiency.

It appeared that every one had made the crossing unharmed, though for a
few minutes each man held to such concealment as he had attained and
there was no effort to reunite.

At last, like disorganized partridges coming back to the covey, we
crawled out of our individual hiding-places and began collecting on the
trail-like path which went twisting up to the house. Some led their
horses and some, who like myself had been separated from their beasts,
came on foot.

As we gathered without a sound the mountaineers were searching the
timber with wide eyes that contended against the darkness.

Then came the startling outburst of a fresh volley. It was fired into
the group and fired from cover on the attorney's own property. I felt a
sensation not unlike a hornet sting in my left shoulder and clapped my
right hand against the spot. I did not fall. I even had a sense of
surprise at the comparative mildness and painlessness of the pang. I
heard some one fall heavily, but in the darkness it was impossible to
distinguish individuals. So close on the assassin's shots that they were
hardly distinguishable came the cracks of our own guns, and without
giving the concealed riflemen time to shift positions our men charged
into the ambush.

Our policy was no longer one of retreat, but of attack. I saw a tall
youth plough his way through the thicket toward a clump of cedar which
had just belched fire, and having to do something, I followed at his
heels. The silence had given way now to the ripping of bushes and the
kicking up of dead leaves, and twice off at my side I heard the
pop-popping of rifles. I, following my guide, was crouching and slipping
from tree trunk to laurel bush and from laurel bush to boulder. Suddenly
a spurt of flame and a report burst out in our faces, and the song of a
bullet passing near made me duck my head. Then the man with me fired and
there was a groan from the front and the crash of a body falling into a
bush.

Afterward (I suppose in a very few minutes) quiet settled again, except
for the treading of our men as they searched the timber. The assailants
were clearly driven off. My companion even ventured to bend down as we
returned and strike a match over the fallen body in the brush. As it
flared up, I recognized with a shock, the thin, saddened face of the
sockless man who had accosted us in the road, and whom our driver had
called Rat-Ankle. He now lay doubled in a shapeless heap, and dead.

We already knew that the casualties had not been one-sided, and as my
companion and I regained the road among the first we saw that some one
still lay there, his horse standing quietly over him. A glance told me
that it was Weighborne. His bulky size even in that crumpled attitude
unmistakably proclaimed him. As we bent over him, we found that he was
unconscious but breathing, and we hoisted him up to an empty saddle,
where we held him as we made the trip to the house.




CHAPTER XX

A CAVALCADE FROM THE LAUREL.


I have since searchingly asked myself whether, at that time, any mean
thought entered my mind as to the possibilities which might open for me
if Weighborne died. I set it down in justification, though it may rather
be attributable to the excitement of the moment than to inherent
guilelessness, that that phase of the matter did not occur to me. Had I
entertained such speculations they must have been short lived, for when
we arrived at the cabin and made an examination, and when later by
relayed telephone messages we brought the doctor, it was to learn that
the patient would have to lie in bed for perhaps a week or two, but need
fear no grave consequences. His wound had narrowly missed the heart, but
the margin was sufficient. My own injury proved to be a mere flesh
scratch and a bandage did for it all that was needful.

I was rather surprised at the almost lethargic calmness with which the
household greeted our disordered homecoming. Preparations for supper
went on with little interruption. There was no excited demand from those
who had stayed at home, for the full story, and even the children seemed
uninquisitive. Only the aged woman showed a flash of unexpected fire as
she demanded, "Didn't ye git nary one of _them_?"

"We got Rat-Ankle," drawled an unshaven lout with a revolting note of
placid satisfaction.

"That's better'n not gettin' nary one," commended the old woman. Her
voice revealed the hereditary source of Marcus' ability for sincere
hating.

I looked at her aged, monkey-like face and the intensity of her beady
eyes with wonderment. There was vindictiveness there but no fear, no
excitement even, except the excitement of hate--and yet this old woman
was the same who could not be induced to travel on a railroad train for
fear of an accident.

It was several hours later that the doctor arrived. He was much like the
men among whom he lived. If he had once been otherwise long association
had roughened him to their own similitude. He entered with a wordless
nod and went straight to the bed where the injured man lay unconscious.
After a silent examination he opened his worn and faded saddle-bags and
proceeded taciturnly but capably with his work. He asked no questions
and Marcus volunteered no explanation. At last he rose and said, "He
ain't in no great danger if he keeps quiet. Have you got a little licker
in the house, Calloway?"

Before the fireplace he poured generously from a stoneware jug into a
tin cup, but instead of tossing down his white whiskey at a gulp he
sipped it slowly, while he gave directions to the lawyer or shouted them
loudly into the ear of the old woman. The only allusion to the ambuscade
came from her.

"Our folks got Rat-Ankle," she announced somewhat triumphantly. "But
they didn't see nary other face of them that lay-wayed 'em."

"Don't pay no attention to Mother," said Marcus more hastily than I had
before heard him speak; "at times she gets childish."

The physician nodded.

Then it was that I, in an ignorance which had not learned the valuable
art of general distrust, volunteered a remark for which my host, so soon
as we were alone, rebuked me sternly.

"Mrs. Marcus is mistaken as to that," I said. "Just as the volley was
fired, I recognized Curt Dawson."

The voice of Calloway Marcus again cut in with an interruption. "Oh, I
reckon you're mistaken about that, Mr. Deprayne. I understand Dawson is
across the Virginia line."

"I'm sure enough," I persisted, failing entirely to catch my host's
effort to silence me, "to swear to it in court."

"Mr. Deprayne is a stranger here," deprecated the lawyer. "He isn't
familiar enough with our people to be certain in these matters."

Again the doctor nodded and, taking up his saddle-bags, went out. As
soon as he had bidden him farewell, Marcus returned. He walked over and
stood before me with a face that was deeply troubled. Except for his
mother, too deaf to hear his low-pitched voice, and Weighborne, whose
initial unconsciousness had passed under medical administrations into a
profound sleep, we were alone.

"Sir," he said patiently, "I can't be angry with you because you don't
understand what you have done. Perhaps I should have warned you. I sent
for Richardson because he was the only doctor within many hours' riding,
but I don't confide in him. He will carry straight to Garvin your
announcement that you have recognized his gun-man. You have given away a
secret I might have used to great advantage. Sir, you have tremendously
complicated matters."

He dropped his hands at his sides with a weary gesture, half-despair.
"However, it's done now," he added, "it's no use to deplore it--but, for
God's sake, be more careful in the future."

When Weighborne recovered consciousness he spoke to me once more of his
wife. He was afraid that an exaggerated report of the affair would leak
through to the Lexington papers, and he wished to allay her anxiety. The
duty of this reassurance devolved on me, but the complicated system of
telephoning spared me the torture of felicitating her. The message was
relayed through disinterested voices before it reached her ears. As it
eventuated Weighborne's precaution was a wise one since the news
filtered that same night to a newspaper correspondent at the railroad
town. This scribe so well utilized his information that the papers of
the next morning carried scare-heads over a story of bloodshed and
massacre which accorded to both of us desperate wounds and ludicrously
lauded us as heroes.

It cannot be said for Weighborne that he proved a docile patient. He had
all the energetic man's aversion to inactive days in bed, and he greatly
preferred, if he must submit to such an exigency, that it be in his own
bed and among more plentiful conveniences, than could be afforded here.
But to move him over twenty semi-perpendicular miles was pronounced
impossible and to that decree he had to submit.

I, who, despite my newspaper peril, was not even bedridden, continued
the daily rides to tracts marked for inspection, and discussed the day's
work with him in the evening.

One afternoon we met in the road a party of horsemen who halted us and
expressed the desire for a peaceable parley. Marcus gave his assurance
and a stout fellow with a ruddy, good-natured face and a benevolent
smile rode out and accosted us.

"You're a lawyer, Calloway," he began, "an' I reckon you know I've got
to do my duty. I hope you ain't holdin' hit ergainst me none." He paused
and seemed relieved when the attorney nodded his understanding.

"I just want ter know ef you won't bring yer fellers ter county co'te
any day this week that suits you an' answer fer the killin' of
Rat-Ankle. I'm namin' it to yer like a friend, an' I'm askin' you ter
set the day. Hit ain't nothin' but a matter of givin' bail noways."

"For whom have you warrants?" asked Marcus.

The sheriff read a list of a half-dozen names, all kinsmen and retainers
of the attorney. Weighborne and myself were not included. Marcus
accepted service and agreed to be present on the date named. It was not
until the sheriff's men had waved their hands and ridden away that he
turned to me.

"That shows Garvin's effrontery," he remarked with a laugh. "He
summonses me to answer in his own court, for meeting with hostility the
attack of his own assassins. I'll be there--but I hope to give him a
surprise."

Weighborne had some temperature and was often restless on his mattress
of corn shucks, though his amiability held steady. One evening several
days after our ambuscade, I was sitting alone and morose before the open
hearth while he slept. Since our apartment had been a sickroom, the
evening gatherings had been suspended and I had companionship only from
my pipe and thoughts. The thoughts were not cheery comrades to-night.
They went back with a brutal sort of insistence to the island and the
things which had there taken root, to grow with the rank and lawless
swiftness of the tropics. I had had a long conversation with Marcus that
evening in which he had outlined his plans for the examining trials. He
meant to strike a bold and unexpected blow, using me as his star
witness.

All that the county judge could do would be to fix a bond for answering
to the grand jury, but the circuit court was also under the influence of
the dictator, and later when the trials came up on that docket the
prosecution would become persecution. Garvin would, however, fix a light
bond, he thought, in the preliminary hearing and would expect Marcus to
await the main issue later. Therefore, he meant to forestall the attack
with an attack in the county court. His enemies would rely on his
reputation as a supporter of law and order to make his warfare a warfare
within the law, and that would also lull them into expecting only
formal and preparatory fencing at the hearing of next Wednesday.

"When I take the course which I mean to take," the attorney had assured
me, "it will be in the nature of exploding a bomb and may precipitate
trouble. If I had the power to do so I should ask for a militia
detachment to be present and preserve order, but unfortunately such a
call can come only from some civil officer such as the circuit
judge--and he is not disposed to act on my request. I shall have to
satisfy myself with having in town every anti-Garvin man whom I can
bring there. Garvin doesn't want a general battle just now. He doesn't
want to attract outside clamor. He wants to move in the dark, so I think
he will instruct against an outbreak in the streets or court-room. But
there is one thing I can do, and that I am arranging. I am held in some
respect by the papers of Louisville and Lexington, and I have written a
rather full statement of conditions here and asked that reporters be
present in the court-room on Wednesday. That will mean that whatever
transpires cannot be hushed up. Then I shall move to swear Garvin off
the bench, announcing openly that his jackal led this ambuscade in
obedience to his own orders. That will be my surprise and my proof of it
will be your testimony. If he suspected it he would find a way to
silence you. Even as it is he knows you recognized Dawson and you must
be cautious. He may seek to keep you out of court."

At length I slipped out and stood for a while leaning against a post of
the porch, although the air was sharp with frost, and the stars pierced
coldly through the hard steel of a winter sky. My other skies had been
softer.

The mountains, under a young moon, stood out black and forbidding; frost
mists hung like frozen smoke on the lowlands. From somewhere about the
house came the nasal singing of a mountaineer to the plunking of a
tuneless banjo. His voice rose and quavered and fell with more care that
his words be distinct than that his notes be true. He had chosen a song
composed by a local bard, and as I stood gazing off across the sea of
moonlight and mist he alone broke and tortured the silence.

    "Right down here in Adamson coun-tee
        Where they have no church of our Lord,
    Frank Smith sold Pate Art'b'ry some whis-key
        And caused him to get shot in the for'd."

His fellows, in all solemnity, took up the ludicrous chorus and
trumpeted in through their noses.

    "Oh, whis-key's the root of all ev-il,
        It fills up a drunkard's hell,
    So why not vote out this old ev-il
        And say farewell, whis-key, farewell!"

I smiled as I thought how little they were changed from rude retainers
in an old, oak-raftered hall of feudal England. I felt as remote from
civilization as though I were living behind the moat and draw-bridge of
some embattled baron. In such a place anything might happen.

And then as the singers fell silent again, I became aware of a faint and
distant sound of voices. The hound which lay curled upon the top step of
the porch rose and sniffed the keen air, his bristles rising. In a
moment he was off toward the road, barking blatantly.

The voices became more distinct and I moved from my position in the
moonlight to the corner of the house where the shadow fell black enough
to swallow me. As I did so a shuffling of feet in the loft told me that
the men there had also caught the sound. The approaching party must be
coming to this house, since we had no neighbor within three-quarters of
a mile and the road ran out and ended at our gate.

Shortly a group of horsemen came into view, climbing the hill a quarter
of a mile away. They seemed to be riding close together, knee to knee,
and except when they crossed the intervals of the moon's spotlight one
could see them only in a massed effect. They came to a halt in the
shadow at a little distance from the gate.

The noiseless opening of a door and a momentary glimpse of a stealthy,
rifle-armed figure slipping out into the shadow of the kitchen assured
me of the preparedness of the impecunious clansmen who played watchdogs
for their keep.

Then a loud and affable voice from the road gave greeting, "Hello, Cal
Marcus!"

There was no immediate reply. Those inside were awaiting a more
conclusive guarantee of pacific intent. Seemingly amicable salutations
shouted from the night had before now brought householders into the
excellent target of a lighted door, where they had lain down and died.

"Hello, Cal Marcus!" called the voice again, "we're a-comin' in."

"Who be ye?" challenged a voice from the interior. "Don't come till we
know who ye be."

In the next moment I started violently and found myself in a tremor from
head to foot, for the voice which answered the question was a woman's
voice, and it was the voice of rich contralto which I had once heard and
often imagined.

"It's I, Frances Weighborne," was the response, "and some gentlemen who
rode over with me from the train." In corroboration came other voices,
deep and masculine, and evidently recognized within as the voices of
friends. The man in the shadow of the kitchen came out from his
concealment and started down to the gate swinging his rifle at his side.
A door opened and framed the emaciated, half-clad figure of Calloway
Marcus. "Come right in, Ma'm," he shouted. The group rode up into the
light and dismounted.

I saw her come in at the gate. The moonlight was full upon her, and I
stood skulking in my concealment of shadow like a thief, held fast in a
paralysis of jealousy and worship.

This was no place for me. I, of all men in the world, could least endure
or be endured at that greeting between Weighborne and his wife who had
ridden these mountains to be with him.




CHAPTER XXI

I GO WALKING AND MEET ENEMIES.


He and I had labored across those twenty miles in a wagon by daylight. I
could guess what it meant at night and in the saddle--and she had done
it! She had come alone, except for such chance escort as she could
recruit at the mining town, and now as she walked in the moon-bath of
the clearing, there was not a man of them all who carried himself with
so free and unwearied a stride. She was dressed in a short riding-skirt
and a heavy sweater. Her shoulders swung back as free as an Indian's,
and I knew at that moment, and without doubt, that this was the elusive
lady of Europe who had walked out of Shepheard's Hotel the night when I
sat on the terrace. She was no fragile ornament of drawing-rooms; she
was the woman who strode like a goddess and for whom timidities had no
existence. She was not then, after all, I exultantly reflected, the
hot-house orchid; a mere whisper and fragrance on waxy petals. She was
the splendid flower I had conceived, fit for God's good open skies. And
that thought sent a rich bugle note of triumph ringing through the chaos
of my misery.

Of a surety it was no place for me. In what was to be said behind that
door I had no part. She had come splendidly, but she had not come to me.
These thoughts raced tumultuously through my mind, and when she reached
the steps of the porch, and the light showed the mud and dust on her
corduroy skirt, and caught the gold of her hair under an upturned hat
brim, I bit savagely at my lips and turned away.

I sat for an hour or more in the shadow of a fence line, with the night
mists rising and congealing under the pale moonlight like the tracery of
frost on a julep mug. I had left my coat inside and at last I was
conscious of being deeply chilled. As often as I turned my eyes out upon
the mountain and forest they came back to dwell on the rough log wall
that separated her from me. I felt the drawing of the magnet. Inside at
least I could look at her, devour her with my eyes though I might not
open my arms to her or even my lips except to utter commonplaces. But
then the thought would come of the tenderness of the reunion which was
perhaps at that moment being enacted so near me, yet so far from me, and
at the picture I ground my teeth. Why had I at last discovered her to be
the sum of all my dreams, and more, only to sit outside a wall of logs
and know that inside she was pouring out on another man the miracle of
her tenderness?

To-morrow I would deliver her husband over to her and go back. Finally,
however, I realized that for to-night the Marcus house was my only
available abode, and that by this time the first affections of greeting
would be over. I could safely return.

Decency and civility demanded that I shake her hand and give an account
of my rough nursing. The cabin was already crowded. What shifting and
rearranging her arrival might necessitate was a thing to which I should
accommodate myself before the household settled down to sleep. Already I
might have caused inconvenience by my disappearance.

As I drew near the house, the cracks of the shutters still held threads
of light. At the threshold of the room where I had left Weighborne I
hesitantly knocked.

"Come in," said a low voice--her voice.

I opened the door and halted in astonishment.

She was sitting before the fire in the rough chair which was usually
occupied by the old woman and her eyes were fixed on the flaring logs
and the white ashes below them. She was leaning forward with her brows
slightly drawn in a troubled and pained expression. The blaze threw
shifting dashes of carmine on her cheeks and heightened the rose-madder
of her lips. Her slender fingers were intertwined across her knees and
one foot, cased in a riding-boot, was tapping the floor in evident
annoyance.

Her discarded sweater hung over the chair back and against its white
background her graceful slenderness was clear drawn despite the loose
folds of a blue flannel shirt. The open collar revealed the arch of her
throat, and though it was now circled by rough fabric instead of pearls,
it was the same throat and neck that had so imperiously supported the
head of the island goddess. But the deep wistfulness of her face and the
troubled rise and fall of her bosom with breathing that was akin to a
sigh filled me with wonder. Then the complete loveliness of her, the
yearning for her swept me, and I had to grip myself resolutely for
control.

I must have let myself in very quietly, for she did not turn her head.
But what held me in pause and anger was the discovery that Weighborne
lay asleep and breathing heavily, as though the last hours had brought
no exciting incident. Could it be possible that he had slept
uninterruptedly? At the thought a wave of savage resentment swept me.
Had she come to me I should have arisen to meet her, though I had to
shake off the sleep of death itself and push my way through the heavy
weight of the grave.

I went very quietly over to her, without speaking, and still she did
not raise her eyes. I looked down, cursing myself that I had dared to
suspect she could burgeon only in the affluence of satins.

Slowly her gaze came up and on seeing me she gave a little start. Then
she spoke in a low voice which was a trifle cool.

"Do you think your welcome is very prompt?"

I stiffened and flushed. Could she be so blindly indifferent as not to
know that I had taken myself off in misery and loneliness only because I
was not cad enough to intrude on that meeting? And now she permitted
herself to grow piqued over the only evidence of consideration it lay in
my power to show her.

"Do you think I could have done otherwise?" I inquired.

"I think if I were a man, and a woman had come across the mountains--"
she halted suddenly and colored. Then she added in an altered tone of
flat indifference, "It doesn't matter."

For a moment I stood there with no answer to frame. Her words bewildered
me. So she might have spoken had she been free or affianced to me. I was
standing above her looking down and her eyes, with the same pained
wideness, were looking at some picture which the flickering flames and
white embers held for her imagination. Then I understood. Her words were
not after all really addressed to me. She, too, was thinking of the man
asleep in the huge four-post bed who had not awakened to receive her,
and upon me was falling the expression of what was in her heart because
I was the only person with whom she could speak. Since he had not
aroused himself she had noticed my absence. Had it been otherwise I
should have been forgotten. It was the final note of my quaint and
unprecedented torture that I should come in as her husband's proxy for a
chiding that should have been his.

For the next few moments I stood helplessly silent. Outside I heard the
distant baying of hounds off on some ungoverned chase. She sat there
while the longings in my heart welled and the reason in my brain reeled,
until I could feel only one thing--that she should belong to me; that my
arms should enfold her--that everything which balked that end was a
monstrous and hideous injustice. Then as a drunken man may suddenly sink
into the irresponsible vagueness that carries him into total
irresponsibility, the tidal wave mastered me. There was an inarticulate
sound in my throat; something between a groan and a sob, which must have
startled her, for she looked suddenly up, and as she did so I dropped to
my knees beside her and carried both her hands to my lips. She flinched
back with a sudden little start of astonishment, but I was now the
primitive creature bereft of sanity and I gathered her to me and
crushed her in my arms and covered the cool softness of her cheeks and
eyes and lips with my kisses until they flushed hot and crimson. In an
instant the thing was over. A wave of returning reason swept me like a
sluicing from a bucket of ice-water, and I came to my feet sane and
unspeakably mortified. She was still sitting very silent and her flushed
color had at once died to pallor. Her eyes were wide with mystified
incomprehension. Her lips moved, but shaped no words. I tried to speak,
but the sense of my outrageous conduct stifled me.

She could not understand and I could not tell her, of all the torture
which had so culminated. After this, even should the powers of miracle
clear away every other obstacle between us, she would never listen. I
heard my voice groan miserably, and with no further effort at
explanation or apology, I walked, or rather stumbled, to the peg where
my coat hung beside the door and let myself out into the night.

Where I went I could not say. I was tramping along with the aimlessness
of the man whose steps are unguided. My one conscious intention was to
keep going, to kill the rest of the night and to try, as best I might to
bring myself to such a point of sanity that with to-morrow morning I
could return and take my medicine with at least the dignity of the
condemned criminal. Vaguely I planned self-destruction--after I had
faced whatever ordeal awaited me first and I had met the obligation of
supporting Marcus in court. I should tell the two of them my story and
let them at least realize that before I had become the madman and the
brute I had been through such things as might craze a man. Weighborne
was not the sort of husband who would tamely pass without punishment
such an affront to his wife and himself. I hoped that his method of
reprisal would be summary. That would bring a sort of relief, yet for
her sake he must let me be my own executioner, that it might end there.

The night was all a-sparkle under the moonlight, and the air, spiced
with frost, went into the lungs with the tingling stimulation of
needles. I tramped endlessly along the road, and all the heat of my
paroxysm cooled into a chill of self-contempt. Still I had no definite
idea of where I was going--I was simply plunging ahead in an effort to
burn up with physical exertion the restlessness and misery that
possessed me.

It was only when I had walked and run alternately for hours, frequently
halting to sit by the roadside and curse myself, that I realized I must
have come a long way from the house of Cal Marcus, and that the night
must be well spent. I might not have even then returned to a realization
of outward things had I not heard the sound of voices and the patter of
unshod hoofs on the roadbed. Some roistering riders of the night were
making their late way home, and had I been in a less heedless mood,
Marcus' frequent injunction and the things I myself had seen would have
prompted me to avail myself of the concealment offered by the fence
row's tangle. But these matters were all far from my thoughts, and I
merely turned back to the side to let the horsemen pass. I was walking
with my head downcast at a point where the moon bathed the road, when
the horses behind broke into a canter. As they passed me one of the
riders, with a surprised shout to his companions, wheeled his mount to a
halt just before me.

"Hold on thar!" sang out a voice. "Let's take this feller along with
us."

I looked resentfully up and as I did so recognized the figure above me
as that of Curt Dawson. When I met his eyes I met also the glitter of a
leveled pistol.

I was in no mood to be trifled with and I knew that surrender to such a
capture meant disaster to Marcus's plan of attack. Their purpose was to
dispose of a dangerous witness, and since my testimony was to be damning
to Curt Dawson, he above all others had a motive to serve which would
make him recklessly desperate. I was unarmed, but I sprang forward
meaning to strike up the weapon or force him to shoot without parley. I
did not greatly care which alternative he chose, but I had no mind to be
taken alive. Even if I succeeded in overpowering Garvin's gun-man, there
was still his ally to reckon with. However, neither thing happened. Curt
Dawson, merely laughed in his indolent fashion and jerked his horse back
in its haunches, sliding from the saddle as he did so.

His fellow-traveler had now reinforced him and the two of them came over
and faced me.

"Bud," said the gun-man with a slow, contemptuous drawl, "we hain't
ergoin' ter kill this feller--leastways not yit. Them's the orders. He
hain't ergoin' ter pester us inter hit, but we're goin' ter take him
along with us. He hain't got no gun. I reckon you kin put up yours."
Then he turned calmly to me and added, "Now, stranger, I low yer gwine
ter come along--or get the hell of a lickin'--and then come along
anyhow."

The second mountaineer slipped his revolver back into the case which,
mountain fashion, he wore strapped to his side beneath his left armpit.
Both men carefully buttoned their leather holsters. Meantime, I looked
from one to the other, gauging their distances, and made up my mind to
attack Dawson first. Then I heard the assassin calmly direct, "Now, Bud,
take hold of him."




CHAPTER XXII

I FAIL TO RETURN HOME.


It was precisely as one might have given the command of attack to a dog,
and under the sting of indignity, my reason once more slipped from me. I
dived for Dawson and saw him reel backward under the blow I planted on
his sneering mouth, but at the same instant the second pair of arms went
round me from behind. Bud had "taken hold" of me and I am forced to say
he did it with the effective enthusiasm of an octopus. I fancy that had
there been an audience, that would have been pronounced a good fight.
Sometimes the three of us swayed from side to side of the road in a
triangular wrestling match; sometimes we rolled about and clawed at each
other on the ground.

The moon had set and between gasping breaths, out of sweat-blinded and
battered eyes, I was occasionally conscious of a steel-blue sky in which
the stars seemed to dance about and of unsteady silhouetted trees. But
I was more sensible of the cruel ruttiness of the road on which our
feet slipped and our ankles twisted. Curt Dawson was one of those
rough-and-tumble battlers who laugh as they fight. His companion kept up
a running string of muttered curses, but both of them were strong,
wolf-like huskies of tireless sinews and savage determination. There
was, of course, no fairness of combat, but I had the advantage of trying
to kill while they were fighting to take me alive, though with odds of
two to one. I suppose it did not last long, but it seemed to me as
interminable as the wars of Valhalla. I was very dizzy and nauseated
from their kicks in the stomach and blind from blood that ran down out
of a cut in my forehead--Curt Dawson wore a heavy ring--still I had the
satisfaction of seeing that "Bud" was badly lamed, possibly from a
twisted ankle, and that the gun-fighter himself was far from fresh. At
last Garvin's head villain came into a clinch with his arms about me and
under his vice-like grip I felt my ribs creaking. Bud thought me whipped
and had drawn off for a moment of much-needed rest. Then I got my hands
up and had the satisfaction of feeling my fingers close on Dawson's
throat. The touch of flesh in my grasp seemed to rally my ebbing
strength and I closed down with all the vicious force I could muster,
until my nails sunk deep under the skin and his own arms relaxed and his
agonized breath rattled in his windpipe. We went down locked together,
but my grasp at his throat held, and as we rolled and wallowed I found
myself on top and gripped the harder. I knew only one desire--to choke
the last breath from his lungs, and I should have accomplished it had
not the second man recognized the situation in time. If I had been
fighting sanely I might have risen in time to meet him, and in his
condition could have disposed of him, but I had forgotten his existence
and remembered only the enemy upon whose chest my knee was pressing and
whose life was fast waning under my ten clinging fingers. The mania to
kill with bare hands is strong when it has once obsessed, and the second
feudist found it an easy thing in my absorbed condition to throw his
handkerchief about my neck and strangle me first into helplessness and
finally into unconsciousness.

I came to my senses lying at the roadside, trussed up like a pig being
taken to market. On either side of me lay my captors stretched at full
length and resting, though a line of gray over the eastern peaks bespoke
the coming of dawn, and a thin ribbon of rosy pinkness was edging the
gray at the margin of the morning.

When I endeavored to rise Curt Dawson also sat up and gazed at me. His
face wore scars that gave me a moment of sincere pleasure, and he found
only one eye available for his scrutiny. His open shirt showed upon his
neck the deep-written autograph of my finger nails, but his lips wore a
grin as he reached for his broad-brimmed felt hat and placed it on the
back of his head.

"Well, stranger," he drawled as good naturedly as though our combat had
partaken only of elements of friendly sport, "I want ter name it to yer
that you ain't noways er cripple in er fight. I told yer yer'd haf' ter
come along, an' I reckon I was about right. Ef yer ready ter ride we'll
heave yer up an' hike."

"What are you going to do with me?" I demanded.

"We'll figger on that by an' by," he assured me; "the fust thing we do
will be plum friendly. We'll take yer where yer kin git a drink of
licker."

I found that prospect grateful, for from head to foot I ached with
bruises and a great weakness possessed me, but I did not propose to
submit tamely at any point.

"I don't see how you are to keep me out of court unless you kill me," I
suggested, "and if you are going to kill me you've got to do it here and
now."

"What fer?" he queried with his tantalizing coolness. "Ef we're ergoin'
ter kill yer, I reckon we'll pick our own time and place. But mebby we
won't haf ter."

He rose indolently and came over with an effort to conceal the hobble of
a limp, and propping my bound body against his knee proceeded to wrap
his blue cotton bandana around my eyes. This being accomplished to his
satisfaction, the two of them loosened my ankles and raised me to one of
the saddles, leaving my hands fast bound, and passing straps around my
legs. Then Dawson mounted behind me, holding me in place, for I found
myself reeling feebly and in danger of collapse. The other man led the
horse that carried the double burden and we started on a journey of
which I have no clear remembrance, since from time to time I drifted
into a condition bordering on unconsciousness.

It was full daylight but still very early when they took me from the
saddle, and of course I had no idea of the road by which we had come or
the country through which we had passed. The blindfold was not removed
until we had entered a house and I had been helped up a steep stairway
and laid on a bare, corn-shuck mattress. Then I was allowed to look on
the bare walls of a loft-like room. The mattress was stretched on the
floor; a tin basin surmounted a box. Otherwise there were no furnishings
of any sort. Dawson was grinning down on me with a stone jug supported
in the crotch of his right elbow and a tin cup in his left hand.

"Say when, stranger," he invited as he began to pour the white whiskey.
"This here is your domicile fer ther present time. Yer victuals will be
along presently." At the door he paused and looked back. "Ef yer needs
anything," he added, "kick like hell on the flo'. They ain't nobody
here that minds a little noise. The latch string hangs outside, but yer
kin see fer yerself there ain't none on this side the do'."

I was for an hour satisfied to lie quietly on the mattress and rest and
after they had brought me a meal of cold bread, greasy bacon and coffee,
I continued inactive except for thinking. The trial was two days off and
the least hardship I need expect would be imprisonment until it was
over. After that I was at a loss to forecast their designs. Even then I
could not be set free to tell my story, but I felt sure that nothing
would be done until the arch-conspirator and dictator, Jim Garvin
himself, had been consulted and had issued his imperial decree.

Shortly before noon I heard footsteps on the stairs, and since one set
of feet came with the creaking caution of a person who did not wish to
be heard, I feigned sleep and breathed with a deep regularity that was
almost a snore. The door opened and Dawson entered. By this time I knew
his delicate tread. He crossed the room and looked at me for a while,
bending low down to listen to my breathing. I did not stir nor open my
eyes and after a time he went again to the door and announced in a
carefully guarded voice, "He's asleep all right enough."

There was no reply, so my straining ears, seeking to do duty also for
the eyes I dared not open, could make no identification, but my face was
turned toward the door and some inner sense declared to me with
insistent conviction that the silent visitor was no other than the
county judge himself. Finally Dawson turned and I counted his steps
until they stopped, as I presumed, at his companion's side. At that
juncture, and with infinite caution I stole a momentary peep between
closely drawn lids, and the brief glimpse revealed the broad back and
shoulders of the man who had so affably chatted with us at the store on
the day when Weighborne and myself had arrived. Even in so cursory a
survey, I knew that I was taking a decided risk, but it seemed
necessary.

My room never had more than a half-light, which filtered through shutter
slats so slanted that I could see nothing between them save the sky and
a few stark sycamore branches. Consequently I lay in comparative
darkness while they were etched against the full light of the partly
open door. Now, should I regain my liberty--a thing highly improbable--I
could testify that Garvin himself had knowledge of my imprisonment.

Outside my door there was silence and I told myself that they were
listening. My simulated sleeping breath stole out to them and reassured
them, for finally I heard Garvin's low voice. "That's the man," he said.
"Just keep him here till I let you know what to do." Then their
descending footsteps on the stairs drowned the words and I was once more
alone.

The next day Dawson and his understrapper, "Bud," whose last name I had
never learned, permitted me to accompany them to the lower floor of the
house and a somewhat larger measure of freedom.

Among the many activities of his young life, Mr. Dawson had at one time
enjoyed that expression of public confidence which is dear to the
mountain man. He had held office as a deputy sheriff. That honor had
been short-lived, but as a memento of his days of power he retained a
very good pair of heavy nickeled handcuffs, and when I was made free of
the lower floor these ornaments adorned my wrists. The connecting chain
was long enough to give my hands a limited scope. My two jailers and
myself beguiled an hour or two with a game of casino, and I was able to
shuffle the cards when the deal fell to me, but the manacles were
sufficiently hampering to give them a sense of entire security.

I welcomed with some eagerness an opportunity to visualize my
environment, since there was now only one day left before the calling of
the Marcus cases on the county court docket, and if I was to learn
anything which might facilitate my escape it must be shortly
accomplished.

I presumed that I had been brought to some remote and isolated point in
the hills, and that even if I could rid myself of handcuffs and
guardians, there still lay ahead of me the problem of a journey,
probably a long one, through an unknown country.

I had still much to learn, and one of the things which did not occur to
me, but which time made clear, was that Garvin never played his game
twice in the same fashion. He had known that my disappearance would wake
into frantic activity the smaller, but no less vigilant force of private
investigators who served Cal Marcus. All the inaccessible hiding places
in the heart of the timbered hills would be under espionage. He
accordingly decided that the best method of keeping me under cover would
be somewhat similar to that of the man in the story who knew his rooms
were to be searched for a document he sought to conceal, and who adopted
the method of putting it in full sight on the mantel shelf, where the
searchers into corners and secret places did not take the trouble to
open its envelope.

I had, in fact, been brought to a cabin which, although it nestled in a
deep gorge a half-mile from the public road, and was invisible to
passers-by, was still less than a mile and a quarter from the town
itself. These things I was to discover on the morning of the trial when,
feeling secure that it was now too late for me to avail myself of the
information, Curt Dawson yielded to the temptation of informing me just
how fully I had been stung.

But on my first visit to the ground floor I saw little that added to my
knowledge. For months the place had palpably been swept by winds and
battered by hail, tenantless and dilapidated. Indeed, the loft where I
had been confined was more habitable than the lower floor. I at once
recognized that they meant to leave the cabin with its air of desertion
unchanged, so that any straggling investigator would pass it by with
unaroused curiosity. There were two rooms, and the walls were vulnerable
to windy gusts through cracks between rotting logs. The windows were
glassless and an insufficient heat came from a fire which burned feebly
on an open and smoke-blackened hearth. My two jailers rose constantly to
fall back shivering on the jug of moonshine. There was no sign of beds
or furniture of any sort. Until we arrived there the house had been
abandoned.

Dawson permitted me to walk to the door and look out. The morning was
gray and chilling. A slight rise in temperature had brought cold
moisture and under a raw sky the hills stretched up all about us in
reeking veils of foggy desolation. I saw only rattling weed stalks
feeding on the decayed skeleton of what had been a fence-line before the
days of abandonment, and a basin choked with volunteer timber, around
which the hill-sides rose like a spite-fence, cutting off whatever lay
beyond. A small front porch had graced the cabin in earlier times, but
of that there now remained only one upright, and a few broken planks. I
tried to locate the stable, but there was no evidence of any outhouse
except some charred and over-grown timbers. Palpably the mountaineers
had not kept their horses with them. If I escaped I must do so on foot.




CHAPTER XXIII

THE OFFER OF PAROLE.


Perhaps the disappointment of my cursory reconnoiter showed itself in my
expression. Curt Dawson, who stood with his arms folded and his loose
length draped against the door-jamb, grinned at my dolorous face.

"Nice place, ain't hit--fer a murder?"

"That's about all," I responded affably enough. I had discovered that I
was gaining nothing by a sullen attitude and I am afraid that I was even
yielding to a cheap desire to impress these desperadoes with my
indifference.

"By the way," I added, "what's the delay about? Why don't you finish up
your job and get to a more comfortable place?"

Again he grinned. "Say, stranger," he questioned, "ain't we treatin' yer
pretty well? Was you ever in any other jail where yer got better
handled? I've done laid myself out ter make yer visit memorable."

"It will be," I assured him, "provided I live long enough to remember
it--and--" I reached out my manacled hand for some of his "natural leaf"
and loaded the cob pipe with which I had been presented, "whenever I
pass through Frankfort in after years, Dawson, I promise to drop into
the penitentiary and pay you a visit."

"No Dawson ain't never put up thar yit," came his quick retort, with a
flash that showed I had touched his raw nerve of fear, but the smile
came back as he added, "as fer me, I venerates the traditions of my
family."

I had never succeeded in trapping this unique man-killer into any
admission which he did not care to make, and I had begun to understand
his ability to take the witness stand and run, unscathed, the gantlet of
cross-examination. Still, I could not refrain now from putting a leading
question.

"How did it occur to you to bring me here? Had the judge arranged in
advance that I should be kidnaped?"

"The who?" he inquired.

"Judge Garvin."

"Aw!" his laugh was hearty and prolonged. "So that's the idee that's
bitin' yer? The jedge thinks I'm in Virginny. In fact, stranger, I am in
Virginny. I just seems ter be here, but I hain't. I brought yer here
because yer'd done been firin' off yer face ter the effect that yer
thought yer saw me shoot at yer from the laurel. I didn't low ter have
yer testifyin' ter no sich false notion. Hit mout injer my rep'tation
fer peace and quiet."

Still he later made me a proposal which I promptly rejected. "I done
been studyin' right smart, an' we ain't doin' no good fer ourselves,
stayin' round here," he ventured. "I done sort figgered that mebby if
hits plum agreeable ter you, we mout take yer down ter the railroad
cars, an' let yer promise to leave the mountings and keep yer face
shet."

"What reason have you to suppose that I'd keep a promise made under
duress?"

"I got two reasons ter spose hit. In the fust place the minnit yer busts
yer contrack an' comes back inter this jurisdiction I gives yer my word
I'm goin' ter kill yer thar same's I would er houn' dawg. In the second
place, I'd have this here--" He fumbled awkwardly in his pocket and
brought out a paper which he handed me to read. It was an affidavit
legally drawn, with blank spaces for my signature, and that of
witnesses. It purported to have been written in an attorney's office in
Virginia and to be duly attested. The document represented me as stating
voluntarily that I had seen Curt Dawson (in Virginia) and had realized
that he was not the man whom I had recognized among our assailants. I
was leaving the mountain country, so I was asked to swear, because,
being an Easterner, I did not find the environment congenial. The
fantastic bit of perjury culminated in this highly colored peroration:

"I feel that, in intimating that the said Curt Dawson made said or any
attempt upon the lives of my party, I have been guilty of an
unpardonable injustice, which I deeply deplore and for which I feel
sincere chagrin." As I read that passage I laughed with an amusement
that was not feigned, and then I tore the paper into fragments which I
scattered among the ashes.

Dawson watched me and shrugged his shoulders.

"We don't hardly like ter kill furriners--" he said. "Them folks down
below misunderstands hit an' raises hell--but I reckon ef they won't
take nuthin' but killin' they kin git kilt."

So they had planned not only to keep me out of court, but to present my
affidavit when it became convenient: an affidavit purporting to have
been made by me across the Virginia line, while I was abjectly fleeing.
Weighborne and maybe his wife as well, whom I had already grossly
insulted, would hear the reading of my Iscariot betrayal. If it were
possible for them to think more contemptuously of me than they already
did, this would be the precise climax to bring about such a result.

Most of that day I spent below stairs. In the afternoon Bud left the
cabin and shortly after returned in great excitement.

"Git that damned feller upstairs quick," he cautioned. "A couple of them
Marcus men is stragglin' round here, an' they mout come in."

Dawson leaped from his chair as though electrified, and his face showed
a passion of anxiety. He sprang toward me and seizing my shoulder
pivoted me, pointing to the stairs.

"Hustle," he shouted as he pushed me toward the door. "Git movin'."
Naturally I did not obey. I scented the possibility of rescue, so I
laughed at him and stolidly stood my ground.

"This place suits me," I said.

With the swiftest demonstration of the art of weapon-drawing I have ever
seen he brought his magazine pistol from its holster and thrust it into
my chest. His chin shot belligerently out and his eyes narrowed into
blazing slits. His profanity came in a wild torrent.

My attitude was still indifference as to whether or not I were killed.
New developments had come fast since I turned from the door of the room
where Weighborne's wife still sat before the fire with my stolen kisses
fresh upon her lips and temples, but there had not been a moment of
forgetfulness. I saw nothing ahead of me worth surrendering for, and now
I felt that parlous as the situation was, it was Dawson rather than I
who was frightened.

"Why don't you shoot?" I asked.

With a foul paroxysm of oaths and obscenity he threw the pistol aside,
and crossing the room caught up the broken broomstick which served in
lieu of a poker. I had never before been beaten. It was not pleasant,
quite aside from the physical pain. And as to that phase of it, one who
has not been bludgeoned with bracelets on his wrists may underestimate
the actual bodily torture of the experience. At all events, I must
confess that even now I sometimes awake from a nightmare in which I am
being thrashed with a broomstick. I tried resistance, but one of them
dragged at my chain while the other belabored me, until in a few moments
I sank down in the wormwood bitterness of humiliation and defeat and was
half-dragged, half-kicked up the stairs, and thrown into my room, where
they gagged me against the possibility of outcry, and tied me so that I
could not move from my mattress or kick upon the floor. Dawson himself
remained with me. They had none too much time. Within a few minutes I
heard the long-drawn halloo of persons without. The voices were friendly
and the response from Bud was equally cordial. The all-pervading
hypocrisy of these mountain hatreds lay over and whitewashed the
attitudes of both parties. As they came they shouted their request for
permission to enter, and the man inside responded with assurances of
welcome. Those who were arriving were coming as spies. Those inside were
bent on deceit.

We heard them calling, still from afar, that they wanted a drink of
liquor, and we heard Bud shout back that his jug was at their command.

Then feet tramped about the lower floor. Curt Dawson stood back in the
shadow of the eaves while this interview lasted with his weapon drawn,
and never once until the visitors rode away from the house did his eyes
leave the door at the head of the stairs.

When Bud came up after they had gone he was a little pale under the
reaction and the strain of anxiety showed in his eyes.

"My God!" he exclaimed. "I 'lowed them fellers never was ergoin' ter
leave hyar."

"What did you tell 'em?" demanded Dawson curtly.

"I told 'em I'd had a little business round hyar--let 'em think it was
somethin' ter do with er still, an' said I'd jest spent the night hyar
ruther then hoof hit back home."

Dawson jerked his head toward the stairway. "Did they say anythin' 'bout
comin' up here?"

"No. They kinder eyed them steps, but they didn't say nothin'."

For a moment Garvin's chief henchman walked the floor, then he snarled
out, "Did they ask anything erbout me?"

"Jim Calloway 'lowed that somebody'd done seed you in this country, an'
I said no, that you was over thar in Virginny."

Again there was a moment's silence after which Dawson's orders came in
quick staccato violence.

"Bud, you've got ter go ter town, so's they'll believe thet story. Don't
come back hyar no more. Them fellers'll ride back before sundown. They
suspicions somethin' an' they'll jest about slip back ter make shore.
I'll take this feller an' lay out in the timber tell night. Here, give
me a lift."

The two of them raised me, still gagged, and carried me down the stairs.
Keeping the house between themselves and the general direction of the
road, they bore me by a path that ran along a cliff to a dense clump of
timber. Then the lesser villain started on with his ambling step,
pausing at the cabin to pick up the jug which was to corroborate his
claim that his business had to do with illicit distilling. He also
stopped indoors to obliterate all traces of human occupancy.

It was perhaps a mark of respect to my belligerency which led Dawson to
leave me gagged, but it was a painful compliment. He propped me up so
that I might have my back against a tree, and from our place of
concealment we could look down unseen on the house. This time my captor
did not favor me with conversation. He sat silent with his visage black
and snarling, and his hand from time to time crept involuntarily toward
his holster. As for myself, I was distinctly uncomfortable. The gag
cramped my jaws and the rope about my ankles was unnecessarily tight.
But during the three hours that I had to sustain this position, events
were transpiring which gave a certain interest to the situation. The men
who had come earlier returned, as Dawson's suspicion had prophesied.
They shouted as before and when they received no answer they approached
with a caution that carried me back to childhood stories of Indian
attacks on block houses. Finally they entered the place, and Dawson sat
there looking on, his hands wrapped about his knees and his shoulders
shaking with silent laughter, as he surveyed their elaborate caution.
They remained in the house for more than an hour and then reconnoitered
the premises, at one time passing very near our place of hiding. Once
more my custodian's lean hand caressed the grip of his pistol, and his
thumb slipped down the safety catch. But in the end they rode away and I
sorrowfully recognized their conviction that they had been running down
a false clue.

It was cold and quite dark when Dawson removed the ropes from my feet
and ordered me to walk back to the house.

That night I slept the sleep of exhaustion, and it was not until my
breakfast arrived the next morning that I awoke.

My captor should have left me in my loft that day and should himself
have remained below where he could watch for possible intrusion. But he
was overcome with a desire to talk and this impulse led to a strategic
error. He wanted to point out (now that he felt certain that I could not
be present when Marcus called his witnesses) how near I had been all
along to the town. He described to me in elaborate detail how, were I at
that moment free, I could walk in twenty-five or thirty minutes to the
court-house door and proceeded to give me satirical and exact
directions. He felt that he had achieved a Machiavellian victory, and it
pleased him to watch me squirm with a sense of frustrated possibilities.

He even explained that while the clan was gathering he, himself, must
remain away, not only because he was taxed with guarding me, but also
because he was, as he facetiously insisted, "in Virginny and too fur
away to git home."

"An' it's a damn shame, too," he confided, "because hit shore looks like
there might be fun in town to-day. All them Marcus people is gatherin'
there an' most of us fellers'll be on hand. Ef somebody gits filled up
with licker thar's mighty ap' ter be a frolic. Thet co'te room hain't
agoin' ter be no healthy place nohow." I shuddered. I was thinking that
the woman who had come on horseback across the hills to join her
husband, would probably be with him in that court-room--if he, himself,
were now able to ride.

After awhile Dawson took me up stairs, and just before he closed the
door, I pleaded that my handcuffs be removed, since one wrist was badly
galled and lacerated. For a time he steadfastly refused, but in the end
agreed to loosen the bracelet from the injured hand, and leave it
dangling to the other. All morning I had been complaining of illness,
and had seemed hardly able to move about. Indeed, my bruises were so
apparent that I was no longer a formidable antagonist. My listlessness,
in part at least, deceived him, and after the anxiety of yesterday, when
his enemies were so close on his trail, he found himself in a state of
reaction and buoyant over-confidence. He produced the key and fitted it
into the lock of the fetter, but before he turned it he paused with a
wink of self-satisfaction to say, "Jest a moment, stranger, I'll make
sure of you fust."

The handcuffs were of that type which tightens with pressure as the lock
tumbler slides over a series of notches. With such an arrangement the
wrist can be squeezed and pinched in a refinement of torture that is
disabling. Dawson now clasped his fist around the bracelet which he
meant to leave locked.

"Now ef you tries to make a false move," he volunteered, "I'm goin' ter
squeeze this, an' ef I has ter squeeze hit I ain't ergoin' ter loosen
hit no mo'." I knew him rather well by this time and had no reason to
doubt his truthfulness of intention, so I merely nodded my enforced
acquiescence. I was bracing every nerve and muscle for the possible
opportunity of the next moment, and at the same time was attempting to
appear totally innocent of any threatening intent.

When, with his one free hand the mountaineer attempted to turn the key,
something about the lock stuck, and after a mumbled oath of impatience,
he bent over and took both hands to the task. That was his one
incautious moment, but I stood docile while he removed the manacle, and
then as he straightened up, loosely holding the chain, I sprang back,
wrenching it from his grasp.

He was instantly after me, but I had put enough space between us to
swing the metal weight over my head.

He saw that this time it was a fight to the death and instead of
crowding in upon my blows retreated one step and thrust his hand under
his armpit to the holster. But it was all too momentary even for his
artistic draw. With the chain wrapped about my right hand and the left
bracelet swinging free I lashed viciously out for his face--and landed.
He dropped like a felled tree and as he collapsed the pistol, half-freed
from its case, rattled on the floor.




CHAPTER XXIV

MY DAY IN COURT.


He was not unconscious, but dazed and groggy, and the blood was flowing
from a nasty cut perilously close to the left temple. I was on him and
pinning him against the planks before he could recover himself. I picked
up the fallen key, liberated my right hand, then closing his manacle
about his own wrist, I dragged him over to an upright post and passing
the chain about it fastened his other hand. I had learned something
about gagging now, so by the time he had recovered his full senses, he
found himself hitched quite securely to the unplaned pillar, bootless,
trouserless and speechless--but above all else astonished. I took one
mean scrap of vengeance which was unnecessary. I went to the grated
shutters and threw the key to the handcuffs out. Then, donning his
clothes before his eyes, since my own would have proclaimed me a
stranger in these parts, I turned and made my way down the stairs, once
more at liberty. I did not vouchsafe him a word of farewell nor turn my
head to look back, though I heard his feet pounding the floor in a
frenzy of rage and futile struggle. Of course, I had possessed myself of
his pistol as well as his hat, boots and trousers.

If I had needed any disguise beyond these clothes it would have been
provided for me by the ragged growth of beard on my face and the unkempt
hair that had not felt a comb since I left the roof of Cal Marcus. I
smiled to myself as I made my exit by the broken porch and thought what
his reflections at the moment must be. He was doubtless recalling his
own explicit directions for reaching the court-house door. It was now
between nine and ten o'clock. If I hurried there might still be time.

The town which I had seen only once before came into view as soon as I
had reached the high road and made the first turn, but I was terrified
to see in the distance two horsemen jogging along in leisurely approach.
I scrambled across the rail fence and lay close to the earth waiting for
them to pass and grudging the flight of each priceless minute. As they
came nearer I heard a whining voice raised in an attempt at song.

    "Right down hyar in Adamson Countee--
    Where they have no church of our Lord--"

Carroled one of the horsemen, and I joyously recognized the young man
who, on the night of Mrs. Weighborne's arrival, had slipped out into the
shadow of Cal Marcus' kitchen to reconnoiter.

In another moment I had been given a place behind the mountain boy, and
soon the three of us were ambling through the squalid square of the
county seat. Though groups of men stood everywhere, and eyed each other
suspiciously, no one recognized, in the ragged stubble-faced wreck
astride a doubly loaded horse, the kidnaped witness.

They did not take me to the court-room, but made me dismount at the back
door of Cal Marcus' law office, just a stone's throw away across the
narrow street. Marcus, himself, came to me there in response to a
hurried summons. He listened with no show of expression or emotion and
at the end of my recital gave me brief instructions, and reduced a part
of my evidence to the form of an affidavit.

"Both crowds are out strong," he told me succinctly; "Garvin's gang has
been instructed to start no trouble. Whether that order will stand when
I spring my surprise I don't know. It will certainly be a severe test of
discipline. They feel quite safe about you, and they mustn't suspect
your escape. Watch that window in the court-room and when I appear and
raise my hand to pour a glass of water come into court. Say nothing
except in answer to my questions."

With those instructions he left me and as he crossed the alley-like
space, he passed between thick clusters of mountain men who formed a
practical cordon about him. I had perhaps an hour to spend alone with my
eyes against the narrow slit of the slightly raised sash. I could see
the lounging crowds and recognize the tensity of conditions. There was
an assumption of nonchalance which sat upon these men with the stamp of
spuriousness. Lines of shaggy horses hitched along two sides of the
square told of many long rides. Swift, furtive glances cast backward and
forward indicated the nerve strain and caution of hostile forces
mingling with a show of cordiality; each bent on giving no offense, but
each watchful and tightly keyed for defensive action.

A group of several young men entered the enclosure of the court-house
together, and from their clothes and appearance I recognized them as the
reporters from Louisville and Lexington. With the eye of the outside
world upon him; with every utterance from the bench being recorded by
these scribes against whom he dare not let a hand be lifted, the head of
the murder syndicate must rely absolutely on chicane. He must play the
fox's game and must not, under any provocation, show the wolf's teeth.

So the stage was being set, and I, waiting there in concealment, was to
afford the climax of the play.

After an interminable time the lean, Lincoln-like face of Cal Marcus
appeared at the dusty window of the court-room and I saw him pour a
tumblerful of water from the broken pitcher. At the same instant one of
the waiting clansmen threw open the door to announce, "They're callin'
yer in co'te."

I needed no urging. My cue had come. They closed around me in a square
and escorted me to the court-room door and as I went I heard the voice
of a deputy sing-songing my name. I even imagined that in his tone was
conviction that the summons would meet with no response.

In order to make clear the exact effect of my appearance, I must go back
and summarize briefly, from accounts later given me by Marcus and
Weighborne, the occurrences of that half-hour which preceded my calling
to the witness stand.

Garvin had appeared in his court-room with his usual affability. He had
even paused to shake hands with Weighborne and express regrets for his
unfortunate "accident." His Honor had announced that he would prefer, in
default of objection, passing all criminal cases to the foot of the
docket, first disposing of several matters of probate and minor
importance. To this Marcus had agreed.

When the reporters appeared the judge was surprised, but his wily
composure had betrayed no evidence of chagrin, and he had halted affairs
to chat with the pencil-wielders while his bailiff provided them with a
table and chairs just below the rostrum.

Then had come the call of the cases against the alleged murderers of
Rat-Ankle, and the attorney's prompt motion to swear Garvin off the
bench. In support of his motion, Marcus launched into a dispassionate,
but unsoftened charge that the judge, himself, had been the chief
instigator of the ambuscade. Garvin had listened with growing amusement.

"Whose affidavits have you to file, Mr. Marcus?" he purred with
unruffled composure.

"That of myself--"

"Is that all?"

"Also that of Mr. Deprayne."

"I've done been informed," drawled the Court, "that Mr. Deprayne was
seen leaving for the Virginia line some days back, and that he told
several people he was going home. If I'd known of his plans I'd
certainly have held him as a material witness, but unfortunately it's
too late now."

"Here is his affidavit," responded Marcus. "I submit it to Your Honor in
support of my motion."

Garvin took the paper and read it slowly. It was in general terms and
did not make clear to him that it had been so recently penned. After the
perusal he delivered himself slowly.

"Learned counsel has made some mighty grave charges against this Co'te;
counsel has been led astray by personal feelin'. The Co'te must protect
its own dignity. The Co'te sees no reason to regard this paper as
genuine, unless Mr. Deprayne himself will state that he swore to it. The
Co'te regrets that it can't produce that witness for the learned
counsel. The Co'te wishes only--" here he glanced significantly at the
press table--"to have the full facts brought out."

"Will Your Honor," suggested Marcus, "instruct the sheriff to call Mr.
Deprayne?"

Garvin had looked up with an expression of surprise and then he had
smiled. "Mr. Sheriff," he instructed, "call Mr. Deprayne."

After that there had been a silence. While Garvin went through the
formality of waiting to hear the announcement "the witness does not
answer," he bent over the desk and once more exchanged compliments with
the reporters. These scribes had been sent to expose him and he was
bent on weaving about them the spell of his personality. Then it was
that I entered. From the door where for an instant I halted, I took in
the stained clapboard walls, carved over with crude initials; and the
dingy benches full of men in jeans and hodden gray. I caught my breath
as a dash of color struck my eyes and I recognized back of the gaunt
standing frame of Marcus, the seated figures of Weighborne and the lady
who had been so strangely important in my life. My cheeks flushed and
bracing back my shoulders, I walked down the center aisle, dust-stained,
with four days' growth of beard on my face, and one eye still
discolored. As I came, I was conscious of a murmur of astonishment
rising incredulously from the benches, and of an excited shuffling of
feet.

Called out of his conversation by this sound, Garvin raised his face,
still wreathed in its bland and smiling suavity--and our eyes met. For
an instant I think he did not recognize me. I must have been a rather
ludicrous and unprepossessing figure of a man, and possibly it was the
very obvious scars of battle on my disfigured countenance that first
told him my identity. At all events, the change that for an unguarded
interval crossed his florid face was startling.

The smile died instantaneously and he leaned forward to stare at me as
at some apparition. He quickly recovered himself, but the reporters
caught the tableau of his astonishment and put a paragraph into their
stories which was the preface to history-making in Adamson County.

I took my seat on the witness stand and raised my hand to be sworn, not
daring to meet the eyes of the woman who sat at the attorney's elbow,
though I felt her gaze upon me. Then I heard the cold modulation of
Marcus's voice.

"Mr. Deprayne, state your name, age and place of residence." I did so.

"Do you aver that an affidavit charging Judge Garvin with conspiracy to
murder and suppress evidence was made by you, and that it is true?"

"I do."

The shuffling of brogans and boots had died out. The fall of a pin might
have been heard at the ends of the room. Every Garvin heeler and every
Marcus adherent was sitting on the edge of his seat. Hands crept
furtively to holsters. There was a general gasp of surprise, then as by
a single impulse a number of men at one side near the back rose, and
across the aisle another group came silently to its feet. The factions
stood taut and motionless, eying each other with hatred. Marcus did not
for an instant resume his questioning and the utter silence was as
oppressive as the stillness that goes ahead of a cyclone. I knew what it
meant, as every one in the room knew. The feud-factions were crouching
for a spring. In another moment the ceiling might ring and rattle with
the cracking of pistols and reek with the stench of burnt powder. The
mountain territory has annals of such holocausts.




CHAPTER XXV

BEING LAUGHED AT.


Every one sat very still lest an excited movement or gesture precipitate
the storm. From my place on the slightly elevated witness chair I had a
full view of the scene in all its ominous tensity. It was as though
breathing had not alone stopped, but all living animation had for the
second been suspended. The body of men had been fixed as though
photographed. An incautious start or the sweep of a hand pocket-ward,
and the outburst would be inevitable.

There were three exceptions among those whom I may term non-combatants.
One reporter began edging down behind the table. Weighborne
unostentatiously shifted his position so as to place his bulky shoulders
between Frances Weighborne and the crowd, and She with an impatient
shifting declined his shielding and sat steadily looking to the front.
She was pale, as I suppose we all were, but perfectly composed.

Then Marcus wheeled and faced the rear of the room, deliberately turning
his back on the enemies who might kill him as they had killed his
partner. With both hands raised above his head and his thin, cuffless
wrists stretching out of his threadbare sleeves, he stood for a tense
moment in silence. His rugged countenance was black with the vehemence
of feeling and his deep eyes were burning.

"_Sit down!_" he thundered. He said no other word, but as he ripped out
that crisp and brief command he swept both arms and hands downward, and,
like hypnotic subjects answering the gesture of the demonstrator, his
clansmen dropped into their seats. Garvin took the cue. He pounded on
his desk with the gavel. "Order in the court-room," he shouted, and his
henchmen also subsided into their benches.

A deep breath of relief swept over the place. The crisis was averted.
Garvin beckoned Marcus and the opposing counsel to his side.
"Gentlemen," he said coolly, "the boys seem a little excited. Unless
there is an objection I'm goin' to adjourn co'te for a half-hour, and
then keep this room clear of spectators." But the moment of peril had
passed and when I reached the square with the attorney, who hastily
spirited me out by the back door, I saw the two elements mingling with a
semblance of entire peace.

Marcus took me directly to his office where we were busied with a
supplemental and more exact affidavit, and I did not see the
Weighbornes. I knew that any meeting must be a most unhappy occasion,
and until this matter was disposed of I was willing to postpone that
final clash. We were shortly interrupted by the arrival of the county
attorney, who announced that at the reconvening of court he would move
to dismiss the cases. He said he realized that there could be no
conviction and would not risk precipitating a conflict. Marcus could
hardly refuse to allow his clients to go free, and so for the time he
had to accept that surrender and reserve his ammunition for later
effectiveness.

To the Marcus house we rode in cortege. I had not intended running at
all, but when I came out of the law office I found that Weighborne had
been much fatigued and had already started back with another guard, and
I could hardly run away without facing the two of them. Marcus too,
insisted that I must return, even if only for a day. Much of our
business remained unfinished, and I inferred from his attitude that he
knew nothing of the inevitable reckoning which I must face at the hands
of my business partner. We started late and our small army arrived after
nine o'clock. It was again a night of sparkle and starlight and frost.
We learned that supper had been saved for us and the attorney and I ate
it in silence. The Weighbornes had not waited for us. I quite
understood that they might not care to break bread with me, and yet I
was puzzled, because in that paralyzed moment in the court-room when I
had, for the only time during the day, looked full in the lady's eyes, I
had seen no anger in them. I had almost fancied that her lips
half-shaped a smile. But she was a remarkable woman, and whatever her
feeling, she might be magnanimous enough and big enough at such a
moment, when we were all in equal danger, to lay aside for the nonce her
just resentment. Now we should meet again as though that had not
happened, and I had no hope of seeing her smile on me again.

Probably she had retired and I should not have to meet her until
to-morrow. I rose from the table and turned to Marcus.

"Where do I sleep to-night?" I inquired.

"Your same place, sir," he answered, and when I had said good-night I
turned and walked along the porch and opened the door of the room which
served jointly as parlor and bedroom.

Once more, precisely as on that other night, I halted in surprise.
Indeed, it might have been the other night, except that Weighborne lay
where he had thrown himself down fully dressed across the big bed. But
just as before, he was sleeping, and just as before She sat before the
fire alone, in much the same attitude. On her face was the same trace of
wistful loneliness.

I could not escape the feeling that this was in reality a part of the
other evening--that it had been momentarily interrupted and that all
which had transpired since I had opened this same door in this exact
way, and seen this precise picture, was only the figment of disordered
imagination. But it was now too late to turn back, and after all there
was nothing to gain by deferring the reckoning. The three of us were
here, and it would take only a moment to wake the sleeping man.

I closed the door, and my heart began the wild beating that meeting her
must always bring. As I started across the room she looked up and rose.
I halted where I stood, waiting for her to speak. This evening she wore
a very simple gingham dress, and the chill of the room had led her to
add the sweater. For a breathing space we stood there, she as slender
and youthful as a school-girl; I as awkward and disheveled as a bumpkin,
with my head hanging shamefacedly--awaiting sentence.

Then to my total bewilderment she smiled and held out her hand.

Had she stricken me down with a lightning bolt as the savages thought
she had stricken down the profaning native, I should have been less
astonished. I stood there unable to understand such forgiveness, and
while I waited, she spoke.

"Now," said the voice which had been ringing in my heart ever since I
had last heard it, "will you be good enough to explain things, or are
you still to be the man of mystery?"

How could I explain things? How could I make a commencement? And yet it
was just that which I had come to attempt.

"If I can explain at all," I said, very miserably, "it will be in one
word--madness."

"Is that all?" she questioned. In her eyes was the whimsical challenge
that had, on the previous occasion, swept me away from my moorings. The
question that I had asked myself once before came back to my mind. Could
it be that my goddess was so far from my ideal that, after all, what had
occurred needed no explanation? I would not admit such a possibility,
and yet her next words seemed to confirm it.

"When I first came here," she mused reflectively and only half-aloud,
"you stayed outside for an hour, and then you disappeared. Of course you
were a prisoner, but to-day you had the opportunity to see us. You
didn't--and yet--" she flushed deeply, and I knew that her thoughts too
were going back to the moment when I had, without words, avowed myself
so savagely.

"I stayed out there that night," I said bluntly, "because I could hardly
be an interloper, when you had ridden these infernal hills to be with
_him_--" I jerked my head savagely toward the bed. Then I went doggedly
on, determined that since she had forced me this far we should hereafter
stand in the certain light of understanding. "I also stayed out there
because, as it happens, I'm a fool. I couldn't endure witnessing a
reunion between yourself and your husband." It seemed to me that she
should first have called on me for other explanations.

At the last word her face clouded with an expression of absolute
bewilderment, and her eyes widened as she gazed at me.

"My--my _what_?" she demanded.

"Your husband," I repeated. "Mr. Weighborne."

She contemplated me as though I were a new and rather interesting
variety of maniac, then her laugh was long and delicious. Her clouded
eyes cleared and danced like skies in which the sun has suddenly burst
through rain.

"Oh," she said finally. "I understand now." Once more her face grew
grave and she added with a catch in her voice.

"And, thank God, I _do_ understand."

"For Heaven's sake," I implored, "tell me what you understand! As for
me, I understand nothing."

"Why, you totally unspeakable idiot," she explained, as though she had
known me always, and as though we had long been close comrades, "I
haven't any husband--yet. That's my brother. Didn't you know that?"

I stood at gaze, dazed, stupefied, open-mouthed; every thing that
denotes the gawky fool. Then I dropped fervently on my knees at her feet
and shamelessly seized her hands in mine and kissed them. She made no
effort to release them and I crushed them greedily while my tongue could
find no words, until, as I afterward learned, her rings cut into the
flesh.

"But," I stammered finally, "you are Frances Weighborne. His wife is
Frances Weighborne. Bob Maxwell told me--"

She laughed again, and Weighborne's heavy breathing became almost a
snore. After all, first impressions are best. Weighborne was a capital
fellow, one could not help liking him.

"Correct," said the lady indulgently, as though she were teaching a
small boy his primer lessons. "I am Frances Weighborne. My sister-in-law
was also christened Frances in baptism, and acquired the surname of
Weighborne in matrimony. There may, so far as I know, be various other
Frances Weighbornes. We have never copyrighted the name."

"Oh, my God!" I groaned helplessly. "What an unspeakable imbecile I've
been--but you're wrong, dearest, you _are_ the only one."

"Do you think it necessary to swear about it?" she inquired. "And are
you now quite certain that I'm the right one?"

"There isn't any time to swear," I assured her, "there is so infinitely
much to say--but not here. Come out under the stars, where one can
breathe. Give me five minutes. Unless I speak now I shall die of
suppressed emotion. All my life I've been a supposedly extinct volcano.
I'm no longer extinct." I halted my rush of words; then added, "Yes,
you're the right one." I rose and, still holding her hands, lifted her
to her feet. At the door, with my hand on the latch, I paused.

"No," I exclaimed, hardly realizing that I was speaking aloud. "You open
it. In the dream it is always you who open the door into the other
world."

She wheeled and looked me in the eyes, her own pupils wide and
incredulous.

"Do you have it, too?" she demanded breathlessly. "Do you dream my
dream? Do I come to you in some vague danger and lead you through a
door?"

She laid her hand on the bolt, just as I had so often seen her do in my
vision, and we stepped together out into the glory of the frost and
moon.

"As you are doing now," I answered; then with a new wonder I demanded,
"But tell me, how in Heaven's name could you dream of me before you knew
me?"

She laughed mockingly.

"Perhaps," she vouchsafed, "if you make yourself very agreeable I may
tell you."




CHAPTER XXVI

HOW IT ENDED--AND BEGAN.


The railings and uprights of the porch were strips of jet against a
world swimming in blue and silver gray. The planks creaked under our
feet. A confusion of saddles and farm gear hung against the log walls.
The tin basin stood on its accustomed shelf. The world of magic was
jumbled with the commonplace. I led her over to the corner where the eye
could gather in the widest vista. She stood there before me very upright
and slim and her eyes held mine as frankly as a child's might have done.
I gazed at her for a moment more, then my arms went out and encircled
her, and I talked very fast and very low.

"I may, at times, seem extremely abrupt," I confessed, "but I'm not.
I've worshiped you upon a coral reef and I've made love to you through
endless days and nights with stars for my witnesses much larger than
these--and softer. And now I've found you--I've found you, and it
doesn't matter what you say, because I shall never again let you go."

She tilted her face upward and her eyes were dancing as she quoted,
"'Nobody asked you, sir.'"

She stood there, facing me, within the circle of my arms, with her chin
as proudly tilted as though she were not surrendering, and with the old
incomparable smile lingering on her lips.

And as I gazed at her in the witchery of the moon, the utter
improbability of it all dawned upon me, until I felt that a moment would
bring awakening and the old gnawing despair. The expression was that
which I knew so well, and she seemed no more and no less real than she
had been, looking out from the mate's chest, with the circle of
mahogany-skinned savages sitting silent before her shrine.

That I had loved her was inevitable. It was written, but that was the
lesser part. Here she stood looking at me out of eyes that were
accepting my love without question. Why did she, without even the siege
of a long wooing, so permit me to step into the temple of her life, as
naturally as though it were the shrine of the coral island where I
belonged as high-priest and demi-god?

She had, before to-night, met me only once, and then I had been the
churl, brusquely rebuffing her sweet courtesy. Yet she had ridden across
the hills, and something sang to me that it was to me she had ridden,
though she may have called it coming to her brother. Why was it? Had I
really conjured her soul to me by wishing it across the world? Had
supreme forces compelled us both, so that preliminary details were
superfluous between us?

However that might be, the gracious smile died slowly on her lips to a
seriousness far sweeter, and as she looked into my face her eyes
widened, and dropped all concealment until I was gazing into her soul.

When a woman meets the eyes of a man in that fashion he ceases to
question, and wishes only to do reverence. It is like rolling back the
waters of the sea and revealing the wonders of the deeps. For it is
decreed that the eyes of a woman are given her in defense, to hide
behind their dance and sparkle the things which lie beneath--and to
disarm. When once they have opened in the miracle of self-revelation and
surrendered their secret, one must be unworthy who feels himself worthy
of such a manifestation.

And the secret I read there was that she loved me beyond all doubting.
It mattered no longer how the wonder had come to pass. That was a mere
point of god-craft. It had happened, and the stars were singing.

I dropped on one knee and lifted her hand to my lips.

Later, I sketched rapidly, agitatedly, the story of the coming of her
portrait to the island, of its place on the chest and its subsequent
worship. I told her of meeting Keller on the steamer and Maxwell in New
York. I summarized the chain of evidence which had to my mind proved her
to be Mrs. Weighborne. I have no doubt that I told it badly, but that
was of no consequence, since back of my broken narration was the pent-up
rush of emotion, and to her this seemed important. Nor did my story, so
fantastic that I hardly expected her to accept it without proof, seem to
surprise her.

"And," I concluded, "I am going to build you a new temple which will
make the Taj Mahal a tawdry mosque, for every block and rafter will be
love, and each year we live I shall add new minarets of worship--and not
only five times each day but a hundred, its _muezzin_ shall call me to
prayer."

Her eyes were glowing, and her laugh trembled.

"I came quite a long way," she told me, "to make you say that, but after
all you have done it very nicely."

"But," I admitted after a long pause, "I don't yet understand--not that
it matters now--but why? That word is beating at my brain--why in the
names of all the gods should you care?"

"Why shouldn't I?" she indignantly countered.

"You have known me," I said blankly, "a few days--and I should have
imagined that I made a sorry impression."

She laughed again.

"I have known you always," she replied.

I shook my head wonderingly.

"Listen," she commanded. "Once upon a time--that's the way all fairy
stories start--I saw you. You didn't notice me much. I was just a kid,
but I fell in love with you. To be exact, it was ten years ago this
month."

There was no end to wonders. All the loose threads of coincidence were
being plaited into a single cable, and the cable was my life line.

"As I grew up I met a lot of men and they insisted on saying nice things
to me; but they were all things of one kind and that wasn't the kind I
wanted--besides, you see, I was waiting. I knew that some day you would
come and that if you had anything to say it would be different. I
compared them all with you. It wasn't just a girl's romantic
foolishness. There was destiny in it. You know the Moslem text--'man's
fate is about his neck.' You had no chance to escape me."

"I, too, knew it was written," I told her, "but I was afraid we should
meet too late. When I saw you at Lexington I thought it was too late."

"I was never afraid of that," she affirmed. "Sometimes I have known that
you were in danger--and later I've known that you escaped. Then there
was the dream--the one dream about the door that came over and over....
At times it seemed that you were very near. Once at Cairo I felt that I
was going to meet you around some corner or in some bazaar--but I
didn't."

"You might, if you had turned your head," I declared. "Did you by any
chance lose a diary at Cairo?"

This time it was she who was surprised.

"I lost one somewhere," she acknowledged; then as she colored divinely
she demanded, "You didn't find it, did you? You didn't read those fool
things?"

"It wasn't foolishness," I quoted. "There was destiny in it." And then I
made full confession.

"I'm glad you wrote it," I added. "I owe that diary something and I want
all my debt to be to you."

For a moment she was silent, then she looked up again and confronted me
once more with a charge of stupidity.

"And you read that, and knew what football game it was, and yet you
never recognized yourself! What are your brains made of, anyway?"

How could a man reply to such a sublime absurdity as that? I groaned.

"In the diary you wrote of an apotheosis," I confessed. "How in the name
of all that is logical could I connect myself with this admirable,
impossible superman? You failed to give the name."

She looked at me and laughed.

"The man is also modest," she observed.

"Of course," I demurred, "it's great to see you treading the clouds,
with ideals for your playmates. Moreover, it's appropriate; but I'm down
here, you know, earthbound and extremely mortal. If we are to walk
together you must come down and join me."

"I'll take you up with me," she hospitably asserted, and though since
then she must have discovered many times that she had draped her cloth
of gold upon a lay figure and had made a plumed and mailed knight of a
failure and an inconsequent, yet she has, with gallant stubbornness,
refused to admit it.

"Dearest," I said very humbly, "I have been inconceivably boorish, and
worse. How could you bring yourself to forgive it?"

"Because," she answered, "I'm a woman--and inquisitive. I knew how you
felt, and I wanted to find out why you acted so horridly at Lexington."

"I was trying very hard not to tell you how I felt," I admitted.

"You didn't have to tell me--in words," she laughed. "You told me in a
hundred other ways, that were just as plain."

"Then the only part of my story," I said, a little crest-fallen, "which
is new to you is the information that you were a goddess and I a high
priest, out there in the South Seas?"

"Oh, that wasn't new at all," she ruthlessly enlightened, "I knew that,
too."

"Is there anything you don't know?" I inquired. "What gift of prophetic
vision--"

"There wasn't any vision about it," she interrupted. "I got a letter
from Mrs. Keller the day before you reached Kentucky. I guess when you
get back to New York you'll find one from the captain. His wife wrote to
tell me you were coming. That was why I got a headache and stayed at
home that night."

She laid her hand on my forearm. My sleeves were uprolled to the elbows.

"Dearest," she exclaimed in sudden anxiety, "you're cold!" I suppose I
was, but I had not known it.

       *       *       *       *       *

It has been some time now since I have written in the diary which had
its birth under such strange circumstances. The narrative went into a
pigeon-hole because I have been too busy living to think of reflecting
upon life. It was a device for moments of emptiness and in later times
also for moments of extraordinary jubilation, but since the last pages
were scribbled there has been enough of celebration in merely living out
the days. Yet now I must add a postscript, so that some time He may
have the full record before him. He is my little son.

He is teaching me a great many things and finding in me a willing pupil.
When I first walked out into the public ways after his entrance to the
stage whereon I hope he will be cast in a worthy part, I walked
differently. I walked with the pride of an emperor. Not the pride of
arrogance. I needed no car of ivory and bronze with captives marching
fettered at its wheel. I needed no slave to whisper in my ear,
"Remember, Caesar, thou art but a man." I was filled with a new
graciousness and wished to be generously courteous to all men, yet that
desire was born of a sense of vast superiority. I had found the meaning
of life; the secret of which the gulls shrieked in mating-time around
the rocks of the island--though then my ears were deaf to its
significance.

She has minted from the precious metal of her soul a life which, with
the other lives of his day, will form the mosaic of his times. I have
the prospect before me of new miracles as that new life unfolds. I feel
the exaltation of being undeservedly linked with something vastly
greater than myself. I made an awkward effort once to put some part of
this idea into words, but Frances only laughed. To her it is all quite
natural. Her only comment was that he is as much mine as hers, which was
a flattery that even my egotism could scarcely assimilate.

We have not named him yet, but an idea struck me a day or two ago while
I was sitting at my down-town desk, and I straightway called her up.

"I have just thought of a name," I said. "I want to call him Francis
Ra-Tuiki. Of course," I hastened to add, realizing that the silence at
the other end of the wire threatened protest, "of course we can dignify
it with highly unphonetic spelling, if you like."

"I don't know," she judiciously reflected. Then with a sudden
afterthought she added, "That might possibly do for a middle name. I
have already decided upon the first."

I wonder what name she has in mind--and she had just finished telling me
that I had a full half-interest in that kid!

A railroad now runs into Adamson County and the new order is replacing
the old. My wife and I and our brother went down on the first train run
over the new line. The people had gathered to see the spectacle, and
incredible as it may seem, there were among them some who looked for the
first time on a locomotive. Old Mrs. Marcus, a little more withered and
monkey-like, was there, and as she contemplated the marvel she could
only murmur in wonderment, "Well, Provi-_dence_!"

Calloway Marcus no longer rides in a hollow square, but goes openly to
court to defend the railway's damage suits. Yet now that the law is
becoming adequate, he will never have the opportunity to turn it, as his
weapon of reprisal, against Jim Garvin. Retribution came to the head of
the murder syndicate with grimmer and more appropriate drama than Marcus
had planned. The judge fell behind his own counter, riddled with bullets
bought from his own shelf, and fired by the hand of his own chief
henchman and jackal.

Though one of the last of the terrorized juries sat in the box, to the
end that the slayer "came cl'ar," it is now Curt Dawson who goes
sunken-eyed and body-guarded, searching the shadows. Shots from the
laurel are few--but occasional even now--and Garvin's boy is nearing
manhood. At all events, Garvin's executioner seems convinced that
reprisal will come to him. Perhaps it is a premonition.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Portal of Dreams, by Charles Neville Buck

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PORTAL OF DREAMS ***

***** This file should be named 31927.txt or 31927.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/9/2/31927/

Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, Mary Meehan and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
