The Project Gutenberg EBook of Company K, Twentieth Regiment, Illinois
Volunteer Infantry, by Andrew Brown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Company K, Twentieth Regiment, Illinois Volunteer Infantry
       Roster and Record

Author: Andrew Brown

Release Date: April 17, 2010 [EBook #32017]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COMPANY K, TWENTIETH REGIMENT ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)









  April 24, 1861.           July 16, 1865.


  COMPANY K,
  Twentieth Regiment, Illinois Volunteer Infantry.

  ROSTER and RECORD


  BY
  ANDREW BROWN.


  YORKVILLE, ILL.
  KENDALL COUNTY RECORD PRINT
  1894.




PREFACE.


At the last annual reunion of the association of the survivors of the 20th
Illinois Regiment, held in Chicago September 8, 1893, I was assigned the
duty of preparing a roster of Company K. This little publication is the
result of my efforts to perform that duty. It is intended for the
surviving members of the Company and their descendants, for relatives and
friends of deceased members and for all others into whose hands it may
chance to come, who are interested in learning about the men who fought
and won battles that secured to America liberty and union.

ANDREW BROWN.

NEWARK, ILLINOIS, June, 1894.




ROSTER AND RECORD.


REUBEN F. DYER, M. D., Ottawa, Ill.

Born at Strong, Franklin county, Maine. Volunteered at Newark, Ill., April
15, 1861. Was elected Captain. Commanded Company at Fredericktown, Fort
Henry and Fort Donelson. Resigned commission as Captain of Company K March
13, 1862, at Pittsburg Landing, Tennessee, with view of obtaining a
position in the line of his profession. August 25, 1862, was commissioned
Surgeon, 104th Regiment, Illinois Volunteer Infantry, which commission he
held till close of war, and, at close was acting Medical Director 14th
Army Corps, General Jefferson C. Davis commanding. Has practiced medicine
at Ottawa since 1865. For a number of years a member of U. S. Board
Examining Surgeons. Is not a pensioner. A republican. A Methodist.


BENJAMIN OLIN, Joliet, Ill.

Born in State of New York. Volunteered at Newark, Ill., in April, 1861.
Elected Orderly Sergeant of Company. May, 1861, commissioned First
Lieutenant. Served with Company in Missouri till November, 1861, when he
resigned on account of ill health. Has been in the practice of law since
1862. At present County Judge of Will county, Ill. Is not a pensioner. Has
never applied for a pension. A liberal democrat. A Methodist.


JOHN N. BOYER, Normal, Ill.

Born in Centre county, Pennsylvania. Volunteered May 10, 1861, at Newark,
Ill. Discharged February 15, 1864, on account of wound received at
Vicksburg. Was appointed Orderly Sergeant June 13, 1861. Commissioned 2d
Lieutenant January 22, 1862; Captain March 13, 1862.

AT SHILOH.

On April 6, 1862, had mumps very badly, and had neck wrapped with red
flannel. Nevertheless, went out in command of the Company. Had sword
struck by a missile and bent nearly double, and received two slight wounds
in the face. At noon was compelled to retire from the Company. When going,
several of the boys turned over their pocket-books to him for safe
keeping. Joined us, and took command of the Company, at daylight the next
morning and was in all the second day's fighting.

AT BRITTON'S LANE.

On September 1, 1862, was indisposed and was riding in an ambulance with
Assistant Surgeon Bailey and Chaplain Button. When first shots were heard
at Britton's Lane he jumped out, buckled on his sword and asked Dr. Bailey
to give him a strong dose of whisky and quinine and then went forward on a
run to take charge of the Company. This is a true story, because Chaplain
Button tells it.

AT VICKSBURG.

On May 22, 1863, while in command of the Company at Vicksburg he was shot
in the foot. On this occasion he lost his sword that had been battered at
Shiloh; also, most of his other personal effects. He was discharged on
account of this wound and receives pension therefor at the rate of twenty
dollars a month.

A MAN OF PEACE.

Since war has been teacher, farmer, business man and cattle man in the
West. Is broken in health. Rheumatism and other debilities. Says he can't
work much. We understand he does not have to. In one sense of the word it
is supposed he is well-heeled, although in another sense it is certain he
is very badly heeled. In religion a Methodist; in politics a radical
republican.


PERRY W. SPELLMAN, Fellowship, Florida.

Born in Pittsford, Monroe county, New York. Volunteered April 24, 1861, at
Newark, Ill. Mustered out July 16, 1865, by reason of close of war. Was
appointed Sergeant in May, 1861. Detailed on recruiting service from
December, 1861, to June, 1862. Was Orderly Sergeant for a few months, then
reduced to the ranks and detailed as acting Hospital Steward and dispenser
of medicine. Was commissioned First Lieutenant March 2, 1863, and Captain
February 23, 1865.

On May 12, 1863, during our desperate struggle behind the rail fence at
Raymond, Comrade Spellman had the command of the Company. Near the close
of that battle, when our lines were advancing through the woods, he was
hit in the side by a bullet and disabled for a time. From May 22, 1865, he
commanded the Company during the siege of Vicksburg, and continued in
command till the latter part of the siege of Atlanta. Was on detached
service as acting assistant Quartermaster 3d Division 17th Army Corps,
from October, 1864, till final muster out.

Since the war has mostly followed business pursuits. Has lived in
Illinois, in South Dakota, and is now in Florida. On December 25, 1893, he
wrote thus: "I came to Florida in January, 1890, and will probably spend
the remainder of my days here. The climate is much more agreeable to me
than that of the chilly North. Roses in full bloom and fresh vegetables
for the table all winter." Pensioned for disability incurred in the army.


FAAGUST ANDERSON, Westport, Brown County, South Dakota.

May, 1861-August 1, 1862. Born in Sweden. Came to America in 1852. Twenty
years old when enlisted. Was shot in wrist at Shiloh and discharged
because of wound. Enlisted in another regiment in August, 1863, and
mustered out in December, 1865, on account of close of war. Is pensioned
at rate of ten dollars a month for wound received at Shiloh, and other
disabilities. Has been farming since the war. Is a republican, but not a
church member.


CHARLES BACON, Clinton, Oneida County, New York.

April, 1861-July, 1865. Born in Paris, Oneida county, New York.
Thirty-three years old when enlisted. Pensioned at rate of eight dollars a
month for disability incurred in army. Pension granted December, 1893.
Votes the republican ticket as often as he has a chance to do so, but in
religion is not very particular. Just goes to whatever church is handiest.


JAMES BARROWS, Newark, Ill.

April, 1861-July 24, 1862. Born in Perry, Wyoming county, New York. Was
twenty-six years old when enlisted. Pensioned at twelve dollars a month.
Is a painter. A member of Baptist church. A republican. Was in the ranks
of Company K at Fredericktown, Fort Henry, Fort Donelson and Shiloh.


MARTIN BISSELL, Plano, Ill.

May, 1861-October 3, 1862. Born in Addison county, Vermont. Twenty-one
years old when enlisted. Slightly wounded at Fort Donelson. At Shiloh was
struck with fragment of bursting shell Sunday morning, in region of hip,
while regiment was executing a retreat after first engagement with the
enemy. Soon afterwards was struck in thigh with spent ball, and later in
the battle had part of right thumb nail knocked off and bayonet scabbard
cut by another ball. At Britton's Lane was shot in right shoulder; was
discharged because of this wound, and draws pension therefor at the rate
of eight dollars a month. Since discharged has been engaged in
agricultural and mechanical pursuits. A republican. A Methodist.


ANDREW BROWN, Newark, Illinois.

April, 1861-July 14, 1864. Born of Irish parents, in Kendall county, Ill.
Seventeen years old when enlisted. Did not go with Company from Newark to
Joliet on Saturday, May 11, 1861, because, on that morning, clothes and
other necessaries were missing, but the next day, being fairly equipped,
he started on foot for Camp Goodell, east of Joliet, at 10 o'clock a. m.
and reached destination at 4 p. m. Was farther away from home then than he
had ever been before in his life. Had made a march of nearly thirty miles
in six hours, but was in very "light marching order." Was not encumbered
with a single superfluous article. When he reported in camp, Lieutenant
Watson ordered the Company to form ranks and then called for three cheers
for the boy they left behind them. From the day he left home till he
returned, a period of more than three years, this volunteer never slept in
a bed nor sat at a table to eat a meal of victuals. Was never on detailed
duty, never straggled from the ranks and, while a soldier, never missed a
march, campaign, skirmish or battle, except when wounded and a prisoner in
the hands of the enemy. When long roll was beat Sunday morning at Shiloh,
he had his gun off the stock and was swabbing out the barrel in a pail of
water. Was under arrest and in guard house once only. Charges preferred
were "committing depredations on private property." The "depredation"
consisted of milking a cow in canteen. Read the New Testament through
three times in the army. Has the little volume yet which Chaplain Button
presented in May, 1861. It has been out in many a storm and is badly
soaked and soiled. Was slightly wounded at Britton's Lane. Was shot twice
through leg at Raymond and captured by the enemy. A prisoner for two
months. Since discharged has been student, teacher, lawyer, farmer. Has
never been greenbacker, free-silver man nor protective tariff man. Is a
democrat, but has much regard and respect for prohibitionists. In religion
liberal. Catholic rather than Protestant.


JOHN CAREY, Blackstone, Ill.

May, 1861-July 16, 1865. Born in Limerick, Ireland. Came to America in
November, 1860. Was twenty-one years old when enlisted.

The preliminary skirmishing of an impending battle always acted like a
tonic on this comrade, and he was never known to be out of condition
whenever a battle was on. Was as good a soldier as ever fought under the
Stars and Stripes.

Captured July 22, 1864, near Atlanta, and confined in Confederate prisons
for nearly seven months. Finally escaped and reached Union lines near
Wilmington, N. C., February 22, 1865. Pensioned at rate of twenty dollars
a month for disabilities incurred in Andersonville Prison. Is a
bachelor--to me it is an utterly unaccountable fact that so congenial a
soul as John Carey should choose to live alone in life. Some girl may
capture him yet. His widow would probably receive a nice pension when John
is gone. Comrade Carey claims that he votes the republican ticket,
although he is a true Irishman and a good Catholic. He did not reply to my
letter of inquiry.


CHARLES CLAYTON, 26 Union St., Wakefield Road, Stalysbridge, Lancashire,
England, Europe.

April, 1861-July 25, 1862. Born in England. Draws pension at rate of eight
dollars a month for disabilities incurred in service. Enrolled at
Washington, D. C., Agency. Certificate No. 411,108.


FRANKLIN CLIFFORD, Seneca, Ill.

April, 1861-July 16, 1865. Born in St. Louis, Missouri. Twenty-one years
old when enlisted. Received some slight wounds. There was no discount on
this comrade's fighting qualities. I remember that very distinctly. Was
captured near Atlanta July 22, 1864. A prisoner seven months and ten days.
Exchanged at Wilmington, N. C., March 1, 1865. Is pensioned at twelve
dollars a month for disabilities incurred in service. Is a laborer. He
writes thus: "I always vote the republican ticket. I suppose I ought to be
a religious man, but I am not."


ANDERSON CONNER, No. 2219 Messanie St., St. Joseph, Missouri.

June 9, 1861-July 16, 1865. Born in Hunterdon county, New Jersey. Eighteen
years old when enlisted. Wounded at Raymond and captured. Sent to Libby
prison. A prisoner only seventeen days. Was then paroled and sent to St.
Louis to await exchange. Remained at St. Louis nearly four months. Was
then exchanged and served with Company K to close of war. Is pensioned at
rate of ten dollars a month for disabilities incurred in the service. His
paternal grandfather was in the Revolution and war of 1812. He says he has
two big boys that might do for soldiers if they were drafted and put under
guard where they could not run.

From 1867 to 1893 lived in Wisconsin; was engaged in lumbering and
farming, but did not make a fortune. In June, 1893, went to Dwight, Ill.;
stayed there two months, then went west to take a new start in life.


JAMES COYLE, St. Louis, Missouri, No. 624-626 Washington Ave.

May, 1861-July 16, 1865. Was captured near Atlanta July 22, 1864, and
confined in Confederate prisons. Escaped and recaptured in woods with
dogs. Escaped again and succeeded in reaching the Union lines after
traveling a distance of one hundred and fifty miles. Was wounded in
trenches at Vicksburg. Is pensioned for wound. Was a very determined and
resolute fighter in battle. Since war has been in business and has been
successful. Is probably a democrat. Has a democratic name and lives in a
democratic State. Did not answer my letter of inquiry. The facts here
given are from previous knowledge.

Since writing the foregoing I have received a letter from this comrade. He
was not mustered out with the regiment in July, but was retained in
service by special order of War Department and mustered out September 26,
1865, at Louisville. Was shot through the right hand in front of Fort
Hill, Vicksburg, May 21, 1863. When captured near Atlanta July 22, 1864,
he was sent to Andersonville. On September 11, 1864, while in transit from
Andersonville to another prison he and George Wilson of Company K escaped
from the cars at midnight and were out fifteen days. Traveled at night and
lay in concealment during the day. Were finally captured and confined in a
common prison at Augusta, Ga., for three weeks. Was then sent to the new
prison at Millen. Was there only one day when he escaped for the second
time with a soldier of the Fifteenth Ohio regiment. Was out the second
time only eleven days and was again captured, and again taken to Augusta;
was there two days when he made a third escape with a Pennsylvania
soldier. "After twenty-one days by constant night travel, we reached
Sherman's army at Atlanta."

In politics a republican; in religion a Presbyterian.


JEROME B. DANN, DeWitt, Saline County, Nebraska.

June 4, 1861-July 16, 1865. Born in Pennsylvania. Seventeen years old when
enlisted. Captured near Atlanta July 22, 1864. A prisoner for several
months. Escaped and recaptured in the woods. Since the war has followed
contracting and building, and is at it yet to some extent. Health is quite
unsatisfactory. Draws pension at rate of twelve dollars a month.--Has been
connected with Congregational church for twenty years. Has always been a
republican and expects to die a republican. You may live a long time yet,
Jerome.


RUDOLPH FAVREAU, West New Brighton, Richmond County, N. Y.

May, 1861-July 14, 1864. Born in Germany. Thirty-five years old when
enlisted. Was the company fifer. Rudolph writes thus: "Ich bin 68 Yahre
alt. Kam nach Amerika 1858, und bin ein Gartner. Ich leide an Reimatismus
und kan garnicht mehr arbeiten und muss nun von meine Pension leben von
$12 monathlich. Auszerdem gehoere ich zuder G. A. R. Post, No. 545, Port
Richmond. Ich belange zu der Deutsche Kirche."


JOHN T. GRAY, Blairsville, Indiana County, Pennsylvania.

April, 1861-July 14, 1864. Twenty-one years old when enlisted. Re-enlisted
soon after discharge from Company K and served one year in U. S. veteran
reserve corps. Is not in good health. Pensioned at rate of $4,00 a month
for rheumatism contracted in the service. Since the war has done a little
of a great many different things. When a boy he associated himself with
the republican party in the days of Fremont and Dayton, and has never had
just cause or provocation to change. Just now, December, 1893, he sees a
blanked sight less cause to change his opinion than ever. In religion, a
free thinker, he professes that he is not a Christian. He does not want to
become a Christian and does not want to be classed as such. Has wife and
happy family, owns the roof above them and lives contentedly. Has never,
since his discharge, seen a single Company K man and but one man of the
regiment.


SAMUEL HAGERMAN, Yorkville, Ill.

June 1, 1861-July 16, 1865. Born in Westmoreland county, Pennsylvania. Was
twenty-seven years old when enlisted. At battle of Shiloh Samuel's gun was
knocked to pieces by some kind of a missile. At Raymond he was shot in the
shoulder and leg, and in the Georgia campaign had a finger shot off.
Receives pension for wounds at rate of eight dollars a month. Member of
Presbyterian church. A republican.


NICHOLAS HANSON, Battle Creek, Ida County, Iowa.

May 8, 1861-July 16, 1865. Born in Schoharie county, New York. He says he
was only seventeen years old when he enlisted. Was wounded July 21, 1864,
near Atlanta. Draws pension for wounds at rate of four dollars a month. Is
farming now and has been most of the time since the war. Is a
Presbyterian. Votes the republican ticket under all circumstances. Is
willing to support anything the party puts up. "If you or any other
Company K folks are ever out this way hunt me up. I own a quarter-section
farm four miles west of town in as good a country as is around Newark. I
have never been able to meet you at any of the reunions, but I am always
glad to get a card of invitation."


MARSHALL HAVENHILL, Miner, Miner County, South Dakota.

Enlisted at Newark in April, 1861. July 20, 1861, was transferred to the
regimental band.


GEORGE HOPGOOD, Morton, Lewis County, Washington.

April, 1861-July 23, 1862. Born in England. Came to America in 1857.
Twenty-one years old when enlisted. Is pensioned at the rate of four
dollars a month for disabilities incurred in service.

Since the war has lived most of the time at Clinton, Missouri, and has
worked as a stone-mason. Has gone west and taken a homestead and intends
to grow up with the country. Is a "republican all the way through". In
religion he is a true Christian. Adopts the grand principles of the Sermon
on the Mount. Get your Bibles, turn to Matthew vii, 12, and read the rule
that he lives by. That is good religion, George. None better was ever
formulated. Live right up to it and you need have no fear of torment or
torture in the life beyond this life.


EDWIN HOWES, Eola, DuPage County, Illinois.

April, 1861-July 15, 1865. Born in State of New York. Twenty-two years old
when enlisted. Wounded and captured at Britton's Lane. Paroled. Captured
again near Atlanta, July 22, 1864, and sent to Confederate prisons.
Escaped from prison and reached Union lines near Wilmington, North
Carolina, February, 1865. Pensioned at the rate of twelve dollars a month
for disabilities incurred in the service. Is a farmer. A prohibitionist.
Professes to be a Christian.


DR. WILLIAM H. H. HUTTON, Surgeon U. S. Marine Hospital Service,
Detroit, Mich.

Born in York, Jefferson county, Ohio. Enlisted in Company K, 20th Illinois
regiment, June 17, 1861, at the age of twenty-three years; discharged
therefrom August 28, 1862, for deafness caused by concussion of cannon at
battle of Pittsburg Landing. Had participated in all battles in which
Company was engaged up to date of discharge.

September 2, 1862, enlisted in Company D, 104th regiment Illinois
volunteers. Reported to his Company at Louisville, Ky., October 2, 1862.
Appointed Sergeant April 10, 1863. Appointed Color-Sergeant on battlefield
of Chicamauga September 20, 1863. Wounded at battle of Missionary Ridge
November 25, 1863. On account of disabilities was sent to Chicago, Ill.,
March, 1864. Was chief clerk Desmarres eye and ear military hospital,
Chicago, from July 4, 1864, to March 8, 1865, at which date was discharged
from 104th Illinois regiment by order of Secretary of War. Was appointed
Hospital Steward U. S. A. March 8, 1864 in which capacity he served till
April 1, 1871, thus making a military record of ten years. As Hospital
Steward, U. S. A., he served at the following places: Chicago, Ill.;
Montgomery, Mobile, and Forts Gaines and Morgan, Alabama; Charleston,
S. C.; Newbern and Raleigh, N. C.; Key West and Dry Tortugas, Florida.
September 8, 1871, was appointed Hospital Steward in U. S. Marine
Hospital, Mobile, Alabama; resigned July 4, 1874.

Graduated from Chicago Medical College March 16, 1875. May 8, 1875, was
appointed Assistant Surgeon U. S. Marine Hospital service. This
appointment was made on results of competitive examination. Promoted to
Surgeon October 5, 1876. As a United States medical officer has served at
ports of New York, Cincinnati, Mobile, Key West, New Orleans, Baltimore,
and is now serving second tour at Detroit.

Has served as Medical Inspector of the Life-Saving Service, is on several
examing boards, and has had a great deal to do with National quarantine
matters, especially as regards yellow fever and cholera. On one occasion
represented the authority of the United States for several months, in
quarantine matters, on the entire Florida coast.

This is a very brief summary of Comrade Hutton's life for nearly
thirty-three years.


JAMES JENNINGS, Sheridan, LaSalle County, Ill.

April, 1861-July 16, 1865. Born in state of New York. Twenty-one years old
when enlisted. Was one of the very first to volunteer at Newark; probably
signed the roll April 15, 1861. He also re-enlisted for another three
years as soon as he had an opportunity to do so, which was December 16,
1863. Is well charged with grit. Was shot in shoulder at Britton's Lane.
Was captured July 22, 1864, near Atlanta, and sent to Andersonville; made
three escapes from prison; first and second were unsuccessful; was
recaptured both times in the woods, after traveling many nights and
undergoing great hardships. Third escape proved successful. Reached Union
lines near Wilmington, N. C, Feb. 22, 1865. Is pensioned at rate of four
dollars a month for wound received at Britton's Lane. Is a farmer.
Non-sectarian in religion; republican in politics.

Comrade Jennings has been greatly bereaved by the loss of his wife who
died at South San Diego, Cal., April 14, 1894. He and daughter Edith
accompanied her to the Pacific coast during the preceding autumn, vainly
attempting to save her from the fatal malady to which she finally
succumbed. Our comrade's home is now desolate.


ELIAS KILMER, Prophetstown, Whiteside County, Ill.

April 24. 1861-July 14, 1864. Born in Oswego county, New York. Twenty-one
years old when enlisted. September 5, 1864, enlisted in 146th Regiment,
Illinois Volunteers, and was discharged therefrom July 5, 1865, by reason
of the termination of the war. Is pensioned at rate of six dollars a
month. Since the war has been a farmer. This is the way Elias writes:
"Politics, black republican. In regard to religion, my wife belongs to the
Methodist church. I suppose you preached prohibition and voted
democratic." There are very many republicans of my acquaintance whom I
would be glad to see preaching prohibition although they continue to vote
the republican ticket. No class of American citizens would be more greatly
blessed and benefitted by prohibition than republicans.


JOHN LEACH, Morris, Ill.

April, 1861-July 16, 1865. Born in West Virginia. Twenty-two years old
when enlisted. A carpenter. A very active republican--never preaches
prohibition. Is a christian, but has not worked at the trade for many
years. Did not answer my letter, and am unable to give further facts from
memory.


JAMES B. LITTLEWOOD, Washington, D. C., No. 415, B Street, N. E.

April, 1861-July, 1865. Born in England. Was struck, I think, by a spent
ball at Britton's Lane. Was a good soldier. Since war, has held clerical
positions in Washington; is now in the Patent Office. While performing
clerical duty, studied medicine and graduated from Medical College at
Georgetown, D. C. Owns a home in Washington. Is probably a democrat at the
present time. Did not answer my letter of inquiry.


JOHN P. MULLENIX, Fairfield, Iowa.

May, 1861-March 25, 1862. Born in Ohio. Thirty-six years old when
enlisted. Receives pension at rate of thirty dollars a month for
disability incurred in service; has drawn pension from date of discharge.
Badly crippled; cannot go without crutches; has no use of left arm and
shoulder; rheumatism is the main difficulty. Is a Presbyterian in belief,
and a republican from principle.


ALBERT PIERSON, 10 Prospect Street, East Orange, New Jersey.

June 3, 1861-November 20, 1862. In 1863, when Confederate army came up
into Pennsylvania, enlisted in a militia company, and served thirty days.
Born in Orange, N. J. Was twenty-two years old when enlisted. Had the
pleasure of participating in only one battle during the war--that of
Fredericktown, Missouri. About November 1, 1861, became very sick at
Bird's Point, Missouri. On the 20th of that month received furlough and
went to Mr. Jessup's, Na-au-say township, Kendall county, Illinois, where
he remained for six months a very sick man. In May, 1862, was sent to East
Orange, N. J., his former home, in charge of a personal attendant, and
came near dying on the journey. Remained at East Orange, sick, for four
months. In August reported to hospital, on Bedloe Island, from which he
was discharged November 20, 1862, and it is the regret of Comrade Pierson
that he was not with Company K, 20th Illinois Regiment, during the whole
war. Since discharged he has been seriously sick, and has paid out money
to doctors. "Yet, I believe there is One above who rules over all, and
when my time comes no doctor can save me." (Doctor Taylor, what think you
of this?) Comrade Pierson is a Presbyterian. He is not a pensioner; he has
never applied for pension. He is a republican; is a powerful republican,
and is in grief because of the ascendancy of the democratic party. This is
the way he writes: "O, what a great big humbug Grover is, anyway; he ought
to be in England, not America. I recall the night after the election; I
expected nothing from New Jersey--she has always been a democrat--but I
did expect good news from the Prairie state. At twelve o'clock report
came, 'Illinois is against Harrison.' At first I refused to believe it. I
had been proud of Illinois up to that time, as I had spent some years
there, but now I am in sorrow for her." Albert, I am surprised that a
grave and serious man of mature years would sit up till twelve o'clock
watching election returns. Don't do it again. Retire at nine o'clock
regularly the night after election and in the morning you will be in
better condition to hear the news. You may get bad news next time, too. As
ordered by the people, so will the result be.

Comrade Pierson has been engaged in different lines of business since the
war--is now, and has been for some years, in the wood and coal business.
He gives this cordial invitation: "If any Company K boys ever come East, I
want them to run out to Orange and see me; about fourteen miles from New
York City, and trains run all the time. Remember!"

In a subsequent letter, Comrade Pierson has given additional facts
concerning himself. In the spring of 1857 he went out to Illinois to be a
farmer. Was in Kendall county, Illinois, when the affair took place at
Fort Sumpter in Charleston Harbor, and immediately joined a Company that
was started at Oswego. That Company was unfortunate in not being accepted,
and he was obliged to go back to work. In the meantime a Kendall county
Company was organized at Newark and went into camp at Joliet. Some of the
Oswego boys went to Joliet and joined that Company and sent back word that
a few more men would be received. Comrade Pierson was full of the war, but
was reluctant about quitting work again. One day he was plowing. His team
consisted of a free horse and a very lazy one. He talked a great deal to
the lazy horse and pelted him with chunks of dirt, but all this was
unavailing and he decided to resort to harsher means. He stopped, threw
the lines from his shoulders, swung them around the plow handle and went
up alongside of the lazy animal to thrash him. But as soon as he commenced
operations the free horse jumped and away went the team. After
considerable time he caught them. He then felt very gritty and resolved to
be a soldier. He tied the horses to a fence and started. As he passed the
house he called at the door and said, "Good bye! I am off for the war,"
and moved on toward Joliet. On this journey he was troubled by the thought
that he was liable to be rejected, as he was a small man and, at that
time, first-class war material was in great abundance. When, however, he
reached camp he passed muster successfully and was happy. Comrade Pierson
closes his letter thus: "When another election comes 'round I want you
fellows out there to attend to business better than you did before. Watch
New Jersey next time."


WILLIAM PRENTICE, Soldiers' Home, Quincy, Illinois.

Enlisted in April, 1861; served for several months in Company K. Was
discharged for disability, and afterwards enlisted in another Regiment. Is
a pensioner.


WILLIAM PRESTON, Steward, Illinois.

April 24, 1861-July 16, 1865. Born in Kendall county, Illinois. Twenty-one
years old when enlisted. Receives pension for disability incurred in
service. After war, engaged in farming; later was in business; now
somewhat retired. Is interested in Company K matters, and is glad that a
roster is likely to be made up.


JAY DELOS PRUYN, Oneonta, New York.

May 1, 1861-July 14, 1864. Born at Syracuse, N. Y., Twenty-two years old
when enlisted. Is granted pension at rate of twelve dollars a month. Is
painter and decorator. Republican. Presbyterian.

I am under special obligation to Comrade Pruyn for aiding me while lying
helpless and in danger of bleeding to death on the battlefield at Raymond.
He bandaged my wounded leg with his big red handkerchief, knotted and
drawn very tightly, and with my own suspenders; gave me a good drink out
of his canteen, and then resumed his place in the ranks. Comrade Pruyn was
a good soldier, a conscientious man, a man of many good qualities. My
association with him in the army will continue a pleasant recollection.


NARCISSE REMILLARD, Mount Taber, Multnomah County, Oregon.

April 1861-July 14, 1864. September 5, 1864, enlisted in 146th Regiment,
Illinois Volunteer Infantry, and was discharged therefrom July 5, 1865.
Was born at Naperville, Canada. Twenty-six years old when enlisted. Is
pensioned at rate of ten dollars a month for disability incurred in
service. In religion, Protestant; a member of Baptist church. In politics,
non-partisan. Votes with reference to the good of the country. Does not
consider the interests of politicians. That is correct; vote as you
shot--for country and for right.


WARREN ROCKWOOD, Sheridan, Illinois.

April, 1861-November 15, 1861. Born in state of New York. Twenty-three
years old when enlisted. Receives pension at rate of eight dollars a
month. Was a farmer for a number of years; now works as carpenter.
Republican. Non-sectarian in religion.


BERDETTE SPENCER, Elmira, New York, No. 1024 College Avenue.

May 13, 1861-July 14, 1864. Born at Mohawk, Herkimer county, N. Y.
Thirty-three years old when enlisted. Was wounded in left forearm at Fort
Donelson, and receives pension of ten dollars a month because of wound. On
account of this wound he was away from the Company on furlough seven
months, three months at Marine hospital, Chicago, and four months at home.
During this time missed Shiloh and Britton's Lane; was in all other
battles with the Company. Is now, and has been since July 24, 1876,
employed at New York State Reformatory, which has about fifteen hundred
prisoners. Has never seen a Company K man since the war. Wants to get all
the news about the boys. Would like to attend a reunion and see them all
once more. Does not know whether to call them boys now or not. Is not a
church member; in belief, a spiritualist.


RICHARD SPRINGER, Chicago, Ill., No. 99 Washington Street.

April, 1861-August 31, 1865. Born at LaFayette, Indiana. Seventeen years
old when enlisted. Shot in right arm July 21, 1864, near Atlanta, while
attempting to rescue Martin Morley, the regimental standard bearer, who
lay wounded between the lines. Draws pension for this wound at rate of
seventeen dollars a month. Since war has been student, journalist, man of
affairs, engaged in various business enterprises, now handles real estate
in Chicago. Fearless and aggressive in politics, as upon battlefields, he
has never winced under stroke of party lash. Has been liberal republican
and greenbacker. Now looks with favor upon the independent populist
movement. In religion, liberal. Protestant rather than Catholic.


JOHN J. TAYLOR, M. D., Streator, Illinois.

June 17, 1861-June 16, 1862. Born in Kent, England. Came to America in
1852 with his parents when eleven years old. Came on ship Prince Albert
with five hundred emigrants; thirty-seven days on sea. Has renounced
allegiance to the British crown. Is now American through and through. Was
twenty years old when enlisted. Receives pension at rate of eight dollars
a month for disabilities incurred in service. Suffered for about twenty
years after discharged from the army with alimentary and other
difficulties. After coming home badly wrecked he attended Normal
University with the purpose of preparing for a teacher, but was compelled
by ill health to abandon the project. Began the study of medicine for
personal benefit, afterwards adopted it as a profession. Studied medicine
at University of Michigan in 1865-6, and in 1866-7 in Chicago at the Rush.
Graduated from Rush Medical College January 25, 1867, and has since been
engaged in the practice of the profession. Is a railroad surgeon, is
secretary of LaSalle county Medical Society, and is examining surgeon for
a number of life insurance companies. Has been president of North Central
Medical Association. Has been captain of State Militia and alderman fourth
ward, Streator.

This comrade is a very zealous adherent of the republican party; he has
great faith in the party. He thinks the republican party is right. He
thinks it always has been right. He thinks it will soon again have control
of the affairs of the government. We are in great danger of being deluged
by foreign goods from which calamity the government should protect us.

In religion he is broad and free. Is not priest-ridden. He cordially
recognizes whatever of good there is in the "religious societies" and
spreads the wide mantle of charity over all their errors. Is very willing
and very anxious to learn in regard to the great beyond, but is not
willing to take bit and be reined by priest or prelate. Desires liberty in
regard to religious thought and action.

"Be industrious, be honest, be clean, be true to yourself and charitable
to others, and lift like a Hercules to lighten the burden of those who are
heavily loaded and weary in the journey of life. These things are
religion."--Taylor.

"The practice of moral duties without a belief in a Divine law-giver, and
without reference to His will or commands, is not religion."--Webster.

Who shall decide when doctors disagree?


WILLIAM TODD, Illinois Soldier's Home, Quincy, Illinois.

April, 1861-May 25, 1865. Was born in Kirkcaldy, Scotland, but left the
bleak, barren hills of his native land in 1849 and came to Chicago. Was
twenty-nine years and nine months old when enlisted. Captured near
Atlanta, Ga., July 22, 1864, and for many months confined in Confederate
prisons.

Since putting foot upon the western continent William has been an
enthusiastic American. He believes America should be protected. We should
not break down the walls and allow the country to be flooded with goods
from foreign shores. We want work to do and plenty of it. An idle brain is
the devil's shop. Don't let the English, the Dutch or the French work for
us, howsoever cheaply they offer their services. Comrade Todd is an
idolator. He worships the republican party. He is wedded to his idol--let
him alone.

In regard to religion, he writes this: "I am a Christian, _i. e._, a
believer in Christ and his teachings. I am not connected with any
denomination, but have a leaning to the Congregational. My father was of
that denomination in Scotland, the name for them there and in England
being Independents." Became a Kendall county man by adoption.

"I enlisted at Champaign, Ill., April 18, 1861, but when we went into camp
at Joliet that Company had four men above the maximum number, and the
Kendall county Company lacked two men of the minimum number. I and another
transferred ourselves from A to K, and were put on the muster roll as
having enlisted in Company K April 24, 1861. So you can put me down in
roster as having enlisted at Newark, Kendall county, Illinois, April 24,
1861."

Comrade Todd is badly broken in health. Right side partly paralyzed. He
says he "cannot write worth a continental." Is a shoemaker. Has worked at
that trade principally since the war, but has been otherwise employed and,
he writes, "I finally got in here." He receives from Uncle Sam at
Washington a regular remittance at the rate of six dollars a month. I
should think the old fellow could do a little better than that.


SAMUEL TRENTOR, Morris, Illinois.

April 24, 1861-July 14, 1864. Born at Moundsville, West Virginia. Nearly
nineteen years old when enlisted. Sam thought that with his long arms he
could do good work with a cavalry sabre, and did not re-enlist in the 20th
Regiment, but when discharged therefrom joined Captain Collins' Company of
the 4th Illinois Cavalry and served until the close of the war. Was shot
in the neck at Britton's Lane. Receives pension at rate of twelve dollars
a month for disabilities incurred in the service. Works for a living.
Writes thus: "I am not a democrat. My religion I have not yet."


WILLIAM VREELAND, Maurice, Iowa.

April, 1861-July 14, 1864. Born in Hudson county, N. J. Twenty-four years
old when enlisted. Receives pension at rate of eight dollars a month for
disability incurred in the service. Was a farmer for several years after
discharge, but the condition of his health forced him to abandon that
vocation. Is now editor and proprietor of the Maurice Free Press. "A
rock-ribbed republican and a Methodist. The two things go well together,
you know." How would prohibition and Methodism go? Think about it brother!


AMBROSE WALLACE.

Born in England. Enlisted in April, 1861. One day while the Regiment was
guarding a railroad near Charleston, Missouri, in the fall of 1861,
Wallace disappeared. Returned to the Company in about two months. Said he
had been captured and had been with Jeff. Thompson at New Madrid. Sunday,
April 6, 1861, he deserted from the ranks on the battlefield of Shiloh and
never afterwards appeared. He now lives in Tennessee. Was heard from a few
months ago. At that time he was not a pensioner, but he wanted to be. As
the law now stands he is barred by his record. His only recourse is to
come North and employ some available Congressman to introduce and pass
through Congress a special act granting him a pension. In all probability
it would be vetoed during the present administration, but the Executive
would be put on record as being opposed to pensions. That would be a point
gained in politics. Undoubtedly it is to the interest of Ambrose Wallace
to have a change.


ANDREW WEST, Cabery, Illinois.

April, 1861-November 1, 1861. Was born in state of New York. On August 8,
1862, he enlisted in the 91st Illinois Regiment, and was discharged
therefrom January 2, 1863; afterwards joined a company of New York
Artillery, and while in this organization was seriously wounded in leg at
Petersburg, Virginia, and draws pension for wound. Did not reply to my
letter of inquiry.

I was sick of measles in a hospital at Cape Girardeau, Missouri, in
September, 1861. At the same time Andrew West was very sick in another
hospital close to the river. One evening, when convalescent and on the
outlook for a boat upon which to return to the Regiment at Bird's Point, I
sat beside Comrade West for nearly an hour and I thought every breath
would be his last. The Surgeon in charge said he was dying and called an
attendant, and directed him to remain with the patient, and gave the
attendant specific instructions in regard to what he should do when the
patient was dead. This attendant was Charles Halbert of the 7th Illinois
Regiment. The end did not come as soon as anticipated, and as the
attendant sat watching and waiting he reached for a sponge in a dish of
water near by, squeezed it out, and with the wet sponge commenced to rub
the dying man. After a little he fancied it gave relief. He continued the
process of rubbing the whole body, and soon became certain that his
patient was coming back to life. In the morning Andrew West was in a
greatly improved condition and the doctor was astonished.

Why did not the dying man die? Comrade Pierson would say it was because
his time had not yet come. Charles Halbert says he saved him.


ALONZO WHITE, Saunemin, Illinois.

June 11, 1861-July 16, 1865. I saw Comrade White about six years ago. At
that time he was a Methodist, a prohibitionist and was not a pensioner. He
had never applied for pension and never expected to apply. I do not know
whether he has held out faithfully up to the present time or not on all
these points. He did not reply to my letter of inquiry. I wrote to the
postmaster of his town and got this: "Yes, he is here. He runs a
blacksmith shop in this town."


ANDREW JACKSON WILSEY, Aurora, Illinois.

April, 1861-June 9, 1862. Born in Madison county, New York. Twenty-one
years old when enlisted. Since discharge has followed a diversity of
pursuits. He is not a pensioner but, I think, would not object to being
enrolled as one of Uncle Sam's beneficiaries. I meet him frequently. He
has never given serious thought to religion and, I understand, has no well
defined and settled theological opinions. In politics he is a democrat, a
regular old-fashioned democrat of the Andrew Jackson type. He was not at
New Orleans, however, but he faced fury of shot and shell at Shiloh.


DEWITT C. WILSON, Plattville, Illinois.

June 11, 1861-July 14, 1864. Born in Shelby county, Ohio. Nineteen years
old when enlisted. Is not a pensioner. Since the war has been a farmer. In
politics a straight republican. In religion aims to be a practical
christian. He believes that good works are more efficacious than loud
prayers and soul-saving sermons. He has no connection with any religious
sect.

On the morning of June 11, 1861, his father sent him into a field with a
horse to cultivate corn with a shovel plow. After working a few hours he
tied his horse to a fence at one end of the field and started directly to
Joliet on foot to enlist. He did good work as a soldier for more than
three years.

All will have a vivid recollection of Fort Donelson. The lack of rations,
the lack of tents or protection of any kind, the hard fighting and the
hard weather, the rain, the sleet, the snow, the cold, the long dreary
nights without fires. On one of those nights DeWitt Wilson and the writer
stood on picket guard together close up to the enemy's works. We were
posted stealthily after dark under a low bushy tree near a road which led
to and from the town. We were to remain very quiet, not to speak louder
than a whisper, and to watch closely all night. If the enemy sallied out
in force we were to fire and run to the Regiment. It was very cold. The
mercury was going down and was not far from zero. Our clothes had been
soaked by previous rains and were now frozen stiff and clanked with every
movement. We remained as posted for several hours. Finally, the
Confederates came over their works and made a vigorous assault with
intent to break the Union line. When the assault was made I was in an
almost helpless condition. I could scarcely move and was nearly captured.
I and my comrade became separated. I lost my course and went into the 11th
Illinois Regiment. DeWitt and I frequently refer to that terrible night,
the hardest in all our experience.

At Britton's Lane Comrade Wilson and two others occupied a slight
ambuscade. He was very anxious to have the enemy show up, and poked his
cap out on the end of his ramrod. Just as he did this a glancing bullet
struck the side of his head and caused him to roll over two or three
times. His face and clothes were smeared with blood, and just then he
would not be considered a good-looking man.


GEORGE WILSON, Sharon Springs, Wallace County, Kansas.

"Sharon is like a wilderness."--Isaiah 33: 9.

April, 1861-July 16, 1865. Was born at Newark, Illinois, April 5, 1838.
Twenty-three when enlisted. Was wounded in hand at Britton's Lane. Was
captured near Atlanta, July 22, 1864, and confined in various Confederate
prisons for nearly nine months. Pensioned for disabilities incurred in
service at rate of four dollars a month. Is a "homesteader" in Western
Kansas, seven miles from the Colorado line.

"I belong to the prevailing church and I vote as I shot--against the
South." "Cease firing! They have surrendered!" The men of the Twentieth
heard those words on many battle fields. Finally they all surrendered and
grounded arms. We whipped the rebels. We whipped them thoroughly. The
entire South lay prostrate and bleeding and helpless at the feet of the
conquering soldiers of the Union. Now, George, come out from the
"prevailing church," the big wicked church of the world, and be a
christian. Forgive your enemies and conquer by kindness. Bless them that
curse you. Do good to them that despitefully use you and persecute you and
say all manner of evil against you falsely. This is the true way. Consider
these thoughts seriously, and when you vote again think of something else
besides voting against the South.


JOSIAH WRIGHT, Akron, Washington County, Colorado.

April, 1861-August 9, 1862. Born in Luzern county, Pennsylvania.
Twenty-two years old when enlisted. Was a non-commissioned officer and
member of the color guard. Was shot through right wrist while bearing
aloft the flag of the 20th Regiment at Shiloh. Was discharged because of
wound. Pensioned for wound at rate of sixteen dollars a month.

Lived in Pennsylvania till 1851. From 1851 to 1871 lived in Kendall
county, Illinois. From 1871 till 1892 lived in Adair county, Missouri.
From spring of 1892 to present time has lived on a homestead in Washington
county, Colorado. Is now, and always has been, a farmer.

In religion is a Methodist. In politics has been a populist since the date
of the organization of that party. Frequently advocates the principles of
the party from the rostrum. Is very friendly to silver. On his envelopes
he has the motto: "Silver sixteen to one." I think Jo has a silver mine on
his homestead in Colorado.

Here is a vivid picture from Josiah Wright's pen which every man of the
20th Regiment who was on hand at Shiloh will appreciate: "I was at the
spring in camp Sunday morning, April 6. The roar of the assault on
General Prentis's division had become terrific. I heard drums beat the
long roll as the signal of alarm. I rushed to the Colonel's tent and got
the flag. In passing out I met the Color Sergeant and gave the flag to
him. The boys of the 20th were swarming out of their tents with their
guns. The Regiment was quickly formed and started on a run in the
direction of the firing. Colonel Marsh rode rapidly up and down the column
urging the men to their utmost. We did not have to go far. The
Confederates were advancing with great impetuosity and sweeping the field
before them. We took position to beat back the on-coming tide and then the
flag was unfurled and waved in the face of the foe. The Color Sergeant was
immediately shot down. I picked up the flag and was soon wounded. Another
member of the color guard then took the flag. I was sent to a boat on the
river and was nearly gone from loss of blood."

This also from Comrade Wright's letter: "As I write grave thoughts crowd
in upon me. I go back in memory to the days of '61. I am again at the war
meeting in Newark, where I listened to the thrilling eloquence of Watson
until fired by a new born purpose I there resolved to serve my country
and, if so it be ordered, to die in the service. I was one of the first to
sign the Company roll. We are now widely scattered, but are bound together
by the strongest ties. We will hardly meet again in this life, but may we
so live that we shall meet around our Father's throne where severed ties
of earth shall be re-united in Heaven." To this closing sentiment of our
brave Comrade say I, most heartily, Amen. So may we live. Let every
Company K man, still left, use this prayer. Comrades Gray and Taylor, join
in.




Our Recruits.


TWO SPLENDID ENGLISHMEN.

On the 4th of July, 1861, two young men of good appearance walked into our
camp and immediately declared their intentions. They proposed to unite
with us. We cordially accepted, and the next day the ceremony was
performed.


JOHN BROAD, Schell City, Vernon County, Missouri.

July 5, 1861-November 27, 1861. Born in England. Came to America in 1859.
Twenty-two years old when enlisted. Pensioned at rate of four dollars a
month for disabilities incurred in service. A carpenter by trade, but now
farming. Was brought up an Anglican. At present a member of the M. E.
church, South. Formerly a democrat. Now votes with the Alliance.


THOMAS HOPGOOD, Clinton, Henry County, Missouri.

July 5, 1861-July 5, 1864. Born in England. Came to America May, 1859.
Twenty-six years old when enlisted. Receives no pension. Politics,
republican all the time. Religion, Protestant, a Presbyterian. Has not
forgotten the time when we campaigned together. Remembers all the boys and
wants to be remembered by all of them.


TWO MORE RECRUITS, BUT NOT OF A KIND.

About the middle of August, 1861, two large and very brave looking men,
Bishop and another[1], came down from Kendall county, Illinois, to join
Company K. We were then at Cape Girardeau, Missouri, and just at that
juncture were in need of re-inforcements. A Confederate army under General
Polk had crossed the river at Columbus, Kentucky, and was threatening the
town. When the recruits arrived the camp was in commotion on account of
the expected attack. Bishop immediately got a gun, took his place in the
ranks and was ready for active hostilities. The other became sad and
pensive. He did not want a gun, and did not appear so much of a warrior as
at the moment of his arrival. He finally went on board of a boat with some
women and children and crossed the Mississippi river. After remaining in
the woods of Southern Illinois for a few days he came back to camp to get
his carpet bag. He did not want to be mustered into the army. He wanted to
go to his peaceful home, and he went. He still lives in Illinois. I am not
informed as to whether he has succeeded in getting a pension or not. His
case will require a special act.

     [1] In original manuscript the name of this recruit was given, but it
     is here omitted in compliance with the very earnest solicitation of
     the printer.


LEWIS G. BISHOP, Grand Junction, Colorado.

July 16, 1861-August 9, 1862. Born in Yorkshire, Cattaraugus county, New
York, on St. Patrick's day, 1838. Was, therefore, twenty-three years old
at time of enlistment. Was wounded in left arm and left leg at Shiloh. Was
sent down the rivers to hospitals at Paducah and Mound City. In course of
time obtained leave of absence and went up to Newark, Illinois. Was then
made aware that the people appreciated the soldiers. Was lionized wherever
he went in Kendall county, which was a source of embarrassment to him, as
he was a modest and humble individual. Was discharged because of wounds
and receives pension therefor at rate of twelve dollars a month. He is
glad that he still has his left leg, although it is not as good as the
other. He is obliged to wear a rubber stocking and use other appliances to
suppress inflammation and reduce varicose veins.

Comrade Bishop remembers with minute particularity the events of the Fort
Henry and Fort Donelson campaigns. He remembers as though it were
yesterday the morning, when, at dawn, we discovered lines of Confederates
looking at us from their rifle pits and when Chaplain Button went upon his
knees on the ground and prayed with great earnestness for the salvation of
the souls of those who should be slain in the impending battle. He thinks
that if the Chaplain had taken a fife and stepped out and played "Yankee
Doodle" it would have a better effect. He confesses that the prayer
depressed him. In the state of mind in which he was at that time he would
greatly prefer to live than to die and take his chances for heaven. This
was probably the prevailing sentiment among the soldiers of both armies.

Comrade Bishop came West in the spring of 1860; went as far as Fort
Larimie, Wyoming, returned in the fall to Illinois, taught school near
Newark in winter of 1860-61; in spring of 1861 went to Wisconsin and
helped to run a raft of lumber out of the Wisconsin river down to
Muscatine; in July, 1861, returned to Kendall county, Illinois. When the
disaster occurred at Bull Run he awoke to the fact that the country was
seriously menaced and resolved to be a soldier. He was acquainted with
many of the boys of Company K, had visited them in Joliet, and he decided
to cast his lot with them. He picked up his carpet-bag and went to Cape
Girardeau, Missouri, and was mustered in.

After discharge Comrade Bishop became a student and a teacher; later he
studied dentistry, and for many years has been engaged in the practice of
that profession.

Religion: Agnostic. He neither asserts nor denies any theological dogma.

Politics: Anything to beat the republican party. Believes that the
principles and methods of that party should be relegated to "innosuous
desuetude." The party is owned and fenced in by syndicates, corporations
and factories, and is not worthy of public confidence. The people should
rise in their sovereign capacity and decree that capital shall cease to
dominate the legislation of the country.

Comrade Bishop has been married and he has been un-married. He considers
that St. Paul gave first-class advice when, in his letter to the
Corinthians, he wrote, "Seek not a wife."


AUGUSTUS GAY, No. 902 Second Street, Seattle, Washington.

April 5, 1862-April 9, 1865. Was born at Albany, New York, in July, 1846.
Was, therefore, fifteen years and nine months old when he enlisted. Was
the youngest man in Company K, and looked very honest. No boy in the whole
Union army had a more innocent face than Augustus Gay. He came to us at
Joliet and was rejected. He followed up the Regiment for about a year and
during most of that time had a position on Dr. Bailey's staff. Finally, at
Pittsburg Landing, the day before the battle of Shiloh, he was mustered
into the service as a member of Company K. Was mustered out at Raleigh,
North Carolina, by reason of the expiration of his term of enlistment.

Augustus Gay appeared to court danger. He went into battle with a broad
smile on his face and a twinkle of the eye as though he were engaged in
something pleasant and agreeable. Was very reckless and daring in action.
The wonder was how it happened that he was never killed. Was captured near
Atlanta July 22, 1864, and went to Anderson prison, where he spent several
months. Was finally transferred by the Confederates from Andersonville to
Savannah and was at that place when it was captured by the Union army
December 21, 1864.

I am in receipt of a long and interesting letter from Comrade Gay in which
he gives facts concerning himself. This is dated March 26, 1894. I had
previously written him up for the roster from memory and had classed him
among the missing. He says he was very glad to hear from Company K. He has
never seen any of the Company since the war, and had never heard from any
of them. He was not sick a day while in the army and was never wounded.
Since the war he has never been so seriously sick as to be confined to his
bed. He is not a rich man and he is not a poor man. He weighs 250 pounds.
He lives well. He never chews nor smokes tobacco nor drinks intoxicating
liquors and never plays cards. He has been on the Pacific slope for twenty
years and has not been back to the States during that time. He has been
married for ten years and has now a boy more than half as old as he was
when he joined Company K. After the war he studied dental surgery and has
followed that profession continuously. Receives pension at rate of six
dollars a month. Writes thus: "I want you to put in your roster that if
ever a Company K man comes to this part of the world I want him to come
and see me."

He says that he is Protestant. But I don't think he is a full-blooded
Protestant. If I remember correctly he used to tell us in the army that
his parents were Hibernians, and that he was half Catholic and half
Protestant, and had by inheritance all the good qualities of both kinds of
religion.


JAMES SPRINGER, Eighty-eighth and Throop Streets, Chicago, Illinois.

Born on a farm near La Fayette, Indiana. Enlisted August 28, 1862, at the
age of twenty-two years. Joined Company K at Holly Springs, Mississippi,
in November, 1862, and served until mustered out at the close of the war
in 1865.

After discharge became a student at the University of Chicago, also, law
department thereof, from which he graduated in June, 1868, and was then
admitted to the bar. Practiced law for sixteen years. For a time was
engaged in journalism. Since 1885 has followed a business career.

In politics an independent; in religion a Methodist.


LAMBERT CONNER, Braidwood, Illinois.

Born in Hunterdon county, New Jersey. I think he enlisted in the spring of
1863. Was then eighteen years old. Mustered out July 16, 1865. Receives
pension at rate of sixteen dollars a month for disabilities incurred in
service. He did not reply to my letter of inquiry.


FOUR KIDS.

Four nice boys, in a bunch, came into our camp at Big Black river,
Mississippi, about the first of April, 1864. These were Pease Barnard,
Charles Hall, Luman Preston and Fayette Scofield. They were all
"Suckers," were separated from their mothers for the first time and, to
the old campaigners of Fort Donelson, Shiloh and Vicksburg, they, appeared
very fresh and innocent. They had been mustered in several weeks before by
a recruiting officer in Illinois, and fitted out with Uncle Sam's
uniforms, and were now ready to assist in winding up the war.


NATHANIEL PEASE BARNARD, Newark, Illinois.

February 25, 1864-July 16, 1865. Born in LaSalle county, Illinois.
Seventeen years old when enlisted. Served in Georgia, went with Sherman
from Atlanta to the sea, and helped to eviscerate the Carolinas. Pensioned
at rate of eight dollars a month. Member of M. E. church. An active member
of republican party. A lawyer by profession.


CHARLES HALL, Westport, Brown County, South Dakota.

February 24, 1864-July 16, 1865. Born in Kendall county, Illinois.
Eighteen years old when enlisted. July, 1864, in Georgia campaign, was
shot in the neck, and for a time was supposed to be dead. This recruit was
built of good material for a soldier. Did not answer my letter.


LUMAN PRESTON, Dixon, Illinois.

February 16, 1864-July 16, 1865. Born in Kendall county, Illinois.
Eighteen years old when enlisted. Is in business. Did not reply to my
letter of inquiry. Is probably very busily engaged attending to customers.
I meet Luman occasionally. He is always in good shape and happy. I think
he is a democrat. Is of the bluest Puritan blood, but has the figure of a
Teuton.




Our Missing Members.


The following four Company K men I cannot find. If any Comrade can give me
any information concerning any of them I desire to have him do so. They
may be living, but I think it is more probable that they are dead:


GEORGE ADAMS.

June, 1861-October 14, 1862. Born in England.


JOHN CONSTANTINE.

May, 1861-August 29, 1861. Born in Ireland. Came to America when one year
old. Claimed to have been discharged from the regular army a short time
before enlisting in Company K. Was an intemperate, boisterous and
quarrelsome man. Was dismissed from the army by sentence of a court
martial.


LOUIS MINTZ.

April, 1861-August 24, 1863. Born in Portugal. In religion was supposed to
be a Hebrew. I think he came to Newark as a peddler and there joined
Company K. He was a good soldier, but was very excitable. On one occasion,
when advancing on skirmish line through the woods, he fired into a dead
rebel who was hanging on a fence. Comrade Mintz was overheated at
Raymond, from which he never recovered, and on account of which he was
discharged.


JOHN PEPOON.

May, 1861-December 16, 1862. At time of enlistment he lived in Oswego
township, Kendall county, Illinois.




OUR DEAD.


For many years earth has held the ashes of our fallen Comrades in its
bosom. We have kept their memories in our hearts.


Slain in Battle.


ANDREW WILSON, Plattville, Illinois.

Born in Ohio. Enlisted June 17, 1861, at the age of twenty-three years.
Shot through the head at Fort Donelson, and instantly killed, February 15,
1862, while the Union line was advancing on the enemy.

Early on the morning of the 16th the Confederates surrendered. I was on
the detail sent out that day to bury the dead of our Regiment. We went to
the place where we had position in the line and there, on a hard hill,
through stones and roots we dug a grave. This is the only grave I have
ever helped to dig. It was thirty feet long and a little more than six
feet wide. When of sufficient depth two men remained in the bottom, and
others handed down, one by one, eighteen men of the 20th Illinois
Regiment. Andrew Wilson was one of the number. When they had all been
placed side by side across the grave, good Chaplain Button spoke solemn,
earnest words in exhortation and prayer. Our dead were covered with earth,
three volleys were fired over them as a parting salutation, and we then
filed away into camp, weary and sad.


CURTIS WANN, Newark, Illinois.

Born in Clarion county, Pennsylvania, October 2, 1843. Enlisted in Company
K, April, 1861. Shot and killed instantly in the battle of Shiloh, Sunday,
April 6, 1862. I have a clear recollection of Curtis Wann on the morning
of that dreadful day, when we were going forward to meet the enemy. His
face was aglow with eagerness and courage, but alas! he was the first to
fall.


JAMES CRELLEN, Newark, Illinois.

Born on the Isle of Man. Had not been in America many years. Was a
shoemaker, and worked at his trade in Newark. Was well thought of by
everybody. He was one of the first to sign the Company roll. He said at
the outset that he wanted to be killed if he could not come out of the war
entire. He dreaded mutilation more than death. At Shiloh, Sunday, April 6,
1861, he was shot through the neck and killed instantly. I had my eyes
squarely upon him when he was struck. He dropped to the ground and never
moved. Did not even quiver. While lying dead upon the battlefield he was
again shot through the face.


MARCUS MORTON.

Enlisted at Joliet May, 1861. Was shot and mortally wounded at Shiloh
April 6, 1861. Died in a few days after the battle.


ISRAEL WATERS, Plattville, Illinois.

Enlisted at Joliet in May, 1861. Was shot and instantly killed May 12,
1863, in the battle of Raymond. While we were engaged in the desperate
fighting behind the rail fence I turned my eyes on Waters and he was
cheering and shouting defiance to the enemy. In a few moments I looked
again and he lay perfectly dead. A bullet had passed through his brain.


WILLIAM SHOGER, Oswego, Illinois.

Born in Germany. Came to America in 1855. Enlisted in May, 1861, at the
age of nineteen years. Shot and killed instantly in the battle of Raymond
May 12, 1863. Was brought up and confirmed a Lutheran. Later withdrew from
Lutheran church and became an active member of Evangelical church.


DAVID BARROWS, Newark, Illinois.

Born in New Hampshire. Enlisted April, 1861, at the age of thirty-five
years. Shot and killed instantly in the battle of Raymond May 12, 1863.
Was a married man and left a wife and three little girls lonely and sad.
If I were asked who was the best soldier in Company K the first man I
would think of would be David Barrows. He did not waste much powder. A
good marksman, and level-headed under the most trying circumstances, he
aimed and fired in the heat and fury of battle with the precision and
accuracy of target practice.

Comrades Waters, Shoger and Barrows were at my right. They were all shot
through the head and, when killed, lay touching each other.


BENJAMIN ADAMS, Newark, Illinois.

Born in Kendall county, Illinois. Enlisted April, 1861, at the age of
twenty years. Killed in battle of Raymond May 12, 1863. Comrade Adams was
shot at the very beginning of the battle, as we lay in the woods waiting
for the skirmishers to rally in, and before we fired a gun. At the close
of the battle he was still living. A comrade paused over him and said--

"Can I do anything for you?"

"No."

"Ben, you are badly hurt. Won't I stay with you?"

"They are running, are they not?"

"Yes, we have them on the run. Won't I stay with you?"

"No; go on."

He was taken by an ambulance to the field hospital and died in a few
minutes after reaching that place.


HENRY MITCHELL, Na-au-say Township, Kendall County, Illinois.

Born of English parents on Prince Edward's Island January 31, 1836. Came
to Kendall county, Illinois, in 1845. Enlisted in Company K May, 1861, at
the age of twenty-five years. Killed in the battle of Raymond May 12,
1863.

Henry Mitchell was in every sense a large, strong, brave man, and was
highly regarded by all such as have regard for what is true and noble in
human life and character. He was scrupulously correct in all his habits.
Never played cards, was never profane in speech, and never had any use for
whisky, tobacco or beer. He had five brothers in the Union army, all in
Company C of the 7th Illinois Regiment, namely, Anthony, William, George,
Robert and Samuel. These five in the 7th Regiment and Henry in the 20th
were all in the battle lines at Fort Donelson and Shiloh. I do not believe
that there is in the whole range of history another instance in which six
brothers fought in the ranks of any army in the same great battles. I have
read of Roman patriotism and Grecian valor, of Spartan mothers sending out
their sons to battle with the injunction to come back either victorious or
dead, but I have never read of anything that is equal to the case of the
six Mitchell brothers in patriotism, devotion and valor, all of whom
responded at once to their country's first call for volunteers.

Of these six brave brothers only three now survive, namely--Anthony, in
Kansas, and Robert and Samuel, in Colorado. George was slain on the second
day at Shiloh. "We were all within six feet of George when he fell,"
writes Anthony. That is, the other four of the 7th Regiment; and Henry was
close by in the 20th Regiment. William contracted disease in the army,
came home sick and died.


ROBERT TAYLOR, Lisbon, Illinois.

Born in England. Came to America when a child. Enlisted in Company K,
April, 1861, at the age of about twenty-three years. Shot through hip and
mortally wounded in battle of Raymond May 12, 1863. Lived a few days after
the battle and died in extreme agony. I lay near him in the hospital. His
suffering was the most terrible that I have ever witnessed.


WILLIAM READ, Newark, Illinois.

Was a recruit. I think he came to the Company in 1862. Was shot in head
and mortally wounded in battle of Raymond, May 12, 1863. Lived a few days
after the battle.


JOHN WOODRUFF, Oswego, Illinois.

Enlisted in May, 1861. Shot and mortally wounded in the battle of Raymond,
May 12, 1863. Was shot in leg below the knee. Three different amputations
were performed, one below the knee and two above, but each was followed by
unfavorable results. He and I were in the same hospital, and not very far
apart. I witnessed the amputations. The patient in all his suffering
exhibited the most incredible fortitude. He lived nearly three weeks and
never groaned nor sighed. At last when informed that mortification was
advancing and the end was near, he called an attendant, paid him for extra
service rendered and then turned over to the attendant his pocket-book and
some other personal effects to be sent to his sister at Iowa Falls, Iowa.
This was done with perfect deliberation. He manifested no fear of death. I
remember him very distinctly in former battles. He was a very brave
soldier.


RICE BAXTER, Na-au-say Township, Kendall County, Illinois.

May, 1861-October 13, 1861. In a few months after being discharged from
Company K he enlisted in another Regiment and was killed in the battle of
Arkansas Post, January 10, 1863. I have been unable to obtain any
information concerning Comrade Baxter from any of his relatives, although
I have made persistent efforts to do so.




Died in the Service.


THOMPSON BRISTOL, Newark, Illinois.

Enlisted in April, 1861, at the age of nineteen years. Went into camp at
Joliet, became sick, went home on furlough and died June 16, 1861. Buried
in Millington. Let his grave be decorated.


WILLIAM ASHTON, Lisbon, Illinois.

Born of English parents in Delaware county, Pennsylvania. Enlisted April,
1861, at the age of nearly twenty-one years. Died at Cape Girardeau,
Missouri, September 2, 1861.


STEPHEN JENNINGS, Newark, Illinois.

Born in State of New York. Enlisted April, 1861, at the age of twenty-five
years. Died of typhoid fever in hospital at Mound City, Illinois, October
15, 1861.


RICHARD CONNER, Plattville, Illinois.

Born in Hunterdon county, New Jersey. Enlisted June 12, 1861, at the age
of twenty years. Died of measles in hospital at Mound City, Illinois,
December 23, 1861.


FRANK LEHMAN.

Born in Germany. Enlisted May, 1861. Died at Bird's Point, Missouri,
January 11, 1862.


JOHN R. MCKEAN, Newark, Illinois.

Was one of the first to volunteer in April, 1861. Had been in the regular
army and, I think, for a short time in the Mexican war. Took a very
active part in organizing the Company and drilling the boys. Was elected
Second Lieutenant. A very efficient officer. Died at Bird's Point,
Missouri, January 23, 1862.

Does any comrade know anything about Lieutenant McKean's burial? If so,
report to me, please.


GEORGE MALLORY, Newark, Illinois.

Born at Rome, Oneida county, New York, November 10, 1835. Came to Kendall
county, Illinois, in 1838. Enlisted April, 1861, at the age of twenty-five
years. Died at Bird's Point, Missouri, January 28, 1862.


WILLIAM CROWNER.

Enlisted in May, 1861. Died in hospital at Mound City, March 10, 1862.


EDWARD ATKINS, Newark, Illinois.

Enlisted April, 1861. Died at Newark, Illinois, March 11, 1862, while home
on furlough sick.


AARON PAXSON, Newark, Illinois.

Enlisted May, 1861. Died at Newark, Illinois, May 4, 1862, while home on
furlough sick.


WILLIAM BENNETT, Adams Township, La Salle County, Illinois.

Born in England January 4, 1837. Enlisted at Newark April, 1861, at the
age of twenty-four years. His vitality was overtaxed at Fort Donelson. He
broke down and never recovered. Was sent down the river and died in
general hospital at St. Louis, Missouri, May 5, 1862.


ALBERT WILCOX, Lisbon, Illinois.

Born in Kendall county, Illinois, January 21, 1842. Enlisted April, 1861,
at the age of twenty years. Died in hospital at St. Louis, Missouri, May
13, 1862.


OTIS CHARLES, Bristol Station, Illinois.

Born in Bristol township, Kendall county, Illinois. Enlisted May, 1861, at
the age of twenty-five years. Overcome by the strain at Fort Donelson he
went home on furlough sick, and died at his home June 1, 1862.


WILLIAM SMITH, Plattville, Illinois.

Born in Centre county, Pennsylvania. Enlisted May, 1861, at the age of
twenty years. Died at Paducah, Kentucky, August 23, 1862, while on
detailed duty in the Signal Corps.


JOSEPH SPRINGER.

Born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, February 10, 1831. Enlisted as a
recruit in Company K August 30, 1862. Died at Lake Providence, Louisiana,
March 18, 1863. Was a member of the Protestant Methodist Church. Belonged
to the society organized at Millbrook, Kendall county, Illinois. Was
married, and when he went away to the war left at home a wife and three
boys, whose respective ages were seven, five and about two and one-half
years. His widow, Mrs. Ann Springer, now lives at Firth, Lancaster county,
Nebraska, from whose letters I make the following extracts: "I am glad the
survivors of Company K are hunting up the records of those that never
returned, as well as the records of those who were spared to come back. I
have been weighed down and almost crushed with sorrow and affliction. I
have never re-married, and, of course, draw pension at the rate of twelve
dollars a month. I have lived with my boys, the oldest of whom was taken
away when nearly sixteen years of age. The other two are still spared. I
had four brothers who went out to fight for the dear old flag. Two of them
never returned. One was William Bennett of Company K. He responded to the
first call and enlisted at Newark, Illinois, early in the spring of 1861.
Another brother, who was in the artillery service, was killed in the
battle of Stone River. God bless the soldiers; they did a noble work; they
are the saviors of the country. If the Company K Roster is published I
want a copy."


ALFRED GRISWOLD, Newark, Illinois.

Enlisted April 1861. Died at Berry's Landing, Louisiana, March 20, 1863.


SUMNER COOK, Newark, Illinois.

Enlisted April, 1861. Died at Vicksburg, Mississippi, of typhoid fever,
July 20, 1863.


GEORGE SLEEZER, Newark, Illinois.

Born in Kendall county, Ill. Enlisted as a recruit for Company K September
26, 1864, at the age of eighteen years. Became sick at Camp Butler, near
Springfield, Illinois, and died at that place November 13, 1864, before he
reached the Company.


WALTER LANDON, Fox Township, Kendall County, Illinois.

Volunteered as a recruit for Company K October 3, 1864, and died in a
short time afterward at Camp Butler, Illinois, before reaching the
Company.


GREENBURY LEACH, Lisbon, Illinois.

Born in West Virginia. Enlisted April, 1861. Captured near Atlanta,
Georgia, July 22, 1864. Confined in Confederate prisons from date of
capture until the following spring. Died at Fortress Monroe, Virginia,
April 30, 1865, just after being exchanged and while on his way to the
north. Was a member of the Methodist Episcopal church. While in the army
always attended whatever religious service was conducted in camp. Was a
regular attendant and participant at regimental prayer-meetings.




Died Since Date of Discharge.


NELSON DAYTON, Newark, Illinois.

Enlisted April, 1861, at the age of eighteen years. Discharged for
disability November 27, 1861. Died March 4, 1862, at Newark, Illinois.


ROBERT LAWTON.

May 1861-August 17, 1862. Born in Lancashire, England. Came to America in
1852. Died in Kendall county, Illinois, of the disease for which
discharged from the army April 14, 1864, at the age of twenty-five years,
three months and eight days. Robert was a good soldier. I remember him
distinctly on the battlefield of Shiloh. During the terrible fighting of
the first day he turned over his pocket-book to a member of the Company
who retired on account of wounds. He did not want his money to be taken by
the rebels if he were killed in the fight.

Comrade Lawton's remains were interred in the little cemetery at
Plattville. The slab marble which marks his final resting place has fallen
down and is broken. When the flowers of May each year come, let patriot
hands decorate this grave.


GILBERT MORTON, Oswego, Illinois.

Enlisted May, 1861. Mustered out July 16, 1865. Promoted to Quartermaster
Sergeant of the Regiment at the outset and, I think, held that position
during the entire war. After discharge he became a railroad official and
had a highly successful career for about ten years. But evil days came,
and he finally died by his own hand at a hotel in Chicago. This was about
the year 1876.


LONGEN MERKLI.

Born in 1829 at Damsingan, Baden, Germany. Went into German army in his
youth, and was thoroughly trained as a soldier. Participated in active
warfare in 1848-'49. He handled sword and bayonet with great dexterity.
Few men could stand before him with these weapons. After his service in
the German army he spent several years as a student. Was a good latin
scholar, and had a knowledge of the French language. Pursued a course of
study in surgery and medicine in a German University, and, by members of
his profession, was considered an expert anatomist. Had been reared in the
faith of the Catholic church, but became a doubter of the fundamental
doctrines of Christianity. Came to America in 1860 and engaged in the
practice of medicine at Milford and Newark. Was one of the first to enlist
in April, 1861. Served in the ranks of the Company for about a year and a
half. Was in the battles of Fredericktown, Fort Donelson and Shiloh. Was
shot in the foot at Shiloh. Was a remarkably brave and fearless man. About
July, 1862, he was detailed to serve in a hospital at Jackson, Tennessee.
When negro soldiers were enlisted he was offered a commission as assistant
surgeon of a negro Regiment, but declined it. He continued on detailed
duty and served as a medical man in various hospitals until the expiration
of his term of enlistment. Was mustered out in July, 1864. After the war,
located at Bristol, Illinois, and pursued the practice of medicine. In his
best years he was unable to control his appetite for strong drink and, as
time advanced, his appetite steadily increased and he became an abject
slave. He died at Bristol, Illinois, August 20, 1879.


GEORGE WATSON, Newark, Illinois.

I doubt whether any man did as much as George Watson toward getting up
Company K. He was a lawyer at Newark, was a democrat, voted for Bell and
Everett in 1860, and was an enthusiastic Union man. He was a fluent
off-hand speaker and was the main figure at all the war meetings in
Newark. Had been in Pennsylvania militia and Mexican war and was a good
drill master. Was elected First Lieutenant. About the first of June, 1861,
he withdrew from the Company and joined Mulligan's Regiment in Chicago.
Was captured with that command at Lexington, Missouri, in 1861. After this
he served on a gunboat and, still later, had a commission in a
Pennsylvania Cavalry Regiment. He was gifted with talent of a high order,
but an uncontrollable appetite for intoxicating liquor barred all
possibility of success in life. It caused his ruin and downfall and death.
He made many spasmodic attempts at reformation, and at these times was a
successful temperance talker. But all his efforts at reform ended in
failure. From the United States Soldiers' Home at Milwaukee, Wisconsin, I
have received this: "The records show that George W. Watson served in
Company K, 20th Illinois Infantry; Company E, 23d Illinois Infantry;
Company F, 2d Pennsylvania Cavalry, and in U. S. Navy. He was admitted
here December 15, 1877, and was killed by a railroad train in Milwaukee,
Wisconsin, at about 3 o'clock p. m., August 21, 1879."


FAYETTE SCOFIELD, Newark, Illinois.

Born in DuPage county, Illinois, January 25, 1847. Enlisted as a recruit
for Company K February 25, 1864. Discharged July 16, 1865. Killed in a
railroad wreck in Missouri February 17, 1881.


AMON HEACOX, Lisbon, Illinois.

Born in Oneida county, New York, June 6, 1817. Enlisted in Company K, May,
1861, at the age of forty-four years. Mustered out July 14, 1864. Was the
oldest man in the Company. I have been informed that he was slightly
wounded at Britton's Lane, but I have no recollection of it. I remember
him very distinctly at Fort Donelson. He was a good man and a good
soldier. Was a member of M. E. church. Was one of six, many years ago, to
organize a Methodist Episcopal church in Lisbon, Illinois. He died in the
Soldiers' Home at Quincy, Illinois, April 23, 1889, in the seventy-third
year of his age. Is interred in the cemetery at Lisbon.


HENRY HAVENHILL, Newark, Illinois.

Born in LaSalle county, Illinois, June 17, 1842. Enlisted April, 1861.
Discharged for disability April 27, 1862. Died in Chicago, Illinois, of
paralysis, June, 1889.


FRANCIS CROWELL, Newark, Illinois.

Born in Tompkins county, New York. Enlisted April, 1861, at the age of
eighteen years. Was wounded in the Georgia campaign July, 1864. Mustered
out July 16, 1865. Died at Waterman, Illinois, of a complication of
diseases, September 17, 1889. The address of his widow is Mrs. Mary A.
Crowell, Waterman, Illinois.


THOMAS GARNER.

April, 1861-July 14, 1864. Born in England. Had been a British soldier,
and saw active service in the Crimean war. Deserted from the British army.
Captured and branded with letter D. Deserted again in Canada and succeeded
in escaping to the United States.

Thomas Garner was one of the best marchers and fighters in the Union army.
He was always at his post. Never straggled from the ranks and never failed
because of sore feet or anything else. Whenever there was fighting on hand
Tom was in it. His great failing we all know, but, notwithstanding that,
he was the best beloved man in Company K. Some years after the war he went
back to England and, in time, returned again to the United States. Soon
after his return he walked from Buffalo, New York, to Morris, Illinois,
and then came to Newark and Sheridan looking for Company K folks. He found
none and went away very despondent. These facts I learned from his friends
in Morris. I have received a communication from the Pension Agent at
Buffalo, New York, which informs me that Thomas Garner, Company K, 20th
Illinois Regiment, was on the rolls of that agency as a pensioner at the
rate of six dollars a month, and that he died during the year 1892. He
drew pension to July 4 of that year. His address at that time was No. 58
Commercial Street, Buffalo, New York. This is the most definite
information I have succeeded in obtaining.


WILLIAM MINARD, Oswego, Illinois.

Born at Walbrough, Ulster county, New York, September 26, 1840. Enlisted
May, 1861. Became Commissary Sergeant of the Regiment. Mustered out July
14, 1864. Died at Chicago, Illinois, of disease of kidneys, January 10,
1894. Interred at Graceland.


GEORGE CONNELLY.

May, 1861-September 8, 1862. Born in Ireland. Had been a soldier in the
regular army. Was a brave man. Was wounded at Shiloh. Was discharged on
account of wound and pensioned therefor. He is now dead. Date of death not
ascertained.


JAMES HAGARDORN.

Enlisted at Joliet in May, 1861, and, I think, served about a year and a
half. Was discharged for disability and became a pensioner. After the war
lived in State of New York. Is now dead. Date of death not ascertained.


JAMES LORD.

May, 1861-March 5, 1863. Was an actor. Came to Newark, Illinois, in the
spring of 1861 with a theatrical troupe and there enlisted in Company K.
He was a very intelligent man and a good soldier. Was wounded at Fort
Donelson. Was discharged for disability and became a pensioner. He is now
dead. Date of death not ascertained.


RALPH PRATT.

May, 1861-November 27, 1861. Discharged for disability. Became a
pensioner. Is now dead. Date of death not ascertained.




REMARKS.


The names of those who served thirty days with Company K in the State
service but who declined to join the Company for three years in the United
States service do not appear in this roster; neither do the names of
drafted men and substitutes who were assigned to the Company during the
last few months of the war.

The dates after a name indicate the time when the soldier first
volunteered and the time when he was mustered out or discharged. Those who
did not enlist for a second term of three years were nearly all mustered
out July 14, 1864. Those who re-enlisted were mustered out July 16, 1865,
on account of the close of the war. Those discharged at other dates were
discharged for disability resulting from wounds or sickness.

The names of 108 Company K men are herein given; 56 are living, 52 are
dead. 4 are missing; of these four I have not been able to obtain any
information whatever. I know not whether they are living or dead.

Of the 56 men living, 41 receive pensions; 7 receive no pension. In regard
to the others, it is not ascertained whether they are pensioners or not.
32 receive pensions for disabilities incurred in the army; 9 for
disabilities not incurred in the army.

Of the 56 men here reported as living, 23 at least were wounded in battle;
13 draw pension for wounds.

Eight Company K men were buried at Raymond--Shoger, Barrows, Waters and
Mitchell were buried in the same grave with others of the Regiment on the
battlefield, near the rail fence. Adams was buried near the field
hospital. Taylor, Reed and Woodruff were buried in the graveyard near the
town. Crellen and Wann were buried on the battlefield of Shiloh. None of
these graves are now marked or known.

For courtesy, and for information furnished to assist me in tracing lost
members of Company K, I am under special obligations to the Hon. WILLIAM
LOCHREN, Commissioner of Pensions, Washington, D. C. I also acknowledge my
indebtedness to many postmasters, to newspaper editors, to pension agents
and others.

If any Company K man dies or changes his place of residence I desire to be
informed of the fact. In this way we will know where every man of the
Company is located. Remember, please.

A more lengthy sketch is given of some Comrades than of others. The reason
is I have had more information in regard to some than in regard to others.
In many cases what is said about each one of the living is his own letter
to me re-cast and abridged. I have not intentionally slighted or
misrepresented any. I may have made errors. If so, I hope they are few and
not of a grievous nature.




A BIT OF HISTORY.


When the news of the President's first call for volunteers reached Newark
the people were wild with excitement. "That night," writes Dr. Dyer, "I
could not sleep. The next morning I was out very early. I went into
Fowler's drug store and there with pen and ink drew up a company
muster-roll and signed it, and united with others in calling a war meeting
for that evening. I was called to make a long ride in the country and upon
my return found five names on the muster-roll in addition to my own. I
wish I had that paper now." This was the beginning of our Company.
Volunteers continued to come forward and in a few days the requisite
number had signed the roll. April 24, 1861, is on record as the date of
our Company organization. We were not accepted under the President's call
and were sorely disappointed. However, most of the boys continued to meet
in Newark and were drilled by Lieutenants Watson and McKean. On May 11,
1861, our Company left Newark for Joliet and went into camp. The 20th
Illinois Regiment was there organized and the Kendall county boys became
Company K of that organization. After that the history of the Company
became part of the history of the Regiment. June 13, 1861, we were
mustered into the United States service for three years, if not sooner
discharged. About the 17th of June we took the cars for the South. Stopped
three weeks at Alton, Illinois, and drilled constantly. Early in July we
went into camp for a short time in the United States Arsenal at St.
Louis, Missouri, and were here armed with Enfield rifles and received new
blue uniforms. We now had a very extravagant opinion of ourselves, of our
fighting qualities in particular, and did not take the least pains to
conceal that opinion from others. This is what a St. Louis paper said of
us:

     ARRIVAL OF COLONEL MARSH'S REGIMENT FROM ALTON.

     At 11 o'clock a. m., of Saturday, the steamer, "City of Alton," from
     Alton, landed at the Arsenal the Twentieth Illinois Regiment, Colonel
     C. C. Marsh commanding. The boat brought also the entire camp
     equipage and stores of the Regiment. The spontaneous greeting
     tendered by our Missouri soldiers was hearty and enthusiastic. Cheers
     upon cheers of welcome rent the air and were responded to by the
     Illinoisans in magnificent style. The guests were assigned the
     western lawn of the Arsenal grounds for their camping site. Tents
     were speedily pitched, baggage distributed, and the newly arrived
     volunteers were soon perfectly at home. They are aching for active
     service wherever desired, and, we understand, are already under
     orders for "a forward movement." Other Regiments in Illinois are also
     in eager anticipation of lively "business" in Missouri or Arkansas.

     Colonel Marsh's Regiment is evidently in first-class condition and
     consists of strikingly vigorous and hardy men. They are brim full of
     health and energy and fun. The Regiment numbers nine hundred and
     sixty-one men rank and file. Success and joy to them.

We left the Arsenal in a few days and for six months were engaged in
"business" in southeast Missouri. On October 21 we met the Confederates in
force, under Jeff. Thompson, at Fredericktown and succeeded in thoroughly
convincing them that they were whipped.

February 6, 1862, we entered Fort Henry and ten days later marched in
triumph into Fort Donelson. April 6 and 7 we had position in the Union
lines at Shiloh and after that took a hand in the siege of Corinth.
September 1 were engaged in the sharp little battle of Britton's Lane. In
the winter of 1862-3 were in the campaign in the mud in northern
Mississippi. Were at Oxford when General VanDorn took Holly Springs and
burned our supplies. In the spring and summer of 1863 we participated in
all the battles of the Vicksburg campaign and in the siege of that
stronghold.

Were out on the Meridian expedition for twenty-nine days in the month of
February, 1864, without tents or other protection from the elements except
what every man carried on his back.

In the spring and summer of 1864 were in the Georgia campaign and siege of
Atlanta. In the fall went from Atlanta to the sea.

In 1865 was in the campaign in the Carolinas and marched through Virginia
to Washington after the Confederate armies had surrendered.

On the 16th of July, 1865, at Louisville, Kentucky, the Twentieth Regiment
Illinois Volunteer Infantry was mustered out of the United States service
and disbanded, and the boys went home.




INDEX.


                       PAGE

  Adams, Benjamin        44

  Adams, George          40

  Anderson                6

  Ashton                 47

  Atkins                 48

  Bacon                   6

  Barnard                39

  Barrows, David         43

  Barrows, James          6

  Baxter                 46

  Bennett                48

  Bishop                 34

  Bissell                 7

  Boyer                   4

  Bristol                47

  Broad                  33

  Brown                   7

  Carey                   8

  Charles                49

  Clayton                 9

  Clifford                9

  Connelly               56

  Conner, Richard        47

  Conner, Anderson       10

  Conner, Lambert        38

  Constantine            40

  Cook                   50

  Crellen                42

  Crowell                55

  Crowner                48

  Coyle                  10

  Dann                   11

  Dayton                 51

  Dyer                    3

  Favreau                12

  Garner                 55

  Gay                    36

  Griswold               50

  Gray                   12

  Hagerdorn              56

  Hagerman               13

  Hall                   39

  Hanson                 13

  Havenhill, Marshall    13

  Havenhill, Henry       54

  Heacox                 54

  Hopgood, Thomas        33

  Hopgood, George        13

  Howes                  14

  Hutton                 14

  Jennings, Stephen      47

  Jennings, James        16

  Kilmer                 16

  Landon                 50

  Lawton                 51

  Leach, Greenbury       51

  Leach, John            17

  Lehman                 47

  Littlewood             17

  Lord                   56

  Mallory                48

  McKean                 47

  Merkli                 52

  Minard                 56

  Mintz                  40

  Mitchell               44

  Morton, Marcus         43

  Morton, Gilbert        52

  Mullenix               18

  Olin                    3

  Paxson                 48

  Pepoon                 41

  Pierson                18

  Pratt                  57

  Prentice               20

  Preston, William       21

  Preston, Luman         39

  Pruyn                  21

  Read                   46

  Remillard              21

  Rockwood               22

  Scofield               54

  Shoger                 43

  Sleezer                50

  Smith                  49

  Spellman                5

  Spencer                22

  Springer, Richard      22

  Springer, James        38

  Springer, Joseph       49

  Taylor, Robert         45

  Taylor, John           23

  Todd                   24

  Trenter                26

  Vreeland               26

  Wallace                26

  Wann                   42

  Waters                 43

  Watson                 53

  West                   27

  White                  28

  Wilcox                 49

  Wilsey                 28

  Wilson, Andrew         41

  Wilson, DeWitt         29

  Wilson, George         30

  Woodruff               46

  Wright                 31


  Preface                 2

  Remarks                57

  A Bit of History       59




Transcriber's Notes:

Passages in italics are indicated by _underscore_.

The following misprints have been corrected:
  "accompauied" corrected to "accompanied" (page 16)
  "doctor's" corrected to "doctors" (page 24)
  "religous" corrected to "religious" (page 29)
  "Novembe" corrected to "November" (page 50)
  "Pennsylania" corrected to "Pennsylvania" (page 53)

Some of the dates seem obviously incorrect; however, they are presented
in this text as they appear in the original.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Company K, Twentieth Regiment,
Illinois Volunteer Infantry, by Andrew Brown

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COMPANY K, TWENTIETH REGIMENT ***

***** This file should be named 32017.txt or 32017.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/0/1/32017/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
