The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Crimson Gardenia and Other Tales of
Adventure, by Rex Beach

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Crimson Gardenia and Other Tales of Adventure

Author: Rex Beach

Release Date: April 23, 2010 [EBook #32101]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CRIMSON GARDENIA ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                 _The Crimson Gardenia_

             _and Other Tales of Adventure_

                      BY REX BEACH

     AUTHOR OF "HEART OF THE SUNSET" "THE SPOILERS" ETC.


ILLUSTRATED

HARPER & BROTHERS PUBLISHERS
NEW YORK AND LONDON

THE CRIMSON GARDENIA AND OTHER TALES OF ADVENTURE
Copyright, 1911, 1912, 1913, 1916, by Harper & Brothers
Copyright, 1910, 1913, by Cosmopolitan Magazine
Copyright, 1906, by The Metropolitan Magazine Co.
Printed in the United States of America
Published April, 1916




[Illustration: Her eyes flashed to the white gardenia on his breast,
then up to his own.]




CONTENTS


THE CRIMSON GARDENIA

ROPE'S END

INOCENCIO

THE WAG-LADY

"MAN PROPOSES--"

TOLD IN THE STORM

THE WEIGHT OF OBLIGATION

THE STAMPEDE

WHEN THE MAIL CAME IN

MCGILL

THE BRAND




ILLUSTRATIONS


HER EYES FLASHED TO THE WHITE GARDENIA ON HIS BREAST, THEN UP TO HIS OWN

AS FLOREAL ROSE FROM HIS FATHER'S BODY HE HEARD A SHOT AND SAW THE
SOLDIERS OF THE REPUBLIC CHARGING HIM

"TAKE YOUR HAND OFF THAT GUN, BARCLAY"

"BARCLAY WASN'T MORE 'N HALF DEAD, AND THE WOMAN FELL TO BEGGIN' FOR HIS
LIFE AGAIN"




THE CRIMSON GARDENIA




I


The royal yacht had anchored amid a thunder of cannon, and the king had
gone ashore. The city was bright with bunting; a thousand whistles blew.
Up through the festooned streets His Majesty was escorted between long
rows of blue-coated officers, behind which the eager crowds were massed
for mile upon mile. Thin wire cables were stretched along the curbs, to
hold the people back, but these threatened to snap before the weight of
the multitude.

In the neighborhood of the raised pavilion where the queen and her maids
of honor waited, the press was thickest; here rows of stands had been
erected that groaned beneath their freight, while roof-tops and windows,
trees and telegraph-poles, were black with clustered humanity.

The king was tall and dark; a long beard hid his face. But the queen was
young and blushing, and her waiting-women were fairer than springtime
flowers. To a crashing martial air, she handed him a sparkling goblet in
which he pledged her happiness, while the street rocked to the roar of
many voices, and in the open spaces youths, grotesquely costumed, danced
with goblin glee.

Mr. Roland Van Dam secretly thought it all quite fine and inspiriting,
but he was too highly schooled to allow himself much emotion. He had
been hard put to obtain seats, and had succeeded only through the
efforts of a friend, the Duke of Cotton; therefore, he felt, the members
of his party might have shown at least a perfunctory appreciation. But
they were not the appreciative kind, and their attitude was made plain
by Eleanor Banniman's languid words:

"How dull! It's nothing like the carnival at Nice, and the people seem
very common."

Her father was dozing uncomfortably, with his two lower chins telescoped
into his billowing chest; Mrs. Banniman complained of the heat and the
glare, and predicted a headache for herself. Near by, the rest of the
party were striving to conceal their lack of interest by guying the
crowd below. Van Dam had been the one to suggest this trip to New
Orleans for the Mardi Gras, and he felt the weight of entertainment
bearing heavily upon him. In consequence, he assumed a sprightly
interest that was very far from genuine.

"This sort of thing awakens something medieval inside of one, don't you
know," he said.

Miss Banniman regarded him with a bland lack of comprehension; her
mother moaned weakly, the burden of her complaint being, as usual:

"Why _did_ we leave Palm Beach?"

"All those dukes and things make me feel as if it were real," Van Dam
explained further. "They say this Rex fellow is a true king during Mardi
Gras week, and those chaps in masks are quite like court jesters. Maybe
they sing of wars and love and romance--and all that rot."

"I dare say life was just as uninteresting in olden days as it is now,"
Eleanor remarked. "Love and romance exist mainly in books, I fancy. If
they ever did exist, we've outgrown them, eh, Roly?"

Being a very rich and a very experienced young woman, Miss Banniman
prided herself upon her lack of illusion. To be sure, she occasionally
permitted Roland to kiss her in celebration of their engagement, but
such caresses left her unperturbed; her pulses had never been stirred.
She looked upon marriage as a somewhat trying, although necessary,
institution. Van Dam, being equally modern and equally satiated by
life's blessings, shared her beliefs in a vague way.

Manifestly, no lover could allow such an assertion as this to go
unchallenged, so he rose to the defense of romance, only to hear her
say:

"Nonsense! Do be sensible, Roly. Such things aren't done nowadays."

"What things aren't done?"

"Oh, those crude, primitive performances we read about in novels. Nice
people don't fall in love overnight, for instance. They don't allow
themselves to hate, and be jealous, and to rage about like wild animals
any more."

"The idea! Your father is a perfect savage, at heart," said Mrs.
Banniman. She nodded at her sleeping husband, who was roused at that
moment by a fly that had strayed into his right nostril. Mr. Banniman
sneezed, half opened his eyes, and murmured a feeble anathema before
dozing off again. It was plain that he was not greatly enjoying the
Mardi Gras.

"All men are primitive," said Roly, quoting some forgotten author, at
which Eleanor eyed him languidly.

"Could you love at first sight and run off with a girl?"

"Certainly not. I'd naturally have to know something about her people--"

"Were you ever jealous?"

"You've never given me an occasion," he told her, gallantly.

"Did you ever hate anybody?"

"Um-m--no!"

"Ever been afraid?"

"Not exactly."

"Revengeful?"

"Certainly not."

She smiled. "It's just as I said. Respectable people don't allow
themselves to be harrowed by crude emotions. I hate my modiste when she
fails to fit me; I was jealous of that baroness at the Poinciana--the
one with all those gorgeous gowns; I'm afraid of flying-machines; but
that is as deep as such things go, nowadays--in our set."

Van Dam was no hand at argument, and he had a great respect for Miss
Banniman's observation; moreover, he had been discussing something of
which he possessed no first-hand knowledge. Therefore, he said nothing
further. No one had a greater appreciation of, or took a keener pleasure
in, life's unruffled placidity than the young society man. No one had a
denser ignorance of its depths, its hidden currents, and its uncharted
channels than he; for adventure had never come his way, romance had
never beckoned him from rose-embowered balconies. And yet, as the world
goes, he was a normal individual, save for the size of his income. He
had not lost interest in life; he was merely interested in things which
did not matter. That, after all, is quite different.

There were times, nevertheless, when he longed vaguely for something
thrilling to happen, when he regretted the Oslerization of romance and
the commercializing of love. Of course, adventure still existed; one
could hunt big game in certain hidden quarters, if one chose. Van Dam
detested stuffed heads, and it took so much time to get them. These
unformed desires came to him only now and then, and he felt ashamed of
them, in an idle way.

Now that the parade had passed, the visitors lost no time in leaving,
and a dignified stampede toward the hotel occurred, for the gentlemen
were thirsty and the ladies wished to smoke. It was due to their haste,
perhaps, that Van Dam became separated from them and found himself
drifting along Canal Street alone in a densely packed crowd of
merrymakers. A masked woman in a daring Spanish dress chucked him under
the chin; her companion showered him with confetti. A laughing Pierrot
whacked him with a noisy bladder; boys and girls in ragged disguises
importuned him for pennies. A very, very shapely female person, in what
appeared to be the beginnings of a bathing suit, laughed over her
shoulder, inviting him, with eyes that danced.

"My word!" murmured the New-Yorker. "This is worth while."

Ahead of him, he caught a glimpse of Miss Banniman's aigrettes and the
ponderous figure of her father. But the gaiety of the carnival crowd had
infected him, and he was loath to leave it for the Grunewald, whither
his friends were bound with the unerring directness of thirsty
millionaires. It was a brilliant, gorgeous afternoon; the streets were
alive with color. Somewhere through this crowd, the young man idly
reflected, adventure--even romance--might be stalking, if such things
really existed. So he decided to linger. To be quite truthful, Van Dam's
decision was made, not with any faintest idea of encountering either
romance or adventure, but because a slight indigestion made the thought
of a gin-fizz or a julep unbearable at the moment.

As he continued to move with the throng, the butt of badinage and the
target for impudent glances, he felt a desire to be of it and in it. He
yielded himself to a most indiscreet impulse. Assuring himself that he
was unobserved, he stepped into a store, purchased a plain black domino
and mask, donned them, and then fell in with the procession once more,
dimly amused at his folly, vaguely surprised at his impropriety.

But now that he was one of the revelers he was no longer an object of
their attentions; they paid no heed to him, and he soon became bored. He
engaged himself in conversation with an old flower-woman, and, as she
had only a solitary gardenia left in her tray, he bought it in order
that she might go home. He pinned the blossom on the left breast of his
domino, and wandered to the nearest corner to watch the crowds flow
past.

He had been there but a moment when a girl approached and stood beside
him. She was petite, and yet her body beneath its fetching Norman
costume showed the rounded lines of maturity; at the edge of her mask
her skin gleamed smooth and creamy; her eyes were very dark and very
bright. As Mr. Van Dam was a very circumspect young man, not given to
the slightest familiarity with strangers, he confined his attentions to
an inoffensive inventory of her charms, and was doubly startled to hear
her murmur:

"You came in spite of all, m'sieu'!"

A French girl, he thought. No doubt one of those Creoles he had heard so
much about. Aloud, he said, with a bow:

"Yes, mademoiselle. I have been looking for some one like you."

Her eyes flashed to the white gardenia on his breast, then up to his
own. "You were expecting some one?"

"I was. A girl, to guide me through the carnival."

"But you are early. Did you not receive the warning?"

"Warning?" he answered, confused. "I received no warning."

"I feared as much," she said, "so I came. But it was unwise of you; it
was madness to risk the streets." Her eyes left his face, to scan the
crowds.

He fancied she shrank from them, as if fearing observation. Van Dam was
puzzled. Her voice and manner undoubtedly betrayed a genuine emotion, or
else she was a consummate actress. If this were some Mardi Gras prank,
he felt a desire to see the next move. If it proved to be anything more,
he fancied that he was too sophisticated to be caught and fleeced like a
countryman. But something told him that this was no ordinary street
flirtation. The words "warning," "risk" seemed to promise entertainment.
If, as he suspected, she had mistaken him for some one else, a brief
masquerade could lead to no harm. He decided to see how far he could
carry the deception.

"What warning could serve to prevent my seeing you?" he asked in a
hollow voice; then was surprised at the flush that stole upward to the
girl's dainty ear.

"You are indeed insane to jest at such a time," she breathed. "I would
never have known you without the flower. But come--we are in danger
here. Some one--is waiting. Will you follow me?"

"To the ends of the earth," he replied, gallantly.

Again she gave him a startled glance, half of pleasure, half of
deprecation; then, as he made a movement to accompany her, she checked
him.

"No, no! You must let me go ahead. They are everywhere. They may suspect
even my disguise. I--I am dreadfully afraid."

Van Dam scarcely knew how to answer this. So, like a wise man, he held
his tongue.

"Listen!" she continued. "I will walk slowly, and do you remain far
enough behind for your own safety--"

"My safety is as nothing to yours," he told her, but she shook her head
impatiently.

"Please! Please! They will never select you out of a thousand dominos,
and I am not sure they suspect me. But should they try to lift my mask,
you must escape at once."

"Would they dare?" Mr. Van Dam inquired, shocked at such a breach of
carnival etiquette.

"They would dare anything."

"But I couldn't allow it, really," he persisted. "If any hand is to lift
your mask, I insist that mine be the favored one."

She darted a doubtful look at him, being plainly perturbed at his tone,
then shook her head. "She told me you were reckless, but you are
quite--insane."

For a second time he discovered that delicious color tingeing her neck
and laughed, which disconcerted her even more. She hesitated, then
turned away and he fell in behind her.

But distance served only to enhance the girl's charms. Roly saw how
beautifully proportioned she was, how regally she carried herself, how
light and springy was her step. Although he had not seen her face, he
somehow felt agreeably certain that she possessed a witching beauty.

The circumspection with which she avoided the densest crowds made him
wonder anew at the character of the danger that could overhang a masked
maiden at mid-afternoon on a carnival day, for by this time he had
forgotten his first suspicion. He thought not at all that the peril
could be serious, or in any way involve him, for the magic of the Van
Dam name protected its owner like invisible mail. The effect of that
patronymic was really quite wonderful; policemen bowed to it, irate
strangers allowed their anger to ooze away before it. It smoothed the
owner's way through difficulties and brought him favors when least
expected; rage changed to servility; indignation, opposition, even
jealousy altered color in the shadow of the Van Dam millions. Nothing
really unpleasant ever happened to Roly, and so it was that he had
become _blase_ and tired at twenty-six.

He followed his masked guide across Canal Street and into the foreign
quarter of the city, where the surroundings were unfamiliar to him. He
gazed with mild repugnance at the squalid old houses, moldering behind
their rusted iron balconies. Dim, flag-paved hallways allowed him a
glimpse of flowered courtyards at the rear; cool passages went twisting
in between the buildings. Over hard-baked, glaring walls there drooped
branches laden with bloom and fruit. The streets were narrow, the houses
leaned intimately toward one another, as if exchanging gossip; little
cafes with sanded floors opened upon the sidewalks. Here the carnival
crowd was more foreign in character; people were dancing to orchestras
of guitar and mandolin; youths turned somersaults for pennies; ragged
negroes jigged and shuffled with outstretched hats.

Through this confusion the Norman girl took her way, now seeking some
deep doorway to allow a particularly boisterous group to pass, now
flitting through the open spaces with the swift irregularity of a
butterfly winging its course through sunlit stretches. But her caution,
her birdlike, backward glances, told Van Dam that she was in constant
dread of discovery, and involuntarily he lessened the distance between
them.

It was well, perhaps, that he did so, for just then a man in a domino
like his own accosted the girl. Roly saw his guide shrink away, saw her
turn and signal him with a swift, imperious gesture of warning. Instead
of heeding it, he moved forward in time to intercept the stranger. The
fellow was laughing loudly; he assumed a tipsy air and lurched against
the girl; then, with a quickness that belied his pose, he snatched at
her mask and bared her features. She cried out in terror, and with the
sound of her voice Mr. Van Dam flew to action. He knew that until six
o'clock disguises were inviolate, and that it was against the strictest
of police regulations to unmask a reveler; therefore he yielded to a
righteous impulse and struck the man in the domino squarely upon the
jaw. Beneath Roly's rounded proportions was a deceptive machinery of
bone and muscle that had been schooled by the most expensive instructors
of boxing. He had known how to hit cleanly since he was twelve years
old, and although he had never struck a man in anger until this moment,
his fist went true. The fellow rocked stiffly back upon his heels and
fell like a wooden figure, his head thumping dully on the pavement, and
Roly gave vent to a most ungentlemanly snort of surprise and
satisfaction. It had been much easier than he had expected, and feeling
that the man should have every opportunity for fair play Roly began
promptly to count, "One, two, three--" Then he felt the girl's hand upon
his arm, and turned in time to catch a fleeting glimpse of a dimpled
chin as she drew her mask down. "Rotten trick, that!"

"Heaven above!" she gasped. "You must flee--quickly!"

People were crossing the street toward them, drawn by the sight of the
fallen man.

"Run away and leave you?" queried Roly. "Hardly!"

"Then"--the breath caught in the girl's throat--"come!"

She clutched his hand and they fled, side by side, pursued by half a
score of shouting merrymakers. Around the first corner they scurried,
into a crowd, then out of it and into the next thoroughfare, doubling
and turning until the girl's breath was gone.

"Why--did--you do--it? Ah!--why?" she gasped, still hurrying him along.

"Drunken loafer!" Van Dam said, vindictively.

"He was not drunk! Don't you understand? Didn't you guess? It was the
Black Wolf!"

Roly did not understand, and he had no opportunity to guess who or what
the Black Wolf might be, for his companion paused, crying:

"God help us! They are coming."

From the street behind rose a babble of angry voices.

"He saw me! He knows!"

She cast a despairing glance about, and, spying a narrow alley close at
hand, darted toward it, dragging Van Dam with her.

Retreat carries with it a peculiar panic, and the young man felt the
stirring of an utterly new sensation within him. He was running away!
What was more, he wanted to keep running, even though he had not the
faintest idea of what menaced him. It was quite remarkable. He seemed to
feel, for some unknown reason, that this sprightly young person beside
him was indeed risking her safety for him. Therefore, he began to share
her apprehensions, but as to what it meant or whither the adventure was
leading he had not a suspicion. He did wonder, however, where the Black
Wolf got his name.

The alley was damp and slippery, being no more than a tunnel-like
passage between two buildings, and it led into a large courtyard full of
carts and wagons. A low shed ran along one side of the inclosure; at the
rear was a two-story structure used as a stable.

"There! I guess we've given them the slip," Van Dam sighed, with relief.

But his companion shook her head. "No, no! We must hide. The Black Wolf
has the cunning of Satan, and now that he knows--" She sped through the
confusion of vehicles to the stable door, with Roly following. An
instant more and they were in an odorful, dim-lit place divided into
stalls out of which the heads of several horses were thrust in friendly
greeting. The girl closed the door and leaned panting against it, one
hand to her heaving bosom. Her head was bowed and her ears were strained
for sounds of pursuit. In the silence Van Dam heard his own heavy
breathing, the swish of the horses' tails, an impatient stirring of
hoofs, and a gentle whinny. He discovered that his pulse was hammering
in a very unusual manner and that he was agreeably excited.

The girl uttered an exclamation. "I feared so! Hurry!" She slipped past
him to a rickety stairway that led upward. "Ah--h--! this mask is
smothering me!" She disengaged it hastily, and he saw it dangling in her
hand as he mounted the steep stairs behind her. He saw also a pair of
dainty silken ankles, swelling into delicious curves that were hidden in
the foamy whiteness of lingerie. Being an extremely respectful
gentleman, Mr. Van Dam lowered his eyes, anticipating with curious
eagerness the pleasure of beholding her countenance, once they had
gained the loft. The desire to see behind her mask became really acute.
He had missed one opportunity by so narrow a margin as to quicken his
desires.

They came out upon a rough landing, and Van Dam caught the whisk of her
skirts disappearing through a door that led into the haymow. As he
followed, the door closed and he found himself in utter darkness. He
heard her fumbling with the lock. Their hands came together as he turned
a rusty key and he felt her figure close against his; her fragrant
breath fanned his cheek.

"Make no sound, as you value our lives."

As she whispered this, Van Dam swore mildly at the luck that prevented
him from appraising his companion's good looks, now that her mask was
off. From the courtyard below sounded voices. The girl clutched him
nervously; her hand was shaking. He could feel her shiver, so he slipped
an arm about her waist. He did this merely to steady her, he told
himself. He reasoned further that such a familiarity could scarcely be
offensive in the dark. As she yielded gratefully to his embrace, her
soft body palpitating against his own, he ceased reasoning and drew her
closer. It was very agreeable to discover that she made no resistance;
he could not recollect any sensation quite like this! As yet he had done
nothing improper, in view of the fact that it was every gentleman's
bounden duty to succor beauty in distress. He wondered if his friends at
the Grunewald had missed him, then realized with relief that Miss
Banniman never allowed his presence or his absence to interfere in the
slightest with her arrangements. They were probably finishing their
drinks by now. This would make an entertaining story, later in the
evening; they would never guess what he was doing.

"Who is that speaking?" he inquired.

"Francois, the Spider," whispered the girl. "Eh, God! How they all have
come to hate you!"

Roly reasoned from these words that his enemies numbered more than one
or two, and involuntarily he asked: "Hate me? What for?"

The girl trembled. "As if you did not know."

"And what would happen if they found me--us?" he persisted, feeling
vaguely for some hint.

"Ah!" Her breath caught. "Hush!" She laid her fingers over the lips of
his mask.

Van Dam yielded to an ungovernable impulse and kissed them through the
stiff, harsh cloth, whereat she said in wonderment:

"Heaven guard us! You are actually laughing. That you are wild, I knew;
but--you are--you act very strangely, m'sieu."

"Perhaps I'm intoxicated," he murmured, and pressed her slender waist
meaningly; whereupon she seemed to feel his arm for the first time. She
drew away, but as she disengaged his embrace her hand encountered his.

"It is wet--bloody--where you struck the Black Wolf."

"That was a good wallop, wasn't it?" Van Dam chuckled, with
satisfaction, while she felt for her handkerchief and dabbled at his
bruised knuckles. "I wondered if I could put him out."

Then they ceased whispering, for some one was entering the stable
beneath them. After a time the stairs creaked to a heavy tread, a hand
tried the door, and they could feel a presence within arm's-length. They
stood motionless, not daring even to shift their weight upon the crazy
floor, until the fellow began to explore the other portion of the loft.

"That is the Spider himself," breathed the girl, close to Van Dam's ear.
"He thinks he has me in his web; but--"

"Yes?"

"I would die before I married him."

A sudden dislike for spiders in general awoke in Roly's breast.

"I hate him. I would kill him if I dared, but he frightens me--" She
broke off and caught at her companion, gasping: "God! What are you
doing?"

He had turned the key softly and was opening the door. To be quite
truthful, Roly Van Dam did not know exactly what he intended doing, but
some reckless impulse moved him to action. He was invaded by a sudden
desire to lay hands upon this Spider person who went about terrorizing
pretty girls. Having been reared to a habit of doing exactly as impulse
dictated, he felt no hesitation now. Away back in his mind, however,
something told him calmly that he had gone quite mad, that the magic of
adventure had sent his wits a-flying and had played havoc with his
common sense. And a change really had come over him with the very
beginning of this enterprise, although he had not stopped to notice it.
The flaring rage that had answered to the Wolf's assault upon the girl,
the joyful sensation of setting his fist into the fellow's face, the
excitement of the flight and the pursuit, had all combined to upset his
equilibrium. Then, too, the presence of this bewitching creature close
beside him in the darkness, the pressure of her body in his arms, the
scent of her warm breath--all this helped to completely electrify him.
He felt the dawning of new and utterly absurd desires. Away with
discretion! To the winds with prudence! This maiden's cause was his.
Here was the one glad moment of his life.

"Francois!" he called in a low voice. He slipped the girl's hand from
his arm, thrust her back into the shadows, and stepped out upon the
landing.

"_Oui!_ In a moment!" The Spider came stumbling toward him. "She is not
here." Van Dam saw a tall man in a domino like his own. "_Sacre!_ She
has disappeared; and that devil's spawn is with her. You found no trace
in the yard below?"

"Sst! Listen," breathed Roly. He sank his fingers into his palms and
measured the distance carefully. Then, as Francois turned his head
attentively, Roly braced himself and swung. It may have been due to the
uncertain light, or to the narrow eyelet-holes through which he peered;
at any rate, Van Dam's blow went short.

The Spider uttered a cry of fury and surprise. Roly felt himself hugged
by a pair of thin, iron-muscled arms; then his hands felt in beneath the
man's disguise, and the cry changed to a gurgle. They strained and
rocked against each other briefly; the floor sagged and creaked; the
door behind them flew open. Francois was groping with one free hand at
his waist; but his domino was like a shirt, and he could not find that
for which his hungry fingers searched. As for Van Dam, a delicious
ferocity was flaming through his veins. Here was an enemy bent upon his
quick destruction. No game he had ever played was half so exhilarating
as this. He could feel the fellow writhe and the breath bursting through
beneath his fingers; he could feel the man's cords harden until they
were like wire. Strange to say, with every wrench and every surge his
own abysmal fury increased. But the Spider was no weakling; he fought
desperately until, in a burst of blind anger that was like some diabolic
glee, Van Dam lifted him bodily and hurled him at the opening in the
floor. The fellow missed his footing, clawed wildly, then fell backward
headlong into the light below. The next instant Van Dam, too, had lost
his balance and followed, bumping from step to step until he fetched up
at the foot with a jar that drove the breath out of him.

He sat up in a moment, still dazed; then he heard a rustle, and beheld
above him a pair of frightened, dark eyes gazing into his. Although he
could see nothing of the girl's face--she had replaced her mask--he knew
that she was racked with anxiety.

"Are you killed?" she queried.

"No; just abominably twisted," he said. Then, with a wry face: "Ouch!
That was an awful bump." As he felt himself over gingerly he stopped
short at the sight of his mask lying crumpled beside him. He realized
that the jig was up and began to formulate an explanation of his
deception, only to hear her exclaim, tremulously:

"God be praised! You are unhurt."

He sat still, staring at her, amazed that no outburst followed her
glimpse of his face.

"How did you dare--?" She turned to the figure of Francois, which Roly
discovered motionless an arm's-length away.

The Spider was sprawled loosely in the litter. His head was twisted upon
his shoulders in a peculiar way, and his mask, having slipped to the
back, stared upward with a placid, waxlike smile that was horrible under
the circumstances.

Still lost in wonderment, Van Dam arose, dusted off his clothing, and
picked up his own disguise. Was it possible that she did not know the
person she had gone to meet? It seemed so, indeed, for she was hanging
upon him anxiously, as if still doubting his safety, while she half
sobbed her admiration of his bravery and her gratitude at his escape.
Roly began to fear he had been imposed upon, after all, else how could
she fail to realize that he was an utter stranger? But the girl's
honesty was compelling; he found that he could not doubt the sincerity
of her gaze.

He felt an unaccountable lack of compunction regarding the Spider. In
fact, he experienced a sense of satisfaction at the completeness of his
victory over the ruffian, and she seemed to share the feeling.

He heard her urging him to make haste, and before he had fully regained
his wits he found himself following her out into the sunlight.
Underneath the wagon-shed she guided him, around behind it and into a
narrow three-foot space, the left side of which was bounded by a board
fence about head-high.

"Quick!" she cried, eagerly. "Once we are on the other side we may
escape. The others are somewhere close by."




II


Van Dam, being accustomed by this time to a certain obedience, lifted
the girl up to the top of the fence, scrambled over it himself, and held
up his arms to her. He was in another yard, much cleaner than the one he
had just quit. There were trees and flowers in it, and looking down on
them were shuttered windows which seemed empty. As she surrendered her
weight to him he gave rein to the license which was in his blood and
pressed a warm kiss back of her mask where the hair lay in wispy
ringlets against her neck.

"_Mon Dieu!_ What a man!" she laughed, struggling gently to free
herself. "You had better put on your mask. We haven't far to go, but
there may be observing eyes."

"Am--I--er--quite the person you pictured?" he queried, as he adjusted
the false face.

"Not at all."

"You have never seen me before to-day?"

"Of course not! How could I?"

"I have seen you often."

"Impossible! Where?"

"Dreams!" said Van Dam, vaguely, yet with some degree of truth. "This
all seems like a dream, as a matter of fact. I'm afraid I'll turn over,
and you'll change into an old lady with hoop-skirts, or a flock of
purple snowbirds, or a friendly crocodile with gold spectacles."

She pondered this for a moment as they made their way across the yard,
being careful in the mean while to see if they were observed. After a
moment she halted.

"Wait!" she said. "I--am not sure we dare risk going farther, for the
streets are alarmed and the Wolf is in the neighborhood with all his
pack. I had thought to take you straight home, but now they will be
watching. It would be madness to try it." Again she fell silent, only to
exclaim: "I have an idea. Come!" She turned abruptly to the right.

"Where are we going now?" he inquired, mildly.

She pointed to a house the back yard of which abutted upon the one that
they were crossing. "Yonder is your cousin Alfred's house. He is away at
business, the servants are out watching the carnival, and so it is
empty. Do you dare venture it?"

"Just the thing!" he said, amiably. "I owe Alfred a call."

The girl laughed shortly. "Ah! He would die of rage--or fright--if he
knew; but you can wait there while I go--"

"Oh, I say! You're not going to leave me?" queried Roly in genuine
alarm.

"Of course, silly! Some one must bring her."

Van Dam fell silent, speculating upon this last remark. After a moment
he said, "You're sure Alfred won't return?"

"Who knows? We must run some hazards. The key will be under the step, I
think. Come!"

They gained ingress to the next inclosure through a cedar hedge. Then,
as they neared the back door, a distant commotion sounded from the
stable-yard, warning them that the Spider's friends had stumbled upon
him. But the girl's ready fingers found the key where it was hidden, and
an instant later they were in a spotless creole kitchen ornamented with
shining pots and pans. A cat rose from a sleepy window-ledge, arched its
back, and stretched.

With a warning gesture Van Dam's guide bade him wait, then disappeared,
returning in a moment.

"It is as I thought--the house is empty." She beckoned him, and he
followed her past a pantry, down a hall, and into a study furnished with
a considerable degree of elegance. Drawn blinds shut out the glaring
heat; it was dim and cool and restful.

The maiden heaved a sigh of relief and steadied herself against one of
the massive mahogany chairs, showing by her attitude that the recent
strain had told upon her.

"Heaven be praised! You are safe here, for a time at least," she managed
to say.

"Nice, comfy place, this," remarked Van Dam, with an appreciative glance
at the surroundings. "We can sit here and--and get acquainted--eh?"

"Hm-m! I think I have learned to know you quite well in the past
half-hour," she laughed.

"True! But we've had very little chance to talk calmly and rationally;
now, have we? Of course you're accustomed to such things, perhaps; but
it has been a trifle strenuous for a person of my easy ways. I don't
mind telling you that I'm positively winded. Let's rest a bit before you
leave."

But the girl shook her head at his suggestion. "You forget how she has
waited and longed for this hour. She has been very ill; nothing seemed
to interest her until you promised to come on the last day of the
_fiesta_. Since then she has been like another woman. She is counting
the moments now until she feels your arms about her."

Roly stirred uncomfortably, for here was something he had not counted
upon. One woman at a time was ample; he had no desire to hold another to
his breast. He was shocked, too, that this girl should suggest such a
thing after what had passed between them. It was unseemly. He felt
tempted to confess his deception and to demand an explanation of the
whole affair, but some sense of shame held him back. Besides, his
companion was undoubtedly sincere, and he could not bring himself to
cause her dismay.

Another reason that urged him to hold his tongue and to let the
adventure run its course was that as yet he had not seen her face. The
desire to do so was becoming insufferable. He was about to claim the
privilege when she changed the current of his thoughts.

"You must not be shocked if she does not recognize you. She has been
ill, very ill, since you--proved so great a--trial to her. You
understand?"

"Perfectly!" he said, thankful that she could not detect his signs of
bewilderment.

"Very well, then. You will make free of your cousin Alfred's hospitality
while I am gone." She laughed nervously. "La! There is irony for you."

"Suppose he should return in the mean time?"

She shrugged. "You seem quite capable of caring for yourself, m'sieu'. I
should not wish to be in his shoes, that is all. But there is little
danger. And now I must leave you."

"Just a moment," he said, taking her two hands in his. "You have seen my
face. Don't you think I wish to see yours?"

Her breath caught at the tone of his voice. "Not yet. Please! When I
return--when you have held her in your arms and made your peace. Then,
perhaps, if you wish--but not until then." She pressed his fingers
meaningly, and he thrilled.

"You haven't spoken my name, either," said he. "Won't you tell me that
you--like me?"

"I--like you, Cousin Emile," said she; then, in a voice that told him
she was blushing rosily, "and what name do you give to me?"

Roly's wits came to his rescue barely in time; with an air of deepest
tenderness, that was not all assumed, he said: "I haven't dared
acknowledge the name my heart has given you, even to myself. It is--"

"No, no!" she laughed, tremulously. "Call me Madelon."

"Madelon, Desire of my Dreams." He raised her hand to his lips. "Until
you give me leave to lift your mask I kiss these dimpled fingers."

It was plain that his boldness did not altogether displease her, for she
paused reluctantly upon the threshold. Her eyes were shining, although
her mask smiled at him vacuously as she said:

"You are a most unusual young man. You awaken something strange within
me. I cannot despise you as I should, for you have taken away my reason.
That is disturbing, is it not? Now, then, avail yourself of the
hospitality of the man who has robbed you. I shall return as fast as
ever my feet will bring me." She waved him a kiss and was gone.

He heard the front door close. Then he endeavored to piece out some
theory as to the cause of this situation, but the more he considered the
clues in his possession the more bewildered he became. One thing only
stood out with alarming certainty--his cousin Madelon had gone to fetch
a woman who loved him. So long as the adventure had concerned him only
with the masked girl herself he had been eager to continue it. Now that
it threatened to involve a second woman, he decided it was time to go.

She would return and find him gone. It would be a disappointment,
perhaps, but not so great as his own at parting from her and leaving
this mystery unsolved. He was somewhat proud of his exploits thus far,
for in an hour's time he had met and bested two of his enemies and had
changed a maiden's heart. No mean accomplishment for an idler! But why
did she feel that she ought to despise him? Why had she risked so much
for a man beloved by another? Why, under these circumstances, had she
welcomed his advances and promised him a sight of her face--a kiss,
perhaps? Above all, who were the Black Wolf, the Spider, and Cousin
Alfred? He gave up puzzling over the affair and determined to get out of
this stranger's house without delay.

It was evident that Cousin Alfred was a person of substance, for the
study was furnished in rich old Santo Domingo mahogany, blood-red and
flaming where the light struck it; the books were bound in uniform
levant; the paintings were valuable; the bric-a-brac in irreproachable
taste. An inlaid ivory humidor was filled with coronas at exactly the
right degree of moisture. He removed the ground-glass stopper from an
etched decanter and sniffed of the contents. The aroma brought a smile
to his face, and, reflecting that the owner had robbed him, he took time
to pour out a drink and to light a fragrant cigar. All gentlemanly
housebreakers did the like, he reflected. Then he yielded to a whimsical
notion and fumbled in his pocket, thinking to leave the price of his
refreshments on the tray.

Midway in this purpose he paused. The breath hung in his throat, the
hair at the back of his neck seemed to rise. He had heard no one enter
the house, there had been no faintest stir since Madelon had left, he
detected no sound whatever, and yet he was positive that eyes were
boring into his back--that he was no longer alone. It was ridiculous,
and yet--A gentle cough sounded behind him!

With a swift gesture he settled his mask back in place and, whirling
around, beheld the most evil-appearing human being he had ever seen. The
man was little and stooped and undersized, all but his head, which was
unusually large. His face was fleshless and covered with a tight skin of
unusual pallor. He was bowing at Van Dam, but his smile was mocking and
his eyes glittered malignantly.

"Good day, Monsieur Black Wolf," said the stranger, harshly. "Making
yourself at home with my wines, as usual, eh?"

Van Dam felt the cold sweat leap out upon his body; he cursed the
deliberation that had betrayed him. With an assumption of indifference
he mumbled something and waved his cigar carelessly.

"How often must I tell you to come here only at night?" snarled the old
man. "Already the police are suspicious. Fortunately, it is carnival
day--I dare say no one suspected you in that disguise."

The speaker deposited his hat upon the table with a sour glance; then,
when his caller said nothing, he snapped:

"Well, well? What is it?"

Van Dam was at a loss for words; he was panic-stricken; but swift upon
his consternation came a reckless determination to take advantage of the
old gentleman's first mistake and to try to brazen the matter through.
There was nothing to be gained by explanation; no one would believe his
story. He spoke out boldly.

"The Wolf is hurt, and the Spider, I think, has his neck very neatly
broken. I came to tell you that your cousin Emile is in the city."

The effect of these words was amazing, electric. Cousin Alfred turned a
corpselike green; he froze in his tracks; his eyes rolled in their
sockets.

"Emile! Here!" His teeth chattered, he plucked at his collar as if he
were strangling. "Then--you? Who are you?"

Roly shrugged. "I am one of the others. I was sent to warn you." He
recognized now the character of the old fellow's emotion. It was
cowardice, terror, but of such utter foulness as to be disgusting.

Evidently this Emile, whoever he was, had a reputation. Roly multiplied
his host's discomfiture by adding:

"Yes; he struck down the Wolf in the street; then dropped the Spider on
his head from the top of a staircase."

"God help us!" stammered Cousin Alfred. "He will take me next! Oh, he
has threatened me--" He cast a frightened glance over his shoulder, as
if expecting the sanguinary Emile to appear at any moment. Then he began
to whine: "I know him, I know him. And the servants gone! I--I am an old
man; he would like nothing better than to find me alone. But how--how
dared he come? Wait! It was Felice. Ho! I'll wager she sent for him; and
he would not refuse, the scoundrel!" The speaker's lips were wet and
loose, his gaze was very evil as he mumbled along.

Felice must be the other girl, the one for whom Madelon had gone, Roly
decided. In view of Alfred's evident hatred, it did not seem right to
allow Madelon to bring the other girl without some warning. One glance
at those working features convinced the young man that such a meeting
would be dangerous; and yet he was quite at a loss how to prevent it.
His host was running on.

"It was only yesterday that she appealed to me, she and Madelon, and all
the time they knew he was coming." He ground his teeth. "I have been a
fool to spare them so long."

"This Felice," Van Dam ventured, groping blindly for some clue, "your
cousin Emile is fond of her, I judge."

"Damnation! He would pass through fire for her. And she would sacrifice
her soul for him." Alfred poured himself a drink with shaking hand. The
glass rattled against the decanter; he spilled the wine over his
waistcoat as he gulped it.

"So they planned to catch me napping, eh? But we shall see. Yes, yes! We
shall see." After a moment, during which he pulled himself together, he
continued: "You shall remain here with me. When he comes we shall afford
him a surprise." He slid open a drawer in the big desk and took from it
a revolver, at which Roly exclaimed:

"I say--whatever makes you think he'll come here?"

"Oh, he will come! There is no doubt of it. He has promised me that
much. Those were his last words--"

"Er--why don't you clear out? You don't have to stay and see him."

But the old man's eyes were red and vindictive as he shook his head.
"You don't understand. So long as he lives we are none of us safe, not
even you. Besides, he would return again; he hangs upon me like a leech.
I--I dream about him."

"Well, what are you going to do?"

"If I--if I should kill him, the law would say nothing. I could kill him
very easily and nothing would be said. You understand?" Cousin Alfred's
lips were watery; little drops of moisture gleamed upon his sallow face;
he eyed the pistol with a shrinking fascination. "I--I--" He fell to
trembling weakly, as his first desperation cooled.

Van Dam watched him curiously. He looked up, at length, to meet Roly's
gaze. His own eyes were wavering; his face was distorted with mingled
fear and eagerness. He stretched his neck, as if he already felt on it
the fingers of his cousin Emile. When Van Dam did not offer to help him
he whined: "He has always intended to even up the score; but I am an old
man. My hand is unsteady. Perhaps you--It would be worth something to
escape those dreams! I could afford to pay well, as you know. You are a
strong man. You have no nerves; your hand is sure--" The old villain's
expression was crafty; he was gnawed by a fierce desire that he was
loath to put into words.

"You mean you'd like to have me make away with him?" queried Van Dam, as
if in a dream.

"Yes, yes! The law would say nothing."

"How so? It's not so easy to kill a man and--"

"But the reward--two thousand dollars! You would get that. I will double
it. Eh? Come now, is it a bargain?" The speaker was trembling, but when
he received no answer he went on: "I will take the blame upon myself. I
will say that I did it; and you will get the money--four thousand
dollars. Let us say five thousand, eh? A tidy sum for a moment's work
with no risk. We are alone in the house. No one but the Wolf knows you
are here. Even I don't know--By the way, I--I haven't seen you yet."

"Under the circumstances, I think I'll keep my mask on," Van Dam
answered. "Perhaps the less you know about me, the better."

"Then you agree?" queried the other, all ashake.

Roly declined with a gesture.

"Eh, God! Five thousand dollars! A fortune, indeed! Think of it! Heaven
knows I am not a Cr[oe]sus, and yet--I might increase even that a
little. What do you say? Six thousand, then, all cash?"

"This is the money you stole from Emile, I believe," said Van Dam. "You
could afford even more--"

"Seven thousand five hundred!" chattered Alfred. "Not another cent, or I
shall do it myself."

"Good! You do it!" Roly exclaimed; whereat the tempter writhed and
shivered in an ague of fear. With a wail that came like a sob and with a
final wrench of his miserly soul, he exclaimed:

"Wait, then! I will pay you ten thousand dollars if you kill him. The
money is there. It will bankrupt me; but--God above! Ten thousand
dollars! It is scarcely worth it--such a little job!"

"How do I know you'd make good?" inquired the young man. "You robbed
him. You might rob me."

"I have promised! It is there--in the safe. The moment he is dead--"

"Bah!" Mr. Van Dam managed a mocking laugh, although his heart was
pounding. "Your word is worth nothing to me."

Alfred made answer by slipping across the room and kneeling before the
steel safe. He spun the knob swiftly to right and to left, then gave a
wrench, and the massive door opened.

"Come here!"

Van Dam obeyed.

"Look!"

He saw legal documents, deeds, mortgages, and blue envelopes, all neatly
marked, then a cash-drawer crowded full of symmetrical packages of
crisp, new ten-dollar bills, each with its bank band plainly labeled
"$1000."

"Eh? Are you satisfied?" The owner was staring craftily up at him,
careful to keep his body between Van Dam and the treasure.

"Jove!" Roly exclaimed in astonishment. "You'll be robbed some night."

"Is it a bargain?"

"I'm no business man." The masker hesitated with an air of extreme
suspicion. "Will you pay in advance?"

At this, Cousin Alfred uttered a bleat of dismay, but Roly was firm.

"I'm not sure you'd open the safe again, don't you see? Besides, it
would take time, and--I'd prefer not to wait; really I would, for I'm
always a bit nervous after a job of this kind."

"Listen, then," exclaimed the old man. "I will close the safe, but I
will leave the combination off. See! We must each run some risk in this
matter, I suppose; but--I trust you. Once it is over, there will be no
delay. A moment and you can be away with ten thousand dollars in your
pocket--and with me to do the explaining."

Why he had allowed the affair to run to so extraordinary a length Van
Dam hardly knew, except that he wished to gain time. He had no idea that
the mysterious Emile would really come to the house, for Madelon had as
much as told him that a far different reason lay behind the young man's
presence in the city.

What did concern Roly, however, the more he considered it, was the
possible consequence if the two girls returned. Thus far he had been
able to meet each new surprise, each fresh situation, with a resource
that amazed himself, but if they came face to face with him and Alfred,
his own masquerade would end at once and disastrous explanations would
certainly follow. Nevertheless, he could not run away and leave them in
an awkward position. As he looked back over the fantastic occurrences of
the past hour or more it amused and amazed him to realize how nicely he
had fitted into the puzzle--and puzzle it surely was; for the whole
sequence of events that had followed the purchase of the white gardenia
that lay above his heart was now more bewildering than ever.

That there was something more than mere roguery afoot he had ample
proof. He felt himself groping along the edge of something vague and
black and sinister. But what it was, what were the issues, or who were
the people involved, he had not the slightest conception. Of one thing
only was he sure, Madelon had no place in this elaborate web and woof of
crime. She had impressed him more deeply even than he had realized, and
his main anxiety now, outside of a desire to protect her from the venom
of this poisonous old man, was to see her face, to lift with his own
fingers the mask that had so tantalized him.

The owner of the house was busily arranging the plans for Emile's
destruction when the doorbell rang. He clutched his guest nervously by
the arm and thrust the revolver into his hand, whispering:

"It is he! The scoundrel has arrived! Quickly now--behind the door!"

But Roly stepped to a front window and, cautiously drawing the curtain
aside, peered out. He saw what he had feared--the figure of a petite
Norman maid, and beside it that of a masked woman in a long, dark robe.

"Well, now! Who can it be?" he heard Alfred whisper, and discovered the
senile villain peering past his shoulder.

"It is Madelon and Felice," Roly explained.

"_They!_ Here? Wait! I will give them a cursing to remember." But before
the speaker could move he found his arms pinioned behind him and his own
weapon pointed at his head. He uttered a squeak of amazement and terror.
"_Mon Dieu!_ What is this?"

"Shut up!" Roly dragged the old man from the window, stripped a thick
curtain cord from its hook, and knotted his wrists together.

Alfred offered no resistance; a horrible fear had him by the throat; he
hung like a sack in the younger man's grasp. His eyes alone retained
their activity. These followed Van Dam in a horrified stare; they seemed
about to emerge from their sockets.

Roly deposited his limp captive in a chair and, stepping to the window,
tapped sharply. When Madelon looked up he signaled her to wait. The hall
portieres furnished another cord for Cousin Alfred's ankles, and a
handkerchief served as a gag. As this was being adjusted, however, the
captive quavered, hoarsely:

"Who--are you?"

"I?" Roly laughed. "Why, I am your cousin Emile!"

The householder voiced a thin shriek and began to plead for his life.
Then the remnants of his strength escaped, leaving him a spineless heap
in the great leather chair.

Van Dam bore him in his arms down the hall, searching for a place of
concealment. This he found in a closet, the door of which he closed.
Then he hastened back to the front entrance.

"You kept us waiting sufficiently," Madelon said, as he stepped aside
for the two women to enter.

Roly's eyes were glued upon the taller of the two figures, but Felice
seemed to take no heed of him. He heard her murmuring in a sick, eager
voice:

"Emile! My own beloved! Emile!"

Madelon raised her hand in a warning gesture and the young man shrank
closer into the shadows.

"Courage, dear!" she said to her companion. "We have arrived at last. A
moment now and he will come." She half led, half supported the taller
woman into the library. The next instant she was back at Van Dam's side.
Drawing him into the parlor, across the hall, she exclaimed in a voice
which showed that tears were in her eyes: "Thank Heaven, no one
recognized us! But I was weak with fright. Oh! It was pitiful! I have
wept at every step. She has been calling you like that, night and day.
Go--quickly!" She removed his mask and thrust him into the hall.

This was the most embarrassing moment Van Dam had experienced thus far.
He had been prepared to face eventual discovery, and had decided to make
a clean breast of his part in this comedy when the necessary moment
arrived, but--this was altogether different. Felice was ill,
half-demented. What might be the effect upon her of this disclosure?
There was nothing to do, however, but to face it out and to make the
truth known as quickly and as gently as possible.

But as he entered the study he received a surprise that robbed the
adventure of all its entertainment, that changed this comedy into a
tragedy and humbled the man's reckless spirit.




III


Van Dam saw that which filled him with an aching pity; for, instead of a
girl, he found awaiting him a frail, sweet-faced old woman whose fingers
were locked as if in prayer, whose lips were murmuring the name of her
son. Her hair, softer and finer than silken floss, was silvery white;
her wistful, wrinkled countenance was ablaze with a glad excitement that
made it glorious and holy. That which caused Van Dam's heart to melt and
to turn away completely, however, was the fact that she was blind.

She had heard his step, muffled as it was in the inch-thick carpet, and
rose with a tender cry, pausing with her arms outstretched, her body
shaken by an ecstasy of yearning.

"Emile! Emile!" she whispered, and came toward him. Her sightless eyes
were wet; she was trembling terribly.

Van Dam experienced a desire to flee. He tried to speak and to warn her
off, but as the feeble figure swayed toward him, the age-old, appalling
tragedy of mother love caused his throat to tighten. Then he took her
hands in his; his arms enfolded her. She lay against his breast, weeping
softly, gladly, while he bowed his head reverently over hers. Had his
life depended upon his speaking, he could not have done so. He merely
waited, with a sick feeling of dread, the instant of her awakening. He
was vaguely surprised as moment followed moment and it did not come.
Then he discovered the explanation. Grief had set her wits to wandering;
days and weeks and months of yearning had burned away some part of her
faculties, leaving her possessed by such a reasonless hunger that almost
any object would have served to fill her want. He had heard of demented
mothers whose minds had been saved by the substitution of a living for a
dead child, and it seemed that this was a similar case; for she was
flooded now with a supreme content and appeared to experience no
suspicion of fraud.

The touch of her fluttering fingers on his cheek was like the caress of
butterfly wings; her voice was soft; her words, though wandering, were
tender and filled with such a heaven-born adoration that his distress
was multiplied. This was her hour, he reflected. Perhaps an all-wise
Providence had selected him to fill this part and to bring glory to her
withered heart. At any rate, he would have been unspeakably cruel to
disillusionize her.

He led her to a chair, then knelt and bowed his head to her straying
fingers, murmuring those terms of endearment which cause a mother's
breast to thrill. When he looked up to Madelon, at last, she saw that he
was crying--quite like a little boy.

From the disconnected words that fell from the blind woman's lips he
began, after a time, to piece the truth together.

Emile had been an only son, a paragon of manly virtues, the keeper of
his mother's soul. There had come a great shock and a great disgrace
that had evidently conspired to unseat her reason. She spoke indirectly
of them, as a child marked by some prenatal influence recoils at contact
with the cause of its infirmity. Then, it seemed, Madelon had come to
watch over and to comfort her, filling a son's place with a daughter's
devotion. There had been persecution, want, the loss of property through
an enemy of whom the mother spoke ramblingly. Van Dam recollected the
dried-up villain in the closet down the hall, and felt a flame of rage
mount through him. He longed mightily to ask questions, to run the
matter down without delay, but dared not, for he was in momentary dread
that the imposture would be discovered. So he spoke as infrequently as
possible, and substituted for words those gentle caresses and endearing
attentions that are far more welcome to a starving heart. Madelon
remained close by, adding a grain of comfort and encouragement now and
then, and regarding Van Dam with a strangely bewildered attention.

But the mother was far from strong. Her excitement had wearied her, and
now, with the relaxation of contentment, fatigue stole over her. She lay
back among the soft cushions, her restless hands moving more slowly, her
gentle voice stilled. She dozed at last, her face serene and beatific.

Madelon motioned to Van Dam, and he rose. Noiselessly they stole across
the hall and into the drawing-room, leaving the placid figure in repose.

She turned upon him, saying, doubtfully: "With every moment you surprise
me, Emile. You are not at all what I expected, not at all the cousin of
whom I have heard so much! Even in looks you seem--how shall I say
it?--strange."

"Are you pleased or disappointed?"

"Ah! Pleased! I--I feel that I must weep. You are so brave and strong,
and yet so gentle, so sweet! Perhaps only a mother recognizes the good
that is in one. That scene in yonder was very--touching. I--I can hardly
credit my ears and my eyes."

"It's plain you have a wrong idea of me. I'm not at all a bad sort."

"So I begin to believe, in spite of everything. La! It is confusing. I
am all in a whirl." She uttered a hesitating, silvery little laugh that
proved her embarrassment.

"We must speak quickly," he said. "I am also greatly confused. You have
opened up a great possibility for me, Madelon. The whole world is
suddenly different. I--I think I am in love with you, my little cousin."

She flung out her hand to check him, crying: "No, no! I could never love
you!"

Her voice was uncertain, and he imprisoned her outstretched palm. Then,
with his free hand, he removed her mask. She made no resistance, she did
not even draw away from him. His heart leaped wildly at the face he saw;
for it was more perfect even than he had imagined. The eyes were deep
brown, the skin was smooth and olive-hued, the lips were red and pouting
with embarrassment. She met his hungry gaze with a flaming blush of
defiance; then she smiled pathetically, and without further delay he
drew her to him and kissed her once, twice, again and again, until she
lay, spent and shaken, in his arms. After a time, she said, wonderingly:

"What miracle is this? I have always hated you; I--hate you now when I
think of the evil you have done. I shall continue to hate you."

"I hardly believe that."

"It is very sad that this has come to pass; it means nothing but
unhappiness."

"How so?"

"Can you ask? You--a refugee, with a price upon your head!" She
shuddered and buried her face against his shoulder. "Why have you made
me love you?"

"It was fate, my little witch. If you will trust me, all will come out
right in the end. But there is a great deal here that I don't
understand. For instance, how came you two to be in want?"

"Surely you know as well as I."

"I do not."

"But I wrote--"

"Letters go astray. Tell me."

"There is little to tell. We hardly know ourselves, except that we
trusted in our good cousin Alfred, as you trusted. He is a snake!" She
clutched Roland fiercely by the folds of his domino. "Oh! It is too bad
that I did not know you sooner, Emile! I would have saved you from those
evil men; for I am very wise. But now you must suffer the punishment for
your crime; and I must suffer also. It is hardly just, is it?"

"Suppose I told you--er--I am innocent?"

"Please!" One rosy palm closed his lips. "You must never lie to me, even
to promote my happiness. No! When a woman loves, she loves blindly,
without reason, regardless of her lover's unworthiness. You have brought
misery to me as you brought it to--her. Perhaps you, too, will suffer,
as a punishment."

"And why have you devoted yourself to my mother?" he inquired.

"I love her. I am alone in the world. We are poor together. Cousin
Alfred has my money, too, you understand."

Van Dam was tempted, as upon several former occasions, to tell her the
truth, but a sudden idea occurred to him--an idea so inspiring, so
brilliant, that it brought an exclamation to his lips.

"Wait here for a moment," he said, and, leaving her, he stole into the
library. With an eye upon the sleeping figure, he knelt before the safe
and turned the knob. It opened noiselessly; and the sight of the
close-packed cash-drawer filled him with a tremendous merriment. It was
exhilarating, it was God-like to be endowed with the power of
restitution and retribution. He greatly enjoyed the feel of the crisp
new bank-notes as he emptied the compartment and assembled the packages
into a bundle. He was amazed at the amount represented. There must have
been twenty thousand dollars, all in those smooth, unsoiled ten-dollar
bills. Evidently the old miser preferred lock and key to a banker's
vagaries. Naughty Alfred, to rob widows and orphans! Well, he had been
warned of the danger of robbery. Van Dam predicted apoplexy for the
owner when he discovered his loss.

The girl was waiting where he had left her, but when she discovered the
nature of the gift he bore, she drew back in amazement.

"Come! Come!" he said. "It belongs to you and--Felice."

"But--_Mon Dieu!_"

"I have prospered. A lucky speculation--a gift from the gods, as it
were! You need have no hesitation in accepting it, for it is yours. And
no one can take it from you, not even Cousin Alfred."

She was still protesting, when they heard the mother call.

"This money--another miracle!" Madelon exclaimed. "It is wonderful! I
feel that I am dreaming. But come! We have overstayed; we may be
discovered at any moment."

He took her in his arms again and whispered his adoration. "I am coming
to find you, Madelon. I have the power to work miracles, you see."

"No, no! If you care for me, you must guard yourself. Perhaps after many
years--perhaps when you have shown yourself worthy, and the world has
forgotten--then--" She shivered at thought of the weary wait ahead of
her; her lips quivered pathetically.

There were many things he wished to ask her; the hunger to retain her in
his arms was almost unbearable. But now that she had been reawakened to
the perils of their situation she allowed him no opportunity. She tore
her lips reluctantly from his; she held him off in an agony of pleading,
and when the mother's voice sounded a second time they returned hand in
hand to the study.

There followed a touching farewell as the blind woman clung shakingly to
the gentle impostor, praying for his safety, imploring him piteously to
be a good man and to walk in the shadow of righteousness. Then came a
lingering, heart-breaking caress, and once more the three were at the
front door.

Van Dam seized the girl's fingers and kissed them, while the look in his
eyes brought tears to hers. Then they were gone; and he stood alone in
the hall of the house he had robbed.

He remained motionless for a time, lost in a blissful intoxication. Was
this strange, new-born delirium--love? It must be, it could be, nothing
else. It was quite amazing, utterly bewildering. He had never dreamed of
anything at all like it. He felt a desire to cry aloud the news of this
marvel; he was melting with pain and gladness; something inside him was
singing gloriously. At thought of Madelon's deep, wide eyes, of her
tender lips, dewy with the birth of passion, his muscles swelled and the
whole world seemed to applaud. But it was so new--so unbelievable! The
swift rush of this afternoon's events had left him in a dizzy whirl. An
hour ago he had been deaf, dumb, and blind, but he had suddenly regained
his every sense. He was no longer _blase_; he was awake with yearnings
and appreciations. Madelon had taught him the greatest secret of the
universe. Madelon--But who the devil was Madelon?

Van Dam brought himself abruptly out of his reverie. There had been
enough mystery for one day. Now for the solution of this puzzle. Back
yonder, gagged and bound, was a cringing human rat who knew everything
Van Dam desired to know, and who would talk, if forced to do so. Roly
decided to have the inmost details of this affair, if it became
necessary to roast the soles of Cousin Alfred's feet over a slow fire in
order to loosen his tongue. Time had flown, but there was a little
margin left.

He hurried down the hall, flung open the door behind which his captive
lay, then recoiled, with mouth agape. The closet was empty!

"Alfred!" he called. "Alfred!" But his voice echoed lonesomely through
the empty rooms. Not a sound broke the silence. There on the floor lay
the handkerchief and the two tasseled curtain cords. He felt a chill of
apprehension, for unseen eyes were observing him, he was certain. With
that vindictive little ruffian at large, the situation altered; each
door might hide a menace, each moment add to his peril.

The thought of that rifled safe, and the consequences of discovery,
convinced Van Dam that this was no place for a respectable New York
society man, so he clapped on his mask and darted down the hall toward
the rear of the house.

Past the pantry and into the kitchen he fled, his precipitate haste
nearly causing him to collide with another masked figure that had just
entered from the garden. Instinctively the two men recoiled. Van Dam saw
that the stranger wore a black domino like his own, and that a white
gardenia was pinned over his heart--it was a twin to the flower that
reposed upon his own breast.

"Emile!" he exclaimed.

With a start the new-comer swept his mask downward, and simultaneously
he conjured an automatic revolver from some place of concealment. The
face that he exposed was not pleasant to look upon, for it was coarsened
by dissipation, and the eyes were both violent and furtive. Underneath
his heavy, passionate features, however, lay a marked resemblance to the
blind mother who had just left.

"Yes. I am Emile," he panted; then, with a snarl, he raised his weapon
until it bore upon Van Dam's breast. "And you are one of the gang, eh?"

"Here! Don't point that confounded thing at me. It might go off." Roly
brushed the mask from his own face, explaining, "I'm not one of the
gang; I'm a friend."

Emile eyed him intently before lowering his weapon. "I never saw you
before."

"Of course not. But--come. We've both got to get out of here."

"Indeed! I came to see my cousin Alfred. It is a little call I promised
him."

"I know everything; and, believe me, you have no time to lose."

"How do you come to know so much?" demanded Emile, suspiciously. "And
what is that?" With the muzzle of his weapon he indicated the waxen
white flower upon Roly's domino.

"There's no time to explain everything--but I know why you are here. The
old man has gone--"

"Gone! Bah! That is a lie. I have followed him all through the city.
I've been to his office, and they told me he was here. I've a little
matter to settle with him. It will only take a moment."

"I tell you he's gone."

"Who the devil are you, anyhow? I have no friends."

"I am Madelon's fiance," Van Dam said, boldly.

"Another lie! She has no fiance." The speaker's face darkened. "If she
marries any one, it shall be me."

An unfamiliar pang smote Van Dam suddenly, but he disregarded it.

"Don't be a fool," he insisted. "I know why you came here, but you're
too late. Your mother and Madelon were here, too, a moment ago--"

"Here?" exclaimed the youth, incredulously.

"Yes! Alfred heard you were in the city and he planned to ambush you; I
tied him up and threw him into a closet. Then I robbed his safe and gave
the money to Madelon and your mother."

Emile's face was a study at this amazing intelligence.

"When I came to look for the old fellow, a moment ago, I found he'd
escaped. I don't know where he has gone. That's why we'd better cut and
run for it, before he sets up an alarm."

"Run!" Emile shook his head. "I have been running--with the Black Wolf
at my heels. I thought they had me cornered more than once. They're
after me now, the whole pack."

"Do they know you're here?"

"I dare say; they were right behind me." He cursed violently. "And to
think that I missed Cousin Alfred, after all!"

"You had no business in the city. You must get out again."

"It's too late now. Why, it's nearly six o'clock. I could never get away
before it's time for masks off."

"Nevertheless, you must try," Van Dam said, decisively. "If you stay
here, you're lost. We'll climb the fence at the rear of the next yard
and slip out through the stable way."

Emile pondered for a moment. "I hadn't thought of that. It's a chance,
but you can't go with me. I sha'n't allow it."

"Nonsense!"

"You don't know the Wolf! If I were seen it would mean the death of both
of us."

"Very well, then, I'll leave by the front way. Now go!"

Van Dam half shoved the young man toward the door.

"Thanks," murmured the fugitive. "You seem to be the right sort. If I
live, I sha'n't forget." The next instant he was gone.

Roly watched him race across the yard, squeeze through the hedge; then,
an instant later, saw his form as he mounted the fence to the wagon
inclosure where the Spider had gone to his destruction earlier in the
afternoon. It was a risky route to safety, he reflected, but, in view of
what Emile had said about his pursuers, it was infinitely preferable to
any other.

Why he had helped the fellow Van Dam scarcely knew, unless it was
because of his sympathy for the under dog. Whatever the boy had done, he
possessed a reckless bravery that was commendable, and he still held his
mother's love.

Roly was about to close the door when he saw a second man, in a long,
black domino, briefly silhouetted above the fence. Then he heard a
whistle. The fellow dropped over into the tracks of Emile, leaving the
New-Yorker amazed at the apparition. A sickening fear clutched Van Dam,
but he knew it was useless to cry out. Could it be that he had sent the
young fellow to his death?

When a moment, then another, had passed with no sound from that quarter,
he closed the kitchen door and retraced his steps swiftly to the front
of the house.

As he came to the library entrance he found it closed, and, from inside,
he heard a tinkle as if a telephone hook was being violently agitated.
Inclining his ear, a low, agonized voice came to him:

"... Le Duc again.... Why haven't you sent the police?... Robbery.... My
cousin Emile ... murder me.... God above! They are slow!... He will
escape...."

Van Dam tried the door. It was locked. Then he called, sweetly: "Alfred!
My dear cousin Alfred!"

The voice at the telephone ended in a shriek. There came a crash as the
instrument fell from the old man's fingers.

So the police were on their way! Escape, then, must be but a matter of
moments. With his heart pounding, Van Dam stepped into the drawing-room
and reconnoitered from a front window. What he saw did not reassure him,
particularly in view of Emile's words; for, directly opposite, he beheld
a masked man in a black domino who looked very much like the Black Wolf.
Scattered up and down the block were others, all idling about in a
seemingly objectless manner. Evidently the house was surrounded. He
dared not risk the back way, after what he had seen. He could not
remain. From the library again came that faint, frantic tinkling.

Van Dam dropped his mask, tore the flimsy robe from his back, and strode
to the front door. Under any other circumstances he would have preferred
to remain and to take the consequences, but for Madelon's sake he dare
not risk an explanation to the police. Besides--how could he explain
that twenty thousand dollars, in clean, crisp ten-dollar notes, that she
had in her possession? He flung the portal wide, stepped out, then
turned and bowed as if to some one inside. "Good-by!" he called,
cheerily. "Had a delightful afternoon." The door closed with a click,
and he was in the open air. He extracted a cigarette from his jeweled
case, noting from the corner of his eye that, with one accord, the
maskers were closing in upon him. Descending the steps, he turned to the
left, walking briskly.

His one chance now depended upon whether these men knew Emile by sight.
If so, he felt that he was reasonably safe. If not--

He was approaching two of them. They separated to let him pass between.
From beneath their fatuously smiling masks he saw eyes staring at him
curiously. The flesh along his spine crinkled and rippled, but he did
not turn his head or falter, even when he knew they had halted. He could
feel the puzzled gaze of many eyes upon him, and imagined the
mystification his appearance had excited. In the midst of their
indecision there sounded the faint clamor of a gong. It grew rapidly
until, with wild clangor, a patrol-wagon reeled into the street and drew
up in front of the house Van Dam had just quitted. He turned as a
half-dozen blue-coats tumbled out of it and rushed up the steps;
incidentally, he saw that the black-clad figures were melting away in
various directions.

Roly did not wait to observe what followed. He turned the first corner,
then quickened his gait, at the next corner swinging once more to the
left. His pulses were jumping, his ears were roaring, he found the
muscles of his jaw were aching from the strain. A close call, surely!
But he had come through it all safely; he was whole, and on his way out
of this mysterious neighborhood. Once more his promptness and resource
had saved him. Here was the very street up which he and Madelon had
fled; yonder was the entrance to the blind alley that led into the
stable-yard.

He noticed that a little crowd was congregated there, many of its
members in the costume of merrymakers. He reflected that Emile might
have found their presence awkward in making his escape. They seemed
greatly excited or shocked over something, he noted, as he approached.
They completely blocked the alley entrance. In among them he forced his
way, then paused, staring down with startled eyes at what he saw. A
babble of voices smote his ears, but he heard nothing. He was elbowed
aside, but his gaze remained riveted upon the body of a man in a black
domino. It lay sprawled in the dirt, and covering the face was a mask
which smiled placidly up at the beholders; on the left breast was pinned
a solitary gardenia, crimson with blood. It had been pierced with a
dagger, and out of it had trickled a bright-red arterial stream.

Van Dam continued to stare at the gruesome sight while his wits whirled
dizzily. Why, it was but a moment ago that this boy had left him, in the
full flower of his youth! The body was still warm. It seemed
inconceivable that the grim reaper could have worked this grisly change
in so short a time! How had it happened? He recalled that somber figure
as he had seen it scaling the fence; he recalled that warning whistle.
At the memory he turned sick. Was it possible that he had been to blame
for this? He shook the notion from him, reflecting that Emile's fate
would have been the same, or worse, had he chosen any other course.
Arrest, he knew, would have been no more welcome than this.

Roly felt a great desire to shout the truth at these people who stood
about so stupidly; he longed to set them on the trail of the Black Wolf
and his pack, but he refrained. How little he really knew, after all!
Who was the Black Wolf? Who was this Emile? What had the young scapegoat
done to place himself not only outside the law, but outside the good
graces of those conspirators? What intricate network of hatred and crime
was here suggested? The desire to know the truth overcame all thought of
his own safety, so he began to question those around him, heedless of
the fact that he was being hunted in this very block.

The crowd was growing. An officer returned after sending a call for an
ambulance, and began to force the people back.

Van Dam discovered a voluble old woman, evidently a shopkeeper, who
seemed better informed than the others, and to her he applied himself.

"Do I know him, indeed?" she cried, shrilly, in answer to his question.
"And who should know him better than I, Emile Le Duc--a fine boy, sir,
of the very best family. Think of it! To be murdered like this! Ah!
That's what comes of a bad life, sir. But right at my own doorstep, as
you might say, and in the light of day! Well! Well! What can you expect?
He must have been mad to return, with the whole city knowing him so
well." She was greatly excited, and her voice broke under the stress of
her feelings. "It doesn't help the neighborhood, you understand, to have
such things happen," she ran on, "although nobody can say it's not as
quiet and respectable hereabouts as the next place. You've noticed as
much yourself, I dare say. Nothing ever happens. A misfortune to all of
us, I call it. Why, it's barely two hours ago that they brought a poor
fellow out of this very alley with his head lolloping around like a ball
on a string. He fell and hurt himself, I hear, although he looked
perfectly dead to me. Think of that! Two in one day. Oh, it doesn't help
the neighborhood, although there's nobody in the whole block as would do
another an injury, unless it might be that poor boy's cousin, the old
rip who lives in the fine house through yonder. He's a bad one, far
worse than Emile, if I do say it who never speaks ill of my neighbors.
And there's others besides me who'll be sorry it isn't him instead of
the young man who lies there with a hole through his ribs. Why, I
thought he was some masquerader, up to his carnival pranks, or drunk,
perhaps, until I noticed him all over blood."

Van Dam drew the speaker into her shop, which was near by, then handed
her a bank-note. "Come! I want you to tell me all you know."

"Ho! A detective, eh? Not that I wouldn't tell you all I know without
this--Ten dollars, is it? Peace and love! You _are_ generous! Well,
then, he has stood right in your tracks, in this very store, many's the
time. Law! What a lad he was! Nothing bad about him, but just reckless,
we used to think. Of course that was before we learned the truth."

"What do you mean?"

"You must be a stranger. Why, the whole world knows the scandal. It made
a commotion, I can tell you. But the poor lad! He's paid for all his
evil deeds. Why, sir, he was dead when he walked out into the street. He
must have been a corpse even when I took him for a merrymaker. Strange
things do happen on these carnival days. They must have finished him
with one stroke. Ugh!"

"They? Whom do you mean?"

The old woman winked, and wagged her head sagely. "Oh! You'll never
learn who, but we know. You think the gang was broken up when Emile went
to prison, but where do all these counterfeits come from, eh? Answer me
that. There's not a week goes by that one of them doesn't find its way
into my store. They're perfect, or nearly so; it would take a
bank-teller to find a flaw. I'm always frightened to death till I work
them off again. For all I know, this very ten-dollar bill you gave me is
bad, but I'll risk it. Some people don't seem to mind them at all, and
so long as there's a chance to get rid of them, why, I don't object. But
that's how it all came about--through counterfeit money, sir. They used
Emile for a cat's-paw, so I've heard, but when he was caught they let
him take his punishment. It was his cousin, Alfred Le Duc, who got him
to confess, under promise of a light sentence. They do say the old
rascal fooled him into it, for what reason nobody ever knew. Anyhow,
they sent Emile away for ten years. He threatened to turn state's
evidence, and perhaps he would have done so if he hadn't escaped."

"Ah! So he broke jail?"

"Exactly! And they've been hunting him ever since, with a reward on his
head, and all the time the counterfeits are still coming in, and the
police are as far from the truth as ever. Poor boy! There he lies, dead,
with a flower over his heart. And I saw him fall! This will kill his
mother. She's blind, you know, and very feeble."

"He has a cousin, Madelon, I believe," Roly ventured.

"Eh? Then you know her? A blessed angel, with a face like a picture and
a heart of pure gold. Hark!" The old lady listened. "There go the clocks
striking six. That means masks off and the end of the carnival. Too bad!
Too bad! And Emile with a flower over his heart."

       *       *       *       *       *

Like one in a dream Roland Van Dam emerged from the foreign quarter into
the broad reaches of Canal Street. He had been gone nearly three hours.
The pavements were strewn with confetti and the litter of a Mardi Gras
crowd, but nowhere was a masker to be seen. Directly ahead of him loomed
the Grunewald, a splendid tower of white brick and terra-cotta. Inside
were his friends, awaiting him, perhaps. He realized, with a sinking
sensation, that Eleanor Banniman was among them and that he had asked
her to be his wife. What a change three hours had brought to him! Why,
in that brief interval he had lived through all those very emotions the
existence of which they had both denied earlier in the day. Life had
opened for him, and he had seen it in the raw. On his hands was the
blood of a fellow-man; on his lips the fragrance of a kiss that set his
veins afire.

"I say, Roly, where _have_ you been?" Miss Banniman's strident voice
demanded, as he entered the cafe.

"Bless my soul!" exclaimed her father, waving his prospective son-in-law
to a chair with a pudgy hand. "We thought you were lost in the tall
grass. You missed tea, but you're in time for a cocktail. Eleanor is
quite cranky if she misses hers."

"Beastly stupid place, don't you think?" Miss Banniman inquired of her
sweetheart.

"Um-m! I haven't found it so," Roly said, with a sigh of relief. "Fact
is, I've been quite entertained."

"You have _such_ absurd tastes. A dash of absinthe in mine, if you
please, waiter. Papa has ordered the car attached to the evening train,
and we're dining aboard. What d'you say to Pinehurst and a week of
golf?"

Roly felt a sudden distaste for Pinehurst, for golf, for all the places
and people he had known. "Lovely!" he managed to say; then, summoning
his courage: "I'll join you later, perhaps. Sorry to break up the party,
but I've a little business here that will take a day or so."

"Business? _You?_ How funny!" exclaimed Eleanor.

"Too bad!" her father said. "It's blooming hot here, and the flies are
awful."

The others joined in commiserating the young man. When they arose to go
up-stairs and prepare for the train, Roly fell in behind them with Miss
Banniman.

"See here, Eleanor, are you sure you love me?" he asked.

She lifted her brows slightly. "Not at all. What put such an idea into
your head? You're a charming boy, even if you are a bit romantic. But
love--I thought we understood each other."

"I've been thinking--something unusual for me--and I don't believe we're
either of us quite ready to take the fatal plunge. How does it strike
you?"

"I'm in no hurry," Miss Banniman said, indifferently. "Let's call it off
for the present. We can try it on again in the autumn, if we feel like
it."

"Mighty sensible of you," Van Dam told her, with relief.

"Oh, that's all right! Don't let this keep you away from Pinehurst,
however. The season's nearly over, and we'll need you for a foursome."
She extended her hand, and Van Dam took it gratefully.

Her father called from the elevator: "See you in a few days, Roly. Good
luck with your business, and don't take any bad money." Mr. Banniman's
use of slang was neither brilliant nor original, but he was chuckling as
the car shot up out of sight.

Van Dam hastened to the desk and called for a city directory, then ran
through it to the L's.

"_L-a, L-e--_" Ah, there it was! "Le Duc, Felice--wid. res. 247 Boule
St."

He made a note of the address, then settled his hat upon his head, lit a
cigarette, and walked jauntily out into the evening and turned toward
Canal Street. It was growing cool; the street lights were gleaming; long
rows of them were festooned for blocks in all directions, blazing forth
in fanciful designs. In a short time now the Rex parade would be under
way, with its countless floats depicting "The Age of Romance."

"Romance, indeed!" smiled Mr. Van Dam, contentedly. Why _this_ was the
age of romance. Something recalled Mr. Banniman's parting words to
him--"bad money!" The young man paused abruptly. "Bad money!" What a
coincidence! He pictured a safe sunk into a library wall, an open
cash-drawer jammed with neatly pinned packages of crisp, new ten-dollar
bank-notes. Then he recalled the story of the garrulous old shop-woman.

Roly came to himself with a jerk. He began to laugh.

"Good Lord!" said he, aloud. "I wonder if Cousin Alfred's money was
counterfeit!"

He was still smiling as he bought a white gardenia and placed it in his
buttonhole.




ROPE'S END




I


A round moon flooded the thickets with gold and inky shadows. The night
was hot, poisonous with the scent of blossoms and of rotting tropic
vegetation. It was that breathless, overpowering period between the
seasons when the trades were fitful, before the rains had come. From the
Caribbean rose the whisper of a dying surf, slower and fainter than the
respirations of a sick man; in the north the bearded, wrinkled Haytian
hills lifted their scowling faces. They were trackless, mysterious,
darker even than the history of the island.

Beneath a thatched roof set upon four posts was a table, spread with
food, and on it a candle burned steadily. No wind came out of the hot
darkness; the flame rose straight and unwavering. Under a similar
thatched shed, a short distance away, a group of soldiers were busy
around a smoldering cook-fire. There were other huts inside the jungle
clearing, through the dilapidated walls of which issued rays of light
and men's voices.

Petithomme Laguerre, colonel of tirailleurs, in the army of the
Republic, wiped the fat of a roasted pig from his lips with the back of
his hand. Using his thumb-nail as a knife-blade, he loosened a splinter
from the edge of the rickety wooden table, fashioned it into a
toothpick, then laid himself back in a grass hammock. He had expected to
find rum in the house of Julien Rameau, but either there had been none
or his brave soldiers had happened upon it; at any rate, supper had been
a dry meal--only one of several disappointments of the day. The sack of
the village had not been at all satisfactory to the colonel; one yellow
woman dead, a few prisoners, and some smoldering ruins--surely there was
no profit in such business.

Reclining at ease, he allowed himself to admire his uniform, a splendid
creation of blue and gold which had put him to much pains and expense.
It had arrived from Port au Prince barely in time to be of service in
the campaign. As for the shoes, they were not so satisfactory. Shoes of
any sort, in fact, cramped Colonel Petithomme Laguerre's feet, and were
refinements of fashion to which he had never fully accustomed himself.
He wore them religiously, in public, for a colonel who would be a
general must observe the niceties of military deportment, even in the
Haytian army, but now he kicked them off and exposed his naked yellow
soles gratefully.

On three sides of the clearing were thickets of guava and coffee trees,
long since gone wild. A ruined wall along the beach road, a pair of
bleaching gate-posts, a moldering house foundation, showed that this had
once been the site of a considerable estate.

These mute testimonials to the glories of the French occupation are
common in Hayti, but since the blacks rose under Toussaint l'Ouverture
they have been steadily disappearing; the greedy fingers of the jungle
have destroyed them bit by bit; what were once farms and gardens are now
thickets and groves; in place of stately houses there are now nothing
but miserable hovels. Cities of brick and stone have been replaced by
squalid villages of board and corrugated iron, peopled by a
shrill-voiced, quarreling race over which, in grim mockery, floats the
banner of the Black Republic inscribed with the motto, "Liberty,
Equality, Fraternity."

Once Hayti was called the "Jewel of the Antilles" and boasted its
"Little Paris of the West," but when the black men rose to power it
became a place of evil reputation, a land behind a veil, where all
things are possible and most things come to pass. In place of monastery
bells there sounds the midnight mutter of voodoo drums; the priest has
been succeeded by the "papaloi," the worship of the Virgin has changed
to that of the serpent. Instead of the sacramental bread and wine men
drink the blood of the white cock, and, so it is whispered, eat the
flesh of "the goat without horns."

As he picked his teeth, Colonel Petithomme Laguerre turned his eyes to
the right, peering idly into the shadows of a tamarind-tree, the
branches of which overtopped the hut. Suspended from one of these was an
inert shape, mottled with yellow patches where the moonbeams filtered
through the leaves. It stirred, swayed, turned slowly, resolving itself
into the figure of an old man. He was hanging by the wrists to a rawhide
rope; his toes were lightly touching the earth.

"So! Now that Monsieur Rameau has had time to think, perhaps he will
speak," said the colonel.

A sigh, it was scarcely a groan, answered.

"Miser that you are!" impatiently exclaimed the colonel. "Your money can
do you no good now. Is it not better to part with it easily than to rot
in a government prison? You understand, the jails are full; many
mulattoes like you will be shot to make room."

"There is no--money," faintly came the voice of the prisoner. "My
neighbors will tell you that I am poor."

Both men spoke in the creole patois of the island.

"Not much, perhaps, but a little, eh? Just a little, let us say."

"Why should I lie? There is none."

"Bah! It seems you are stubborn. Congo, bring the boy!" Laguerre spoke
gruffly.

A man emerged from the shadows at the base of the tree and slouched
forward. He was a negro soldier, and, with musket and machete, shuffled
past the corner of the hut in the direction of the other houses, pausing
as the colonel said:

"But wait! There is a girl, too, I believe."

"Yes, monsieur. The wife of Floreal."

"Good! Bring them both."

Some moments later imploring voices rose, a shrill entreaty in a woman's
tones, then Congo and another tirailleur appeared; driving ahead of them
a youth and a girl. The prisoners' arms were bound behind them, and
although the girl was weeping, the boy said little. He stepped forward
into the candle-light and stared defiantly at the blue-and-gold officer.

Floreal Rameau was a slim mulatto, perhaps twenty years old; his lips
were thin and sensitive, his nose prominent, his eyes brilliant and
fearless. They gleamed now with all the vindictiveness of a serpent,
until that hanging figure in the shadows just outside turned slowly and
a straying moonbeam lit the face of his father; then a new expression
leaped into them. Floreal's chin fell, he swayed uncertainly upon his
legs.

"Monsieur--what is this?" he said, faintly.

The girl cowered at his back.

"Your father persists in lying," explained Laguerre.

"What do you--wish him to say?"

"A little thing. His money can be of no further use to him."

"Money?" Floreal voiced the word vacantly. He turned to his wife,
saying, "Monsieur le Colonel asks for money. We have none."

The girl nodded, her lips moved, but no sound issued; she also was
staring, horror-stricken, into the shadows of the tamarind-tree. Her
arms, bound as they were, threw the outlines of her ripe young bosom
into prominent relief and showed her to be round and supple; she was
lighter in color even than Floreal. A little scar just below her left
eye stood out, dull brown, upon her yellow cheek.

Laguerre now saw her plainly for the first time, and shook off his
indolence. He swung his legs from the hammock and sat up. Something in
the intensity of his regard brought her gaze away from the figure of
Papa Rameau. She saw a large, thick-necked, full-bodied black, of bold
and brutal feature, whose determined eyes had become bloodshot from
staring through dust and sun. He wore a mustache, and a little pointed
woolly patch beneath his lower lip. Involuntarily the girl recoiled.

"Um-m! So!" The barefoot colonel rose and, stepping forward, took her
face in his harsh palm, turning it up for scrutiny. His roving glance
appraised her fully. "Your name is--"

"Pierrine!"

"To be sure. Well then, my little Pierrine, you will tell me about this,
eh?"

"I know nothing," she stammered. "Floreal speaks the truth, monsieur.
What does it mean--all this? We are good people; we harm nobody. Every
one here was happy until the--blacks rose. Then there was fighting
and--this morning you came. It was terrible! Mamma Cleomelie is
dead--the soldiers shot her. Why do you hang Papa Julien?"

Floreal broke in, hysterically: "Yes, monsieur, he is an old man. Punish
me if you will, but my father--he is old. See! He is barely alive. These
riches you speak about are imaginary. We have fields, cattle, a
schooner; take them for the Republic, but, monsieur, my father has
injured no one."

Petithomme Laguerre reseated himself in the hammock and swung himself
idly, his bare soles scuffing the hard earthen floor; he continued to
eye Pierrine.

Now that young Rameau had brought himself to beg, he fell to his knees
and went on: "I swear to you that we are not traitors. Never have we
spoken against the government. We are 'colored,' yes, but the black
people love us. They loved Cleomelie, my mother, whom the soldiers shot.
That was murder. Monsieur--she would have harmed nobody. She was only
frightened." The suppliant's shoulders were heaving, his voice was
choked by emotion. "She is unburied. I appeal to your kind heart to let
us go and bury her. We will be your servants for life. You wish money.
Good! We will find it for you. I will work, I will steal, I will kill
for this money you wish--I swear it. But old Julien, he is dying there
on the rope--"

Floreal raised his tortured eyes to the black face above him, then his
babbling tongue fell silent and he rose, interposing his body between
Pierrine and the colonel. It was evident that the latter had heard
nothing whatever of the appeal, for he was still staring at the girl.

Floreal strained until the rawhide thongs cut into his wrists, his bare,
yellow toes gripping the hard earth like the claws of a cat until he
seemed about to spring. Once he turned his head, curiously, fearfully,
toward his young wife, then his blazing glance swung back to his captor.

The silence roused Laguerre finally, and he rose. "Speak the truth," he
commanded, roughly, "otherwise you shall see your father dance a
bamboula while my soldiers drum on his ribs with the cocomacaque."

"He is feeble; his bones are brittle," said the son, thickly.

"As for you, my little Pierrine, you will come to my house; then, if
these wicked men refuse to speak, perhaps you and I will reach an
understanding." Laguerre grinned evilly.

"Monsieur--!" With a furious curse Floreal flung himself in the path of
the black man; the wife retreated in speechless dismay.

Petithomme thrust young Rameau aside, crying, angrily: "You wish to
live, eh? Well, then, the truth. Otherwise--"

"But--she? Pierrine?" panted Floreal, with a twist of his head in her
direction.

"I may allow her to go free. Who can tell?" He led the girl out across
the moonlit clearing and to the largest house in the group. He
reappeared, making the door fast behind him, and returned, stretching
himself in the hammock once more.

"Now, Congo," he ordered, "let us see who will speak first." Taking a
pipe from his pocket, he filled it with the rank native tobacco and
lighted it. The tirailleur he had addressed selected a four-foot club of
the jointed cocomacaque wood, such as is used by the local police, and
with it smote the suspended figure heavily. Old Julien groaned, his son
cried out. The brutality proceeded with deliberation, the body of old
Julien swung drunkenly, spinning, swaying, writhing in the moonlight.

Floreal shrank away. Retreating until his back was against the table, he
clutched its edge with his numb fingers for support. He was young, he
had seen little of the ferocious cruelty which characterized his
countrymen; this was the first uprising against his color that he had
witnessed. Every blow, which seemed directed at his own body, made him
suffer until he became almost as senseless as the figure of his father.

His groping fingers finally touched the candle at his back; it was
burning low, and the blaze bit at them. With the pain there came a
thought, wild, fantastic; he shifted his position slightly until the
flame licked at his bonds. Colonel Laguerre was in the shadow now,
watching the torture with approval. Maximilien, the other soldier,
rested unmoved upon his rifle. Floreal leaned backward, and shut his
teeth; an agony ran through his veins. The odor of burning flesh rose
faintly to his nostrils.

"Softly, Congo," directed the colonel, after a time. "Let him rest for a
moment." Turning to the son he inquired, "Will you see him die rather
than speak?"

Floreal nodded silently; his face was distorted and wet with sweat.

Laguerre rose with a curse. "Little pig! I will make your tongue wag if
I have to place you between planks and saw you in twain. But you shall
have time to think. Maximilien will guard you, and in the morning you
will guide me to the hiding-place. Meanwhile we will let the old man
hang. I have an appetite for pleasanter things than this." He turned
toward the house in which Pierrine was hidden, whereat Floreal strained
at his bonds, calling after him:

"Laguerre! She is my wife--by the Church! My wife."

Petithomme opened the door silently and disappeared.

"Humph! The colonel amuses himself while I tickle the sides of this
yellow man," said Congo in some envy.

"I don't believe there is any money," Maximilien observed. "What? Am I
right?" He turned inquiringly to Floreal, but the latter had regained
his former position, and the candle-flame was licking at his wrists. "To
be sure! This is a waste of time. Make an end of the old man, Congo, and
I will take the boy back to his prison. It is late and I am sleepy."

The speaker approached his captive, his musket resting in the hollow of
his arm, his machete hanging at his side. "So, now! Don't strain so
bitterly," he laughed. "I tied those knots and they will not slip, for I
have tied too many yellow men. To-morrow you will be shot, monsieur, and
Pierrine will be a widow, so why curse the colonel if he cheats you by a
few hours?"

Congo was examining his victim, and uttered an exclamation, at which
Maximilien paused, with a hand upon Floreal's shoulder.

"Is he dead?"

"The club was heavier than I thought," answered Congo.

"He brought it upon himself. Well, the prison at Jacmel is full of
colored people; this will leave room for one more--"

Maximilien's words suddenly failed him, his thoughts were abruptly
halted, for he found that in some unaccountable manner young Rameau's
hands had become free and that the machete at his own side was slipping
from its sheath. The phenomenon was unbelievable, it paralyzed
Maximilien's intellect during that momentary pause which is required to
reconcile the inconceivable with the imminent. It is doubtful if the
trooper fully realized what had befallen or that any danger threatened,
for his mind was sluggish, and under Rameau's swift hands his soul had
begun to tug at his body before his astonishment had disappeared. The
blade rasped out of its scabbard, whistled through its course, and
Maximilien lurched forward to his knees.

The sound of the blow, like that of an ax sunk into a rotten tree-trunk,
surprised Congo. A shout burst from him; he raised the stout cudgel
above his head, for Floreal was upon him like the blurred image out of a
nightmare. The trooper shrieked affrightedly as the blade sheared
through his shield and bit at his arm. He turned to flee, but his head
was round and bare, and it danced before the oncoming Floreal. Rameau
cleft it, as he had learned to open a green cocoanut, with one stroke.
On the hard earth, Maximilien was scratching and kicking as if to drag
himself out of the welter in which he lay.

Floreal cut down his father and received the limp figure in his arms. As
he straightened it he heard a furious commotion from the camp-fire where
the other tirailleurs were squatted. From the tail of his eye he saw
that they were reaching for their weapons. He heard Laguerre shouting in
the hut, then the crash of something overturned. As he rose from his
father's body he heard a shot and saw the soldiers of the Republic
charging him. They were between him and Pierrine. He hesitated, then
slipped back into the shadow of the tamarind-tree, and out at the other
side; his cotton garments flickered briefly through the moonlight, then
the thicket swallowed him. His pursuers paused and emptied their guns
blindly into the ink-black shadows where he had disappeared.

[Illustration: As Floreal rose from his father's body he heard a shot
and saw the soldiers of the Republic charging him.]

When Colonel Laguerre arrived upon the scene they were still loading and
firing without aim, and he had some difficulty in restoring them to
order. Blood they were accustomed to, but blood of their own letting.
This was very different. This was a blow at the government, at their own
established authority. Such an appalling loss of life seldom occurred to
regular troops of the Republic; it was worse than a pitched battle with
the Dominicans, and it excited the troopers terribly.

Perhaps he had been mistaken and there was no money, thought the
colonel, as he returned to his quarters after a time. Of course the girl
still remained, and he could soon force the truth from her, but she was
the only source of information left now that Floreal had escaped, for
Laguerre had noted carelessly that the body of Julien had hung too long.
It was annoying to be deceived in this way, but perhaps the day had not
been without some profit, after all, he mused.

The road to the Dominican frontier was rough and wild. All Hayti was
aflame; every village was peopled by raging blacks who had risen against
their lighter-hued brethren. Among the fugitives who slunk along the
winding bridle-paths that once had been roads there was a mulatto youth
of scarcely twenty, who carried a machete beneath his arm. In his eyes
there was a lurking horror; his wrists were bound with rags torn from
his cotton shirt; he spoke but seldom, and when he did it was to curse
the name of Petithomme Laguerre.




II


Floreal took up his residence across the border. The countries had long
been at war, so he found reason to change his name. He likewise changed
his language, although that was not so easily accomplished, and then,
since he had been born of the sea, he returned to it. But he could not
bring himself to utterly forsake the island of his birth, for twice a
year, when the seasons changed, when the trades died and the hot lands
sent their odors reeking through the night, he felt a hungry yearning
for Hayti. During these periods of lifeless heat his impulses ran wild;
at these times his habits changed and he became violent, nocturnal. As
he thought of Petithomme Laguerre he bit his wrists in an agony of
recollection. Women shunned him, men said to one another:

"This Inocencio is a person of uncertain temper. He has a bad eye."

"Whence did he come?" others inquired. "He is not one of us."

"From Jamaica, or the Barbadoes, perhaps. He has much evil in him."

"And yet he makes no enemies."

"Nor friends."

"Um-m! A peculiar fellow. A man of passion--one can see it in his face."

Hayti had become quiet once more--as quiet as could be expected--and the
former colonel of tirailleurs had prospered. He was now "General
Petithomme Laguerre, Commandant of the Arrondissement of the South," and
the echo of his name crept eastward along the coast, even to Azua.

The bitterness of this news finally sent Inocencio seaward in a
barkentine, the business of which was not above suspicion. He cruised
through the Virgin Islands, on around the Leewards and the Windwards,
seeing something of the world and tasting of its wickedness. A year
later, at Trinidad, he fell in with a Portuguese half-breed, captain of
a schooner bound on hazardous business, and, inasmuch as high wages were
promised, he shipped. Followed adventures of many sorts, during which
Inocencio became a mate, but made no friends.

One night when the moon was full and the schooner lay becalmed there was
drinking and gambling in the little cabin. It was the change of the
seasons, before the rains had come; the air was close; the ship reeked
with odors. Inocencio played like a demon, for his heart was fierce, and
the cards befriended him. All night he and the Portuguese half-breed
shuffled and dealt, drank rum, and cursed each other. When daylight came
the schooner had changed hands.

       *       *       *       *       *

Colon sits on the southern shore of the Caribbean, and through it drifts
a current of traffic from many seas. It is like the riffle of a sluice
or the catch-basin of a sewer, gathering all the sediment carried by the
stream, and thither Captain Inocencio headed, drawn on the tide. It was
at the time of the French fiasco, when De Lesseps's name was powerful,
and when Colon was the wickedest, sickest city of the Western
Hemisphere.

Into the harbor came Inocencio's schooner, pelting ahead of the stiff
trade-winds that blew like the draught from an electric fan, and there
the Haytian stayed, for in Colon he found work that suited him. There he
heard the echo of tremendous undertakings; there he learned new
rascalities, and met men from other lands who were homeless, like
himself; there he tasted of the white man's wickedness, and beheld forms
of corruption that were strange to him. The nights were ribald and the
days were drear, for fever stalked the streets, but Inocencio was
immune, and for the first time he enjoyed himself.

But he was solitary in his habits; the festering town, with its
green-slimed sewers and its filthy streets, did not appeal to him, so he
took up his abode on the shore of a little bay close behind, where a
grove of palm-trees overhung a sandy beach. Just across a mangrove swamp
at his back was the city; before him lay his schooner, her bowsprit
pointing seaward. Day and night it pointed seaward, like a resolute
finger; pointed toward Hayti and--Pierrine.

In time the mulatto acquired a reputation and gathered a crew of
ruffians over whom he tyrannized. There were women in his camp, too,
'Bajans, Sant' Lucians, and wenches from the other isles, but neither
they nor their powdered sisters along the back streets of Colon appealed
to Inocencio very long, for sooner or later there always came to him the
memory of a yellow girl with a scar beneath her eye, and thoughts of her
brought pictures of a blue-and-gold negro colonel and an old man hanging
by the wrists. Then it was that he felt a slow flame licking at his
tendons, and his hatred blazed up so suddenly that the women fled from
him, bearing marks of his fingers on their flesh.

Sometimes he sailed away and was gone for weeks. When he returned his
crew told stories of aimless visits to the Haytian coast in which there
appeared to be neither reason nor profit, since they neither took nor
fetched a cargo. These journeys came at regular intervals, as if there
arrived upon the hurrying trades a call that took him northward, just
before the seasons changed.

His helpers retailed other gossip also, rumors of a coming revolution in
the Republic, tales of the great general, Petithomme Laguerre, who had
aims upon the Presidency. Inocencio's ears were open, and what he heard
stirred his rage, but he was not a brilliant man, and his brain, unused
to strategy, refused to counsel him. For five years he had studied the
matter incessantly, nursing his hate and searching for a means to
satisfy it. Then, as if born of the lightning, he saw his way.

He consulted a French clerk in the Canal offices, and between them they
contrived a letter which ran as follows:

     To His Excellency, General Petithomme Laguerre, Commandant of the
     Arrondissement of the South, Jacmel, Republic of Hayti.

     GENERAL,--The bearer, Inocencio Ruiz, of Cartagena, master of the
     schooner _Stella_, will consult you upon a matter of extreme
     delicacy which concerns the sale of two hundred rifles. These arms,
     of latest model, were consigned to this port, but under the
     existing relations of amity between the French and Colombian
     governments they cannot be used. Knowing your patriotism and the
     zeal with which you safeguard the welfare of your country, the
     writer makes bold to offer these arms to you, as agent of the
     Haytian government, at a low figure. Captain Ruiz, a man of
     discretion, is empowered to discuss the matter with you at greater
     length.

     In full appreciation of your supreme qualities as a soldier and
     statesman, it is with admiration that I salute you.

     Respectfully,
     ANTOINE LEBLANC.

When the letter was finally read to Inocencio he nodded; but the French
clerk said, doubtfully:

"This Laguerre is a man of force, I believe. I should not care to trifle
with him in this way."

"I, too, am a man of force," said the mulatto.

"He is your enemy?"

"To the death."

The white man shook his head. "Danger lurks along the Haytian coast;
many things happen there, for the people are barbarians. I should prefer
to forgive this Petithomme rather than oppose him, even though he were
my enemy."

Inocencio scowled. "When I die I shall have no enemies to forgive, for I
shall have killed them all," he said, simply.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jacmel lay white in the blazing sun as the _Stella_ dropped anchor. The
trades were failing, and the schooner drifted slowly under a full spread
of canvas. Near where she came to rest lay a Haytian gunboat,
ill-painted, ill-manned, ill-disciplined, and Inocencio regarded her
with some concern, for her presence was a thing he had not counted upon.
It argued either that Laguerre had won the support of her commander or
that she had been sent by the government as a check upon his activities.
In either event she was a menace.

A band was playing in the square, and there were many soldiers.
Inocencio did not go ashore. Instead he sent the letter by a member of
his crew, a giant 'Bajan whom he trusted, and with it he sent word that
he hoped to meet His Excellency, General Laguerre, that evening at a
certain drinking-place near the water-front.

The sailor returned at dusk with news that set his captain's eyes aglow.
Jacmel was alive with troops; there had been a review that very
afternoon and the populace had hailed the commandant as President. On
all sides there was talk of revolution; the whole south country had
enrolled beneath the banner of revolt. The gunboat was Laguerre's; all
Hayti craved a change; the old familiar race cry had been raised and the
mulattoes were in terror of another massacre. But the regular troops
were badly armed and the perusal of Inocencio's letter had filled the
general with joy.

Captain Ruiz was early at the meeting-place, but he waited patiently,
drinking rum and listening to the chatter of the street. His Spanish
accent, his identity as the master of the schooner in the offing, and,
above all, his threatening eyes, won him a tolerance which the warlike
blacks did not accord to Haytians of his color; therefore he was not
molested. He soon confirmed his sailor's story; revolution was indeed in
the air; the country was seething with unrest. Many houses already had
been burned--sure token of an uprising. The soldiers had had a taste of
pillage and persecution. The streets were thronged with them now;
merchants were on guard before their shops; from every side came the
sounds of revelry and quarreling.

Laguerre arrived, finally, a huge, forbidding man of martial bearing,
and he was heralded by cheers. He was much older and infinitely prouder
than when Inocencio had seen him. His uniform had been blue at that
time, but now it was parrot-green; his epaulettes were broader, the
golden braid and dangling loops were heavier, and he was fat from easy
living. With age and power he had coarsened, but his eyes were still
bloodshot and domineering.

"Captain Ruiz?" he inquired, pausing before the yellow man.

"Your Excellency!" Inocencio rose and saluted. The seaman's eyes were
smoldering, but his lips were cold, for he felt the dread of
recognition.

Time, it seemed, had dulled the sharp outlines of Laguerre's memory as
it had changed the younger man's features, for he continued,
unsuspectingly:

"You are the agent of Monsieur Leblanc, I believe."

"The same."

"Good! Now these rifles--you have them near by?"

"Within gunshot, Excellency. They are in the harbor at this moment."

Laguerre's face lighted. "Ha! A man of business, this Leblanc. You will
fix the price, as I understand it."

There followed a certain amount of bickering, during which the general
allowed himself to be worsted. He agreed weakly to Inocencio's terms,
having already decided to appropriate the God-sent cargo without
payment. The latter had counted upon this, and, moreover, he had
rightfully construed the light in those bloodshot eyes.

"Monsieur le General must see these rifles for himself, to appreciate
them, and he must count them, too, else how can he know that I am not
deceiving him? We must observe caution, for there may be spies--"
Inocencio spoke craftily.

"Pah! Spies? In Jacmel?"

"Nevertheless, there is a gunboat in the harbor and she flies the flag
of the Republic. My skiff is waiting; we will slip out and back
again--in an hour the inspection will be completed. You must see those
rifles with your own eyes, Excellency. They are wonderful--the equal of
any in the world; no troops can stand before them. They are
magnificent."

"Come!" said Laguerre, rising.

"But alone!" Inocencio displayed a worthy circumspection. "This is
hazardous business. That war-ship with the flag of the Republic--my
employer is a man of reputation."

"Very well." Laguerre dismissed an aide who had remained at a distance
during the interview, and together the two set out.

"You arrived barely in time, for we march to-morrow," said the general;
"at least we march within the week. My defiance has gone forth. My
country cries for her defender. There will be bloody doings, for I tell
you the temper of the people is roused and they have no stomach for that
tyrant at Port au Prince."

"Bloody doings!" Inocencio smiled admiringly upon his companion. "And
who could cope with them better than yourself? You have a reputation,
Excellency. The name of Petithomme Laguerre is known, even in my
country."

"Indeed!" The black general's chest swelled.

"We have heroes of our own--men who have bathed in blood defending our
rights--but our soldiers are only soldiers, they are not statesmen. We
are not so fortunate as Hayti. We would welcome, we would idolize such a
one. Would that we had him; would that we boasted a--Petithomme
Laguerre."

The hearer was immensely gratified at this flattery and he straightened
himself pompously, saying:

"But we are favored by God, we Haytians, and we have bred a race of
giants. We have gained our proud position among the nations at the price
of blood. Believe me, we are not ordinary men. Our soldiers are braver
than lions, our armies are the admiration of the world, we have reached
that level for which God created us. It requires strong hands to guide
such a people. My country calls. I am her servant."

The moon was round and brilliant as they walked out upon the rotting
wharf--all wharves in Hayti are decayed--the night had grown still, and
through it came the gentle whisper of the tide, mingled with the babel
from the town. Land odors combined with the pungent stench of the harbor
in a scent which caused Inocencio's nostrils to quiver and memory to
gnaw at him. He cast a worried look skyward, and in his ungodly soul
prayed for wind, for a breeze, for a gentle zephyr which would put his
vengeance in his hands.

He had dropped anchor well offshore, hence the row was long, but as they
neared the _Stella_ a breath came out of the open. It was hot, stifling,
as if a furnace door had opened, and the yellow man smiled grimly into
the night.

The crew were sleeping on the deck as the two came overside, but at
sight of that glittering apparition of green and gold they rubbed their
eyes open and stared in speechless amazement. They were reckless
fellows, fit for any enterprise, but Inocencio had learned to keep a
silent tongue, so they knew nothing of his present plans. They heard him
saying:

"Into the cabin, Monsieur le General, if you will be so good. It is
dark, yes, but there will be a light presently, and then--a sight for
any soldier's eyes! Something that will gladden the heart of any
patriot!" They went below, leaving the sailors open-mouthed. "A
miserable place, Excellency," came the soft voice, "but the Cause! For
Hayti one would suffer--A match, if you will be so kind. The lamp is at
your hand." The skylight glowed a faint yellow, then was brightly
illuminated. "For Hayti one would endure--much."

There followed the sound of a blow, of a heavy fall, then a loud,
ferocious cry, and a subdued scuffling, during which the crew stared at
one another. The giant 'Bajan crept forward finally and was met by
Inocencio, emerging from the cabin. The captain was smiling, and he
carefully closed the hatch before he gave orders to make sail.

The breeze was faint, so the schooner gathered headway slowly, but as
the lights of Jacmel and of the anchored gunboat faded out astern
Inocencio sat upon the deck-house and drummed with his naked heels upon
the cabin wall. He lit one cigarette after another, and the helmsman saw
that he was laughing silently.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dawn broke in an explosion of many colors. The sun rushed up out of the
sea as if pursued; night fled, and in its place was a blistering day,
full grown. The breeze had died, however, and the _Stella_ wallowed in a
glassy calm, her sails slatting, her booms creaking, her gear
complaining to the drunken roll. The slow swells heeled her first to one
side, then to the other, the decks grew burning hot; no faintest ripple
stirred the undulating surface of the Caribbean. Afar, the Haytian hills
wavered and danced through a veil of heat. The slender topmast described
long measured arcs across the sky, like a schoolmaster's pointer; from
its peak the halyards whipped and bellied.

"Captain!" The 'Bajan waited for recognition. "Captain!" Inocencio
looked up finally. "There--toward Jacmel--there is smoke. See! We have
been watching it."

The mulatto nodded.

"The smoke of a ship."

"Ah! A ship!" Inocencio smiled and the negro recoiled suddenly. All
night long the master of the _Stella_ had sat upon the deck-house,
staring at the sea and smoking. At times he had laughed and whispered to
some one whom the helmsman could not see, but this was the first time he
had smiled at any member of his crew. In fact, it was the first time the
sailor had ever seen him smile. The 'Bajan withdrew and went forward to
consult with his fellows. They eyed their employer curiously, fearfully,
for much had happened to alarm them, not the least of which had been a
furious commotion from below. Frightful curses had issued from the
cabin, threats which had caused their limbs to tremble, but they had
affected the captain like soothing music. It was very strange. It caused
the sailors to look with concern upon that thin, low streamer in the
distance; it led them to go aft in a body finally and speak their minds.

"The smoke is growing larger," they declared, and Inocencio roused
himself sufficiently to look. "It is the war-ship. We are pursued. Who
is this big man below?"

"He is a--friend of mine, Petithomme Laguerre--"

"Laguerre!"

"What did I tell you?" exclaimed the 'Bajan, breathlessly.

"What shall we do?" one of them inquired in a panic. "That smoke! The
wind has forsaken us." He shuffled his bare feet uncomfortably. "We will
be shot for this."

Inocencio tossed away his cigarette and rose; he lifted his eyes aloft.
The slim topmast arrested his attention as it swept across the sky, and
he watched it for a moment; then to the giant sailor he said: "You will
find a new rope forward. Make it fast to the end of this halyard and run
it through yonder block." He slid back the hatch and descended leisurely
into the cabin.

Laguerre was sitting in a chair with his arms and legs securely bound,
but he had succeeded in working considerable havoc with the furnishings
of the place as well as with his splendid uniform. His lips foamed, his
eyes protruded at sight of his captor; a trickle of blood from his scalp
lent him a ferocious appearance.

Inocencio seated himself, and the two men stared at each other across
the bare table.

Laguerre spoke first, his tongue thick, his voice hoarse from yelling.
Inocencio listened with fixed, unwavering gaze.

"You tricked me neatly," the former raved. "You are a government spy, I
presume. The government feared me. Well, then, it was bold work, but you
will listen to what I say now. We will settle this matter quickly, you
and I. I have money. You can name your price."

The hearer curled his thin lips. "So! You have money. You offer to buy
your life. Old Julien had no money; he was poor."

Petithomme did not understand. "I am too powerful to remain in prison,"
he declared. "The President would not dare harm me; no man dares harm
me; but I am willing to pay you--"

"All Hayti could not buy your life, Laguerre!"

Some tone of voice, some haunting familiarity of feature, set the
prisoner's memory to groping blindly. At last he inquired, "Who are
you?"

"I am Floreal."

The name meant nothing. Laguerre's life was black; many Floreals had
figured in it.

"You do not remember me?"

"N-no, and yet--"

"Perhaps you will remember another--a woman. She had a scar, just here."
The speaker laid a tobacco-stained finger upon his left cheek-bone, and
Laguerre noticed for the first time that the wrist beneath it was maimed
as from a burn. "It was a little scar and it was brown, in the
candle-light. She was young and round and her body was soft--" The
mulatto's lean face was suddenly distorted in a horrible grimace which
he intended for a smile. "She was my wife, Laguerre, by the Church, and
you took her. She died, but she had a child--your child."

The huge black figure shrank into its green-and-gold panoply, the
bloodshot eyes rested upon Inocencio with a look of terrified
recognition.

"I have no children, Laguerre; no wife; no home! I am poor and you have
become great. There was an old man whom you stretched by the wrists, in
the moonlight. Do you remember him? And the old woman, my mother, whom
one of your soldiers shot? Maximilien did it, but I killed him and
Congo! And now there is only you."

"That was--long ago." The prisoner rolled his eyes desperately; his
voice was uncertain as he whined, "I am rich--richer than anybody
knows."

"Others had more money than we, eh?"

The general nodded.

"Pierrine is dead, and you would have been the President. It is well
that I came in time." Again Captain Ruiz smiled, and the corpulent
soldier was shaken loosely as by an invisible hand. "Come now! Your
friends are approaching and I must prepare you to greet them."

He untied the knots at Laguerre's ankles, then motioned him toward the
cabin door.

That streamer of smoke had grown; it was a black smudge against the sky
when the two gained the deck, and at sight of it the general shouted:

"My ship! The gunboat! Ho! If harm comes to me--"

Inocencio took one end of the new rope which had been run through the
block at the masthead, and knotted it about his prisoner's wrists, then
with his knife he severed the other bonds.

"Give way!" he ordered.

The crew held back, at which he turned upon them so savagely that they
hastened to obey. They put their weight upon the line; Laguerre's arms
were whisked above his head, he felt his feet leave the deck. He was
dumb with surprise, choked with rage at this indignity, but he did not
understand its significance.

"Up with him! In a rush!" cried the captain, and hand over hand the
sailors hauled in, while upward in a series of jerks went Petithomme
Laguerre. The schooner listed and he swung outward; he tried to entwine
his legs in the shrouds, but failed, and he continued to rise until his
feet had cleared the crosstree.

"Make fast!" Inocencio ordered.

Laguerre was hanging like a huge plumbob now, and as the schooner heeled
to starboard he swung out, farther and farther, until there was nothing
beneath him but the glassy sea. He screamed at this, and kicked and
capered; the slender topmast sprung to his antics. Then the vessel
righted herself, and as she did so the man at the rope's end began a
swift and fearful journey. Not until that instant did his fate become
apparent to him, but when he saw what was in store for him he ceased to
cry out. He fixed his eyes upon the mast toward which the weight of his
body propelled him, he drew himself upward by his arms, he flung out his
legs to break the impact. The _Stella_ lifted by the bow and he cleared
the spar by a few inches. Onward he rushed, to the pause that marked the
limit of his flight to port, then slowly, but with increasing swiftness,
he began his return journey. Again he resisted furiously and again his
body missed the mast, all but one shoulder, which brushed lightly in
passing and served to spin him like a top. The measured slowness of that
oscillation added to its horror; with every escape the victim's strength
decreased, his fear grew, and the end approached. It was a game of
chance played by the hand of the sea. Under him the deck appeared and
disappeared at regular intervals, the rope cut into his wrists, the slim
spar sprung to his efforts. In the distance was a charcoal smear which
grew blacker.

After a time Laguerre heard Inocencio counting, and saw his upturned
face.

"Ha! Very close, Monsieur le General, but we will try once again. Ship's
timber is not so hard as cocomacaque, but sufficiently hard,
nevertheless. And the rope bites, eh? But there was old Julien--What?
Again? You were always lucky. His flesh was cold and his bones brittle,
yet he did not kick like you. If Pierrine were here to see this! What a
sight--the liberator of his country--God's blood, Laguerre! The sea is
with you! That makes five times. But you are tiring, I see. What a sight
for her--the hero of a hundred battles dangling like a strangled parrot.
It is not so hard to die, monsieur, it--Ah-h!"

A cry of horror arose from the crew who had gathered forward, for
Petithomme Laguerre, dizzied with spinning, had finally fetched up with
a crash against the mast. He ricocheted, the swing of the pendulum
became irregular for a time or two, then the roll of the vessel set it
going again. Time after time he missed destruction by a hair's-breadth,
while the voice from below gibed at him, then once more there came the
sound of a blow, dull, yet loud, and of a character to make the hearers
shudder. The victim struggled less violently; he no longer drew his
weight upward like a gymnast. But he was a man of great vitality; his
bones were heavy and thickly padded with flesh, therefore they broke one
by one, and death came to him slowly. The sea played with him
maliciously, saving him repeatedly, only to thresh him the harder when
it had tired of its sport. It was a long time before the restless
Caribbean had reduced him to pulp, a spineless, boneless thing of putty
which danced to the spring of the resilient spruce.

They let him down finally and slid him into the oily waters, overside,
but the breeze refused to come and the _Stella_ continued to wallow
drunkenly. The sky was glittering, the pitch was oozing from the deck,
in the distance the Haytian mountains scowled through the shimmer.

Inocencio turned toward the approaching gunboat, which was very close by
now, a rusty, ill-painted, ill-manned tub. Her blunt nose broke the
swells into foam, from her peak depended the banner of the Black
Republic, symbolic of the motto, "Liberty, Equality, Fraternity." The
captain of the _Stella_ rolled and lit a cigarette, then seated himself
upon the cabin roof to wait. And as he waited he drummed with his naked
heels and smiled, for he was satisfied.




INOCENCIO




I


Captain Inocencio prepared to let himself self over the side of the
schooner. Outside, the Caribbean was all agleam, save where the
coral-reef teeth gnashed it into foam; inside, a sand beach, yellow in
the moonlight, curved east and west like a causeway until the distance
swallowed it. Back of that lay the groves of cocoanut-trees, their
plumes waving in the undying undulations that had never ceased since
first the trade-winds breathed upon them. Beneath the palms themselves
the jungle was ink-black, patched here and there with silver. The air
was heavy with the slow rumble of an ever-restless surf and, all about,
the sea was whispering, whispering, as if minded to tell its mysteries
to the moon, not yet two hours high.

It was the sort of night that had ever wakened wild impulses in Captain
Inocencio's breast. It was on such a night that he had first felt the
touch of a woman's lips; it was on such another night that he had first
felt a man's warm blood upon his hands. That had been long ago, to be
sure, in far Hayti, and since that time both of those sensations had
lost much of their novelty, for he had lived fast and hard, and his
exile had plunged him into many evils. It was on such a night, also,
that he had begun his wanderings, fleeing southward between moonrise and
moonset; southward, whither all the scum of the Indies floated. But,
even to this day, when the full of a February moon came round with the
fragrant salt trades blowing and the sound of a throbbing surf beneath
it, the sated, stagnant blood of Captain Inocencio went hot, his thin
mulatto face grew hard, and a certain strange exultance blazed within
him.

His crew had long since come to recognize this frenzy, and had they now
beheld him, poised half nude at the rail, his fierce eyes bent upon the
forbidden shore, they would have ventured no remark. As it happened,
however, they were all asleep, all three of them, and the captain's lips
curled scornfully. What could black men know about such subtleties as
the call of moonlight? What odds to them if yonder palm fronds beckoned?
They had no curiosity, no resentfulness; otherwise they, too, might have
dared to break the San Blas law.

It was four years now since he had begun to sail this coast, and even
though he was known on every _cay_ and bay from Nombre de Dios to
Tiburon, and even though it was recognized that the Senor "Beel
Weelliams" paid proper price for cocoa and ivory nuts, his head trader
had never beaten down the people's distrust. On the contrary, their
vigilance had increased, if anything, and now, after four years of
scrupulous fair dealing, he, Captain Inocencio, was still compelled to
sleep offshore and under guard, like any common stranger.

It had made the Haytian laugh at first; for who would wish to harm a San
Blas woman, with the streets of Colon but a hundred miles to the west?
Then, as the months crept into years, and for voyage after voyage he
never saw a San Blas woman's face, he became furious. Next he grew
angry, then sullen, and a sense of injury burned into him. He set his
wits against theirs; but invariably the sight of his schooner's sails
was a signal for the women to melt away--invariably, when night came,
and he and his blacks had been herded back aboard their craft, the women
returned, and the sound of their voices served to fan the flame within
his breast.

Night after night, in sheltered coves or open river-mouths, the captain
of the _Espirita_ had lain, belly down, upon the little roof of the
deck-house, his head raised serpent-wise, his gloomy eyes fixed upon the
cook-fires in the distance. And when some woman's figure suddenly stood
out against the firelit walls, or when some maiden's song came floating
seaward, he had breathed curses in his bastard French, and directed a
message of hate at the sentinel he knew was posted in the jungle
shadows. At times he had railed at his crew of spiritless Jamaican
"niggers," and lusted for a following of his own kind--men with the
French blood of his island in their veins, men who would follow where
the moonlight flickered. He had even gone so far, at one time, as to
search the water-fronts from Port Limon to Santa Marta in quest of such
fellows; he had winnowed the off-scourings of the four seas gathered
there, but without success. They were villainous chaps, for the main
part, crossed with many creeds and colors, and ready for any desperate
venture; but he could not find three helpers of sufficient hardihood to
tamper with the San Blas virgins. Instead, they had retold him the tales
he already knew by heart; tales of swift and sudden retribution
overtaking blacks and whites; retribution that did not halt even at the
French or the hated _Americanos_. They told him that, of all the motley
races gathered here since earliest Spanish days, the San Blas blood
alone retained its purity. It was his boss, the Senor Williams, who had
gone back farthest into history, and it was he likewise who had
threatened him with prompt discharge if he presumed to trespass. The
Senor Williams was not one to permit profitable trade relations to be
jeopardized by the whim of a Haytian mulatto.

Inocencio had listened passively; then, when alone, smiled. He owed no
loyalty. He had no law. Even the name he went by was a fiction.

He continued to make his trips and, when he came driving in ahead of the
humming trade-winds, his schooner laden with the treasures of the
islands, the back streets of Colon awoke to his presence and prepared to
greet him. But however loud the music in the _cantinas_, however fierce
the exaltation of the liquor in him, however wild the orgy into which he
plunged, he could never quite drown the memory of those sleepless vigils
far to the eastward. Ever in his quiet moments he heard the faint song
of San Blas women wafted by the breath of the sea, ever in his dreams he
saw the slim outlines of girlish figures black against a flaring
camp-fire.

Four years this thing had grown upon him, during which he haunted the
San Blas coast. And then, one night, he slipped overside and swam
ashore. It was not so dangerous as it seemed, for, once he had gained
the shelter of the jungle, no less than a pack of hounds could have
followed him, inasmuch as the thickets were laced by a network of trails
that gave forth no sound to naked soles, and the rustling branches
overhead, played upon by the never-ceasing breeze, drowned all signal of
his presence. Once he had defied the tribal law, he knew no further
peace. It was like the first taste of blood to an animal. Thereafter
Inocencio, the outlaw, whose name was a symbol of daring, became a
jackal prowling through the midnight glades, tasting the scent of the
villages, and staring with hungry eyes from just beyond the shadow's
edge. Rather he became a panther, for in his caution was no cowardice,
only a feline patience. Village after village he hunted until he had
marked his prey. Then he waited to spring.

To be sure, he had never spoken with the girl, nor even seen her
clearly, but the sound of her voice made him tremble.

To accomplish even this much had taken many trips of the _Espirita_, had
meant many sleepless nights and some few tense moments when only the
shadows saved him from betrayal. There had been times, for instance,
when the quick simulation of a wild pig's grunt or the purr of _el
tigre_ had served to explain the sound of his retreat; other times when
he had stood motionless in the shadows, the evil rust-red blade of his
machete matching the hue of his half-nude body.

To-night he crouched behind the deck-house and ran his eye over the
schooner in one final glance of caution. It was well that all should be
in readiness, for the moment of his spring might come within the hour,
or, if not to-night, then to-morrow night, or a week, a month, a year
from to-night, and then a tackle fouled or a block jammed might spell
destruction.

He thrust his head through a loop of the leathern scabbard, and swung
the huge knife back until it lay along the crease between his shoulders;
then he seized the port stay and let himself softly downward overside.
The water rose to his chin. Without a ripple, he glided into the
moonlight astern, and a moment later his round, black head was no more
than a piece of bobbing drift borne landward by the current.

Down past the village he swam, noting the rows of dugouts on the beach.
He saw a blot in the big mahogany _cayuca_, a great canoe hewn from one
priceless trunk, and recognized it for the sentinel. On he floated, then
worked his way ashore behind the little point. Once he felt the hard,
smooth sand beneath his soles, he waited until a cloud obscured the
moon, and when the light broke through again he was dripping underneath
a wide-leaved breadfruit-tree at the jungle's edge. Removing the machete
from his neck, he wrung the water from his cotton trousers. Over his
head a night-bird croaked hoarsely.

The girl was at her father's house, tending a fire on the dirt floor. It
was a large house, for the old man was rich in daughters, and, by the
San Blas rule, their husbands had come to live with him. He had waxed
fat long ago on their labors, and now only this youngest one remained
unmarried. But the ceremony was set. Inocencio had heard the news upon
his arrival three days before, and had grudgingly bought a big store of
tortoise-shell from the groom-to-be, knowing full well that the money
was intended for the wedding celebration. Markeena was the fellow's
name, a straight, up-standing youth who more than once had excited the
Haytian's admiration for his skill with a canoe. But since that day the
latter had regarded him with smoldering eyes.

The big thatched roof with its bark-floored loft stood on posts
blackened by the smoke of many feasts; there were no walls. The jungle
crept close to it from the rear, and hence the watcher could witness
every movement of the girl as she passed between the hammocks or stooped
to her task. He could see, for instance, the play of her dark round
shoulders above the neck of her shift. He ground his yellow teeth and
gripped the moist earth with the soles of his naked feet, as a tiger
bares its claws before the leap.

It was very hard to wait. For an hour he stood there. Once a dog came to
him and sniffed, then, recognizing a frequent visitor, returned to the
house and resumed its slumber beside the fire. From the houses beyond
came the sound of voices, of a child crying querulously, and of a woman
quieting it. People came and went. An old hag began pounding grain in a
mortar, crooning in a broken voice. The girl's father came rolling into
view, and, after a word to her, struggled heavily up the ladder to his
bed. He was snoring almost before the structure had ceased to creak
beneath him. In the thicket a multitude of nocturnal sounds arose, the
insect chorus of the night.

And then, before Inocencio realized what she was up to, the girl had
stolen swiftly out and past him, so close that he could hear the scuff
of her sandals on the beaten path. The next instant he had glided from
cover and fallen in behind, his pulses leaping, his long, lithe muscles
rippling; but he moved as silently as a shadow.

Had he been a less accomplished bushman he might have lost her, for she
plunged into the jungle unhesitatingly. However, he had long ago learned
these trails by daylight, and knew them better than the lines of his own
palm; hence, every moonlit turn, every flash of her white slip, found
him close upon her track.

It puzzled him at first to discover her reason for this unexpected
sally, but soon he decided she must be bent upon some mission. Then,
when he saw that she purposely avoided the village and was bending
toward the open palm-grove abreast of his anchorage, he knew she must be
going to a tryst. So Markeena was the sentinel! That fellow in the
mahogany _cayuca_ was her lover! Inocencio, the dissolute, felt a flame
of rage suffuse him. When, at last, his quarry emerged into the
mysterious half-light under the high roof of palms, and paused, he
strode after her. She gave the melancholy call of the night-bird that
had sounded in the breadfruit-tree over his head earlier in the evening;
then, seeing him close beside her, uttered a little cry of pleasure. Not
until he was too near for flight did she discover her mistake, and then
she seemed to freeze. Her utter silence was more menacing than a scream.

It was the instant for which he had schooled himself, so he spoke to her
in her own tongue.

"Make no outcry! I will not harm you."

She drew back, at which he laid his great, bony hand upon her, his eyes
blazing. She was deathly frightened, being little more than a child.

"I have waited for you many nights," he explained. "I feared you
would never come." Then, as she continued to stare up at him
uncomprehendingly, he ran on: "I am Inocencio, the trader. Every night
I have watched you at your work. I want you for my woman."

Her voice had forsaken her utterly, but she struggled weakly, so he
tightened his grip until his fingers sank into her flesh. She began to
gasp as if from a swift run; the open neck of her garment slipped down
over one shoulder; her eyes were distended until he saw them ringed
about with white. The terror of this tall yellow man with the hungry
eyes robbed her of power, and she let him drag her toward the lapping
water as if she were no more than some weak, wild thing that he had
trapped.

Of course she knew him, for, while the San Blas law may banish women, it
cannot blind them, and she, too, had studied him from concealment.
Although his words had made no impression whatever upon her, his grasp
and the direction he was drawing her had at last translated what was in
his mind. Then she burst into life. But she made no outcry, for it takes
strength to scream, and every atom of her force was directed against
his. She began to moan. Her every muscle writhed. With her free hand she
tore at his entwining fingers, but they were like jungle creepers that
no human strength could serve to loosen. And all the time he drew her
with him, speaking softly.

Then she felt him pause, and her distracted vision beheld another figure
entering the shadows from the shore. She called to her lover hoarsely,
and saw him halt at the strange note, peering inward for a sight of her.
She voiced words now for the first time, crying:

"The stranger! The stranger!"

Then, hearing the scrape of her captor's machete as he drew it from its
scabbard, she renewed her struggle more fiercely.

Captain Inocencio held the girl at his left side until the last moment,
balancing the great knife-blade as if to try his arm; then, when the
Indian was close upon him, coming straight as a dart, he freed himself.
A slanting moonbeam showed Markeena's ferocious visage and his upraised
weapon, but the Haytian met the falling blow with a fierce upward stroke
that once before had done him service. It was the stroke that had made
him an exile years before.

Inocencio's physical strength had ever been his pride, if also his
undoing. Above all things, he prided himself upon the dexterity and
vigor of his wrist. His early training on that blood-red Caribbean isle,
and a later life in thicket and swamp, had served to transform the
cumbrous native weapon into a thing of life at his hands. More than
once, for instance, he had harried a serpent until it struck, for the
mere satisfaction of severing its head in midcourse, and now he felt the
wide blade enter flesh. Before his antagonist could cry out twice he had
slashed again, this time downward as if to split a green cocoanut. The
next instant he had seized the girl as she fled into the jungle.

But she had found her voice at last, and he was forced to muffle her
with his palm. When they were out into the moonlight, however, with the
dry sand up to their ankles, he let her breathe; then, pointing with his
machete to the _Espirita_ lying white and ghostlike in the offing, he
drove her down into the warm sea until it reached her waist.

"Swim!" he ordered, and, when she would have renewed the alarm, he
raised his blade, grimly threatening to call the sharks with her blood.

"Swim!" he repeated, and she struck out, with him at her shoulder.

But the village was roused. A confused clamor betrayed its bewilderment,
and before the swimmers had won more than half-way to the schooner,
figures came running along the shore. Inocencio cautioned the girl to
hold her tongue, and she obeyed, thoroughly cowed by his roughness. She
turned upon her side and swam with her face close to his, her eyes fixed
upon him curiously, wonderingly. Her easy progress through the water
showed that her fright had largely vanished, and showed likewise that,
had the Haytian been no uncommon swimmer himself, she might have
distanced him. All the way out to the boat she stared at him with that
same fixed look, maintaining her position at his side. The moon and the
salt brine in his eyes played him tricks, else he might have fancied her
to be half smiling, as if in some strange exaltation akin to his own.

Not until he finally dragged her, panting, to the deck of the
_Espirita_, and her white-clad figure stood out clearly from the shore,
did her tribesmen realize the nature of the alarm. Then the vibrant
turmoil suddenly stilled for the space of a full minute while the
enormity of the outrage made itself felt. They drew together at the edge
of the sea, staring open-mouthed, amazed, before they raised their
blood-cry.

The man and woman rested a moment, their eyes upon the shore, and where
they stood twin pools of water blackened the deck. Then Inocencio turned
to look upon his prey. The girl's flimsy cotton shift was molded to her
figure, and he saw that she was even fairer than he had pictured. In
spite of his need for haste, he paused to gloat upon the favor the moon
and the salt sea had rendered him. As for her, she flung his glance back
bravely until he wrenched open the cabin hatch and pointed to the dark
interior. Then she weakened. But she had a will of her own, it seemed,
for she refused to be locked inside. He strode toward her, and she
clutched the rigging desperately, turning her glance to one of appeal.

"You may come up in a moment," he translated, but still she clung to the
stay. "If you try to escape--" He scowled upon her terribly, at which
she shook her head. Having already tasted her strength, he knew there
was no time to force her, so he leaped at his crew.

The three blacks were snoring forward of the deck-house, so he seized a
bucket of water at the rail and sluiced them into wakefulness, keeping
his eye upon the girl meanwhile. When he saw that in truth she made no
move he let his caution slip and raged over the ship like a tiger,
beating his half-clad crew ahead of him with the flat of his machete. By
the time they had gained their wits the tribesmen were massing at the
canoes. As the mainsail rose creaking he broke out the jib with his own
hand, then with one stroke of his knife severed the manila mooring-rope,
and the _Espirita_ fell off slowly ahead of the breeze. Inocencio ran
back to spur his befuddled "niggers" to further activity, only to find
the girl still motionless, her eyes following his every movement. Under
the curses, the schooner slowly raised her wings and the night wind
began to strain at the cordage.

But at last, when the Jamaicans were fully awake to the state of
affairs, they threatened mutiny, whereat the mulatto flung himself upon
them so savagely that they scattered to arm themselves with whatever
weapons lay at hand. Then they huddled amidship, rolling their eyes and
praying; for out from the shore came a long mahogany _cayuca_, and it
was full of straight-haired men.

It takes a sailing-craft some time to gain its momentum, and as yet the
full strength of the trades had not struck the _Espirita_; hence the
canoe overtook her rapidly. Inocencio called to one of his men and gave
him the tiller, then took stand beside the girl, the naked blade of his
weapon once more beneath his arm.

The schooner's helmsman gave himself to God, while the cordage overhead
began to whine as the deck rose. It was upon the Haytian's lips to warn
his pursuers off when one of them called to the girl, bidding her leap.
Inocencio heard the breath catch in her throat, but she made no move,
and the command was repeated.

This time she answered by some exclamation that he did not understand,
whereat the canoemen ceased paddling, as if her word had paralyzed them.
They hurled their voices at her savagely, but she remained motionless,
the while the waters beneath her began to foam and bubble. The
_Espirita's_ crew ceased their prayers, and in the silence that ensued
the sea whispered at the bow as the craft listed more heavily under the
full force of the wind.

Inocencio could not fathom the meaning of the subdued colloquy among the
San Blas men, so he shouted a warning, but, strangely enough, they made
no answer. They only crouched, with paddles motionless, staring at the
dimming figures facing them, until the _Espirita_, "wing and wing" ahead
of the trades, was no larger than a seagull. As yet they had not learned
of the other tragedy hidden in the shadow of the palms; had they
suspected what lay weltering at the edge of a trampled moonlit glade
behind them, no threat of Inocencio's, no plea of his new-found woman,
could have held them back.

Once the schooner was under way, the Haytian led the girl to the
deck-house and thrust her roughly inside, closing the hatch. Then with
his own hands he took his craft through the reef and out into the
leaping Caribbean. Not until the San Blas coast was a mere charcoal line
upon the port quarter and the salt spray was driving high did he deliver
over the helm. At last, however, he gave his crew instructions for the
night and went below, closing and bolting the hatch behind him. When the
smoky lamp that swung between the bunks was lit and its yellow gleam had
illumined the interior he saw the girl's eyes fast upon him. He went
toward her across the tilting floor and she arose to meet him, smiling.




II


Senor Bill Williams was in a fine rage. "Didn't you like your job?" he
questioned.

Inocencio shrugged languidly. "Oh yes! The job was good."

"You knew I'd fire you!"

"_Si!_"

The American tempered his indignant glare with a hint of curiosity. "You
must love that San Blas girl."

"What do you say?"

"You must love her--better than your job at least?"

"_Si_, senor. I suppose so."

"What is she like, Inocencio?"

"Well, she is just like other women. All women are alike--only some are
fat. One time I had a female from Martinique, and she acted just the
same as this one."

"Humph! If she is like all the others, what the devil made you--do it?"

"Senor, you have plenty of money, and yet one night I saw you bet two
thousand pesos on the _rouge_. Why did you do that, eh?"

"That is altogether different."

The Haytian smiled. "I am tired of these females at Colon. They are
common people--very common. Then, too, those San Blas people, they are
so scared that somebody is going to steal a woman! Maybe if they had
left me asleep on shore I would never have noticed no woman at all. But
they don't trust me, so, sure enough--I steal one."

"And you say she came willingly?" queried Williams, incredulously.

"Oh yes! When her people commanded her to jump from my schooner she
refused them. I did not understand at the time, but by an' by she told
me." He swelled his chest with pride. "I guess she never seen so brave a
man as me before. Eh, senor?"

"Humph! I guess I never will _sabe_ you niggers," acknowledged the
American.

Inocencio corrected his recent employer, but without show of the
slightest heat:

"I am no nigger, senor; I am Haytian. She is San Blas Indian. My father
was not even so dark as me. Black men have thick heads and you have to
beat them, but nobody ever beat me, not even a white man. When those
niggers sleep I lie awake and study; I make schemes. That is why I left
Hayti."

"Do you understand that you've got me into a hell of a fix? I've got to
take a trip down there myself to square things."

Inocencio lighted a black cigarette and blew the smoke through his nose.
Evidently other people's troubles did not concern him. Recognizing the
futility of reproach or indignation, the former speaker continued:

"But see here, now! This girl! You can't keep her."

"Eh? Who's going to take her away?" interrogated the Haytian, quickly.
"Bah! One man tried that, and--I killed him with my machete." His thin
lips drew back at the memory, and for an instant his yellow face showed
a hint of what had made his reputation.

"She won't stay with you."

"Oh yes, she will. She was wild, very wild at first, but--she will
stay."

"And how about her people? They're bad _hombres_. Even the government
lets them alone--fortunately for you."

"They won't make no trouble about that Markeena. He is quite dead, I
think."

"By Jove! You're a cold-blooded brute!"

"Senor! You told me once that nobody had ever married a San Blas female,
eh?"

"Yes. Even the old Spaniards tried it, but the blood is clean, so far;
something unusual, too, in this country."

Inocencio began to laugh silently, as if at a joke. "Some day, maybe,
you will see a San Blas half-breed playing in the streets of Colon,"
said he.

"I don't believe it."

"I'll bet you my wages--two hundred pesos. Come! I'll show you."

"You get out of here," said the American, roughly. "That's something I
don't allow anybody to joke about." And, when the mulatto had gone, he
continued aloud: "By Heaven! this is sure a tough country for a white
man!"

Inocencio strode through the streets toward the swamp that lies behind
the town, oblivious to the grilling midday heat that smote him from
above, from the concrete walks beneath, and from the naked walls on
every side. It was before the days of the American occupation, and the
streets were nothing more than open cesspools, the stench from which
offended sorely. Buzzards flapped among the naked children at play in
the mire beside the sewer ditches.

The place was filled with everything unhealthy, and had long been known
as the earth's great festering sore. Neither the Orient nor the farthest
tropics boasted another spot like Colon, or Aspinwall, as it had been
called, with its steaming, hip-deep streets and its brilliant flowering
graveyards. So hateful had it proved, in fact, that when seamen signed
articles binding themselves to work their ships into any corner of the
globe they inserted a clause exempting them from entering Aspinwall.

Now, however, the town was lively, for this was the dry season, when the
fever was at its lowest, and the resorts were filled with the flotsam
and jetsam of a tropic world. It was a polyglot town, moreover, set upon
a fever-ridden mangrove isle serving as one terminus of the world's
short cut, and in it had collected all the parasites that live upon the
moving herd.

The French work of digging had but served to augment the natural
population by a no less desperate set from overseas, and now from the
open doors of their cubbyholes women of every color greeted the
passer-by.

Inocencio, whose last exploit was already a thing of gossip, received
unusual attention, there being no color line in Colon town. White,
yellow, and black women fawned upon him and bade him tarry, but he
merely paused to listen or to fan their admiration by a word, then idled
onward, pleased at the notice he evoked.

Once fairly out of the pest-hole, he threaded his way through the swamp
toward the other shore of the island. Blue land-crabs scuttled among the
mangrove roots at his approach; the place was noisy with the hum of
insects; on every hand the heated mud gave forth a sound like the smack
of huge moist lips. But on the other side he came into a different
domain. Here the sea-breeze banished the hovering miasma, the shore was
of powdered coral sand, a litter of huts drowsed beneath a grove of
cocoa palms, while a fleet of _cayucas_ lay moored to stakes inside the
breakers or bleaching in the sun.

Captain Inocencio was a person of some importance here, for, besides his
occupation as a trader, he exacted toll from a score or more of lazy
blacks. They were a lawless crew, gathered from the remotest corners of
the Indies, composed of Jamaicans, 'Bajans, and Saint Lucians, all
reared to easy life and ripe for such an occasional crafty pilgrimage as
Inocencio might devise. They had gathered around him naturally, paying
him scant revenue, to be sure, yet offering a certain loyalty that had
its uses. Although the village was but a mile from the town itself,
Inocencio's word was law; when the Colombian soldiers were called upon
to visit the spot, they came in numbers, never singly.

The girl was seated on the rickety porch of his cabin, her feet drawn
under her, her chin upon her knees. The other women were gossiping
loudly, staring at her from a distance, but her black eyes only
smoldered sullenly. He swore at the curious negro wenches and sent the
girl about her household duties, then stretched himself in the shade and
eyed her complacently until he fell asleep.

It was a week later that one of his men came to him breathlessly to
announce that the San Blas Indians were in the town.

"How many?" queried Inocencio.

"Four boat-loads."

"Did they come to trade?"

"Oh yes, boss."

This was no unusual thing, for they often displayed their little cargoes
of nuts and fruits and vegetables upon the water-front. Inocencio rose
lazily and stretched, then, calling the woman, explained the tidings to
her.

"I will go see them," he announced, finally.

"Oh, boss," cried the black man, "they will kill you!"

He shrugged his brawny shoulders and, thrusting the machete beneath his
arm, took the trail out through the mangrove swamp.

Straight to the Colon water-front he went, and there flaunted himself
before the men from down the coast. Here and there he strolled, casting
back their looks of hatred with a bravado that attracted all the idlers
in the neighborhood. Wenches nudged one another and tittered nervously,
pointing him out and telling anew the story of his daring. Men watched
him with wondering admiration, and he heard them murmuring:

"Ah, that Inocencio!"

"_El diabolo!_"

"And so brave! He would fight an army."

"See the great arms of him, and the eye like a tiger."

It was the keenest pleasure he had ever tasted.

As for his enemies, they kept their silence. They bartered their stock
and, having made their purchases, raised sail and scudded away down the
coast whence they had come.

Inocencio got drunk that night--for who could withstand the lavish
flattery that poured from every _cantina_ up and down the length of
Bottle Alley? Who could resist the smiles of the chalk-faced females of
Cash Street, all eager to laud his bravery. Some time before morning he
reeled into his shack beneath the palms, to find the woman waiting
fearfully. He cursed at her for staring at him so, and fell upon his
bed.

In the months that followed he seldom lost an opportunity of showing
himself to the San Blas men when they came to town, but in time this
pleasure palled as all others had, for the woman's kindred seemed
incapable of resentment. Gradually, also, he became accustomed to her
presence, and spent much of his time among the women of Cash Street. On
one occasion he returned from an orgy of this sort to find her talking
to one of his men, a young Barbadian with a giant's frame. It was only
by accident, due to the liquor in him, that his hand went wild and he
missed killing the fellow; then he beat the woman unmercifully.

Chancing to meet the Senor Williams on the street some time later, he
said: "_Buenas dias_, senor! You see, Captain Inocencio is still alive
and the woman has not run away."

His former employer grunted, as if neither phenomenon were worthy of
comment.

"I've heard how you rub it into those San Blas fellows," Williams
remarked. "I can't understand why they never avenged Markeena."

"Bah! They have heard of me," said the Haytian, boastfully; then, with a
grin, "You remember our bet, senor?"

"I never made you a bet," the American denied, hotly. "But I've a mind
to. I've been here ten years, and I think I know those people."

"Two hundred pesos!"

"You'll never have a child by her. They won't allow it. They'll get her
and you, too, in ample time. I tell you, their blood is clean."

"Two hundred pesos that she brings me a San Blas half-breed within two
months," smiled the mulatto, insolently.

And Williams exclaimed: "I'll do it. It's worth two hundred 'silver' to
see a miracle."

"_Bueno!_ I'll bring him to you when he comes."

Thereafter Inocencio gave over beating the woman.

Back at the little settlement beyond the swamp the coming event did not
pass without comment, and although the black women were kind to their
straight-haired neighbor, she never made friends with them, nor did she
ever accompany Inocencio to town. On the contrary, she seemed obsessed
by an ever-present dread, and whenever she heard that her own people
were near she concealed herself and did not appear again until they were
gone. Bred into her deepest conscience was the certainty that her tribe
would make desperate attempt to preserve its most sacred tradition, and
hence, as the days dragged on and her condition became more pronounced
her fears increased likewise. She began to look forward to the birth of
the child as the crisis upon which her own life hinged. Inocencio did
his best to dissipate her fears, explaining boastfully that the mere
mention of his name was ample protection for her, and, did he wish it,
not even the army of the Republic could take her from him. But still she
would not be convinced.

And then, in the dark of the December moon, the expected came. It was
that season when the rains were at their heaviest, when rust and rot
might be felt by the fingers. A gray mold had crept over all things
indoors; a myriad of insect pests burdened the air.

In the rare intervals between showers every faintest draught deluged the
huts from the dripping palm leaves overhead. From the swamp arose a
noxious vapor whenever the sun exposed itself; tree-toads shrilled
incessantly. Outside, the surf maintained its sullen murmur; through the
gloom of starless nights its phosphorescent outlines rushed across the
reef like phantom serpents in parade.

In the dead of a night like this the visitors arrived.

Even the heavy animal slumber of the blacks was broken by the scream
that issued from the hut of Captain Inocencio. And then the sound of
such fighting! The negroes might have rushed to the assistance of their
leader had it not been for the echo of that awful woman-cry hovering
over the village like a shadow. It filled the air and hung there,
saturating the breathless night with such unnamable terror that the
wakened children began to whimper and the women buried their heads in
the ragged bedding to keep it out. Death was among them and the bravest
cowered while through the quivering silence there came the sounds of a
mighty combat lasting for such an interminable time that the listeners
became hysterical.

At length they discovered that the night was dead again, save for the
sudden patter of raindrops on the thatches when the palm fronds stirred.
One of them called shrilly, another answered, but they did not venture
forth. Afterward they fancied they had heard the thrust of paddles in
the lagoon and strange voices dwindling away to seaward, but they were
not sure. Eventually, however, the stillness got upon them more
fearfully than the former noises, and they stirred. Then, in time, they
heard the voice of Inocencio himself cursing faintly, as if from a great
distance. A light showed through the cracks of a hut, and Nicholas, the
least timid, emerged with a lantern held on high. He summoned the rest
around him, then went toward the black shadow of Inocencio's dwelling
with a score of white-eyed, dusky faces at his shoulder.

The door was down, and from the threshold they could see what the front
room contained. It was Nicholas who, with clattering teeth and nerveless
fingers, dragged a blanket from the bed and covered the woman's figure.
It was he who traced the feeble voice to the wreck of a room behind, and
strove to lift Inocencio out of the welter in which he lay. But the
Haytian blasted him with curses for opening his wounds; so they propped
him against the wall by his direction, and bound him about with strips
torn from the mattress. Then he called for a cigarette, and its ashes
were upon his breast when the French doctor arrived from the hospital on
the Point.

When the white man's work was done, the mulatto addressed him weakly:

"Will m'sieu' do me a great favor?"

"Certainly."

"M'sieu' is acquainted with the American, Senor Williams?"

"_Oui._"

"Will _m'sieu' le docteur_ please to tell him that Captain Inocencio has
won his wager?"

"I don't understand."

"Listen! In the room yonder, under the bed, m'sieu' will find a little
boy baby rolled up in a blanket. The woman heard them at the door, and
she was just in time. Oh, she knew they would be coming."

The French doctor nodded his comprehension. "But--your wife herself?"
said he. "Perhaps when you are well again you can have your vengeance.
The soldiers will--"

"Bah! What is the use?" interrupted Inocencio. "The world is full of
women." Then, strangely enough, he bared his yellow teeth in a smile of
rarest tenderness. "But this boy of mine! They came to kill him,
m'sieu', and to show that the San Blas blood cannot be crossed; but the
woman was too quick of wit. They did not find him, praise God! _Le
docteur_ has seen many children, perhaps, but never a child like this."
He ran on with a father's tender boastfulness. "M'sieu' will note the
back and the legs of him. And see, he did not even cry, poor little man!
Oh, he is like his father for bravery! He will be my vengeance, for he
has the San Blas blood in him; he will be a man like me, too. Bring him
to me quickly; I must see him again." He was still babbling fondly to
the negroes about him when the doctor reappeared, empty-handed.

"The child is dead," said the white man, simply.

In the silence Inocencio rose to a sitting posture. His fierce eyes grew
wild with a fright that had never been there until this moment. Then,
before they could prevent him, he had gained his feet. He waved them
aside and went into the room of death, walking like a strong man. A
candle guttering beside the open window betrayed the utter nakedness of
the place. With one movement of his great, bony hands he ripped the
planks of the bed asunder and stared downward. Then he turned to the
east and, raising his arms above his head, gave a terrible cry. He began
to sway, and even as the doctor leaped to save him he fell with a crash.

It was Nicholas who told the priest that the French doctor would not let
them move him; for he lay upon his face at the feet of the San Blas
woman, his arms flung outward like the arms of a cross.




THE WAG-LADY




Her real name was June--well, the rest doesn't matter; for no one ever
got beyond that point. It was the Scrap Iron Kid who first bore news of
her coming to the Wag-boys. Knowing him for a poet, they put down his
perfervid description as the logical outpouring of a romantic spirit.

Reddy summed it up neatly by saying, "The Kid has fell for another
quilt, that's all."

"I 'ain't fell for no frill," the Kid stoutly declared. "I've saw too
many to lose me out. This gal's a thoroughbred."

"Another recruit for Simons, I suppose," Llewellyn yawned. "I'll drop in
at the theater and look her over."

"An' she ain't no actor, neither," Scrap Iron declared. "She's goin' to
start a hotel."

"Bah! If she's as good-looking as you claim, some Swede will marry her
before she can buy her dishes."

"Sure! They must all pull something like that to start with," said the
Dummy, who was a woman-hater; "then when you've played 'em straight they
h'ist the pirate's flag and go to palmin' percentage checks in some
dance-hall."

But again the idealistic Scrap Iron Kid came stubbornly to the defense
of the new-comer; and the argument was growing warm when Thomasville and
the Swede entered with two caddies of tobacco which they had managed to
acquire during the confusion at the water-front, thus ending the
discussion.

There were six of the Wag-boys, six as bold and unscrupulous gentlemen
as the ebb and swirl of the Northern gold rush had left stranded beneath
the rim of the Arctic, and they had joined forces, drawn as much,
perhaps, by their common calling as by the facilities thus afforded for
perfecting any alibis that a long and lonesome winter might render
necessary. Nor is it quite correct to state that they were stranded; for
it takes more than the buffets of a stormy fate to strand such men as
the Dummy and George Llewellyn and the Scrap Iron Kid and their three
companions.

Llewellyn was the gentleman of the outfit, owing to the fact that the
polish of an early training had not been utterly dulled by a four years'
trick at Deer Lodge Penitentiary. The Dummy had gained his name from an
admirable self-restraint which no "third-degree" methods had ever served
to break; Thomasville was so called because of a boyish pride in his
Georgia birthplace; while Reddy and the Swede--But this is the story of
the Wag-lady, and we digress.

To begin with, June was young, with a springtime flush in her cheeks,
and eyes as clear as glacier pools. Yet with all her youth and beauty,
she possessed a poise that held men at a distance. She also had a
certain fearlessness that came, perhaps, from worldly innocence and was
far more effective than the customary brazenness of frontier women. She
went ahead with her business, asking neither advice nor assistance, and,
almost before the Wag-boys knew what she was up to, she had leased the
P. C. Warehouse near their cabin and had carpenters changing it into a
bunk-house.

In a week it was open for business; on the second night after it was
full. Then she built a tiny cabin near her "hotel," and proceeded to
keep house for herself, sleeping daytimes and working nights.

"Say, she's coinin' money!" the Scrap Iron Kid advised his companions
some time later. "She's got fifty bunks at a dollar apiece, and each one
is full of Swede. You'd ought 'o drift by in business hours--it sounds
like a sawmill."

"If she's getting the money so fast, why don't you grab her, Kid?"
inquired Llewellyn.

"You cut that out!" snapped the former speaker. "There ain't nobody
going to grab that dame. I'd croak any guy that made a crack at her, and
that goes!"

Seeing a familiar light smoldering in the Kid's eyes, Llewellyn desisted
from further comment, but he made up his mind to become acquainted with
June at once.

Now, while he succeeded, it was in quite an unexpected manner; for
before he had formulated any plan Thomasville came to him with a
proposition that drove all thoughts of women from his mind and sent them
both out to the mines shortly after dark, each provided with a
six-shooter and a bandana handkerchief with eyeholes cut in it.

Jane had returned to her cabin the following morning, and was preparing
for bed, when she heard a faltering footstep outside. She glanced down
at her money-sack filled with the night's receipts of her hotel, then at
the fastenings of her door. She knew that law was but a pretense and
order a mockery in the camp, but the next instant she slid back the bolt
and let in a flood of morning sunlight.

There, leaning against her wall, was a tall, dark young man whose head
was hanging loosely and rolling from side to side. His hair beneath the
gray Stetson was wet, his boots were sodden and muddy, one arm was
thrust limply into the front of his coat as if paralyzed. She saw that
the sleeve was caked with blood. Even as she spoke he sagged forward and
slid down at her feet.

She was not the sort to run for help, and so, taking him under the
armpits, she had him on her bed and his sleeve cut away before he opened
his eyes. It was but an instant's work to heat a basin of water; then
she fell to bathing the wound. When she drew forth the shreds of cloth
that had been taken into the flesh by the bullet, the man's face grew
ghastly and she heard his teeth grind, but he made no other sound.

"That hurt, didn't it?" she smiled at him, and he tried to smile back.
"How did it happen?" she queried.

"Accident."

"You have come a long way?"

He nodded.

"Why didn't you ask for help?"

"It--wasn't worth while."

She looked at him wonderingly, admiring his gameness; then was surprised
to hear him say:

"So you're June!"

"Yes."

He closed his eyes and lay still while she poured some brandy for him;
then he said:

"Please don't bother. I must be going."

"Not till you've eaten something." She laid a soft, cool palm upon his
forehead when he endeavored to rise, and he dropped back again, watching
her curiously.

He had barely finished eating when another footstep sounded outside and
a heavy knock followed.

"Hey, June!" called a voice. "Are you up?"

It was Jim Devlin, the marshal, and the girl rose, only to stop at the
look she saw in the wounded man's face. His dark eyes had widened;
desperation haunted them.

"What is it, Mr. Devlin?" she answered.

"Have you seen anything of a wounded man within the last half-hour?"

She flashed another glance at her guest, to find him staring at her
defiantly, but there was no appeal in his face. "What in the world do
you mean?"

"There was a hold-up at Anvil Creek, and some shooting. We're pretty
sure one of the gang was hit, but he got away. Pete, the waterman, says
he saw a sick-looking fellow crossing the tundra in this direction. I
thought you might have noticed him."

Again June's eyes flew back to the pale face of the stranger. He had
risen now and, seeing the frank inquiry in her gaze, he shrugged his
shoulders and turned his good hand palm upward as if in surrender,
whereupon she answered the marshal:

"I'm sorry you can't come in, Mr. Devlin; but I'm just going to bed."

"Oh, that's all right. I'll take a look through your bunk-house. Sorry
to disturb you."

When the footsteps had died away the stranger moistened his lips and
asked, "Why did you do that?"

"I don't know. You are brave, and brave men aren't bad. Besides, I
couldn't bear to send any person out of God's sunshine into the dark.
You see, I don't believe in prisons."

When Llewellyn told the other Wag-boys of June's part in his escape his
story was met with exclamations that would have pleased her to hear, but
the Scrap Iron Kid broke in to say, menacingly:

"Look here, George, don't aim to take no advantage of what she done for
you when you was hurt, or I'll tip her off!"

"Aw, rats!" cried Llewellyn, furiously. "What do you take me for?" Then,
staring coldly at the Kid, he said, "And it won't do her any good to
have you hanging around, either."

June's action toward Llewellyn, and her mode of life, gained the
admiration and respect of the Wag-boys, and although they avoided her
carefully, they watched over her from a distance. Nor was it long before
they found a means of serving her, although she did not hear of it for
many months.

The Dummy came home one night to inform his partners that Sammy
Sternberg, who owned the Miners' Rest, was boasting of his conquest of
June, whereupon Sammy was notified by Llewellyn, acting as a committee
of one, that his lies must cease. Sammy got a little drunk a few nights
later and boasted again, with the result that the Scrap Iron Kid, who
was playing black-jack, promptly floored him with a clout of his .45,
and the Swede who was standing near by kicked the prostrate Sternberg in
the most conspicuous part of his green-and-purple waistcoat, thereby
loosening a rib.

It was not long before the sporting element of the camp learned to treat
June with the highest courtesy, and, since she had been adopted in a
measure by the Wag-boys, she became known as the Wag-lady.

Meanwhile June was prospering. The homeless men who patronized her place
began to intrust their gold-sacks to her care; so she went to Harry
Hope, the P. C. agent, and bought a safe in which to deposit her
lodgers' valuables. Frequently thereafter she sat guard all night over
considerable sums of money while the owners snored peacefully in the big
back room.

When winter closed down June began to see more and more of Harry Hope.
And she began to like him, too; for he was the sort to win women's
hearts, being big and boyish and full of merriment. He had spent several
years in the Northland, and its winds had blown from him many of the
city-born traits, leaving him unaffected, impulsive, and hearty. While
the frontier takes away some evil qualities it also takes some good
ones, and Harry Hope was not by any means a saint. As the nights grew
longer he gained the habit of dropping in to talk with June on his way
up-town. One evening he paused before leaving and asked:

"Can you take care of something for me, June?"

"Of course," she answered.

He flung a leather wallet into her lap, laughing. "You're the banker for
the community; so lock that up overnight, if you please."

"Oh-h!" she gasped. "There are thousands of dollars! I'd rather not."

"Come! you must! I didn't get it in time to put it in the company's
safe, and if I carry it around somebody will frisk me."

"Where are you going?"

"Down to Sternberg's. I'm going to outguess his faro-dealer. This is my
lucky night, you know."

Realizing full well the lawlessness of the camp, June felt a bit nervous
as she laid the money away. In the course of the evening, however, she
gradually lost her fears.

Some time after midnight, when the big front room of the bunk-house was
empty, the outside door opened, admitting a billow of frost out of which
emerged two men. They were strangers to June, and when she asked them if
they wished beds they said "No." They backed up to the stove and began
staring at their surroundings curiously.

It had never been June's practice to forbid any man the comfort of her
coal-burner, even though he lacked the price for a bed, but, remembering
the money in her safe, she sharply ordered these two out.

Neither man stirred. They blinked at her in a manner that sent little
spasms of nervousness up her spine.

"I tell you it's too late--you can't stay!"

"That's too bad," said one of them. He crossed toward the desk behind
which she sat, at which she softly closed the heavy safe door. It gave
out a metallic click, however, which caused the fellow's eyes to gleam.

"That safe ain't locked, eh?" he inquired.

"Yes, it is," she lied.

He smiled as if to put her at her ease, but it was an evil leer and set
her heart to pounding violently. She was tempted to cry out and arouse
her lodgers, but merely flung back the fellow's glance defiantly.

The stranger ran his eye over the place and then said, "I guess we'll
set awhile." Drawing a chair up beside the door, he motioned to his
partner to do the same. They tilted back at their ease, and June fancied
they were listening intently. For a half-hour, an hour, they sat there,
following her every movement, now and then exchanging a word in a tone
too low for her to hear.

She was well-nigh hysterical with the strain of waiting, when she saw
both men lower the front legs of their chairs and rise together. The
next instant the door swung violently yet noiselessly inward and a
masked man with a gun in his hand leaped out of the night. Another man
was at his heels, and they covered her simultaneously. Then a most
amazing thing occurred.

June's mysterious visitors pounced upon them from behind, there was a
brief, breathless struggle, and the next instant all four swept out into
the snow amid a tangle of arms and legs. Followed the sounds of a
furious scuffle, of heavy blows, curses and groans, then a voice:

"Beat it now or we'll croak the two of you! And peddle the word that no
rough stuff goes here. Do you get that?" There was the impact of a boot
planted against flesh, and the next instant June's deliverers had
re-entered and closed the door.

One of them was sucking a wound in the fleshy part of his hand where a
falling revolver hammer had punched him, but he inquired in a thoroughly
business-like tone, "Got a little hot water, June?"

June emerged weakly from behind her desk. "W-what does it all--mean?"

"Oh, it's all right. They won't trouble you no more."

"They came to--rob me, and you knew it--"

"Sure! Harry Hope got full and told about leaving eight thousand dollars
with you; so we beat 'em to it."

"But why didn't you say so? You frightened me."

"We wasn't sure they'd try it, and we didn't like to work you up."

"Please--who are you?"

"Us? Why, we're Wag-boys! Llewellyn's our pal. I'm Charley Fitzhugh;
they call me the Dummy. And this is Thomasville."

Thomasville nodded and mumbled greetings without removing his thumb from
his mouth, whereupon June began to express her gratitude. But thanks
threw the Wag-boys into confusion, it seemed, and they quickly bade her
an embarrassed good night.

Now that they had removed the weight of obligation that had rested upon
them, the Wags became more neighborly. Llewellyn and the Scrap Iron Kid
called to explain that the Dummy and Thomasville had broken all rules of
friendship by "hogging the spotlight" and to express their own regret at
having been absent during the attempted hold-up.

June was eating her midnight lunch when they came, and after they had
left Llewellyn said:

"She didn't have any butter, Kid. Notice it?"

"Sure. Butter's peluk. Rothstein cornered the supply, and he's holding
it for a raise."

"Where does he keep it?"

"In that big tent back of his store, along with his other stuff."

Now, the Wag-boys did nothing by halves. About dusk the following day
the Rothstein watchman was accosted by a stranger who had just muched in
from the creek. The two gossiped for a moment. Then, as the stranger
made off, he slipped and fell, injuring himself so painfully that the
watchman was forced to help him down to Kelly's drug-store. Upon
returning from this labor of charity the watchman discovered, to his
amazement and horror, that during his absence two men had entered the
tent by means of a six-foot slit in the rear wall. They had brought a
sled with them, moreover, and had made off with about five hundred
dollars' worth of Rothstein's heart's blood, labeled "Cold Brook
Creamery, Extra Fine."

The next morning when June returned to her cabin she found a case of
butter.

A few days later the Dummy discovered a string of ptarmigan hanging
beside the rear door of a restaurant, and, desiring to offer June some
delicate little attention, he returned after dark and removed them. As
ptarmigan were selling at five dollars a brace, he was careful to
protect the girl; he sat on the back steps of the restaurant and picked
the birds thoroughly, scattering the feathers with a careless hand.

Scarcely a day passed that June did not receive something from the Wags,
but of course she never dreamed that her gifts had been stolen. As for
her admirers, it was the highest mark of their esteem thus to lay at her
feet the choicest fruits of their precarious labors, and, although they
were common thieves--nay, worse than that--they stole rather from love
of excitement than for hope of gain, and the more fantastic the
adventure the more it tickled their distorted fancies.

They were most amusing, and June grew to like them immensely. She began
to mother them in the way that pleases all women. She ruled them like a
family of wayward children, she settled their disputes, and they
submitted with subdued, though extravagant, joy. She asked Llewellyn
once about that wound in his arm, but he lied fluently, and she believed
him, for she was not the kind to credit evil of her friends.

Once they had received encouragement, they fairly monopolized her. She
was never safe from interruption, for the Wag-boys never slept. They
came to her cabin singly and collectively at all hours of day or night,
during her absence or during her presence, and they never failed to
leave something behind them.

Reddy was a good cook, but he loathed a stove as he loathed a policeman,
yet he donned an apron, and at the cost of much profanity and sweat
produced a chocolate cake that would have done credit to a New England
housewife. Furthermore, it bore June's name in a beautiful scroll
surrounded by a chocolate wreath, and she found it on her bed when she
came home one morning.

Chancing to express a liking for oysters in the hearing of the Scrap
Iron Kid, she mysteriously received a whole case of them when she knew
very well that there were none in camp. Of course she did not dream that
in securing them the Kid had put his person in deadly peril.

On returning from her duties at another time she found that during the
night the interior walls of her cabin had been painted, and, although
she did not want them painted and although the smell gave her a violent
headache, she pretended to be overcome with delight. In order to
beautify her little nest Reddy had burgled a store and stolen all the
paint there was of the particular shade that pleased his eye.

Now, the Wag-boys pretended to be care-free and happy as time went on.
In reality they were gnawed by a secret trouble--it was June's growing
fondness for Harry Hope. After careful observation they decided that the
P. C. agent would not do at all; he was too wild. He had undeniably lost
his head and was gambling heavily, tempted perhaps by the lax morality
of the camp and the license of good times.

It was the Dummy who finally proposed a means of safeguarding June's
wandering affections.

"Somebody's got to split her away from this Hope," he declared. "It's up
to us, and Llewellyn's the only one in her class."

The Scrap Iron Kid's face assumed an ugly yellow cast as he inquired,
quietly, "D'you mean George is to marry her?"

"Hardly!" exploded the Dummy. "Just toll her away."

"Why shouldn't I marry her?" Llewellyn demanded.

"I can think of five reasons," the Kid retorted. He tapped his chest
with his finger. "Here's one, and there's the other four." He pointed to
the other Wag-boys. "D'you think we'd let you marry her? Huh! I'd sooner
marry her myself."

Llewellyn ended the discussion by stamping out of the cabin, cursing his
partners with violence.

Business of the P. C. Company took Harry Hope to Council City in
February; so the Wags felt easier--but only for a time. They found that
June was grieving for him, and were plunged into deep despair until
Scrap Iron came home with the explanation that the lovers had quarreled
before parting. It was a signal for a celebration during which Reddy
cooked wildly for a week, making puddings and pies and pastries, most of
which were smuggled into June's cabin. Thomasville journeyed out to a
certain roadhouse run by a Frenchman, and returned with a case of eggs
wrapped up in a woolen comforter. It required the combined perjury of
the other Wags to prove an alibi for him, but June had an omelet every
morning thereafter.

Then, just as they were weaning her away, as they thought, the blow
fell. It came with a crushing force that left them dumb and
panic-stricken. June took pneumonia! The Scrap Iron Kid brought the
first news of her illness, and he blubbered like a baby, while Dummy,
the woman-hater, cursed like a man bereft.

"How d'you know it's pneumonia?" queried Thomasville.

"The doc says so. Me 'n' George dropped in with some beefsteaks we
copped from the butcher, and found her in bed, coughing like the devil.
She couldn't get up--pains in her boosum. We run for Doc Whiting
and--fellers, it's true! George is there now." The Kid swallowed
bravely, and two tears rolled down his cheeks.

The Wag-boys broke out of their cabin on the run, then strung out down
the snow-banked street toward June's cabin, where they found Dr.
Whiting, very grave, and Llewellyn with his face blanched and his lips
tight drawn. They tiptoed in and stood against the wall in a silent,
stricken row, twirling their caps and trying to ease the pain in their
throats.

The Wag-lady was indeed very ill. Her yellow hair was tumbled over her
pillow and she was in great pain, but she smiled at them and made a
feeble jest--which broke in her throat, for she was young and all alone
and very badly frightened. It was too much for the Scrap Iron Kid, who
stumbled out into the freezing night and fought with his misery. He
tried to pray, but from long inexperience he fancied he made bad work of
it.

An hour later they assembled and laid plans to weather the storm.

"She's worried about her hotel," Llewellyn announced. "If that was off
her mind she'd have a better chance."

"Let's manage it for her," the Dummy offered. "I'll watch it to-night."

"An' who'll watch you?" queried the Kid.

"D'you reckon I'd run out on a pal like June?" stormed the Dummy,
whereat Scrap Iron assured him he was positive that he would not, for
the very good reason that he and Reddy would take care that no
opportunity offered.

"You run the joint like you say, an' we'll lookout her game for her;
then to-morrow night the other three can do it. We'll take turn an' turn
about, an' them that's off shift will nurse her. I've been thinkin'
now--if only we knowed something about women folks--"

"I been married once or twice, if that's any good," Thomasville ventured
to confess; whereupon he was elected head nurse by virtue of his
experience, and accordingly they went to work.

Dr. Whiting had promised to secure a woman to care for the sick girl,
but women were scarce that winter and he was only partly successful, so
the greater portion of the responsibility fell upon the Wags. He also
spoke of removing June to the excuse for a hospital, but they would not
hear to this. And so the battle for her life began.

It was a battle, too, for she grew rapidly worse and soon was delirious,
babbling of strange things which tore at the hearts of the Wag-boys. Day
after day, night after night, she lay racked and tortured, fighting the
brave fight of youth, and through it all the six thieves tended her.
They were ever at her side, coming and going like the wraiths of her
distorted fancy, and while three of them divided the day into watches
the other three ran the bunk-house, keeping strict account of every
penny taken in. They O. K.'d one another's books, and it would have
fared badly indeed with any one of them had he allowed the least
discrepancy to appear in his reckoning.

It was a strange scene, this, a sick and friendless girl mothered by a
gang of crooks. When June's condition improved they rejoiced with a deep
ferocity that was pitiful; when it grew worse they went about hushed and
terror-stricken. Through it all she called incessantly for Harry Hope,
and it was Llewellyn who finally volunteered to go to Council City and
fetch him--an offer that showed the others he was game.

But before the weather had settled sufficiently to allow it, Hope came.
He arrived one night in a blinding smother which whined down over the
treeless wastes, driving men indoors before its fury. Hearing of June's
illness, he had taken the trail within an hour, fighting his way for a
hundred trackless miles through a blizzard that daunted even a Wag-boy,
and he showed the marks of battle. His face was bitten deeply by the
cold, his dogs were dying in the harness, and it was evident that he had
not slept for many hours. He whimpered like a child when Llewellyn met
him at June's door; then he heard her wearily babbling his name, as she
had done these many, many days, and he went in, kneeling beside her with
his frozen breath still caked upon his parka hood.

Llewellyn stood by and heard him tenderly calling to the wandering girl,
saw the peace that came into her face as something told her he was near;
then the Wag-boy who had once been a gentleman came forward and gave
Hope his hand, and thanked him for his coming.

June began to mend after that, and it was not long before Whiting said
she might recover if she had proper food. She would, however, need
nourishment--milk; but there was only one cow in camp, and other sick
people, and not sufficient milk to go round. The Wag-boys lumped their
bank-rolls and offered to buy the animal from its owner, but he refused.
So they stole the cow and all her fodder.

Now it is no difficult matter to steal a cow, even in a mining-camp in
the dead of winter, but it is not nearly so easy for a cow to remain
stolen under such conditions, and the Wags were hard put to prevent
discovery. It would have been far easier, they realized, to steal a
two-story brick house or a printing-office, and then, too, not one of
them knew how to secure the milk even after they had gained the cow's
consent. They made various experiments, however, one of which resulted
in Reddy's having the breath rammed out of him, and another causing
Thomasville to adopt crutches for a day or so. But eventually June got
her milk, a gallon of it daily. Every night or two the cow had to be
moved, every day they gagged her to muffle her voice. Then, when
discovery was imminent, they made terms of surrender, exacting
twenty-five per cent. of the gross output as the consideration for her
return.

They breathed much easier when the cow was off their hands.

Spring was in sight when June became strong enough to take up her
duties, and she was surprised to find her hotel running as usual, also a
flour-sack full of currency beneath her bed, together with a set of
books showing her receipts. It was signed by Llewellyn and witnessed by
the other Wags. There was no record of disbursements.

One day Whiting advised her to get out in the air, and the Scrap Iron
Kid volunteered to take her for a dog ride.

"I didn't know you had a team," she said.

"Who? Me? Sure! I got as good a team as ever you see," he declared, and
when she accepted his invitation he proceeded to get his dogs together
in a startling manner. He tied a soup-bone on a string and walked the
back streets; then, when he beheld a likely-looking husky, he dragged
the bone behind him, enticing the animal by degrees to the Wag-boys'
cabin, where he promptly tied it up. He repeated the performance seven
times. The matter of harness and sled was but a detail; so June enjoyed
a ride that put pink roses into her cheeks and gave the Scrap Iron Kid a
feeling of pure, exalted joy such as he had never felt in all his
adventurous career.

The day she walked over to the Wag house unassisted was one of such wild
rejoicing that she was forced to tell them shyly of her own happiness, a
happiness so new that as yet she could scarcely credit it. She was to be
Mrs. Harry Hope, and asked them to wish her joy.

Llewellyn made a speech that evoked the admiration of them all, even to
the Kid, who was miserably jealous, and June went home with her heart
very warm and tender toward these six adventurers who had been so true
to her.

It was to be expected that Hope would share in his sweetheart's
extravagant gladness, for he loved her deeply, with all the force of his
big, strong nature, yet he acted strangely as time went on. Now he was
sad and worried, again he seemed tortured by a lurking disquietude of
spirit. This alarmed the Wag-lady, and she set out to find the secret of
his trouble.

The ice was breaking when he made a clean breast of it, and when he had
finished June felt that her heart was breaking also. It was the
commonplace story of a young man tempted beyond his strength. Hope's
popularity had made him a host of friends, while his generosity had made
"no" a difficult answer. He had plunged into excesses during the early
winter; gambled wildly, not to win, but for the fun of it. He had lost
company money, trusting to his ability to make it good from his own
pocket when the time came. The time was coming, and his pockets were
empty. Spring was here, the first boats would arrive any day, and with
them would come the P. C. men to audit his accounts. It was possible to
cover it up, to be sure, but he scorned to falsify his books.

"I should have stayed in Council City," he said, "but when I heard you
were--sick--" He buried his brown face in his hands.

The girl's lips were white as she asked, "How much is it?"

"Nearly twenty thousand."

She shook her head hopelessly. "I haven't nearly that much, Harry, but
perhaps they would let us pay off the balance as we are able."

"June!" he cried. "I wouldn't let you! I'll go to jail first! I--I
suppose you won't want to marry me, now that you know?"

"I love you more than twenty thousand dollars' worth," she replied.
"We'll face it out together."

"If only I had time I could pay it back and they'd never know, for I
have property that will sell, once the season opens."

"Then you must take time."

"I can't. Sternberg will tell."

"What has Sternberg to do with it?"

"I lost the money in his place--his books will show. He suspects, even
now, and he's talking about it. He doesn't like me, you know, since he
heard of our engagement."

The days fled swiftly by; the hills thrust their scarred sides up
through the melting snow; the open sea showed black beyond the rim of
anchor ice. As nature awoke and blossomed, June faded and shrank until
she was no more than the ghost of her former self. Then one day smoke
was reported upon the horizon, and the town became a bedlam; for the
door of the frozen North was creaking on its hinges, and just beyond lay
the good, glad world of men and things.

June could stand it no longer; so she told her sorrow to Llewellyn, who
had half guessed it, anyhow, and he in turn retold it to his
fellow-Wags.

The Scrap Iron Kid was for killing Hope at once, and argued that it was
by far the simplest way out of June's trouble, carrying with it also an
agreeable element of retribution. Hope had hurt the Wag-lady, therefore
the least atonement he could offer was his blood. But Dummy, the foxy
old alibi man of the outfit, said:

"I've got a better scheme. Hope wants to do the right thing, and June'll
make him if she has a chance. The company will get its coin, she'll get
her square guy, an' nobody'll be hurt, provided he has time to swing
himself. The ace in the hole is Sammy Sternberg; he's got the books. Now
what's the answer?"

"Steal the books!" chorused the Wags; and Dummy smiled.

"Why, sure."

"You can't stick up no saloon full of rough-necks and sleepers," said
Scrap Iron. "Sammy caches his books in the safe when he's off shift, and
we can't blow the safe, 'cause the joint never closes."

But the Dummy only grinned, for this was the sort of job he liked, and
then he proceeded to make known his plan.

Those were terrible hours for June. She prayed with all the earnestness
of her earnest being that her lover might be spared; repeatedly she
strained her tear-filled eyes to the southward. As for Hope, he had
tasted the consequences of his guilt, and his face grew lined and
haggard with the strain of waiting. He could have met the future with
some show of resignation had it not been for the knowledge of his
sweetheart's suffering; but as the hours passed and that thin black line
of soot still hung upon the horizon, he thought he would go mad.

On the second day a steamer showed, hull down, having wormed her way
through the floes, and Nome marched out upon the shore ice in a body.

June and Harry went with the others, hand in hand, and the man walked as
if he were marching to the gallows. It was not the P. C. steamer, after
all; it was the whaler _Jeanie_. The fleet was in the offing, however,
so she reported, and would be in within another twenty-four hours, if
the pack kept drifting.

Hope ground his teeth, and muttered: "Poor little June! I wish it were
over for your sake!" and she nodded wearily.

But as they neared the shore again they heard rumors of strange doings
in their absence. There had been a daring daylight hold-up at the
Miners' Rest. Six masked men had taken advantage of the exodus to enter
and clean out the place at the point of the gun, and now Sammy Sternberg
was poisoning the air with his complaints.

Details came flying faster as they trudged up into Front Street, and Doc
Whiting paused to say:

"That's the nerviest thing yet, eh, Harry?"

"Was anybody hurt?"

"No damage done except to Sammy's feelings."

"They surely didn't get much money?"

"Oh, no! Their total clean-up wasn't a hundred dollars; but they lugged
off Sammy's books."

June felt herself falling, and grasped weakly at her lover's arm, for
she saw it all. "Come!" she said, and dragged him up to her own cabin,
then on to the Wag-boys' door. They were all there, sprawled about and
smoking.

"You did this!" she said, shakingly. "You did it for me!"

"Did what?" they asked in chorus, looking at her blankly.

"Oh, we know," said Harry Hope. "You've given me a chance--and I'll make
good!" His own voice sounded strange in his ears.

There was an instant's awkward pause, and then the Scrap Iron Kid said,
simply, "You'd better!" and the others nodded.

Llewellyn spoke up, saying, "Reddy is our regular chef; but I'd like to
have you see me cook a goose." Then he drew from his inside pocket what
seemed to be a leaf torn from a ledger, and, unfolding it, he struck a
match, then lighted it.

"I suppose I ought to be a man and face the music," Hope managed to
stutter, "but I'm going to cheat the ends of justice for June's sake.
I'm much obliged to you."

When they had gone off, hand in hand, the Scrap Iron Kid nodded
approvingly to George, saying, "That was sure some cookin' you did,
pal."

And Llewellyn answered, "Yes, I cooked your goose and mine, but she'll
be happy, anyhow."




"MAN PROPOSES--"

THE STORY OF A MAN WHO WANTED TO DIE




I


There were seventeen policies in all and they aggregated an even million
dollars. It thrilled Butler Murray to note his own name neatly typed
upon the outside of each. Those papers possessed a remarkable
fascination for him, not only because they meant the settlement of his
debt to Muriel, but because his life, instead of being the wholly
useless thing he had come to regard it, was really, by virtue of those
documents, a valuable asset upon which he could realize at once.

One million dollars was a great deal of money, even to Butler Murray,
and yet it was so easy! Why, it was even easier to make that amount than
it had been to spend it! Although the former process might not prove so
amusing, it at least offered a degree of interest wholly lacking in the
latter.

When DeVoe entered, Murray greeted him warmly. "I'm glad I caught you,
Henry. They told me you've been out West somewhere."

"Yes, I'm promoting, you know--mines!" DeVoe flung off his fur coat and
settled into an easy-chair.

"Getting along all right?"

"No. My friends either know too little about mines or too much about me.
I've a good proposition, though, and if I could ever get started, I'd
clean up a million."

"It's not so hard to make a million dollars."

"How the deuce do you know? You've never had to try. By the way, why are
you living here at the club? Where is Mrs. Murray?"

"She is at the farm with the children. We have--separated."

"_No!_ Jove! I'm sorry. What does it mean--the road to Reno?"

"I hardly think she will divorce me, on account of the publicity;
although she ought to."

"Woman scrape, I suppose."

"No, nothing like that. I've spent all her money."

DeVoe opened his eyes in amazement. "Oh, see here now, you couldn't
spend it _all_! Why, she had even more than you!"

"It's all gone--hers and mine."

"Good _Lord_!"

"Yes. I was always extravagant, but I've been speculating lately. I
thought I'd get a sensation either way the market went, but I was
disappointed. I dare say I have exhausted my capabilities for
excitement. It's a long story, and I won't bore you with it, but, to be
exact, all I have left is the town house and the farm and the place in
Virginia. There isn't enough income, however, to keep any one of them
going."

"Well, well! You _have_ been stepping along. Why, it's inconceivable!"
DeVoe stirred uneasily in his chair. The calm indifference of this
broad-shouldered, immaculate fellow amazed him. He could not tell
whether it was genuine or assumed, and in either event he was sorry he
had come, for he did not like to hear tales of misfortune. Butler
Murray, the millionaire, was a good man to know, but--

"I sent for you because I need--"

"See here, Butler," the younger man broke in, abruptly, "you know I
can't lend. I'm borrowing myself. In fact, I was going to make a touch
on you."

"Oh, I don't want your money; I want your help. I think, perhaps, I'm
entitled to it, eh?"

Henry flushed a trifle. "You're welcome to that at all times, of course,
and if I had a bank-roll, I'd split it with you, but I just can't seem
to get started."

"Suppose you had twenty-five thousand dollars, cash; would that help?"

"Help! Great Heavens! I could swing this deal; it would put me on my
feet."

"I'm ready to pay you that amount for a few weeks of your time."

"Take a year of it, two years. Take my life's blood. Twenty-five
thousand! You needn't tell me any more; just name the job and I'll take
my chances of being caught. But--I say, you just told me you were
broke."

"I received about fifty thousand dollars from the sale of the yacht, and
I invested the money. I want you to help me realize on that investment."
Murray tossed the packet of papers he had been examining into DeVoe's
lap.

After scrutinizing them an instant, the latter looked up with a crooked,
startled stare.

"Are you joking? Why, these are your insurance policies!"

"Exactly! There are seventeen of them, and they foot up one million
dollars--the limit in every company. They begin to expire in March, and
I don't intend to renew them. In fact, I couldn't if I wanted to."

The two men regarded each other silently for a moment, then the younger
paled.

"Are you--crazy?" he gasped.

"The doctors didn't think so, and that is the heaviest life insurance
carried by any man in America, with a few exceptions. Do you think they
would have passed me if I'd been wrong up here?" He tapped his forehead.
"I intend that you shall receive twenty-five thousand dollars of that
money; the rest will go to Muriel."

DeVoe continued to stare alternately at the policies and his friend;
then cleared his throat nervously.

"Let's talk plainly."

"By all means. You will need to know the truth, but you are the only one
outside of myself who will. For some time I have felt the certainty that
I am going to die."

"Nonsense! You are an ox."

"The more I've thought about it the more certain I've become, until now
there isn't the slightest doubt in my mind. I took my last dollar and
bought that insurance. Do you understand? I'm considered rich, therefore
they allowed me to take out a million dollars."

"Sui--God Almighty, man!" DeVoe's sagging jaw snapped shut with a click.

"Let me finish; then you can decide whether I'm sane or crazy, and
whether you want that twenty-five thousand dollars enough to help me. To
begin with, I'll grant you that I'm young--only forty--healthy and
strong. But I'm broke, Henry. I don't believe you realize what that
means to a chap who has had two fortunes handed to him and has
squandered both. I'm really twice forty years of age, perhaps three
times, for I have lived faster than most men. I have been everywhere, I
have seen everything, I have done everything--except manual labor, and
of course I don't know how to do that--I have had every sensation. I'm
sated and old, and sometimes I'm a bit tired. I have no enthusiasm left,
and I'm bankrupt. To make matters worse I have a wife who knows the
truth and two lovely children who do not. Those kids believe I'm a hero
and the greatest man in all the universe; in their eyes I'm a sort of
demigod, but in a few years they'll learn that I have been a waster and
thrown away not only my own fortune, but the million that belonged to
them. That will be tough for all of us. Muriel knows how deeply I've
wronged her, but she is too much a thoroughbred to make it public.
Nevertheless, she detests me, and I detest myself; she may decide to
divorce me. At any rate, I have wrecked whatever home life I used to
have, for I'll never be able to support her, even if I sell the three
places. I'll be known as a failure; I'll be ridiculed by the world. On
the other hand, if I should die before next March she would be rich
again." Murray's eyes rested upon the package of policies. "Perhaps time
would soften her memory of me. The youngsters would have what they're
entitled to, and they would always think of me as a grand, good,
handsome parent who was taken off in his prime." He smiled whimsically
at this. "That is worth something to a fellow, isn't it? I don't want
them to be disillusioned, Henry; I don't want to endure their pity and
toleration. I don't want to be in their way and hear them say, 'Hush!
Here comes poor old father!' Do you understand?"

"To a certain extent. Then you really intend--to kill yourself?" DeVoe
glanced about the cozy room as if to assure himself that he was not
dreaming.

"Decidedly not. That insurance wouldn't be payable if--it was suicide. I
intend to die from natural causes--before the first of March."

"What do you want me to do?"

"Very little; keep me company, answer questions about my illness,
perhaps; attend to a few things after I'm gone. You might even have to
prove that I didn't take my own life. Do you agree?"

"Whew! That's a cold-blooded proposition. Are you really in earnest?"

"It took nearly my last dollar to buy that insurance. I will execute a
promissory note to you for twenty-five thousand dollars, payable one
year from date. Borrowed money, understand? The executors will see that
it is paid. Is that satisfactory?"

"But you say you can't kill yourself and yet--Good Lord! How calmly
we're discussing this thing! What makes you think you'll die of natural
causes within the next three months?"

"I shall see that I do. Oh, I've thought it all out. I've studied
poisons, but there is the danger of discovery when one uses them.
They'll do to fall back upon if necessary, but there is a better way
which is quite as certain, reasonably quick, and utterly above
suspicion."

"What is it?" questioned DeVoe, interestedly.

"Pneumonia! I had a touch of it once, and I know. They nearly lost me.
It takes us big, robust fellows off with particular ease and expedition.
You and I will take a hunting trip; it is winter; I will suffer some
unexpected exposure; you'll do what you can to save me, but medical
attention will come too late. It won't take two weeks altogether."

"If you're looking for pneumonia I know the place. When I left, ten days
ago, men were dying like flies. You won't need to go hunting it; it will
come hunting you."

"Out West somewhere, eh?".

"The Nevada desert. That's where I'm mining."

"Deserts are usually hot."

DeVoe shivered. "Not this one, at this season. It's a hell of a country,
Butler; five thousand feet elevation, biting winds, blizzards, and all
that. You just can't keep warm. But the danger is in the Poganip."

"The what?"

"The Poganip; what they call 'the Breath of Death' out there. It's a
sort of frozen fog peculiar to that locality."

"Then you accept my offer?"

Again DeVoe hesitated. "Are you really going to do it? Well then, yes.
If I don't take your money, I suppose you'll employ somebody else."

"Good! We'll leave to-morrow."

"Can you get your affairs in shape by then?"

"I don't want them in shape. Don't you understand?"

"I see." After a moment the younger man continued, "It's all very well
for us to plan this way--but I'm not sure we'll succeed in our
enterprise."

"Why not, pray?"

"Well, I dare say I'm a good deal of a rotter--I must be to go into a
thing like this--but I have a superstitious streak in me. Possibly it's
reverence; at any rate I believe there is a Power outside of ourselves
which appoints the hour of our coming and the hour of our going. I'm not
so sure you can pull this off until that Power says so."

Murray laughed. "Nonsense! What is to prevent my shooting myself at this
moment, if I want to?"

"Nothing, if you want to--but you don't want to. Why don't you want to?
Because that Power hasn't named this as your time. I don't make myself
very clear."

"I think I see what you're driving at, but you're wrong. We are masters
of our own destinies; we make our lives as full or as empty as we
choose. I have emptied mine of all it contained, and I don't consider
that I am doing any one an injury in disposing of what belongs alone to
me. Now we'll complete the details."

The speaker drew a blank note from his desk and filled it in.

It was with a very natural feeling of interest that Butler Murray
watched the desert unfold before his car window a few days later as his
train made its way southward from the main line and into the Bad Lands
of the Nevada gold-fields. There was snow everywhere; not enough for
warmth, but enough to chill the landscape with a gray, forbidding
aspect. It lay, loose-piled and shifting, behind naked rocks, or
streamed over the knife-edge ridges, swirling and settling in the
gullies like filmy winding-sheets. All the world up here was barren,
burned out, and cold, like his own life; it was a fitting place in which
to end an existence which had proven such a mockery and failure.

Goldfield was a conglomerate city in the hectic stage of its growth.
Rough, uncouth, primitive, it lay cradled in the lap of inhospitable
hills upon the denuded slopes of which derricks towered like gallows.
The whole naked country spoke of death and desolation.

A bitter wind laden with driving particles of sleet met the travelers as
they stepped off the train.

DeVoe's headquarters consisted of a typical mining-camp shack in the
heart of the town, containing a bare little office and two
sleeping-rooms, the hindermost of which gave egress to a yard banked in
snow and flanked by other frame buildings.

Murray selected the coldest apartment and unpacked his belongings, the
most precious of which was a folding morocco case containing three
photographs--one of Muriel and one each of the boy and the girl.

Then followed a week of careful preparation. Together the two men made
frequent excursions to various mining properties. Murray mingled with
the heterogeneous crowd of brokers, promoters, gamblers, and
mine-owners; he took options on claims and made elaborate plans to
develop them; he was interviewed by reporters from the local papers;
articles were printed telling of his proposed activities. When he had
laid a secure foundation, he announced to DeVoe that the time had come.

It appeared that the latter had by no means exaggerated the dangers of
this climate, for men were really dying in such numbers as to create
almost a panic, the hospitals were overcrowded, and Murray had been
repeatedly warned to take the strictest care of himself if he wished to
preserve his health. The altitude combined with the cold and wet and the
lack of accommodations was to blame, it seemed, and accounted for the
high mortality rate. Doctors assured him that once a man was stricken
with pneumonia in this climate there was little chance of saving him.

       *       *       *       *       *

That evening he let the fire die out of the stove in his room, then went
next door to a little Turkish-bath establishment, and proceeded to sweat
for an hour. Instead of drying himself off he flung a greatcoat over his
streaming shoulders, slipped into boots and trousers, then stepped
across the snow-packed yard to his own quarters, where he found DeVoe
bundled up to the chin and waiting. His brief passage across the open
snow had chilled him, for the wind was cruel, but he blew out the light
in his chamber, flung off his overcoat, then, standing in the open door,
drank the frost-burdened air into his overheated lungs.

"God! You're half naked!" chattered the onlooker. "You'll freeze."

The moisture upon Murray's body dried slowly. He began to shake in every
muscle, but he continued his long, deep breaths--breaths that congealed
his lungs. He became cramped and stiff. He suffered terribly. He felt
constricting bands about his chest; darting, numbing pains ran through
him. He could not tell how long he continued thus, but eventually the
sheer agony of it drove him back. He closed the door and crept into bed,
the clammy cotton sheets of which were warm against his flesh. Through
rattling teeth he bade good night to his friend, saying:

"D-don't mind--anything I do or--say during the night."

DeVoe lost no time in seeking his own warm room, where Murray heard him
stamping and threshing his arms to revive his circulation.

There could be but one outcome to such a suicidal action, the frozen man
reflected. Stronger fellows than he were dying daily from half such
exposure. Why, already he could feel his lungs congesting. Although the
agony was almost unendurable, he forced himself to lie still, then
traced the course of his blood as it gradually crept through his veins.
Eventually he fell asleep, tortured, but satisfied.

Henry found him slumbering peacefully late the next morning, and when he
arose he felt better and stronger than he had for years.

"Jove! I'm hungry," he said as he dressed himself.

"I expected to find you mighty sick," his friend exclaimed, wonderingly.
"I slept cold all night."

"It seems I didn't catch it that time. I must be stronger than I
thought."

He ate a hearty breakfast, and, although he tramped the hills all day in
the snow and cold, watching himself carefully for signs of approaching
illness, he was disappointed to discover none whatever. At bedtime he
repeated his performance of the night before, but with the same result.
When he awoke on the second morning, however, he found the desert town
wrapped in the dark folds of a fog that chilled his marrow and clung to
his clothing in little beads. It was a strange phenomenon, for the air
was bitterly cold and yet saturated with moisture; mountain and valley
were hidden in an impalpable dust that was neither fog nor snow, but a
freezing, uncomfortable combination of both.

DeVoe hugged the fire all day, saying to his guest: "You'll have to do
the trick alone, Butler; it's too deucedly unpleasant sitting there in
the cold every night. I'll get sick."

"It's not very agreeable for me, either, and the least you can do is to
keep me company. That's the agreement, you know."

After some argument DeVoe acceded, saying, "Oh, if you want me to hold
your hand while you freeze I suppose I'll have to do it, although I
can't see the use of it."

That night when Murray had regained his cheerless room after taking his
Turkish bath he drank a goblet of raw whisky, then flung wide the door,
and, standing upon the sill, half nude and gleaming with perspiration,
inhaled the deadly Poganip. When the fiery liquor had driven the last
drop of his hot blood to the surface he seized a bottle of alcohol and,
upending it, drenched his body. If he had suffered previously, he now
endured supreme agony. As the alcohol evaporated upon his naked skin it
fairly froze the blood he had forced up from his heart's cavities. He
groaned with the pain of it. Again he felt as if his body were coating
with ice; his lungs contracted with that agonizing grip.

"This is too c-cold for me," DeVoe chattered, finally. "I'm going to
beat it."

As Butler Murray cowered and shook in his bed an hour later he decided
that his third and final effort had succeeded, for not only did he
plainly feel the effects of that terrible ordeal, but by every law of
nature and hygiene he was doomed. He had drunk the whisky to increase
the peripheral circulation of his body to the highest point, then by the
use of the alcohol had reduced his temperature to a frightful extent and
driven his blood back, frozen and sluggish. That was inevitably
suicidal, as the least knowledge of medicine would show; it could not be
otherwise. He was very glad, too, for this suffering was more than he
had bargained for.

He awoke in the morning feeling none the worse for his action. He did
not even have a cold.

DeVoe's amazement at this miracle was mingled with annoyance which he
showed by complaining: "See here, Butler, are you kidding? You might at
least have a little consideration for my feelings; this suspense is
awful."

"My dear fellow, I'm doing all I can." Murray filled his chest, then
pressed it gingerly with his palm. There was not a trace of soreness;
his muscles lacked even a twinge of rheumatism.

       *       *       *       *       *

That day he had another window cut in the wall of his room, immediately
over his bed, and, after exposing himself as usual upon retiring, left
it open and slept in the draught. Finding that this had no effect, he
undertook to sleep without covers, but the bitter weather would not
permit, so he purchased drugs and, after returning from his Turkish
bath, swallowed a sleeping-potion. When he could no longer keep his eyes
open he lay down nude and dripping where the frigid wind sucked over
him. Some time, somehow, before morning he must have covered himself,
for he awoke between the sheets as usual. With the exception of a thick
feeling in his head, however, which quickly wore off, he possessed no
ill effects.

Day after day, night after night, he exposed himself with a deliberate
methodical recklessness that seemed fatal; time after time his good
constitution threw off the assault. DeVoe declared querulously that his
friend looked even better than when they had arrived, and the scales
showed he had put on five pounds of weight. The affair assumed an
ironical, grisly sort of humor which amused Murray. But it was maddening
to DeVoe.

One howling, stormy afternoon the former bundled his accessory into warm
clothes and took him for a long walk. Leaving the town behind them, they
plowed up through the snow to the summit of a near-by mountain where the
gale raged past in all its violence. Henry was cursing the cold and
grumbling at his idiocy in coming along, and, when he had regained his
breath, growled:

"Understand, Butler, this ends it for me. I never agreed to kill
_myself_. Hereafter you can make your Alpine trips alone. I've had a
cold now for a week."

Murray laughed good-naturedly. "Remember, if I fail I can't pay you."

"For Heaven's sake, then, get it over with! I need that money and--I
have nerves."

The former speaker opened his coat and DeVoe saw that he had left the
house with no protection whatever beneath it, except trousers and
footgear. His body was wet from the climb, but he exposed it openly to
the storm until he was blue with cold, while the younger man stamped
about, threshing his arms and lamenting his own discomfort.

That night Murray repeated his Turkish bath, swallowed his usual
narcotic, and lay down upon his draughty couch to be awakened some time
after midnight by a cry of "Fire." He noted dully that a vivid glare was
flickering through his open windows, and saw that the roofs adjoining
were silhouetted against a redly glowing sky; he heard a great clamor of
shouting voices, gunshots, bells, running feet, so arose and dressed
himself. Instead of donning his regular clothing, however, he drew on a
pair of trousers, thrust his bare feet into rubber boots, then buttoned
a rubber coat over his naked shoulders.

When he undertook to rouse DeVoe, Henry refused to get up, murmuring
sourly beneath his blankets:

"It's too cold and I've just fallen asleep--been tossing around for
hours."

"Very well. If it should spread in this direction I'll come back and
help get the things out."

The blizzard of the previous day had increased in violence, and as
Murray stepped out into it the cold sank through his thin garb and cut
him to the bone. His rain-coat was almost no protection, the rubber
boots upon his bare feet froze quickly, but he smiled with a grim,
distorted sense of satisfaction as he decided that here perhaps was his
long-awaited opportunity.

A winter fire in a desert mining-camp is a serious calamity. Water is
scarce at all times, and at this particular season Goldfield was even
drier than usual. Volunteers had already joined the insufficient fire
department, but the blaze was gaining headway in spite of all. The wind
played devilish pranks, serving not only to fan the conflagration, but
to deaden human hands and reduce human bodies to helpless, clumsy
things.

Butler Murray plunged into the fight with an abandon that won admiration
even in this chaos. He had no fear, he courted danger, he led where
others shrank from following. In and out of the flames he went, now
blistered by the heat, now numbed by the wintry gale. His body became
drenched with sweat, only to be caked in ice from the spray a moment
later. Icicles clung to his brows, his boots filled with water. It was
he who laid the dynamite, it was he who set it off and razed the
buildings in the path of the conflagration, checking the swift march of
destruction. Although he labored like a giant, taking insane risks at
every opportunity, his life seemed charmed, and dawn found him
uninjured, although staggering from weakness. Women brought him hot
coffee and sandwiches, then when the fire was under control he returned
to his quarters, half naked, as he had set out. It had been one long
battle against the blind god luck and he had emerged unscathed. And yet
he had not lost, for no human body could withstand a strain like this;
his previous exposures had been as nothing compared with what he had
undergone these many hours. If this did not bring pneumonia nothing
could.

As he lurched up the frozen street men cheered him and something warm
awoke in his heart, but when he stumbled into DeVoe's room he found that
young man still in bed, his cheeks flushed and feverish. Henry was
coughing and groaning; he complained of pains in his head and chest.

An hour later a doctor pronounced it pneumonia, and when the patient
grew rapidly worse he was moved to the wretched excuse for a hospital.
Murray snatched a few hours' sleep that night as he sat by his friend's
bedside and the next day found him as fit as ever. But in spite of every
attention DeVoe's fever mounted, his lungs began to fill, and on the
second night he died.

The suddenness of this tragedy stunned Butler Murray and its mockery
enraged him. He had promised DeVoe, toward the last, to take his body
East, and now decided it was just as well to do so, for he had proven,
to his own satisfaction at least, that he could not catch pneumonia, no
matter how hard he tried. A few hours later, therefore, he was on the
overland train bound for New York.

He had wasted a month of valuable time, but as to relinquishing his
purpose, the idea never occurred to him.




II


The physical comfort of his club was most agreeable after his recent
ordeal, but he enjoyed it only a few days, then began to look about for
a suitable place in which to end his grim comedy. He selected the spot
with little delay--a sharp turn in a hillside road that wound down from
the heights near Spuyten Duyvil--he had often passed it in summer and
knew the danger well. If his automobile went over the edge, now that the
roads were icy, who could say it was not accidental?

He did not advise Muriel of his return, fearing to trust himself either
to write or to telephone, but spent much time in front of the morocco
case with its three photographs, longing desperately to see her and the
children.

When he felt that an auspicious time had arrived, he 'phoned his friend,
Dr. Herkimer, and invited himself to dinner. Herkimer was delighted, and
a few evenings later the clubman motored out toward Yonkers, where he
was made welcome and spent an agreeable evening.

"Where's your chauffeur?" the doctor inquired as his guest drew on his
fur coat and driving-gloves, preparatory to leaving.

"I let him go to-night. I thought I'd enjoy running the machine, for a
change."

"The roads are bad; be careful you don't skid on the hills. I nearly
went over to-day."

Murray promised to heed the warning, and a few moments later was gliding
toward the city.

The beauty of this cold, sharp night was inspiriting; the moon was
brilliant; the air was charged with life and vigor. It gave him a thrill
to realize that he was sweeping to probable death; that nothing now
could intervene to thwart him, and while, of course, there was the
unpleasant possibility that a plunge over the declivity might do no more
than maim him, he had studied the place carefully and intended to reduce
that chance to a minimum by driving his car down the hill with
sufficient velocity to hurl it far out over the edge. There were
railroad tracks beneath; anything short of instant death would be
miraculous.

As he came out upon the heights at last it occurred to him that he was
behaving very well for a man about to die. His hand was steady, his
heart was not greatly quickened, he was absolutely sane and healthy and
full of the desire to live. A short distance from the crest he stopped
his machine, then sat motionless for a few moments drinking in the
beauty of the night and taking his farewell of Muriel. When he had
arrived at peace with himself he fixed his wife's image in his mind,
then, thrusting down the accelerator, let in the clutch. There was a
jar, a jerk, a spasmodic shudder of the machinery; the motor went dead.

This unexpected interruption affected Murray oddly, until he realized
that after stopping the car he had neglected to shift his gears to
neutral. With an imprecation at his stupidity he clambered out and
cranked the motor. When it failed to start he primed his carbureter and
cranked again. It was an expensive, foreign-built machine, and one turn
should have served to set it going, but, strangely enough, there was no
explosion. For fifteen minutes he did everything his limited knowledge
permitted, but the car remained stationary upon the crest of the hill, a
stubborn, lifeless mass of metal.

Evidently that jerk had wrought havoc with some delicate adjustment, he
reasoned, perhaps the wiring, but it was too dark to diagnose just where
the trouble lay. It was cold, also, and his numb fingers refused to be
of much assistance. He gave over his efforts finally, and stared about
with a troubled look in his eyes. This was childish, utterly idiotic. He
wanted to laugh, but instead he cursed, then cranked the motor viciously
until the sweat stood out upon his forehead.

An hour later he was towed into town behind a rescue-car summoned by
telephone from the nearest garage. As he left his machine to board a
Subway train, the mechanic announced:

"Maybe it was a good thing you broke down before you hit that hill,
boss. There was a bad accident at the turn, to-day; the police are going
to close the street till spring."

Murray was not superstitious, but, recalling his many failures at
Goldfield, he decided he would make no further attempt to do away with
himself by means of his motor-car. Now that this particular road was
closed to traffic, he knew of no other place so favorable to his
project, and, inasmuch as the time was growing short, to be only
partially successful in his attempt would mean utter ruin. With no
little regret, therefore, he made up his mind to fall back upon poison,
which at least was certain, even though possessed of obvious drawbacks.

His experience with DeVoe had rendered him a bit cynical regarding the
value of friendship, hence it was with no fear of a checkmate that he
telephoned to Dr. Herkimer and made an appointment for that afternoon.
When the doctor arrived at the club, Murray laid the matter before him
in a concise, cold-blooded manner, and was relieved to hear him voice
exactly the words DeVoe had used.

"What do you want me to do?"

"I want you to call here for me to-morrow morning. You will find me dead
in my bed. I want you to examine me and call it heart failure or
whatever you think best. Your word will be sufficient; there will be no
suspicion, no further examination, at least, until the poison I intend
to use will have had time to disappear or change its form."

"And why should I do this?" The doctor looked his friend over oddly.

"Here is one reason which I hope is sufficient." Murray held out a
promissory note for the same amount as the one he had executed for
DeVoe.

Herkimer took it, then, as he read the figures, his face paled. Crushing
it in his palm, he rose, and in a voice harsh with fury unloosed a
stream of profanity that surprised his hearer.

"You contemptible, short-bred loafer!" he concluded. "What do you take
me for? What makes you think I'd do such a rotten thing as that?"

Murray smiled. "You'll _have_ to, old man. It isn't pleasant, of course,
but you won't allow Muriel and the children to lose that money. I like
your spirit, but I shall kill myself just the same, and it's up to you
to see that they are not ruined."

Again Herkimer became incoherent.

"Oh, swear as much as you please, I'm going to do it, nevertheless. I've
made a wretched failure of everything else, but I intend to right one of
my wrongs while there is time."

"Right! Wrong!" bellowed the physician. "Damn it, man! You're asking me
to help you steal a million dollars. Does that occur to you?"

"The end justifies the means in this case. You're not rich. That
twenty-five thousand--"

Herkimer flung the paper at the speaker.

"Well, if you won't take my money, you'll have to help me, out
of friendship. At nine o'clock to-morrow morning I shall be dead.
Knowing the truth and all it means, you'll _have_ to come.
You--_can't--stay--away_."

"Oh, is that so?" the doctor mocked, furiously. "I'll show you whether I
can or not." He jerked his watch from his pocket and consulted it.
"There's a train for Boston in twenty minutes and I'm going to take it.
I couldn't get back here in time even if I wanted to. Now, kill yourself
and be damned to you." He seized his hat and rushed out of the room,
slamming the door behind him.

A moment later Murray heard a taxi-cab whir noisily away from the
club-house door.

Manifestly, there were more difficulties in the way of this enterprise
than he had counted upon. Without the co-operation of some reliable
physician the clubman dared not do away with himself in New York;
coroners are curious, medical attention is too prompt, he was too well
known, the very existence of that tremendous amount of life insurance
would lead to investigation. He decided to go hunting, and he knew just
the right place to go, too, he thought.

Several years before he had joined a gunning club which owned a vast
expanse of rice-fields and marsh lands in North Carolina, and, knowing
the place thoroughly, he concluded that it offered perfect facilities
for such an action as he contemplated. Accordingly, he packed his guns,
wired for a guide, and boarded a train for the South that very night. In
his pocket he carried a vial containing twenty-five grains of powdered
cocaine.

The club launch met him at Boonville, the nearest station, and during
the twenty-mile trip down the Sound he learned all he wished to know.
The shooting was well-nigh over; there were no other members at the
club-house; he would have the place all to himself.

For several days he hunted diligently, taking pains to write numerous
letters to his friends, and among others to Muriel. It was his first
letter since their parting, and the strain of holding his pen within
formal bounds was almost too much for him. It was a pity she would never
understand his motives in doing this thing, he reflected. It was a pity
he had never understood his own feelings before it was too late.
Manlike, he had thrown away the only precious thing of his life while
searching for counterfeit joys, and, man-like, he regretted his folly
now that he had lost her.

That evening he informed his guide that he intended to hunt by himself
on the following morning, and in answer to the old negro's warning
assured him that he knew the channels well and was amply able to handle
a canoe.

He rose early, forced himself to eat a substantial breakfast, for the
sake of appearances, then set out in his Peterboro. The morning was
chilly and he had purposely donned a heavy sweater, shell vest, leather
coat, and hip-boots. He paddled down the river for a mile or more, then
let his craft drift with the current. Far away on one horizon was a
dark, low-lying fringe of pines marking the mainland; two miles to
seaward sounded the slow rumble of the restless Atlantic; on every hand
were acres upon acres, miles upon miles of waving marsh-grass interlaced
with creeks and channels; nowhere was there a sign of human life.

He took the little bottle from his pocket, reached over the side and
filled it with water. He replaced the cork and shook the vial until the
white powder it contained was thoroughly dissolved. There were
twenty-five grains of it, eight fatal doses, and he had seen that it was
fresh. This time there could be no question of failure, he reasoned. Nor
was there much chance of discovery, for after that drug had remained in
his body for a few hours it would be exceedingly difficult of
identification, even at the hands of an expert toxicologist. But there
were no experts in this country, no doctors at all, in fact, this side
of Boonville, twenty miles away.

He marveled at his coolness as he flung the cork into the stream and
raised the bottle to his lips. His pulse was even, his mind was
untroubled. He drank the contents, filled the bottle and let it sink;
then rose to his feet, and, bearing his weight upon the gunwale of his
canoe, swamped it.

Burdened as he was with shells and hunting-gear he sank, but the cold
water sent him fighting and gasping to the surface again. The blind
instinct of self-preservation mastered him and, being a powerful
swimmer, he struck out. He had planned too well, however. His boots
filled, his clothing became wet and he went down for a second time. Then
commenced a senseless, terrible struggle, the more terrible because the
man fought against his own determination. He rose slowly to the surface,
but the shore was far away, the canoe, bottom up, was out of reach. He
gasped wildly for breath as his face emerged, but instead of air he
inhaled water into his lungs. He choked, horrible convulsions seized
him, his limbs threshed, his ears roared, his chest was bursting. He
rose and sank, rose and sank, enduring the agony of suffocation, all the
time fighting with a strong man's desperation. After a time he seemed to
hear shouting; something tugged and hauled at him; he discovered he
could breathe again. His senses wavered, left him, returned; he saw
faces bending above him. A moment later he heard his name spoken, then
found himself awash in the bottom of a gamekeeper's batteau.

As in a dream he heard his rescuers explain that they had been out in
search of poachers and had rounded the bend below in time to behold him
struggling for his life. They were hurrying him back to the club-house
now as fast as arms and oars could propel them, and after he had gained
sufficient strength he sat up.

He strove to answer their excited questions, but could not speak. A
strange paralysis numbed his vocal cords; he could not swallow; his
tongue was thick and unmanageable. This silence alarmed the wardens, but
Murray knew it to be nothing more than a local anaesthesia due to the
contact of the cocaine. He became conscious of feeling very wretched.

They helped him up to the club-house, and on the way he caught glimpses
of horrified black faces. He saw the superintendent preparing to send to
Boonville for a doctor, but, knowing that the launch had already left,
calculated the time it would take for a canoe to make the trip, and was
vaguely amused to realize that all this excitement was useless. He
experienced a feeling of triumph at the knowledge that he had succeeded
in spite of all.

A short time later he was in bed, packed in warm blankets and hot-water
bags, but through it all he maintained that distressing dumbness.
Despite the artificial heat his hands and feet tingled, as if asleep,
then became entirely numb, and he reasoned that the cocaine had begun to
affect his circulation. He noted how the chill crept upward slowly,
showing that the drug was working. On the mantel opposite he saw Muriel
smiling at him from the morocco case and realized that she was very
beautiful. After a time her outlines became less distinct, which told
him that his optic nerve was becoming affected. Next the contents of the
room grew hazy. That was quite as it should be.

He was much interested to note his heart action, which by now had become
very erratic. Every pulsation that ran through him sounded as plainly in
his ears as a drum-beat. He noticed that they were regular for a time,
then gradually increased in speed until his heart raced like a runaway
motor, then ceased suddenly, began again slowly, faintly, grew slower
and fainter, until with every flutter he thought, "This is the end!"

When this phenomenon had been repeated time after time the sick man
endeavored to assist the poison's effect. At each feeble recovery of his
heart he held his breath and strained with all his might, striving by
every force of will to stop the systolic action.

As he had often heard that men live again their evil deeds in the hour
of dissolution, and while he had perhaps more than the average number of
sins upon his soul, he determined to die thinking only of pleasant
things, if possible. He recalled his wedding-day, and pictured Muriel as
she had appeared that morning. How sweet and gentle she had been, what a
wonderful time it had proved for him. They had sailed for the
Mediterranean on the following morning, landing at Naples, where they
had spent a week. From there they had gone to Rome for three dreamlike
months and then to Nice and to Cairo, all the time in a lovers'
paradise. From Egypt they had turned back to Morocco. Yes, Morocco, and
how she had loved it there. Thence they had journeyed--where? To Spain,
of course. Murray realized that his mind was working more slowly, which
meant that the circulation to his brain was becoming sluggish. In a few
moments he would be unable to think at all, it would be over--Muriel
would be rich again. She was still young; she might marry some good man.
From Spain they had gone by rail to--Paris? No, the Riviera--It was very
difficult to think. In Germany, he remembered, they had taken an old
castle for the--From Germany they had gone--gone. Yes. Muriel was--gone!

       *       *       *       *       *

Murray awoke to find a trained nurse at his bedside. He was still in his
room at the club, and after a time reasoned that the cocaine must be
working very slowly. At the first words the nurse laid a hand upon his
lips, saying:

"Don't speak, please. You have been very ill." Stepping to the door, she
called some one, whereupon a man came quickly. Murray recognized him
instantly as the famous Dr. Stormfield. They had met here three years
previous and shot from the same blind.

"Hello, Murray!" the doctor began. "I'm glad you came around finally.
You've given us the devil of a fight."

"How long--have I been ill?" whispered the sick man.

"Two days; unconscious all the time. Lucky for you that I ran down for a
little shooting and happened to be on the launch from Boonville the
morning you upset. We picked up your messenger on his way to town, and I
got here just in time. Now don't talk. You're not out of danger by any
means." That evening the physician explained further: "You must have
suffered a terrible shock in that cold water. I never saw a case quite
like it. Your heart puzzled me; it behaved in the most extraordinary
manner."

"You say I'm not out of danger?"

"Far from it. Your heart is nearly done for, and the slightest exertion
might set you off. If you got up, if you raised yourself off the bed,
you might--go out like that." Stormfield snapped his fingers.

"I suppose my wife has been notified?"

"Yes." The doctor looked at his patient curiously. "Would you like to
have her come--"

"No, no!" A frightened look leaped into Murray's eyes. "That's not
necessary, you know." After a time he said: "Leave me, please. I'm
tired."

When the doctor had closed the door he lifted himself to his elbow,
swung his feet out upon the floor and stood up; then, faint as he was,
he began to stoop and raise himself, flexing his arms, meanwhile, as if
performing a calisthenic exercise. He was possessed by the one idea,
that he must succeed while there was still time.

The nurse found him face downward upon his bed and sounded a quick
alarm. All that night Stormfield sat beside him, his eyes grave, his
brow furrowed anxiously. At intervals a woman came to the door, then at
a sign from the watcher disappeared noiselessly. Thereafter Murray was
never left alone.

A day or two later he complained of this over-attention, saying that the
nurse's constant presence annoyed him, but Stormfield paid no attention.
After a time the physician startled him by inquiring, abruptly:

"See here, Murray, what did you take?"

"I don't understand."

"Yes, you do."

"Why--What makes you think I took anything?"

"Come, come! I'm a specialist; I have some intelligence."

There was a pause, then the sick man finally admitted, "I took
twenty-five grains of cocaine."

"_Twenty-five grains!_ God! It's incredible! Eight grains is the largest
dose on record. You're dreaming, or else the drug was stale."

"I was particular to see that it was fresh."

Stormfield paced the room, shaking his head and muttering. "I wouldn't
dare report such a thing; I'd be called a faker, and yet--there are no
hard-and-fast laws of medicine." He stopped and stared at his patient.
"What the devil prompted you to do it--with such a wife?"

"That's just it," the latter cried, miserably. "Oh, you've done for her
a great injury by saving me, Doctor. But I won't allow it. I--won't!"

"I see!" The doctor went to the door, where he motioned some one to
enter.

A woman rose from her chair in the hall and came swiftly to the bedside.
Her face showed the signs of a long and sleepless vigil, but her eyes
were aflame with a hunger that held Butler Murray spellbound and amazed.

"_You!_" he said, weakly. "When did you come?"

"I have been here for days," she answered. "Did you think I could stay
away?"

"My--Muriel." He held up his shaking arms, whereupon she knelt and took
his tired head to her breast.

"I thought I was doing right," he confided, after he had told her
everything, "but I see now that I was all wrong."

"God will name the day," she declared, simply, "and until He does no man
can say 'I will.'"

"Are you quite sure you have acted wisely in showing me my folly?
Remember we are poor. Even yet I might make you rich again, for there is
time, and--I'm not worth this great sacrifice."

"Sacrifice? This is the day of our triumph, dear. When we had all those
other riches we never knew contentment, love, or happiness. Now we can
start again, with nothing but ourselves and our children. We won't have
time to be unhappy. Are you willing to try with me?"

He stroked her soft hair lovingly and smiled up into her eyes. "DeVoe
was right, there _is_ a Power. I shall pray God every day to spare me,
sweetheart, for now I want to live."




TOLD IN THE STORM




The front room of the roadhouse was deserted save for the slumbering
bartender, back-tilted in a corner, his chin upon his chest, and one
other man who sat in the glare of a swing lamp playing solitaire. It
was, perhaps, three hours after midnight. The last carouser had turned
in. There was no sound save the scream of the black night and the cry of
the salt wind. At intervals only, when the storm lulled, there came from
the back room the sound of many men asleep.

I stumbled out from the rear room, heavy-eyed, half clad, and of a
vicious temper, dressing in sour silence beside the stove.

"Did they wake you up?" the card-player inquired.

"Yes."

"Me, too. I'd rather bunk in with a herd of walrus in the mating
season."

He was a long, slim man, with blue-black hair and a gas-bleached face of
startling pallor from which glittered two wild and roving eyes that
flitted in and out of my visual line toward, to, and past me with a
baffling elusive glimmer like that of jet spangles. His hands were
slender and bony and colorless, but while he talked they worked, each
independently. They performed queer, wizard antics with the
cards--one-handed cuts, rapid, fluttering shuffles and "frame-ups,"
after each pass leaving the pile of pasteboards as square-edged and even
as before. While he observed me over his shoulder one hand wandered to
some scattered poker-chips which clicked together beneath his touch into
a solid-ivory column as if separately magnetized. He shuffled and dealt
and cut the disks and made them do odd capers like the cards.

"I slept in a menagerie tent once," said he, "but these people have got
it on the animals." He nodded toward the sleeping-quarters.

"The open life seems to make a Pan's pipe out of the human nose," said
I, with disgust.

My indignation was intense and underlaid with a sullen fury at losing my
rest. I seized the stranger and led him with me to the open door,
saying, roughly, "Listen to that."

The room was large and low, dim-lighted and walled with tiers of
canvas-bottomed "standees" three high. The floor was a litter of boots,
the benches piled with garments. Every bed was full, and the place
groaned with sounds of strangulation, asphyxiation, and other
disagreeable demises. The bunks were peopled by tortured bodies, which
seemed to cry of throttlings, garrotings, and sundry hideous
punishments. My nervous system, unable to stand it, had risen a-quiver,
then shrieked for mercy.

From the nearest sleeper came the most unhappy sounds. He snored at
free-and-easy intervals with the voice of a whistling-buoy in a ground
swell--a handsome, resonant intake that died away reluctantly, then
changed to a loathsome gurgle, as if he blew his breath through a tube
into a pot of thick liquid. Now and then he smacked his lips and ground
his teeth until the gooseflesh arose on my neck.

"That's the fellow that drove me out," said my new acquaintance as we
went back to our seats beside the stove. "I had the berth below him. I
sleep light, anyhow, since I woke up one night down on the Texas
Panhandle and found a Chinaman astraddle of my brisket with a
butcherknife."

"That must have been nice," said I at random. "What did you do?"

"I doubled up my legs and kicked him into the camp-fire." The stranger
was dealing the cards again, this time into a fanlike, intricate
solitaire much affected by gamblers. "I tried the trick again to-night,
but I went wrong. I wanted to stop the swan-song of the guy over my
head, so I lifted up my feet and put them where the canvas sagged
lowest. Then I stretched my legs like a Jap juggler, but I fetched away
my own bunk and came down on the man below. I broke a snore short off in
him. He'll never get it out unless he has it pulled. That was us you
heard two hours ago."

I was too tired and sleepy to talk, for I had come down from the hills
the previous afternoon to find the equinoxial raging, and as a result
the roadhouse full from floor to ridge-pole with the motley crew that
had sifted out from the interior. The coastwise craft were hugging the
lee of the sandy islet, waiting for the blow to abate; telephone-wires
were down, and Bering's waters had piled in from the south until they
flooded the endless sloughs and tide flats behind Solomon City,
destroyed the ferries, and cut us off both east and west, by land and by
sea. It were better, I had thought, to wait on the coast for a day or
so, watching for a chance to dodge to Nome, than to return to the mines,
so I had lugged my war bag into Anderson's place and made formal demand
for shelter.

The proprietor had apologized as he assigned me a bunk. "It's the best
I've got," said he. "I've put you alongside of the stove, so if the boys
snore too loud you can heave coal on 'em. Them big lumps is better than
your boots."

I had tried both fuel and footgear fruitlessly, and when my outraged
ears would not permit further slumber I had given up the attempt. Now,
while the blue-haired man with insomnia dealt "Idiot's Delight" I sat
vaguely fascinated by the play of his hands, half dozing under the drone
of his voice.

The wind rioted without, whipping the sea spray across the sand-dunes
until it rattled upon our walls like shot. Meanwhile my companion
adventured aimlessly, his strange and vagrant fancies calling for no
answer, his odd and morbid journeyings matching well with the whimpering
night. His stories were without beginning, and they lacked any end. They
commenced without reason, led through unfrequented paths, then closed
for no cause. Through them ran no thread of relevancy. They were neither
cogent nor cohesive. Their incidents took shape and tumbled forth
irrelated and inconsequent. Wherefore I knew them for the truth, and
found myself ere long wide-eyed and still, my brain as keen as ever
nature made it.

The story of the dead Frenchman has seemed strained and gruesome to me
since, but that night the storm made it real, and the stranger's
unsmiling earnestness robbed it of offense. His words told me a tale of
which he had no thought, and painted pictures quite apart from those he
had in mind. His very frame of mind, his pagan superstition, his frank,
irreverent philosophy, disclosed queer glimpses of this land where
morals are of the fourth dimension, where life is a gamble and death a
joke. Whether he really believed all he said or whether he made sport of
me I do not know. It may be that the elfin voices of the storm roused in
him an impulse to gratify his distorted sense of humor at my expense--or
at his own. He began somewhat as follows:

"It's a good night for a dead man to walk." Then, seeing the flicker in
my eyes, he ran on: "You don't think they can do it, eh? Well, I didn't
believe it neither, and I'm not sure I believe it now, but I've seen
queer things--queer things--and I've only got one pair to draw to.
Either they happened as I saw them or I'm crazy." He leaped at his story
boldly.

"I'm pretty tired and hungry when I hit Council City late one fall, for
I'd upset my rowboat, lost my outfit, and 'mushed' it one hundred fifty
miles. My whole digestive paraphernalia is in a state of _innocuous
desuetude_, if you know what that is, because all I save from the wreck
is a flour-sack full of cigarette-papers and a package of chocolate
pills about the size of a match-head. Each one of these pellets is
warranted to contain sufficient nourishment to last the Germany army for
one month. I read it on the label. They may have had it in them; I don't
know. I swallowed one every morning and then filled up on reindeer moss
till I felt like the leaping-pad in a circus.

"Now, when I reach camp I find there ain't any fresh grub to speak of.
But I can't get away, so I stick on until spring. See! In time we begin
to have scurvy something terrible. One man out of every five cashes in.
I'm living in a cabin with a lot of Frenchmen and we bury seven from
this one shack--seven, that's all! It gets on my nerves finally. I don't
like dead men. Now, the last two who fall sick is old man Manard and my
pal, young Pete De Foe. Pete has a ten-dollar gold piece and Manard owns
a dog. Inasmuch as they both knew that they can't weather it out till
the break-up, Pete bets his ten dollars against the dog that he'll die
before Manard. Well, this is something new in the sporting line, and we
begin to string our bets pretty free. There ain't much excitement going
on, so the boys visit the cabin every day, look over the entries, then
go outside and make book. I open up a Paris mutuel. The old man is a
seven-to-one favorite at the start because he had all the best of it on
form, but the youngster puts up a grand race. For three weeks they
seesaw back and forth. First one looks like a winner, then the other.
It's as pretty running as I ever see. Then Pete lets out a wonderful
burst of speed, 'zings' over the last quarter, noses out Manard at the
wire, and brings home the money. He dies at 3 A.M. and wins by four
hours. I cop eighty-four dollars, six pairs of suspenders, a keg of wire
nails, and a frying-pan, which constitutes all the circulating medium of
the camp. I'm the stakeholder for the late deceased also, so I find
myself the administrator of Manard's dog and the ten dollars that Pete
put up.

"Now, seeing that it had been a killing finish, we arrange for a
double-barreled burial and a swell funeral. The ground is froze, of
course, but we dig two holes through the gravel till we break a
pick-point and decide to let it go at that. The 'Bare-headed' Kid is
clergyman because he has a square-cut coat that buttons up the front to
his chin. There ain't any Bible in camp, so he read some recipes out of
a baking-powder cook-book, after which Deaf Mike tries to play 'Taps' on
the cornet. But he's held the horn in his mit during the services, and,
the temperature being forty degrees below freezo, when he wets his lips
to play they stick to the mouthpiece and crab the hymn. As a whole, it
is an enjoyable affair, however, and the best-conducted funeral of the
winter. Everybody has a good time, though nothing rough.

"Now, I've been friendly to young Pete De Foe--him and I bunked
together--and the next night he comes to me, saying that he can't rest.
I see him as plain as I see you.

"'What's wrong?' says I. 'Are you cold?'

"'No. The ground is chilly, but it ain't that. Manard, the old hellion,
won't let me sleep. He's doing a sand jig on my grave. He says I won
that bet crooked and died ahead of time just to get his dog. He's sore
on you, too.'

"'What's he sore on me for?' says I.

"'He says he's an old man, and he'd 'a' died first if you hadn't put in
with me to double-cross him. He's laying for you,' says Pete.

"Well, I'm pretty sick myself, with a four months' diet of pea soup and
oatmeal, and when I wake up I think it's a dream. But the next night
Pete is back again, complaining worse than ever. It seems the ghost of
old man Manard is still buck-and-winging on Pete's coffin, and he begs
me to come down and call the old reprobate off so that he can get some
rest. He comes back the third night, the fourth, and the fifth, and by
and by Manard himself comes up to the cabin and begins to abuse me. He
says he wants his dog back, but naturally I can't give it to him. It
gets so that I can't sleep at all. Finally, when Pete ain't sitting on
my bunk Manard is calling me names and gritting his teeth at me. I begin
to fall off in weight like a jockey in a sweat bath. It gets so I have
to sit up all night in a chair and make the fellers prod me in the
stomach with a stick whenever I doze off. I tell you, stranger, it was
worse than horrible. I don't know how I made it through till spring.

"Well, in the early summer I get a letter from the steamboat agent at
Nome saying Manard's people out in the States have slipped him some
coin, with instructions to send the old man out so they can give him
decent burial. He offers me one-fifty to bring him down to the coast.
Now, this decent-burial talk makes me sore, for I staged the obsequies
myself, and they were in perfect form. It was one of the tastiest
funerals I ever mixed with. However, I'm broke, so I agree to deliver
what is left of Manard at the mouth of the river, and the agent says
he'll have a first-class coffin shipped down to the trader at Chinik,
our landing. When I deliver Manard, ready for shipment, I get my hundred
and fifty.

"I give you my word I ain't tickled pink with this undertaking. I'm not
strong on body-snatching, and I have a hunch that the shade of old
Manard is still hanging around somewhere. However, a bird in the hand is
the noblest work of God, and I need that roll, so I make ready. It takes
me half a day to get drunk enough to want to do the job, and when I get
drunk enough to want to do it I'm so drunk I can't. Then I have to sober
up and begin all over again. The minute I get sober enough to do the
trick I realize I ain't drunk enough to stand the strain. I jockey that
way for quite a spell till I finally strike an average, being
considerable scared and reckless to the same extent.

"I remembered that we planted the old man in the left-hand grave, but
when I get to the graveyard I can't recollect whether I stood at the
foot or at the head of the hole during the services--a pint of that
mining-camp hootch would box the compass for any man--so I think I'll
make sure.

"I have brought along three tools--a pick, a shovel, and a bottle of
rye. The ground is froze, so I use all of them. Naturally I can't afford
to get the wrong Frenchman, so I pry up the lid of the first box I
uncover and take a good rubber. Well, sir, it is a shock! Instead of
rags and bones like I'm expecting, there is old Manard in statuary quo,
so to speak. Froze? Maybe so. Anyhow, he grins at me! That's what I
said! He grins at me, and I take it on the lam. Understand, I have no
intentions of running away--in fact, I don't know I'm doing it until I
fetch up back in the saloon. It seems I just balanced my body on my legs
and they did all the work.

"Well, I'm pretty well rattled, so I blot up another pint of
pain-killer, and finally the bartender goes back with me and helps load
Manard into my Peterboro. I'm pretty wet by this time. We get the box
into the canoe all right, but it's too big to fit under the seat, so we
place the foot of it on the bottom of the boat and rest the other end on
a paddle laid across the gunnels. This sort of gives Manard the
appearance of lounging back on an incline. You see, when I ripped up the
boards to take a look I broke off a piece at a knot-hole, and that
allows him a chance to look out with one eye. He seems to approve of the
position, however, so I get in at the stern, facing him, and ask if he's
ready. He gives me the nod, and I shove off. Just for company I take my
grave-digging tools along--that is, all but the pick and the shovel. It
was pretty near full when I started, but I lose the cork and drink it up
for safety.

"I don't remember much about the first part of the trip except that I
get awful lonesome. By and by I begin to sing:

    "'Oh, the French are in the bay!' said the Shaun Van Vocht.
    'The French are in the bay,' said the Shaun Van Vocht.
    'The French are in the bay. They'll be here without delay.
    'But their colors will decay,' said the Shaun Van Vocht."

"I've got a mean singing-voice when I'm sober, but when I'm kippered
it's positively insulting. It makes my passenger sore, and he shows it.
Now, I'm not saying that Manard wasn't as dead as a dried herring. He
was past and gone, and he'd made his exit all right. He'd moved out, and
his lease had expired. But I saw that box move. It shifted from side to
side. I quit singing. My song-fountain ran dry. Says I to myself: 'I
just neglected to lash you down, Mr. Manard; you didn't really turn
over. It was the motion of the boat.' Then, just to make sure, I break
forth into 'Johnny Crapaud,' keeping my eye on the right lens of the old
man where it showed through the broken board. This time there ain't a
doubt of it. He lurches, box and all, clean out of plumb and nearly
capsizes me. His one lamp blazes. Yes, sir, blazes! I tries to get out
of range of it, but it follers me like a searchlight. I creeps forward
to cover it up with my coat, but the old frog-eater leans to starboard
so far that I have to balance on the port gunnel to keep from going
over. We begin to spin in the current. Manard sees he has me buffaloed,
and it pleases him. He wags his head at me and grins like he did when he
came to me in my sleep.

"Well, sir, that eye enthralls me. It destroys my chain of thought. I
feel the chills stealing into my marrow, and that one hundred and fifty
dollars looks mighty small and insignificant. By and by I begin to
figure it out this way: says I, 'I've outrun him once to-day, and if I
can get ashore I'll try it again.' But when I turn the canoe toward
shore Manard heels over till we take water.

"'Lie still, you blame fool!' says I. 'If you feel that way about it
I'll stay with the ship, of course.' I can see the corner of his mouth
curl up at that, and he slides back into position. Then I know that
he'll let me stick as long as I don't try to pull out and leave him
flat. You really can't blame a corpse much under the circumstances.
However, I can't swim, so I try to square myself. I make conversation of
a polite and friendly nature, and the old boy settles back to enjoy
himself.

"Well, this one-sided talkfest gets tiresome after a while. I run out of
topics, so I tell him funny stories. Sometimes he likes them, and
sometimes he 'most jumps out of the box. Sore? Say, when I pull a wheeze
that he don't like he makes it known quick, and I sit clutching the
gunnels, with my hair on end while he rocks the boat like a demon.

"When I get to the mouth of the river it's night. I find a stiff breeze
blowing and the bay covered with whitecaps, so I try to convince Manard
that we'd better camp. But I no more than suggest it till I have to bail
for dear life. Seeing that he's dead set to keep going, I kiss myself
good-by and paddle out across the bay. How we ever made it I don't know,
but along about midnight we blow into Chinik, with me singing songs to
my passenger and cracking 'Joe Millers' that came over in seventy-six.
I'm still pretty drunk.

"The trader tells me that the coffin hasn't come from Nome yet. But the
steamer is due before morning, so I ask him to cache Manard somewhere
and wake me up when the boat comes. Then I go to the hay. I'm tuckered
out. It seems that the coaster comes in a few hours later, but the
trader is dealing a stud game and tells the purser to dump his freight
on the beach. They do as ordered, then pull out. About daylight the wind
shifts, the tide rises and begins to wash the merchandise away. Two
'rough-necks' get busy saving their outfit, when what comes bobbing past
on the waves but a handsome zink-lined casket--the one from Nome.

"'Hey, Bill, cop that box; it'll make a swell bath-tub,' says one. So
the other pulls up his rubber boots, wades out, and brings it in. The
trader, hearing that his goods are in danger, adjourns the game long
enough to see about it. He hurries down to the beach, looks over his
stuff, then inquires:

"'Where's my coffin?'

"'You 'ain't got no more coffin than a rabbit,' says one of the miners.

"'Oh, yes, I have. That's it right there.'

"'I guess not. That's my coffin. I copped it on the high seas--flotsam
and jetsam,' says the 'roughneck.' 'What's more, I'm going to use it for
a cupboard or a cozy corner. If you want it bad pay me fifty dollars
salvage and it's yours.' Naturally the trader belched.

"'All right. If you don't want it I'll use it myself,' says the miner.
'It's the first one I ever had, and I like it fine. There's no telling
when I'll get another.'

"'Said time ain't but a minute,' observes the trader, 'unless you gimme
that freight.'

"There is some further dispute till the miner, being a quick-tempered
party, reaches for his Gat. After the smoke clears away it is found that
he has made an error of judgment, that the storekeeper is gifted as a
prophet, and that the 'roughneck' is ready for his coffin.

"Now, inasmuch as this had been a purely personal affair and the boys
was anxious to reopen the stud game, they exonerated the trader from all
blame complete, and he, being ever anxious to maintain a reputation for
fair dealing and just to show that there ain't no animus behind his
action, gives the coffin to the man who had claimed it. What's more, he
helps to lay him out with his own hands. Naturally this is considered
conduct handsome enough for any country. In an hour the man is buried
and the poker game is open again. The trader apologizes to the boys for
the delay, saying:

     "'The box is mine, all right, and I'm sorry this play come up, but
     the late lamented was so set on having that piece of bric-a-brac
     that it seemed a shame not to give it to him.'"

At this point the narrator fell silent, much to my surprise, for
throughout this weird recital I had sat spellbound, forgetful of the
hour, the storm outside, and the snoring men in the bunkroom. When he
had gone thus far he began with a bewildering change of topic.

"Did you ever hear how Dawson Sam cut the ears off a bank dealer?"

"Hold on!" said I. "What's the rest of this story? What became of
Manard?"

"Oh, he's there yet, for all I know," said the stranger as he shuffled
the cards. "His folks wouldn't send no more money, the steamboat agent
at Nome had done his share, and the trader at Chinik said he wasn't
responsible."

"And you? Didn't you get your one hundred and fifty dollars?"

"No. You see, it was a C. O. D. shipment. I wake up along about noon,
put my head under the pump, and then look up the trader. He is still
playing stud.

"'Where's my casket?' says I. 'I've got my dead man, but I don't collect
on him till he's crated and f. o. b.' The trader has an ace in the hole
and two kings in sight, so he says over his shoulder:

"'I'm sorry, old man, but while you was asleep a tenderfoot jumped your
coffin.' Now, this Dawson Sam has a crooked bank dealer named--"

"I think I'll go back to bed," said I.




THE WEIGHT OF OBLIGATION




This is the story of a burden, the tale of a load that irked a strong
man's shoulders. To those who do not know the North it may seem strange,
but to those who understand the humors of men in solitude, and the
extravagant vagaries that steal in upon their minds, as fog drifts with
the night, it will not appear unusual. There are spirits in the
wilderness, eerie forces which play pranks; some droll or whimsical,
others grim.

Johnny Cantwell and Mortimer Grant were partners, trail-mates, brothers
in soul if not in blood. The ebb and flood of frontier life had brought
them together, its hardships had united them until they were as one.
They were something of a mystery to each other, neither having
surrendered all his confidence, and because of this they retained their
mutual attraction. Had they known each other fully, had they thoroughly
sounded each other's depths, they would have lost interest, just like
husbands and wives who give themselves too freely and reserve nothing.

They had met by accident, but they remained together by desire, and so
satisfactory was the union that not even the jealousy of women had come
between them. There had been women, of course, just as there had been
adventures of other sorts, but the love of the partners was larger and
finer than anything else they had experienced. It was so true and fine
and unselfish, in fact, that either would have smilingly relinquished
the woman of his desires had the other wished to possess her. They were
young, strong men, and the world was full of sweethearts, but where was
there a partnership like theirs, they asked themselves.

The spirit of adventure bubbled merrily within them, too, and it led
them into curious byways. It was this which sent them northward from the
States in the dead of winter, on the heels of the Stony River strike; it
was this which induced them to land at Katmai instead of Illiamna,
whither their land journey should have commenced.

"There are two routes over the coast range," the captain of the _Dora_
told them, "and only two. Illiamna Pass is low and easy, but the
distance is longer than by way of Katmai. I can land you at either
place."

"Katmai is pretty tough, isn't it?" Grant inquired.

"We've understood it's the worst pass in Alaska." Cantwell's eyes were
eager.

"It's a heller! Nobody travels it except natives, and they don't like
it. Now, Illiamna--"

"We'll try Katmai. Eh, Mort?"

"Sure! They don't come hard enough for us, Cap. We'll see if it's as bad
as it's painted."

So, one gray January morning they were landed on a frozen beach, their
outfit was flung ashore through the surf, the life-boat pulled away, and
the _Dora_ disappeared after a farewell toot of her whistle. Their last
glimpse of her showed the captain waving good-by and the purser flapping
a red table-cloth at them from the after-deck.

"Cheerful place, this," Grant remarked, as he noted the desolate
surroundings of dune and hillside.

The beach itself was black and raw where the surf washed it, but
elsewhere all was white, save for the thickets of alder and willow which
protruded nakedly. The bay was little more than a hollow scooped out of
the Alaskan range; along the foot-hills behind there was a belt of
spruce and cottonwood and birch. It was a lonely and apparently
unpeopled wilderness in which they had been set down.

"Seems good to be back in the North again, doesn't it?" said Cantwell,
cheerily. "I'm tired of the booze, and the street-cars, and the dames,
and all that civilized stuff. I'd rather be broke in Alaska--with
you--than a banker's son, back home."

Soon a globular Russian half-breed, the Katmai trader, appeared among
the dunes, and with him were some native villagers. That night the
partners slept in a snug log cabin, the roof of which was chained down
with old ships' cables. Petellin, the fat little trader, explained that
roofs in Katmai had a way of sailing off to seaward when the wind blew.
He listened to their plan of crossing the divide and nodded.

It could be done, of course, he agreed, but they were foolish to try it,
when the Illiamna route was open. Still, now that they were here, he
would find dogs for them, and a guide. The village hunters were out
after meat, however, and until they returned the white men would need to
wait in patience.

There followed several days of idleness, during which Cantwell and Grant
amused themselves around the village, teasing the squaws, playing games
with the boys, and flirting harmlessly with the girls, one of whom, in
particular, was not unattractive. She was perhaps three-quarters Aleut,
the other quarter being plain coquette, and, having been educated at the
town of Kodiak, she knew the ways and the wiles of the white man.

Cantwell approached her, and she met his extravagant advances more than
half-way. They were getting along nicely together when Grant, in a
spirit of fun, entered the game and won her fickle smiles for himself.
He joked his partner unmercifully, and Johnny accepted defeat
gracefully, never giving the matter a second thought.

When the hunters returned, dogs were bought, a guide was hired, and, a
week after landing, the friends were camped at timber-line awaiting a
favorable moment for their dash across the range. Above them white
hillsides rose in irregular leaps to the gash in the saw-toothed barrier
which formed the pass; below them a short valley led down to Katmai and
the sea. The day was bright, the air clear, nevertheless after the guide
had stared up at the peaks for a time he shook his head, then re-entered
the tent and lay down. The mountains were "smoking"; from their tops
streamed a gossamer veil which the travelers knew to be drifting
snow-clouds carried by the wind. It meant delay, but they were patient.

They were up and going on the following morning, however, with the
Indian in the lead. There was no trail; the hills were steep; in places
they were forced to unload the sled and hoist their outfit by means of
ropes, and as they mounted higher the snow deepened. It lay like loose
sand, only lighter; it shoved ahead of the sled in a feathery mass; the
dogs wallowed in it and were unable to pull, hence the greater part of
the work devolved upon the men. Once above the foot-hills and into the
range proper, the going became more level, but the snow remained
knee-deep.

The Indian broke trail stolidly; the partners strained at the sled,
which hung back like a leaden thing. By afternoon the dogs had become
disheartened and refused to heed the whip. There was neither fuel nor
running water, and therefore the party did not pause for luncheon. The
men were sweating profusely from their exertions and had long since
become parched with thirst, but the dry snow was like chalk and scoured
their throats.

Cantwell was the first to show the effects of his unusual exertions, for
not only had he assumed a lion's share of the work, but the last few
months of easy living had softened his muscles, and in consequence his
vitality was quickly spent. His undergarments were drenched; he was
fearfully dry inside; a terrible thirst seemed to penetrate his whole
body; he was forced to rest frequently.

Grant eyed him with some concern, finally inquiring, "Feel bad, Johnny?"

Cantwell nodded. Their fatigue made both men economical of language.

"What's the matter?"

"Thirsty!" The former could barely speak.

"There won't be any water till we get across. You'll have to stand it."

They resumed their duties; the Indian "swish-swished" ahead, as if
wading through a sea of swan's-down; the dogs followed listlessly; the
partners leaned against the stubborn load.

A faint breath finally came out of the north, causing Grant and the
guide to study the sky anxiously. Cantwell was too weary to heed the
increasing cold. The snow on the slopes above began to move; here and
there, on exposed ridges, it rose in clouds and puffs; the clean-cut
outlines of the hills became obscured as by a fog; the languid wind bit
cruelly.

After a time Johnny fell back upon the sled and exclaimed: "I'm--all in,
Mort. Don't seem to have the--guts." He was pale, his eyes were
tortured. He scooped a mitten full of snow and raised it to his lips,
then spat it out, still dry.

"Here! Brace up!" In a panic of apprehension at this collapse Grant
shook him; he had never known Johnny to fail like this. "Take a drink of
booze; it'll do you good." He drew a bottle of brandy from one of the
dunnage bags and Cantwell seized it avidly. It was wet; it would quench
his thirst, he thought. Before Mort could check him he had drunk a third
of the contents.

The effect was almost instantaneous, for Cantwell's stomach was empty
and his tissues seemed to absorb the liquor like a dry sponge; his
fatigue fell away, he became suddenly strong and vigorous again. But
before he had gone a hundred yards the reaction followed. First his mind
grew thick, then his limbs became unmanageable and his muscles flabby.
He was drunk. Yet it was a strange and dangerous intoxication, against
which he struggled desperately. He fought it for perhaps a quarter of a
mile before it mastered him; then he gave up.

Both men knew that stimulants are never taken on the trail, but they had
never stopped to reason why, and even now they did not attribute
Johnny's breakdown to the brandy. After a while he stumbled and fell,
then, the cool snow being grateful to his face, he sprawled there
motionless until Mort dragged him to the sled. He stared at his partner
in perplexity and laughed foolishly. The wind was increasing, darkness
was near, they had not yet reached the Bering slope.

Something in the drunken man's face frightened Grant and, extracting a
ship's biscuit from the grub-box, he said, hurriedly: "Here, Johnny. Get
something under your belt, quick."

Cantwell obediently munched the hard cracker, but there was no moisture
on his tongue; his throat was paralyzed; the crumbs crowded themselves
from the corners of his lips. He tried with limber fingers to stuff them
down, or to assist the muscular action of swallowing, but finally
expelled them in a cloud. Mort drew the parka hood over his partner's
head, for the wind cut like a scythe and the dogs were turning tail to
it, digging holes in the snow for protection. The air about them was
like yeast; the light was fading.

The Indian snow-shoed his way back, advising a quick camp until the
storm abated, but to this suggestion Grant refused to listen, knowing
only too well the peril of such a course. Nor did he dare take Johnny on
the sled, since the fellow was half asleep already, but instead whipped
up the dogs and urged his companion to follow as best he could.

When Cantwell fell, for a second time, he returned, dragged him forward,
and tied his wrists firmly, yet loosely, to the load.

The storm was pouring over them now, like water out of a spout; it
seared and blinded them; its touch was like that of a flame.
Nevertheless they struggled on into the smother, making what headway
they could. The Indian led, pulling at the end of a rope; Grant strained
at the sled and hoarsely encouraged the dogs; Cantwell stumbled and
lurched in the rear like an unwilling prisoner. When he fell his
companion lifted him, then beat him, cursed him, tried in every way to
rouse him from his lethargy.

After an interminable time they found they were descending and this gave
them heart to plunge ahead more rapidly. The dogs began to trot as the
sled overran them; they rushed blindly into gullies, fetching up at the
bottom in a tangle, and Johnny followed in a nerveless, stupefied
condition. He was dragged like a sack of flour, for his legs were limp
and he lacked muscular control, but every dash, every fall, every quick
descent drove the sluggish blood through his veins and cleared his brain
momentarily. Such moments were fleeting, however; much of the time his
mind was a blank, and it was only by a mechanical effort that he fought
off unconsciousness.

He had vague memories of many beatings at Mort's hands, of the slippery
clean-swept ice of a stream over which he limply skidded, of being
carried into a tent where a candle flickered and a stove roared. Grant
was holding something hot to his lips, and then--

It was morning. He was weak and sick; he felt as if he had awakened from
a hideous dream. "I played out, didn't I?" he queried, wonderingly.

"You sure did," Grant laughed. "It was a tight squeak, old boy. I never
thought I'd get you through."

"Played out! I--can't understand it." Cantwell prided himself on his
strength and stamina, therefore the truth was unbelievable. He and Mort
had long been partners, they had given and taken much at each other's
hands, but this was something altogether different. Grant had saved his
life, at risk of his own; the older man's endurance had been the greater
and he had used it to good advantage. It embarrassed Johnny tremendously
to realize that he had proven unequal to his share of the work, for he
had never before experienced such an obligation. He apologized
repeatedly during the few days he lay sick, and meanwhile Mort waited
upon him like a mother.

Cantwell was relieved when at last they had abandoned camp, changed
guides at the next village, and were on their way along the coast, for
somehow he felt very sensitive about his collapse. He was, in fact,
extremely ashamed of himself.

Once he had fully recovered he had no further trouble, but soon rounded
into fit condition and showed no effects of his ordeal. Day after day he
and Mort traveled through the solitudes, their isolation broken only by
occasional glimpses of native villages, where they rested briefly and
renewed their supply of dog-feed.

But although the younger man was now as well and strong as ever, he was
uncomfortably conscious that his trail-mate regarded him as the weaker
of the two and shielded him in many ways. Grant performed most of the
unpleasant tasks, and occasionally cautioned Johnny about overdoing.
This protective attitude at first amused, then offended Cantwell; it
galled him until he was upon the point of voicing his resentment, but
reflected that he had no right to object, for, judging by past
performances, he had proved his inferiority. This uncomfortable
realization forever arose to prevent open rebellion, but he asserted
himself secretly by robbing Grant of his self-appointed tasks. He rose
first in the mornings, he did the cooking, he lengthened his turns ahead
of the dogs, he mended harness after the day's hike had ended. Of course
the older man objected, and for a time they had a good-natured rivalry
as to who should work and who should rest--only it was not quite so
good-natured on Cantwell's part as he made it appear.

Mort broke out in friendly irritation one day: "Don't try to do
everything, Johnny. Remember I'm no cripple."

"Humph! You proved that. I guess it's up to me to do your work."

"Oh, forget that day on the pass, can't you?"

Johnny grunted a second time, and from his tone it was evident that he
would never forget, unpleasant though the memory remained. Sensing his
sullen resentment, the other tried to rally him, but made a bad job of
it. The humor of men in the open is not delicate; their wit and their
words become coarsened in direct proportion as they revert to the
primitive; it is one effect of the solitudes.

Grant spoke extravagantly, mockingly, of his own superiority in a way
which ordinarily would have brought a smile to Cantwell's lips, but the
latter did not smile. He taunted Johnny humorously on his lack of
physical prowess, his lack of good looks and manly qualities--something
which had never failed to result in a friendly exchange of badinage; he
even teased him about his defeat with the Katmai girl.

Cantwell did respond finally, but afterward he found himself wondering
if Mort could have been in earnest. He dismissed the thought with some
impatience. But men on the trail have too much time for their thoughts;
there is nothing in the monotonous routine of the day's work to distract
them, so the partner who had played out dwelt more and more upon his
debt and upon his friend's easy assumption of pre-eminence. The weight
of obligation began to chafe him, lightly at first, but with
ever-increasing discomfort. He began to think that Grant honestly
considered himself the better man, merely because chance had played into
his hands.

It was silly, even childish, to dwell on the subject, he reflected, and
yet he could not banish it from his mind. It was always before him, in
one form or another. He felt the strength in his lean muscles, and
sneered at the thought that Mort should be deceived. If it came to a
physical test he felt sure he could break his slighter partner with his
bare hands, and as for endurance--well, he was hungry for a chance to
demonstrate it.

They talked little; men seldom converse in the wastes, for there is
something about the silence of the wilderness which discourages speech.
And no land is so grimly silent, so hushed and soundless, as the frozen
North. For days they marched through desolation, without glimpse of
human habitation, without sight of track or trail, without sound of a
human voice to break the monotony. There was no game in the country,
with the exception of an occasional bird or rabbit, nothing but the
white hills, the fringe of alder-tops along the watercourses, and the
thickets of gnarled, unhealthy spruce in the smothered valleys.

Their destination was a mysterious stream at the headwaters of the
unmapped Kuskokwim, where rumor said there was gold, and whither they
feared other men were hastening from the mining country far to the
north.

Now it is a penalty of the White Country that men shall think of women.
The open life brings health and vigor, strength and animal vitality, and
these clamor for play. The cold of the still, clear days is no more
biting than the fierce memories and appetites which charge through the
brain at night. Passions intensify with imprisonment, recollections come
to life, longings grow vivid and wild. Thoughts change to realities, the
past creeps close, and dream figures are filled with blood and fire. One
remembers pleasures and excesses, women's smiles, women's kisses, the
invitation of outstretched arms. Wasted opportunities mock at one.

Cantwell began to brood upon the Katmai girl, for she was the last; her
eyes were haunting and distance had worked its usual enchantment. He
reflected that Mort had shouldered him aside and won her favor, then
boasted of it. Johnny awoke one night with a dream of her, and lay
quivering.

"Hell! She was only a squaw," he said, half aloud. "If I'd really
tried--"

Grant lay beside him, snoring, the heat of their bodies intermingled.
The waking man tried to compose himself, but his partner's stertorous
breathing irritated him beyond measure; for a long time he remained
motionless, staring into the gray blur of the tent-top. He had played
out. He owed his life to the man who had cheated him of the Katmai girl,
and that man knew it. He had become a weak, helpless thing, dependent
upon another's strength, and that other now accepted his superiority as
a matter of course. The obligation was insufferable, and--it was unjust.
The North had played him a devilish trick, it had betrayed him, it had
bound him to his benefactor with chains of gratitude which were irksome.
Had they been real chains they could have galled him no more than at
this moment.

As time passed the men spoke less frequently to each other. Grant joshed
his mate roughly, once or twice, masking beneath an assumption of
jocularity his own vague irritation at the change that had come over
them. It was as if he had probed at an open wound with clumsy fingers.

Cantwell had by this time assumed most of those petty camp tasks which
provoke tired trailers, those humdrum duties which are so trying to
exhausted nerves, and of course they wore upon him as they wear upon
every man. But, once he had taken them over, he began to resent Grant's
easy relinquishment; it rankled him to realize how willingly the other
allowed him to do the cooking, the dish-washing, the fire-building, the
bed-making. Little monotonies of this kind form the hardest part of
winter travel, they are the rocks upon which friendships founder and
partnerships are wrecked. Out on the trail, nature equalizes the work to
a great extent, and no man can shirk unduly, but in camp, inside the
cramped confines of a tent pitched on boughs laid over the snow, it is
very different. There one must busy himself while the other rests and
keeps his legs out of the way if possible. One man sits on the bedding
at the rear of the shelter, and shivers, while the other squats over a
tantalizing fire of green wood, blistering his face and parboiling his
limbs inside his sweaty clothing. Dishes must be passed, food divided,
and it is poor food, poorly prepared at best. Sometimes men criticize
and voice longings for better grub and better cooking. Remarks of this
kind have been known to result in tragedies, bitter words and flaming
curses--then, perhaps, wild actions, memories of which the later years
can never erase.

It is but one prank of the wilderness, one grim manifestation of its
silent forces.

Had Grant been unable to do his part Cantwell would have willingly
accepted the added burden, but Mort was able, he was nimble and "handy,"
he was the better cook of the two; in fact, he was the better man in
every way--or so he believed. Cantwell sneered at the last thought, and
the memory of his debt was like bitter medicine.

His resentment--in reality nothing more than a phase of insanity begot
of isolation and silence--could not help but communicate itself to his
companion, and there resulted a mutual antagonism, which grew into a
dislike, then festered into something more, something strange,
reasonless, yet terribly vivid and amazingly potent for evil. Neither
man ever mentioned it--their tongues were clenched between their teeth
and they held themselves in check with harsh hands--but it was
constantly in their minds, nevertheless. No man who has not suffered the
manifold irritations of such an intimate association can appreciate the
gnawing canker of animosity like this. It was dangerous because there
was no relief from it: the two were bound together as by gyves; they
shared each other's every action and every plan; they trod in each
other's tracks, slept in the same bed, ate from the same plate. They
were like prisoners ironed to the same staple.

Each fought the obsession in his own way, but it is hard to fight the
impalpable, hence their sick fancies grew in spite of themselves. Their
minds needed food to prey upon, but found none. Each began to criticize
the other silently, to sneer at his weaknesses, to meditate derisively
upon his peculiarities. After a time they no longer resisted the advance
of these poisonous thoughts, but welcomed it.

On more than one occasion the embers of their wrath were upon the point
of bursting into flame, but each realized that the first ill-considered
word would serve to slip the leash from those demons that were straining
to go free, and so managed to restrain himself.

The crisis came one crisp morning when a dog-team whirled around a bend
in the river and a white man hailed them. He was the mail-carrier, on
his way out from Nome, and he brought news of the "inside."

"Where are you boys bound for?" he inquired when greetings were over and
gossip of the trail had passed.

"We're going to the Stony River strike," Grant told him.

"Stony River? Up the Kuskokwim?"

"Yes!"

The mail-man laughed. "Can you beat that? Ain't you heard about Stony
River?"

"No!"

"Why, it's a fake--no such place."

There was a silence; the partners avoided each other's eyes.

"MacDonald, the fellow that started it, is on his way to Dawson. There's
a gang after him, too, and if he's caught it'll go hard with him. He
wrote the letters--to himself--and spread the news just to raise a
grub-stake. He cleaned up big before they got onto him. He peddled his
tips for real money."

"Yes!" Grant spoke quietly. "Johnny bought one. That's what brought us
from Seattle. We went out on the last boat and figured we'd come in from
this side before the break-up. So--fake! By God!"

"Gee! You fellers bit good." The mail-carrier shook his head. "Well!
You'd better keep going now; you'll get to Nome before the season opens.
Better take dog-fish from Bethel--it's four bits a pound on the Yukon.
Sorry I didn't hit your camp last night; we'd 'a' had a visit. Tell the
gang that you saw me." He shook hands ceremoniously, yelled at his
panting dogs, and went swiftly on his way, waving a mitten on high as he
vanished around the next bend.

The partners watched him go, then Grant turned to Johnny, and repeated:
"Fake! By God! MacDonald stung you."

Cantwell's face went as white as the snow behind him, his eyes blazed.
"Why did you tell him I bit?" he demanded, harshly.

"Hunh! _Didn't_ you bite? Two thousand miles afoot; three months of
hell; for nothing. That's biting some."

"_Well!_" The speaker's face was convulsed, and Grant's flamed with an
answering anger. They glared at each other for a moment. "Don't blame
me. You fell for it, too."

"I--" Mort checked his rushing words.

"Yes, _you_! Now, what are you going to do about it? Welch?"

"I'm going through to Nome." The sight of his partner's rage had set
Mort to shaking with a furious desire to fly at his throat, but,
fortunately, he retained a spark of sanity.

"Then shut up, and quit chewing the rag. You--talk too damned much."

Mort's eyes were bloodshot; they fell upon the carbine under the sled
lashings, and lingered there, then wavered. He opened his lips,
reconsidered, spoke softly to the team, then lifted the heavy dog-whip
and smote the malamutes with all his strength.

The men resumed their journey without further words, but each was
cursing inwardly.

"So! I talk too much," Grant thought. The accusation struck in his mind
and he determined to speak no more.

"He blames me," Cantwell reflected, bitterly. "I'm in wrong again and he
couldn't keep his mouth shut. A hell of a partner, he is!"

All day they plodded on, neither trusting himself to speak. They ate
their evening meal like mutes; they avoided each other's eyes. Even the
guide noticed the change and looked on curiously.

There were two robes and these the partners shared nightly, but their
hatred had grown so during the past few hours that the thought of lying
side by side, limb to limb, was distasteful. Yet neither dared suggest a
division of the bedding, for that would have brought further words and
resulted in the crash which they longed for, but feared. They stripped
off their furs, and lay down beside each other with the same repugnance
they would have felt had there been a serpent in the couch.

This unending malevolent silence became terrible. The strain of it
increased, for each man now had something definite to cherish in the
words and the looks that had passed. They divided the camp work with
scrupulous nicety, each man waited upon himself and asked no favors. The
knowledge of his debt forever chafed Cantwell; Grant resented his
companion's lack of gratitude.

Of course they spoke occasionally--it was beyond human endurance to
remain entirely dumb--but they conversed in monosyllables, about trivial
things, and their voices were throaty, as if the effort choked them.
Meanwhile they continued to glow inwardly at a white heat.

Cantwell no longer felt the desire to merely match his strength against
Grant's; the estrangement had become too wide for that; a physical
victory would have been flat and tasteless; he craved some deeper
satisfaction. He began to think of the ax--just how or when or why he
never knew. It was a thin-bladed, polished thing of frosty steel, and
the more he thought of it the stronger grew his impulse to rid himself
once for all of that presence which exasperated him. It would be very
easy, he reasoned; a sudden blow, with the weight of his shoulders
behind it--he fancied he could feel the bit sink into Grant's flesh,
cleaving bone and cartilages in its course--a slanting downward stroke,
aimed at the neck where it joined the body, and he would be forever
satisfied. It would be ridiculously simple. He practised in the gloom of
evening as he felled spruce-trees for fire-wood; he guarded the ax
religiously; it became a living thing which urged him on to violence. He
saw it standing by the tent-fly when he closed his eyes to sleep; he
dreamed of it; he sought it out with his eyes when he first awoke. He
slid it loosely under the sled lashings every morning, thinking that its
use could not long be delayed.

As for Grant, the carbine dwelt forever in his mind, and his fingers
itched for it. He secretly slipped a cartridge into the chamber, and
when an occasional ptarmigan offered itself for a target he saw the
white spot on the breast of Johnny's reindeer parka, dancing ahead of
the Lyman bead.

The solitude had done its work; the North had played its grim comedy to
the final curtain, making sport of men's affections and turning love to
rankling hate. But into the mind of each man crept a certain craftiness.
Each longed to strike, but feared to face the consequences. It was
lonesome, here among the white hills and the deathly silences, yet they
reflected that it would be still more lonesome if they were left to keep
step with nothing more substantial than a memory. They determined,
therefore, to wait until civilization was nearer, meanwhile rehearsing
the moment they knew was inevitable. Over and over in their thoughts
each of them enacted the scene, ending it always with the picture of a
prostrate man in a patch of trampled snow which grew crimson as the
other gloated.

They paused at Bethel Mission long enough to load with dried salmon,
then made the ninety-mile portage over lake and tundra to the Yukon.
There they got their first touch of the "inside" world. They camped in a
barabara where white men had slept a few nights before, and heard their
own language spoken by native tongues. The time was growing short now,
and they purposely dismissed their guide, knowing that the trail was
plain from there on. When they hitched up, on the next morning, Cantwell
placed the ax, bit down, between the tarpaulin and the sled rail,
leaving the helve projecting where his hand could reach it. Grant thrust
the barrel of the rifle beneath a lashing, with the butt close by the
handle-bars, and it was loaded.

A mile from the village they were overtaken by an Indian and his squaw,
traveling light behind hungry dogs. The natives attached themselves to
the white men and hung stubbornly to their heels, taking advantage of
their tracks. When night came they camped alongside, in the hope of
food. They announced that they were bound for St. Michaels, and in spite
of every effort to shake them off they remained close behind the
partners until that point was reached.

At St. Michaels there were white men, practically the first Johnny and
Mort had encountered since landing at Katmai, and for a day at least
they were sane. But there were still three hundred miles to be traveled,
three hundred miles of solitude and haunting thoughts. Just as they were
about to start, Cantwell came upon Grant and the A. C. agent, and heard
his name pronounced, also the word "Katmai." He noted that Mort fell
silent at his approach, and instantly his anger blazed afresh. He
decided that the latter had been telling the story of their experience
on the pass and boasting of his service. So much the better, he thought,
in a blind rage; that which he planned doing would appear all the more
like an accident, for who would dream that a man could kill the person
to whom he owed his life?

That night he waited for a chance.

They were camped in a dismal hut on a wind-swept shore; they were alone.
But Grant was waiting also, it seemed. They lay down beside each other,
ostensibly to sleep; their limbs touched; the warmth from their bodies
intermingled, but they did not close their eyes.

They were up and away early, with Nome drawing rapidly nearer. They had
skirted an ocean, foot by foot; Bering Sea lay behind them, now, and its
northern shore swung westward to their goal. For two months they had
lived in silent animosity, feeding on bitter food while their elbows
rubbed.

Noon found them floundering through one of those unheralded storms which
make coast travel so hazardous. The morning had turned off gray, the sky
was of a leaden hue which blended perfectly with the snow underfoot,
there was no horizon, it was impossible to see more than a few yards in
any direction. The trail soon became obliterated and their eyes began to
play tricks. For all they could distinguish, they might have been
suspended in space; they seemed to be treading the measures of an
endless dance in the center of a whirling cloud. Of course it was cold,
for the wind off the open sea was damp, but they were not men to turn
back.

They soon discovered that their difficulty lay not in facing the storm,
but in holding to the trail. That narrow, two-foot causeway, packed by a
winter's travel and frozen into a ribbon of ice by a winter's frosts,
afforded their only avenue of progress, for the moment they left it the
sled plowed into the loose snow, well-nigh disappearing and bringing the
dogs to a standstill. It was the duty of the driver, in such case, to
wallow forward, right the load if necessary, and lift it back into
place. These mishaps were forever occurring, for it was impossible to
distinguish the trail beneath its soft covering. However, if the
driver's task was hard it was no more trying than that of the man ahead,
who was compelled to feel out and explore the ridge of hardened snow and
ice with his feet, after the fashion of a man walking a plank in the
dark. Frequently he lunged into the drifts with one foot, or both; his
glazed mukluk soles slid about, causing him to bestride the invisible
hog-back, or again his legs crossed awkwardly, throwing him off his
balance. At times he wandered away from the path entirely and had to
search it out again. These exertions were very wearing and they were
dangerous, also, for joints are easily dislocated, muscles twisted, and
tendons strained.

Hour after hour the march continued, unrelieved by any change, unbroken
by any speck or spot of color. The nerves of their eyes, wearied by
constant near-sighted peering at the snow, began to jump so that vision
became untrustworthy. Both travelers appreciated the necessity of
clinging to the trail, for, once they lost it, they knew they might
wander about indefinitely until they chanced to regain it or found their
way to the shore, while always to seaward was the menace of open water,
of air-holes, or cracks which might gape beneath their feet like jaws.
Immersion in this temperature, no matter how brief, meant death.

The monotony of progress through this unreal, leaden world became almost
unbearable. The repeated strainings and twistings they suffered in
walking the slippery ridge reduced the men to weariness; their legs grew
clumsy and their feet uncertain. Had they found a camping-place they
would have stopped, but they dared not forsake the thin thread that
linked them with safety to go and look for one, not knowing where the
shore lay. In storms of this kind men have lain in their sleeping-bags
for days within a stone's-throw of a roadhouse or village. Bodies have
been found within a hundred yards of shelter after blizzards have
abated.

Cantwell and Grant had no choice, therefore, except to bore into the
welter of drifting flakes.

It was late in the afternoon when the latter met with an accident.
Johnny, who had taken a spell at the rear, heard him cry out, saw him
stagger, struggle to hold his footing, then sink into the snow. The dogs
paused instantly, lay down, and began to strip the ice pellets from
between their toes.

Cantwell spoke harshly, leaning upon the handle-bars: "Well! What's the
idea?"

It was the longest sentence of the day.

"I've--hurt myself." Mort's voice was thin and strange; he raised
himself to a sitting posture, and reached beneath his parka, then lay
back weakly. He writhed, his face was twisted with pain. He continued to
lie there, doubled into a knot of suffering. A groan was wrenched from
between his teeth.

"Hurt? How?" Johnny inquired, dully.

It seemed very ridiculous to see that strong man kicking around in the
snow.

"I've ripped something loose--here." Mort's palms were pressed in upon
his groin, his fingers were clutching something. "Ruptured--I guess." He
tried again to rise, but sank back. His cap had fallen off and his
forehead glistened with sweat.

Cantwell went forward and lifted him. It was the first time in many days
that their hands had touched, and the sensation affected him strangely.
He struggled to repress a devilish mirth at the thought that Grant had
played out--it amounted to that and nothing less; the trail had
delivered him into his enemy's hands, his hour had struck. Johnny
determined to square the debt now, once for all, and wipe his own mind
clean of that poison which corroded it. His muscles were strong, his
brain clear, he had never felt his strength so irresistible as at this
moment, while Mort, for all his boasted superiority, was nothing but a
nerveless thing hanging limp against his breast. Providence had arranged
it all. The younger man was impelled to give raucous voice to his glee,
and yet--his helpless burden exerted an odd effect upon him.

He deposited his foe upon the sled and stared at the face he had not met
for many days. He saw how white it was, how wet and cold, how weak and
dazed, then as he looked he cursed inwardly, for the triumph of his
moment was spoiled.

The ax was there, its polished bit showed like a piece of ice, its helve
protruded handily, but there was no need of it now; his fingers were all
the weapons Johnny needed; they were more than sufficient, in fact, for
Mort was like a child.

Cantwell was a strong man, and, although the North had coarsened him,
yet underneath the surface was a chivalrous regard for all things weak,
and this the trail-madness had not affected. He had longed for this
instant, but now that it had come he felt no enjoyment, since he could
not harm a sick man and waged no war on cripples. Perhaps, when Mort had
rested, they could settle their quarrel; this was as good a place as
any. The storm hid them, they would leave no traces, there could be no
interruption.

But Mort did not rest. He could not walk; movement brought excruciating
pain.

Finally Cantwell heard himself saying: "Better wrap up and lie still for
a while. I'll get the dogs underway." His words amazed him dully. They
were not at all what he had intended to say.

The injured man demurred, but the other insisted gruffly, then brought
him his mittens and cap, slapping the snow out of them before rousing
the team to motion. The load was very heavy now, the dogs had no
footprints to guide them, and it required all of Cantwell's efforts to
prevent capsizing. Night approached swiftly, the whirling snow particles
continued to flow past upon the wind, shrouding the earth in an
impenetrable pall.

The journey soon became a terrible ordeal, a slow, halting progress that
led nowhere and was accomplished at the cost of tremendous exertion.
Time after time Johnny broke trail, then returned and urged the huskies
forward to the end of his tracks. When he lost the path he sought it
out, laboriously hoisted the sledge back into place, and coaxed his
four-footed helpers to renewed effort. He was drenched with
perspiration, his inner garments were steaming, his outer ones were
frozen into a coat of armor; when he paused he chilled rapidly. His
vision was untrustworthy, also, and he felt snow-blindness coming on.
Grant begged him more than once to unroll the bedding and prepare to
sleep out the storm; he even urged Johnny to leave him and make a dash
for his own safety, but at this the younger man cursed and told him to
hold his tongue.

Night found the lone driver slipping, plunging, lurching ahead of the
dogs, or shoving at the handle-bars and shouting at the dogs. Finally,
during a pause for rest he heard a sound which roused him. Out of the
gloom to the right came the faint, complaining howl of a malamute; it
was answered by his own dogs, and the next moment they had caught a
scent which swerved them shoreward and led them scrambling through the
drifts. Two hundred yards, and a steep bank loomed above, up and over
which they rushed, with Cantwell yelling encouragement; then a light
showed, and they were in the lee of a low-roofed hut.

A sick native, huddled over a Yukon stove, made them welcome to his mean
abode, explaining that his wife and son had gone to Unalaklik for
supplies.

Johnny carried his partner to the one unoccupied bunk and stripped his
clothes from him. With his own hands he rubbed the warmth back into
Mortimer's limbs, then swiftly prepared hot food, and, holding him in
the hollow of his aching arm, fed him, a little at a time. He was like
to drop from exhaustion, but he made no complaint. With one folded robe
he made the hard boards comfortable, then spread the other as a
covering. For himself he sat beside the fire and fought his weariness.
When he dozed off and the cold awakened him, he renewed the fire; he
heated beef-tea, and, rousing Mort, fed it to him with a teaspoon. All
night long, at intervals, he tended the sick man, and Grant's eyes
followed him with an expression that brought a fierce pain to Cantwell's
throat.

"You're mighty good--after the rotten way I acted," the former whispered
once.

And Johnny's big hand trembled so that he spilled the broth.

His voice was low and tender as he inquired, "Are you resting easier
now?"

The other nodded.

"Maybe you're not hurt badly, after--all. God! That would be awful--"
Cantwell choked, turned away, and, raising his arms against the log
wall, buried his face in them.

       *       *       *       *       *

The morning broke clear; Grant was sleeping. As Johnny stiffly mounted
the creek bank with a bucket of water he heard a jingle of sleigh-bells
and saw a sled with two white men swing in toward the cabin.

"Hello!" he called, then heard his own name pronounced.

"Johnny Cantwell, by all that's holy!"

The next moment he was shaking hands vigorously with two old friends
from Nome.

"Martin and me are bound for Saint Mikes," one of them explained. "Where
the deuce did you come from, Johnny?"

"The 'outside.' Started for Stony River, but--"

"Stony River!" The new-comers began to laugh loudly and Cantwell joined
them. It was the first time he had laughed for weeks. He realized the
fact with a start, then recollected also his sleeping partner, and said:

"'Sh-h! Mort's inside, asleep!"

During the night everything had changed for Johnny Cantwell; his mental
attitude, his hatred, his whole reasonless insanity. Everything was
different now, even his debt was canceled, the weight of obligation was
removed, and his diseased fancies were completely cured.

"Yes! Stony River," he repeated, grinning broadly. "I bit!"

Martin burst forth, gleefully: "They caught MacDonald at Holy Cross and
ran him out on a limb. He'll never start another stampede. Old man Baker
gun-branded him."

"What's the matter with Mort?" inquired the second traveler.

"He's resting up. Yesterday, during the storm he--" Johnny was upon the
point of saying "played out," but changed it to "had an accident. We
thought it was serious, but a few days' rest 'll bring him around all
right. He saved me at Katmai, coming in. I petered out and threw up my
tail, but he got me through. Come inside and tell him the news."

"Sure thing."

"Well, well!" Martin said. "So you and Mort are still partners, eh?"

"_Still_ partners?" Johnny took up the pail of water. "Well, rather!
We'll always be partners." His voice was young and full and hearty as he
continued: "Why, Mort's the best damned fellow in the world. I'd lay
down my life for him."




THE STAMPEDE




From their vantage on the dump, the red gravel of which ran like a raw
scar down the mountainside, the men looked out across the gulch, above
the western range of hills to the yellow setting sun. Far below them the
creek was dotted with other tiny pay dumps of the same red gravel over
which men crawled, antlike, or upon which they labored at windlass. Thin
wisps of smoke rose from the cabin roofs, bespeaking the supper hour.

They had done a hard day's work, these two, and wearily descended to
their shack, which hugged the hillside beneath.

Ten hours with pick and shovel in a drift where the charcoal-gas
flickers a candle-flame will reduce one's artistic keenness, and
together they slouched along the path, heedless alike of view or color.

As Crowley built the fire Buck scoured himself in the wet snow beside
the door, emerging from his ablutions as cook. The former stretched upon
the bunk with growing luxury. "Gee whiz! I'm tuckered out. Twelve hours
in that air is too much for anybody."

"Sure," growled the other. "Bet I sleep good to-night, all right, all
right. What's the use, anyhow?" he continued, disgustedly. "I'm sore on
the whole works. If the Yukon was open I'd chuck it all."

"What! Go back to the States? Give up?"

"Well, yes, if you want to call it that, though I think I've shown I
ain't a quitter. Lord! I've rustled steady for two years, and what have
I got? Nothing--except my interest in this pauperized hill claim."

"If two years of hard luck gives you cold feet, you ain't worthy of the
dignity of 'prospector.' This here is the only honorable calling there
is. There's no competition and cuttin' throats in our business, nor we
don't rob the widders and orphans. A prospector is defined as a
semi-human being with a low forehead but a high sense of honor, a
stummick that shies at salads, but a heart that's full of grit. They
don't never lay down, and the very beauty of the business is that you
never know when you're due. Some day a guy comes along: 'I hit her over
yonder, bo,' says he, whereupon you insert yourself into a pack-strap,
pound the trail, and the next you know you're a millionaire or two."

"Bah! No more stampedes for me. I've killed myself too often--there's
nothing in 'em. I'm sick of it, I tell you, and I'm going out to God's
country. No more wild scrambles and hardships for Buck."

A step sounded on the chips without, and a slender, sallow man entered.

"Hello, Maynard!" they chorused, and welcomed him to a seat.

"What are you doing out here?"

"D'you bring any chewing with you?"

Evidently he labored under excitement, for his face was flushed and his
eyes danced nervously. He panted from his climb, ignoring their
questions.

"There's been a big strike--over on the Tanana--four bits to the pan."

Forgetting fatigue, Crowley scrambled out of his bunk while the cook
left his steaming skillet.

"When?"

"How d'you know?"

"It's this way. I met a fellow as I came out from town--he'd just come
over--one of the discoverers. He showed me the gold. It's coarse; one
nugget weighed three hundred dollars and there's only six men in the
party. They went up the Tanana last fall, prospecting, and only just
struck it. Three of 'em are down with scurvy, so this one came over the
mountains for fresh grub. It'll be the biggest stampede this camp ever
saw." Maynard became incoherent.

"How long ago did you meet him?" Crowley inquired, excitedly.

"About an hour. I came on the run, because he'll get into camp by
eleven, and midnight will see five hundred men on the trail. Look at
this--he gave me a map." The speaker gloatingly produced a scrap of
writing-paper and continued, "Boys, you've got five hours' start of
them."

"We can't go; we haven't got any dogs," said Buck. "Those people from
town would catch us in twenty miles."

"You don't want dogs," Maynard answered. "It's too soft. You'll have to
make a quick run with packs or the spring break-up will catch you. I
wish I could go. It's big, I tell you. Lord! How I wish I could go!"

They were huddled together, their eyes feverish, their fingers tracing
the pencil-markings. A smell of burning food filled the room, but there
is no obsession more absolute than the gold-lust.

"Get the packs together while me and Buck eats a bite. We'll take the
fox-robe and the Navajo. Glad I've got a new pair of mukluks, 'cause we
need light footgear; but what will you wear, boy? Them hip-boots is too
heavy--you'd never make it."

"Here," said Maynard, "try these." He slipped off his light gossamer
sporting-boots, and Buck succeeded in stamping his feet into them.

"Little tight, but they'll go."

They snatched bites of food, meanwhile collecting their paraphernalia,
Maynard helping as he could.

Each selected a change of socks and mittens. Then the grub was divided
evenly--tea, flour, bacon, baking-powder, salt, sugar. There was nothing
else, for spring on the Yukon finds only the heel of the grub-stake.
Each rolled his portion in his blanket and lashed it with light rope.
Then an end of the bundle was thrust into the waist of a pair of
overalls and the garment closely cinched to it. The legs were brought
forward and fastened, forming two loops, through which they slipped
their arms, balancing the packs, or shifting a knot here and there. A
light ax, a coffee-pot, frying-pan, and pail were tied on the outside,
and they stood ready for the run. They stored carefully wrapped bundles
of matches in pockets, packs, and in the lining of their caps. The
preparations had not taken twenty minutes.

"Too bad we ain't got some cooked grub, like chocolate or dog-biscuits,"
said Crowley, "but seeing as we've got five hours' start over everybody
we won't have to kill ourselves."

Maynard spoke hesitatingly. "Say, I told Sully about it as I came
along."

"What!" Crowley interrupted him sharply.

"Yes! I told him to get ready, and I promised to give him the location
an hour after you left. You see, he did me a good turn once and I had to
get back at him somehow. He and Knute are getting fixed now. Why, what's
up?"

He caught a queer, quick glance between his partners and noted a
hardness settle into the lined face of the elder.

"Nothing much," Buck took up. "I guess you didn't know about the
trouble, eh? Crowley knocked him down day before yesterday and Sully
swears he'll kill him on sight. It came up over that fraction on Buster
Creek."

"Well, well," said Maynard, "that's bad, isn't it? I promised, though,
so I'll have to tell him."

"Sure! That's all right," Crowley agreed, quietly, though his lip
curled, showing the strong, close-shut, ivory teeth. His nostrils
dilated, also, giving his face a passing wolfish hint. "There's neither
white man nor Swede that can gain an hour on us, and if he should happen
to--he wouldn't pass."

Be it known that many great placer fortunes have been won by those who
stepped in the warm tracks of the discoverers, while rarely does the
goddess smile on the tardy; in consequence, no frenzy approaches that of
the gold stampede.

Passing Sully's place, they found him and his partner ready and waiting,
their packs on the saw-buck. Crowley glared at his enemy in silence
while the other sneered wickedly back, and Big Knute laughed in his
yellow beard.

Buck's heart sank. Could he outlast these two? He was a boy; they were
reckless giants with thews and legs of iron. Knute was a gaunt-framed
Viking; Sully a violent, florid man with the quarters of an ox. Through
the quixotism of Maynard this trip bade fair to combine the killing
grind of a long, fierce stampede with the bitter struggle of man and
man, and too well he knew the temper of his red-headed partner to doubt
that before the last stake was driven either he or Sully would be down.
From the glare in their eyes at passing it came over him that either he
or Knute would recross the mountains partnerless. The trail was too
narrow for these other men. He shrank from the toil and agony he felt
was coming to him through this; then, with it, there came the burning
gold-hunger; the lust that drives starving, broken wrecks onward
unremittingly, over misty hills, across the beds of lava and the
forbidden tundra; on, into the new diggings.

It neared eight o'clock, and, although darkness was far distant, the
chill that follows the sun fell sharply.

As they swung out on to the river their fatigue had dropped away and
they moved with the steady, loose gait of the hardened "musher." Buck
looked at his watch. They had been gone an hour.

"The race is on!" said he.

Though unhurried, their progress was likewise unhindered, and the miles
slipped backward as the darkness thickened, hour by hour. Straight up
the fifty-mile stream to its source, over the great backbone and into
the unmapped country their course led. If they hurried they would have
first choice of the good claims close about the discovery; if they
lagged Sully and his ox-eyed partner would overtake them, and beyond
that it was unpleasant to conjecture.

"We'll hit water pretty soon!" Crowley's voice broke hours of silence,
for they were sparing of language. They neither whistled nor sang nor
spoke, for Man is a potential body from which his store of energy wastes
through tiny unheeded ways.

True to prophecy, in the darkness of midnight they walked out upon a
thin skin of newly frozen ice.

"Look out for the overflow! She froze since dark," Crowley cautioned.
"We're liable to go through."

On all sides it cracked alarmingly, while they felt it sag beneath their
feet. It is bad in the dark to ride the ice of an overflow, for one may
crash through ankle-deep to the solid body beneath or plunge to his
armpits.

They skated over the yielding surface toward safety till, without
warning, Crowley smashed in half-way to his hips. He fell forward
bodily, and the ice let him through till he rolled in the water. Buck
skimmed over more lightly, and, when they had reached the solid footing,
helped him wring out his garments. Straightway the cloth whitened under
the frost and crackled when they resumed their march, but there was no
time for fires, and by vigorous action he could keep the cold from
striking in.

They had threaded up into the region where spring was further advanced,
and within half an hour encountered another overflow. Climbing the steep
bank, they wallowed through thickets waist-deep in snow. Beneath the
crust, which cut knifelike, it was wet and soggy, so they emerged
saturated. Then debouching on to the glare ice the boy had a nasty fall,
for he slipped, and his loose-hung pack flung him suddenly. Nothing is
more wicked than a pack on smooth ice. The surface had frozen
glass-smooth, and constant difficulty beset their progress. Their
slick-soled footgear refused to grip it, so that often they fell, always
awkwardly, occasionally crushing through into the icy water beneath.

Without warning Buck found that he was very tired. He also found that
his pack had grown soggy and quadrupled in weight, tugging sullenly at
his aching shoulders.

As daylight showed they slipped harness and, hurriedly gathering twigs,
boiled a pot of tea. They took time to prepare nothing else, yet even
though the kettle sang speedily, as they drank from around the bend
below came voices. Crowley straightened with a curse and, snatching his
pack, fled up the stream, followed by his companion. They ran till
Buck's knees failed him. Thereupon the former removed a portion of the
youngster's burden, adding it to his own, and they hurried on for hours,
till they fell exhausted upon a dry moss hummock. Here they exchanged
footgear, as Buck now found his feet were paining him acutely, owing to
the tightness of his rubber boots. They proved too small for Crowley as
well, and in a few hours his feet were likewise ruined.

Noon found them limping among the bald hills of the river's source. Here
timber was sparse and the snows, too, had thinned; so to avoid the
convolutions of the stream they cut across points, floundering among
"niggerheads"--quaint, wobbly hummocks of grass--being thrown repeatedly
by their packs which had developed a malicious deviltry. This footing
was infinitely worse than the reeking ice, but it saved time, so they
took it.

Now, under their stiff mackinaws they perspired freely as the sun
mounted, until their heavy garments chafed them beneath arms and legs.
Moreover, mosquitoes, which in this latitude breed within arm's-length
of snow-drifts, continually whined in a vicious cloud before their
features.

Human nerves will weather great strains, but wearing, maddening,
unending trivialities will break them down, and so, although their
journey in miles had been inconsiderable, the dragging packs, the
driving panic, the lack of food and firm footing, had trebled it.

Scaling the moss-capped saddle, they labored painfully, a hundred yards
at a time. Back of them the valley unrolled, its stream winding away
like a gleaming ribbon, stretching, through dark banks of fir, down to
the Yukon. After incredible effort they reached the crest and gazed
dully out to the southward over a limitless jangle of peaks, on, on, to
a blue-veiled valley leagues and leagues across. Many square miles lay
under them in the black of unbroken forests. It was their first glimpse
of the Tanana. Far beyond, from a groveling group of foot-hills, a
solitary, giant peak soared grandly, standing aloof, serene, terrible in
its proportions. Even in their fatigue they exclaimed aloud:

"It's Mount McKinley!"

"Yep! Tallest wart on the face of the continent. There's the creek we go
down--see!" Crowley indicated a watercourse which meandered away through
canons and broad reaches. "We foller it to yonder cross valley; then
east to there."

To Buck's mind, his gesture included a tinted realm as far-reaching as a
state.

Stretched upon the bare schist, commanding the back stretch, they
munched slices of raw bacon.

Directly, out toward the mountain's foot two figures crawled.

"There they come!" and Crowley led, stumbling, sliding, into the strange
valley.

As this was the south and early side of the range, they found the hills
more barren of snow. Water seeped into the gulches till the creek ice
was worn and rotted.

"This 'll be fierce," the Irishman remarked. "If she breaks on us we'll
be hung up in the hills and starve before the creeks lower enough to get
home."

Small streams freeze solidly to the bottom and the spring waters wear
downward from the surface. Thus they found the creek awash, and,
following farther, it became necessary to wade in many places. They came
to a box canon where the winter snow had packed, forming a dam, and, as
there was no way of avoiding it without retreating a mile and climbing
the ragged bluff, they floundered through, their packs aloft, the slushy
water armpit-deep.

"We'd ought 'a' took the ridges," Buck chattered. Language slips forth
phonetically with fatigue.

"No! Feller's apt to get lost. Drop into the wrong creek--come out fifty
mile away."

"I bet the others do, anyhow," Buck held, stubbornly. "It's lots easier
going."

"Wish Sully would, but he's too wise. No such luck for me." A long
pause. "I reckon I'll have to kill him before he gets back!" Again they
relapsed into miles of silence.

Crowley's fancy fed on vengeance, hatred livening his work-worn
faculties. He nursed carefully the memory of their quarrel, for it
helped him travel and took his mind from the agony of movement and this
aching sleep-hunger.

The feet of both men felt like fearful, shapeless masses; their packs
leaned backward sullenly, chafing raw shoulder sores; and always the
ravenous mosquitoes stung and stung, and whined and whined.

At an exclamation the leader turned. Miles back, silhouetted far above
on the comb of the ridge, they descried two tiny figures.

"That's what we'd ought 'a' done. They'll beat us in."

"No, they won't. They'll have to camp to-night or get lost, while we can
keep goin'. We can't go wrong down here; can't do no more than drownd."

Buck groaned at the thought of the night hours. He couldn't stand it,
that was all! Enough is enough of anything and he had gone the limit.
Just one more mile and he would quit; yet he did not.

All through that endless phantom night they floundered, incased in
freezing garments, numb and heavy with sleep, but morning found them at
the banks of the main stream.

"You look like hell," said Buck, laughing weakly. His mirth relaxed his
nerves suddenly, till he giggled and hiccoughed hysterically. Nor could
he stop for many minutes, the while Crowley stared at him apathetically
from a lined and shrunken countenance, his features standing out
skeleton-like. The younger man evidenced the strain even more severely,
for his flesh was tender, and he had traveled the last hours on pure
nerve. His jaws were locked and corded, however, while his drooping eyes
shone unquenchably.

Eventually they rounded a bluff on to a cabin nestling at the mouth of a
dark valley. Near it men were working with a windlass, so, stumbling to
them, they spoke huskily.

"Sorry we 'ain't got room inside," the stranger replied, "but three of
the boys is down with scurvy, and we're all cramped up. Plenty more
folks coming, I s'pose, eh?"

The two had sunk on to the wet ground and did not answer. Buck fell with
his pack still on, utterly lost, and the miner was forced to drag the
bundle from his shoulders. As he rolled him up he was sleeping heavily.

Crowley awakened while the sun was still golden; his joints aching
excruciatingly. They had slept four hours. He boiled tea on the miners'
stove and fried a pan of salt pork, but was too tired to prepare
anything else, so they drank the warm bacon-grease clear with their tea.

As Buck strove to arise, his limbs gave way weakly, so that he fell, and
it took him many moments to recover their use.

"Where's the best chance, pardner?" they inquired of the men on the
dump.

"Well, there ain't none very close by. We've got things pretty well
covered."

"How's that? There's only six of you; you can't hold but six claims,
besides discovery."

"Oh yes, we can! We've got powers of attorney; got 'em last fall in St.
Michael; got 'em recorded, too."

Crowley's sunken eyes blazed.

"Them's no good. We don't recko'nize 'em in this district. One claim is
enough for any man if it's good, and too much if it's bad."

"What district you alludin' at?" questioned the other, ironically.
"You're in the Skookum District now. It takes six men to organize. Well!
We organized. We made laws. We elected a recorder. I'm it. If you don't
like our rules, yonder is the divide. We've got the U. S. government
back of us. See!"

Crowley's language became purely local, but the other continued
unruffled.

"We knew you-all was coming, so we sort of loaded up. If there's any
ground hereabouts that we ain't got blanketed, it's purely an oversight.
There's plenty left farther out, though," and he swept them a mocking
gesture. "Help yourselves and pass up for more. I'll record 'em."

"What's the fee?"

"Ten dollars apiece."

Crowley swore more savagely.

"You done a fine job of hoggin', didn't you? It's two and a half
everywhere else."

But the recorder of the Skookum District laughed carelessly and resumed
his windlass. "Sorry you ain't pleased. Maybe you'll learn to like it."

As they turned away he continued: "I don't mind giving you a hunch,
though. Tackle that big creek about five miles down yonder. She
prospected good last fall, but you'll have to go clean to her head,
'cause we've got everything below."

Eight hours later, by the guiding glare of the Northern Lights, the two
stumbled back into camp, utterly broken.

They had followed the stream for miles and miles to find it staked by
the powers of attorney of the six. Coming to the gulch's head, to be
sure, they found vacant ground, but refused to claim such unpromising
territory. Then the endless homeward march through the darkness! Out of
thickets and through drifts they burst, while fatigue settled on them
like some horrid vampire from the darkness. Every step being no longer
involuntary became a separate labor, requiring mental concentration.
They were half dead in slumber as they walked, but their stubborn
courage and smoldering rage at the men who had caused this drove them
on. They suffered silently, because it takes effort to groan, and they
hoarded every atom of endurance.

Many, many times Buck repeated a poem, timing his steps to its rhythm,
rendering it over and over till it wore a rut through his brain, his
eyes fixed dully upon the glaring fires above the hilltops. For years a
faintness came over him with the memory of these lines:

    Then dark they lie, and stark they lie, rookery, dune, and floe,
    And the Northern Lights came down o' nights to dance with the
        houseless snow.

Reaching the cabin, they found an army of men sleeping heavily upon the
wet moss. Among them was the great form of Knute, but nowhere did they
spy Sully.

With much effort they tore off the constricting boots and, using them
for pillows, sank into a painful lethargy.

Awakened early by the others, they took their stiffly frozen footgear
beneath the blankets to thaw against their warm bodies, but their feet
were swelled to double size and every joint had ossified rheumatically.
Eventually they hobbled about, preparing the first square meal since the
start--two days and three nights.

Still they saw no Sully, though Crowley's eyes darted careful inquiry
among the horde of stampeders which moved about the cabin. Later, he
seemed bent on some hidden design, so they crawled out of sight of the
camp, then, commencing at the upper stake of Discovery, he stepped off
the claims from post to post.

It is customary to blaze the boundaries of locations on tree trunks, but
from topographical irregularities it is difficult to properly gauge
these distances, hence, many rich fractions have been run over by the
heedless, to fall to him who chained the ground.

Upon pacing the third one, he showed excitement.

"You walk this one again--mebbe I made a mistake."

Buck returned, crashing through the brush.

"I make it seventeen hundred."

The claim above figured likewise, and they trembled with elation as they
blazed their lines.

Returning to camp, they found the recorder in the cabin with the scurvy
patients. Unfolding the location notices, his face went black as he
read, while he snarled, angrily:

"'Fraction between Three and Four' and 'Fraction between Four and Five,'
eh? You're crazy."

"I reckon not," said Crowley, lifting his lips at the corners
characteristically.

"There ain't any fraction there," the other averred, loudly. "We own
them claims. I told you we had everything covered."

"You record them fractions!"

"I won't do it! I'll see you in--"

Crowley reached forth suddenly and strangled him as he sat. He buried
his thumbs in his throat, forcing him roughly back against a bunk.
Farther and farther he crushed him till the man lay pinioned and
writhing on his back. Then he knelt on him, shaking and worrying like a
great terrier.

At the first commotion the cripples scrambled out of bed, shouting
lustily through their livid gums, their bloated features mottled and
sickly with fright. One lifted himself toward the Winchester, and it
fell from his hands full cocked when Buck hurled him into a corner,
where he lay screaming in agony.

Drawn by the uproar, the stampeders outside rushed toward the shack to
be met in the door by the young man.

"Keep back!"

"What's up!"

"Fight!"

"Let me in!"

A man bolted forward, but was met with such a driving blow in the face
that he went thrashing to the slush. Another was hurled back, and then
they heard Crowley's voice, rough and throaty, as he abused the
recorder. Strained to the snapping-point, his restraint had shattered to
bits and now passion ran through him, wild and unbridled.

From his words they grasped the situation, and their sympathies changed.
They crowded the door and gazed curiously through the window to see him
jam the recorder shapelessly into a chair, place pen and ink in his
hand, and force him to execute two receipts. It is not a popular
practice, this blanketing, as the temper of the watchers showed.

"Serves 'em right, the hogs," some one said, and he voiced the universal
sentiment.

That night, as they ravened over their meager meal, Knute came to them,
hesitatingly. He was greatly worried and apprehension wrinkled his
wooden face.

"Saay! W'at you t'ink 'bout Sully?"

"I don't know. Why?"

"By yingo, ay t'ink he's lose!"

"Lost! How's that?"

In his dialect, broken by anxiety, he told how Sully and he had
quarreled on the big divide. Maddened by failure to gain on Crowley, the
former had insisted on following the mountain crests in the hope of
quicker travel. The Swede had yielded reluctantly till, frightened by
the network of radiating gulches which spread out beneath their feet in
a bewildering sameness, he had refused to go farther. They had
quarreled. In a fit of fury Sully had hurled his pack away, and Knute's
last vision of him had been as he went raving and cursing onward like a
madman, traveling fast in his fury. Knute had retreated, dropped into
the valley, and eventually reached his goal.

There is no time for reliefs on a stampede. The gentler emotions are
left in camp with the women. He who would risk life, torture, and
privation for a stranger will trample pitilessly on friend and enemy
blinded by the gold glitter or drunken with the chase of the rainbow.

For five days and nights the army lived on its feet, streaming up
gullies where lay the hint of wealth or swarming over the somber bluffs;
and hourly the madness grew, feeding on itself, till they fought like
beasts. Fabulous values were begotten. Giant sales were bruited about.
Flying rumors of gold at the cross-roots inflamed them to further
frenzy.

A town site was laid out and a terrible scramble for lots ensued.

One man was buried in the plot he claimed, his disputant being adjudged
the owner by virtue of his quicker draw. It was manslaughter, they knew,
but no one spared the time to guard him, so he went free. Nor did he run
away. One cannot, while the craze is on.

Five days of this, and then the stream broke. With it broke the delirium
of the five hundred. The valleys roared and bawled from bluff to bluff,
while the flats became seas of seething ice and rubbish. Thus, cut off
from home, they found their grub was gone, for every one had clung till
his food grew low. As the obsession left them their brotherhood
returned--food was apportioned in community, and they spoke vaguely of
the fate of Sully.

For still another half-fortnight they lay about the cabin while the
streams raged, and then Crowley spoke to his partner. Rolling their
blankets, they started, and, although many were tempted to go, none had
the courage, preferring to starve on quarter rations till the waters
lowered.

Ascending for miles where the torrent narrowed, they felled a tree
across for a bridge and, ascending the ridges, took the direction of
camp. In a new and broken country, not formed of continuous ranges, this
is difficult. So to avoid frequent fordings they followed the high
ground, going devious, confusing miles. The snows were largely gone,
though the nights were cruel, and thus they traveled.

At last, when they had worked through to the Yukon spurs, one morning on
a talus high above Buck spied the flapping forms of a flock of ravens.
They fluttered ceaselessly among the rocks, rising noisily, only to
settle again.

These are the gleaming, baleful vultures of the North, and often they
attain a considerable size and ferocity.

The men gazed at them with apathy. Was it worth while to spend the steps
to see what drew them? By following their course they would pass far to
the right.

"I hate the dam' things," said Crowley, crossly. "I seen 'em, oncet,
hangin' to a caribou calf with a broken leg, tryin' to pick his eyes
out. Let's see what it is."

He veered to the left, scrambling up among the boulders. The birds rose
fretfully, perching near by, but the men saw nothing. As they rested
momentarily the birds again swooped downward, reassured.

Then, partly hidden among the detritus, they spied that which made
Crowley cry out in horror, while the sound of Buck's voice was like the
choking of a woman. As they started, one of the ebony scavengers dipped
fiercely, picking at a ragged object. A human arm slowly arose and
blindly beat it off, but the raven's mate settled also, and, sinking its
beak into the object, tore hungrily.

With a shout they stumbled forward, lacerated by the jagged slide rock,
only to pause aghast and shaking.

Sully lay crouched against a boulder where he had crawled for the sun
heat. Rags of clothing hung upon his gaunt frame, through which the
sharp bones strove to pierce; also at sight of his hands and feet they
shuddered. With the former he had covered his eyes from the ravens, but
his cheeks and head were bloody and shredded. He muttered constantly,
like the thick whirring of machinery run down.

"Oh, my God!" Buck whispered.

Crowley had mastered himself and knelt beside the figure. He looked up
and tears lay on his cheeks.

"Look at them hands and feet! That was done by fire and frost together.
He must have fell in his own camp-fires after he went crazy."

The garments were burned off to elbow and knee, while the flesh was
black and raw.

Tenderly they carried the gabbing creature down to the timber and laid
him on a bed of boughs. His condition told the grim tale of his
wanderings, crazed with hunger and hardship.

Heating water, they poured it into him, dressing his wounds with strips
from their underclothes. Of stimulants they had none, but fed him the
last pinch of flour, together with the final rasher of salt pork,
although they knew that these things are not good for starving men. For
many days they had traveled on less than quarter rations themselves.

"What will we do?"

"It ain't over twenty miles to the niggers'. He'll die before we can get
help back. D'ye reckon we can carry him?"

It was not sympathy which prompted Crowley, for he sympathized with his
boyish companion, whose sufferings it hurt him sorely to augment. It was
not pity; he pitied himself, and his own deplorable condition; nor did
mercy enter into his processes, for the man had mercilessly planned to
kill him, and he likewise had nursed a bitter hatred against him, which
misfortune could only dim. It was not these things which moved him, but
a vaguer, wilder quality; an elemental, unspoken, indefinable feeling of
brotherhood throughout the length of the North, teaching subtly, yet
absolutely and without appeal, that no man shall be left in his
extremity to the cruel harshness of this forbidding land.

"Carry him?" Buck cried. "No! You're crazy! What's the use? He'll die,
anyhow--and so'll we if we don't get grub soon." Buck was new to the
country, and he was a boy.

"No, he won't. He lived hard and he'll die hard, for he's a hellion--he
is. We've got to pack him in!"

"By God! I won't risk _my_ life for a corpse--'specially one like him."
The lad broke out in hysterical panic, for he had lived on the raggedest
edge of his nerve these many days. Now his every muscle was dead and
numbed with pain. Only his mind was clear, caused by the effort to force
movement into his limbs. When he stopped walking he fell into a
half-slumber which was acutely painful. When he arose to redrive his
weary body it became freakish, so that he fell or collided with trees.
He was bloody and bruised and cut. Carry a dead man? It was madness,
and, besides, he felt an utter giving away at every joint.

He was too tired to make his reasoning plain; his tongue was thick, and
Crowley's brain too calloused to grasp argument, therefore he squatted
beside the muttering creature and wept impotently. He was asleep, with
tears in his stubbly beard, when his partner finished the rude litter,
yet he took up his end of the burden, as Crowley knew he would.

"You'll kill us both, damn ye!" he groaned.

"Probably so, but we can't leave him to them things." The other nodded
at the vampires perched observantly in the surrounding firs.

Then began their great trial and temptation. For hours on end the birds
fluttered from tree to tree, always in sight and hoarsely complaining
till the sick fancies of the men distorted them into foul, gibing
creatures of the Pit screaming with devilish glee at their anguish.
Blindly they staggered through the forest while the limbs reached forth
to block them, thrusting sharp needles into their eyes or whipping back
viciously. Vines writhed up their legs, straining to delay their march,
and the dank moss curled ankle-deep, slyly tripping their dragging,
swollen feet. Nature hindered them sullenly, with all her heart-breaking
implacability. They reeled constantly under their burden and grew to
hate the ragged-barked trees that smote them so cruelly and so roughly
tore their flesh. Ofttimes they fell, rolling the maniac limply from his
couch, but they dragged him back and strained forward to the hideous
racket of his mumblings, which grew louder as his delirium increased.
They were forced to tie him to the poles, but could not stop his ghastly
shriekings. At every pause the dismal ravens croaked and leered evilly
from the shadows, till Buck shuddered and hid his face while Crowley
gnashed his teeth. From time to time other birds joined them in
anticipation of the feast, till they were ringed about, and the sight of
this ever-growing, grisly, clamorous flock of watchers became awful to
the men. They felt the horny talons searching their flesh and the hungry
beaks tearing at their eyeballs.

A dog-sled and birch-bark practice covering both banks of the Yukon for
two hundred miles yielded Doc Lewis sufficient revenue to grub-stake a
Swede. Thus he slept warm, kept his feet dry, and was still a miner. He
did not believe in hardship, and eschewed stampedes. Yet when he had
seen the last able-bodied man vanish from camp on the Skookum run he
grew restless. He scoffed at fake excitements to Jarvis, the
faro-dealer, who also forbore the trail by virtue of his calling, but he
got no satisfaction. A fortnight later he rolled his blankets and
journeyed toilsomely up the river valley.

"Better late than never," he thought.

Arriving at the empty shack of the negroes, he camped, only to awaken
during the night to the roar of the torrent at his door. Having seen
other mountain streams in the break-up, he waited philosophically,
hunting ptarmigan among the firs back of the cabin.

He had lost track of the days when, down the gulch, in the morning
light, he descried a strange party approaching.

Two men bore between them a stretcher made from their shirts. They
crawled with dreadful slowness, resting every hundred feet. Moreover,
they stumbled and staggered aimlessly through the niggerheads. As they
drew near he sighted their faces, from which the teeth grinned in a
grimace of torture and through which the cheek-bones seemed to
penetrate.

He knew what the signs boded. For years he had ministered to these
necessities, and no man had ever approached his success.

"It is the rape of the North they are doing," he sighed. "We ravage her
stores, but she takes grim toll from all of us." He moved the hot water
forward on the stove, cleared off the rude table, and laid out his
instrument-case.




WHEN THE MAIL CAME IN




We didn't like Montague Prosser at first--he was too clean. He wore his
virtue like a bath-robe, flapping it in our faces. It was Whitewater
Kelly who undertook to mitigate him one day, but, being as the nuisance
stood an even fathom high and had a double-action football motion about
him, Whitewater's endeavors kind of broke through the ice and he
languished around in his bunk the next week while we sat up nights and
changed his bandages.

Yes, Monty was equally active at repartee or rough-house, and he knocked
Whitewater out from under his cap, slick and clean, just the way you
snap a playing-card out from under a coin, which phenomenon terminated
our tendencies to scoff and carp.

Personally, I didn't care. If a man wants to wallow about in a
disgusting daily debauch of cleanliness, it is his privilege. If he
squanders the fleeting moments brushing teeth, cleaning fingernails, and
such technicalities, it stands to reason he won't have much time left to
attend to his work and at the same time cultivate the essentials of life
like smoking, drinking, and the proper valuation of a three-card draw.
But, as I say, it's up to him, and outsiders who don't see merit in such
a system shouldn't try to bust up his game unless they've got good
foot-work and a knockout punch.

It wasn't so much these physical refinements that riled us as the
rarefied atmosphere of his general mental and moral altitudes. To me
there's eloquence and sentiment and romance and spiritual uplift in a
real, full-grown, black-whiskered cuss-word. It's a great help in a
mountainous country. Profanity is like steam in a locomotive--takes more
to run you up-hill than on the level, and inasmuch as there's only a few
men on the level, a violent vocabulary is a necessity and appeals to me
like a certificate of good character and general capability.

There wasn't a thing doing with Prosser in the idiom line, however. His
moral make-up was like his body, big and sound and white and manicured,
and although his talk, alongside of ours, listened like it was skimmed
and seminaried, still when we got to know him we found that his verbal
structures had vital organs and hair on their chests just like anybody
else's, and at the same time had the advantage of being fit to send
through the mails.

He had left a widowed mother and come north on the main chance, like the
rest of us, only he originated farther east. What made the particular
ten-strike with us was the pride he took in that same mother. He gloried
in her and talked about her in that hushed and nervous way a man speaks
about a real mother or a regular sweetheart. We men-folks liked him all
the better for it. I say we men, for he was a "shine" with the
women--all nine of them. The camp was fifteen hundred strong that
winter, over and above which was the aforesaid galaxy of nine, stranded
on their way up-river to a Dawson dance-hall. The Yukon froze up and
they had to winter with us. Of course there were the three married
ladies, too, living with their husbands back on the Birch Ridge, but we
never saw them and they didn't count. The others went to work at
Eckert's theater.

Monty would have been right popular at Eckert's--he was a handsome
lad--but he couldn't see those people with a field-glass. They simply
scandalized him to death.

"I love to dance," said he, one night, as we looked on, "and the music
sends thrills through me, but I won't do it."

"Why not?" I asked. "This is Alaska. Be democratic. You're not so
awfully nice that a dance-hall girl will contaminate you."

"It's not democracy that I lack, nor contamination that I'm afraid of,"
he replied. "It's the principle back of it all. If we encourage these
girls in the lives they lead, we're just as bad as they are."

"Look here, son, when I quit salt water I left all that garbage and
bilge-water talk about 'guilt' and 'responsibility' behind. The days are
too short, the nights are too cold, and grub is too dear for me to spare
time to theorize. I take people the way I take work and play--just as
they come--and I'd advise you to do the same."

"No, sir; I won't associate with gamblers and crooks, so why should I
hobnob with these women? They're worse than the men, for all the
gamblers have lost is their honesty. Every time I see these girls I
think of the little mother back home. It's awful. Suppose she saw me
dancing with them?"

Well, that's a bad line of talk and I couldn't say much.

Of course, when the actresses found out how he felt they came back at
him strong, but he wrapped himself up in his dignity and held himself
aloof when he came to town, so he didn't seem to mind it.

It was one afternoon in January, cold and sharp, that Ollie Marceau's
team went through the ice just below our camp. She was a great
dog-puncher and had the best team in camp--seven fine malamoots--which
she drove every day. When the animals smelled our place they ran away
and dragged her into the open water below the hot springs. She was wet
for ten minutes, and by the time she had got out and stumbled to our
bunk-house she was all in. Another ten minutes with the "quick" at
thirty below would have finished her, but we rushed her in by the fire
and made her drink a glass of "hootch." Martin got her parka off somehow
while I slashed the strings to her mukluks and had her little feet
rubbed red as berries before she'd quit apologizing for the trouble
she'd made. A fellow learns to watch toes pretty close in the winter.

"Lord! stop your talk," we said. "This is the first chance we have had
to do anything for a lady in two years. It's a downright pleasure for us
to take you in this way."

"Indeed!" she chattered. "Well, it isn't mutual--" And we all laughed.

We roused up a good fire and made her take off all the wet clothes she
felt she could afford to, then wrung them out and hung them up to dry.
We made her gulp down another whisky, too, after which I gave her some
footgear and she slipped into one of Martin's Mackinaw shirts. We knew
just how faint and shaky she felt, but she was dead game and joked with
us about it.

I never realized what a cute trick she was till I saw her in that great,
coarse, blue shirt with her feet in beaded moccasins, her yellow hair
tousled, and the sparkle of adventure in her bright eyes. She stood out
like a nugget by candle-light, backed as she was, by the dingy bark
walls of our cabin.

I suppose it was a bad instant for Prosser to appear. He certainly cued
in wrong and found the sight shocking to his Plymouth Rock proprieties.

The raw liquor we had forced on her had gone to her head a bit, as it
will when you're fresh from the cold and your stomach is empty, so her
face was flushed and had a pretty, reckless, daring look to it. She had
her feet high up on a chair, too--not so very high, either--where they
were thawing out under the warmth of the oven, and we were all laughing
at her story of the mishap.

Monty stopped on recognizing who she was, while the surprise in his face
gave way to disapproval. We could see it as plain as if it was blazoned
there in printer's ink, and it sobered us. The girl removed her feet and
stood up.

"Miss Marceau has just had an accident," I began, but I saw his eyes
were fastened on the bottle on the table, and I saw also that he knew
what caused the fever in her cheeks.

"Too bad," he said, coldly. "If I can be of any assistance you'll find
me down at the shaft-house." And out he walked.

I knew he didn't intend to be inhospitable; that it was just his
infernal notions of decency, and that he refused to be a party to
anything as devilish as this looked--but it wasn't according to the
Alaska code, and it was like a slap in the girl's face.

"I am quite dry," she said. "I'll be going now."

"You will not. You'll stay to supper and drive home by moonlight," says
we. "Why, you'd freeze in a mile!" And we made her listen to us.

During the meal Prosser never opened his mouth except to put something
into it, but his manner was as full of language as an oration. He didn't
thaw out the way a man should when he sees strangers wading into the
grub he's paid a dollar a pound for, and when we'd finally sent the
young woman off Martin turned on him.

"Young feller," said he--and his eyes were black--"I've rattled around
for thirty years and seen many a good and many a bad man, but I never
before seen such an intelligent dam' fool as you are."

"What do you mean?" said the boy.

"You've broke about the only law that this here country boasts of--the
law of hospitality."

"He didn't mean it that way," I spoke up. "Did you, Monty?"

"Certainly not. I'd help anybody out of trouble--man or woman--but I
refuse to mix with that kind of people socially."

"'That kind of people,'" yelled the old man. "And what's the matter with
that kind of people? You come creeping out of the milk-and-water East,
all pink and perfumed up, and when you get into a bacon-and-beans
country where people sweat instead of perspiring you wrinkle your nose
like a calf and whine about the kind of people you find. What do you
know about people, anyhow? Did you ever want to steal?"

"Of course not," said Prosser, who kept his temper.

"Did you ever want to drink whisky so bad you couldn't stand it?"

"No."

"Did you ever want to kill a man?"

"No."

"Were you ever broke and friendless and hopeless?"

"Why, I can't say I ever was."

"And you've never been downright hungry, either, where you didn't know
if you'd ever eat again, have you? Then what license have you got to
blame people for the condition you find them in? How do you know what
brought this girl where she is?"

"Oh, I pity any woman who is adrift on the world, if that's what you
mean, but I won't make a pet out of her just because she is friendless.
She must expect that when she chooses her life. Her kind are bad--bad
all through. They must be."

"Not on your life. Decency runs deeper than the hives."

"Trouble with you," said I, "you've got a juvenile standard--things are
all good or all bad in your eyes--and you can't like a person unless the
one overbalances the other. When you are older you'll find that people
are like gold-mines, with a thin streak of pay on bed-rock and lots of
hard digging above."

"I didn't mean to be discourteous," our man continued, "but I'll never
change my feelings about such things. Mind you, I'm not preaching, nor
asking you to change your habits--all I want is a chance to live my own
life clean."

The mail came in during March, five hundred pounds of it, and the camp
went daffy.

Monty had the dogs harnessed ten minutes after we got the news, and we
drove the four miles in seventeen minutes. I've known men with
sweethearts outside, but I never knew one to act gladder than Monty did
at the thought of hearing from his mother.

"You must come and see us when you make your pile," he told me,
"or--what's better--we'll go East together next spring and surprise her.
Won't that be great? We'll walk in on her in the summer twilight while
she is working in her flower-garden. Can't you just see the green trees
and smell the good old smells of home? The catbirds will be calling and
the grass will be clean and sweet. Why, I'm so tired of the cold and the
snow and the white, white mountains that I can hardly stand it."

He ran on in that vein all the way to town, glad and hopeful and
boyish--and I wondered why, with his earnestness and loyalty and broad
shoulders, he had never loved any woman but his mother. When I was
twenty-three my whole romantic system had been mangled and shredded from
heart to gizzard. Still, some men get their age all in a lump; they're
boys up till the last minute, then they get the Rip Van Winkle while you
wait.

This morning was bitter, but the "sour doughs" were lined up outside the
store, waiting their turns like a crowd of Parsifal first-nighters, so
we fell in with the rest, whipping our arms and stamping our moccasins
till the chill ate into our very bones. It took hours to sort the
letters, but not a man whimpered. When you wait for vital news a tension
comes that chokes complaint. There was no joking here, nor that
elephantine persiflage which marks rough men when they forgather in the
wilderness. They were the fellows who blazed the trail, bearded, shaggy,
and not pretty to look at, for they all knew hardship and went out
strong-hearted into this silent land, jesting with danger and singing in
the solitudes. Here in the presence of the Mail they laid aside their
cloaks of carelessness and saw one another bared to the quick, timid
with hunger for the wives and little ones behind.

There were a few like Prosser, in whom there was still the glamour of
the Northland and the mystery of the unknown, but they were scattered,
and in their eyes the anxious light was growing also.

Five months is a wearying time, and silent suspense will sap the
courage. If only one could banish worry; but the long, unbearable nights
when the mind leaps and scurries out into the voids of conjecture like
sparks from a chimney--well, it's then you roll in your bunk and your
sigh ain't from the snow-shoe pain.

A half-frozen man in an ice-clogged dory had brought us our last news,
one October day, just before the river stopped, and now, after five
months, the curtain parted again.

I saw McGill, the lawyer, in the line ahead of me and noted the grayness
of his cheeks, the nervous way his lips worked, and the futile,
wandering, uselessness of his hands. Then I remembered. When his letter
came the fall before it said the wife was very low, that the crisis was
near, and that they would write again in a few days. He had lived this
endless time with Fear stalking at his shoulder. He had lain down with
it nightly and risen with it grinning at him in the slow, cold dawn. The
boys had told me how well he fought it back week after week, but now,
edging inch by inch toward the door behind which lay his message, it got
the best of him.

I wrung his hand and tried to say something.

"I want to run away," he quavered. "But I'm afraid to."

When we got in at last we met men coming out, and in some faces we saw
the marks of tragedy. Others smiled, and these put heart into us.

Old man Tomlinson had four little girls back in Idaho. He got two
letters. One was a six-months-old tax-receipt, the other a laundry bill.
That meant three months more of silence.

When my turn came and I saw the writing of the little woman something
gripped me by the throat, while I saw my hands shake as if they belonged
to somebody else. My news was good, though, and I read it slowly--some
parts twice--then at last when I looked up I found McGill near me.
Unconsciously we had both sought a quiet corner, but he had sunk on to a
box. Now, as I glanced at him I saw what made me shiver. The Fear was
there again--naked and ugly--for he held one lonesome letter, and its
inscription was in no woman's hand. He had crouched there by my side all
this time, staring, staring, staring at it, afraid to read--afraid to
open it. Some men smile in their agony, shifting their pitiful masks to
the last, others curse, and no two will take their blows alike.

McGill was plucking feebly at the end of his envelope, tearing off tiny
bits, dropping the fragments at his feet. Now and then he stopped, and
when he did he shuddered.

"Buck up, old pal," I said.

Then, recognizing me, he thrust the missive into my hand.

"Tell me--for God's sake--tell me quick. I can't--No, no--wait! Not yet.
Don't tell me. I'll know from your face. They said she couldn't live--"

But she had, and he watched me so fiercely that when the light came into
my face he snatched the letter from me like a madman.

"Ah-h! Give it to me! Give it to me! I _knew_ it! I told you they
couldn't fool me. No, sir. I felt all the time she'd make it. Why, I
knew it in my marrow!"

"What's the date?" I inquired.

"September thirtieth," he said. Then, as he realized how old it was, he
began to worry again.

"Why didn't they write later? They must know I'll eat my heart out.
Suppose she's had a relapse. That's it. They wrote too soon, and now
they don't dare tell me. She--got worse--died--months ago, and they're
afraid to let me know."

"Stop it," I said, and reasoned sanity back into him.

Monty had taken his mail and run off like a puppy to feast in quiet, so
I went over to Eckert's and had a drink.

Sam winked at me as I came in. A man was reading from a letter.

"Go on. I'm interested," said the proprietor.

The fellow was getting full pretty fast and was down to the garrulous
stage, but he began again:

     "DEAR HUSBAND,--I am sorry to hear that you have been so
     unfortunate, but don't get discouraged. I know you will make a good
     miner if you stick to it long enough. Don't worry about me. I have
     rented the front room to a very nice man for fifteen dollars a
     week. The papers here are full of a gold strike in Siberia, just
     across Bering Sea from where you are. If you don't find something
     during the next two years, why not try it over there for a couple?"

"That's what I call a persevering woman," said Eckert, solemnly.

"She's a business woman, too," said the husband. "All I ever got for
that room was seven-fifty a week."

It seems I'd missed Montague at the store, but when the crowd came out
Ollie Marceau found him away in at the back, having gone there to be
alone with his letters. She saw the utter abandon and grief in his pose,
and the tears came to her eyes. Impulsively she went up and laid her
hand on his bowed head. She had followed the frontier enough to know the
signs.

"Oh, Mr. Prosser," she said, "I'm so sorry! Is it the little mother?"

"Yes," he answered, without moving.

"Not--not--" she hesitated.

"I don't know. The letters are up to the middle of December, and she was
very sick."

Then, with the quick sentiment of her kind, the girl spoke to him,
forgetting herself, her life, his prejudice, everything except the
lonely little gray woman off there who had waited and longed just as
such another had waited and longed for her, and, inasmuch as Ollie had
suffered before as this boy suffered now, in her words there was a sweet
sympathy and a perfect understanding.

It was very fine, I think, coming so from her, and when the first shock
had passed over he felt that here, among all these rugged men, there was
no one to give him the comfort he craved except this child of the
dance-halls. Compassion and sympathy he could get from any of us, but he
was a boy and this was his first grief, so he yearned for something
more, something subtler, perhaps the delicate comprehension of a woman.
At any rate, he wouldn't let her leave him, and the tender-hearted lass
poured out all the best her warm nature afforded.

In a few days he braced up, however, and stood his sorrow like the rest
of us. It made him more of a man in many ways. For one thing, he never
scoffed now at any of the nine women, which, taken as an indication, was
good. In fact, I saw him several times with the Marceau girl, for he
found her always ready and responsive, and came to confide in her rather
than in Martin or me, which was quite natural. Martin spoke about it
first.

"I hate to see 'em together so much," said he. "One of 'em is going to
fall in love, sure, and it won't be reciprocated none. It would serve
him right to get it hard, but if _she's_ hit--it'll be too dam' pitiful.
You an' I will have to combine forces and beat him up, I reckon."

The days were growing long and warm, the hills were coming bare on the
heights, while the snow packed wet at midday when we went into town to
sled out grub for the clean-up. We found everybody else there for the
same purpose, so the sap began to run through the camp. We were loading
at the trading-post the next day when I heard the name of Ollie Marceau.
It was a big-limbed fellow from Alder Creek talking, and, as he showed
no liquor in his face, what he said sounded all the worse. I have heard
as bad many a time without offense, for there is no code of loyalty
concerning these girls, but Ollie had got my sympathy, somehow, and I
resented the remarks, particularly the laughter. So did Prosser, the
Puritan. He looked up from his work, white and dangerous.

"Don't talk that way about a girl," said he to the stranger, and it made
a sensation among the crowd.

I never knew a man before with courage enough to kick in public on such
subjects. As it was, the man said something so much worse that right
there the front busted out of the tiger-cage and for a few brief moments
we were given over to chaos.

I had seen Whitewater walloped and I knew how full of parlor tricks the
kid was, but this time he went insane. He knocked that man off the
counter at the first pass and climbed him with his hobnails as he lay on
the floor. A fight is a fight, and a good thing for spectators and
participants, for it does more to keep down scurvy than anything I know
of, but the thud of those heavy boots into that helpless flesh sickened
me, and we rushed Prosser out of there while he struggled like a maniac.
I never saw such a complete reversal of form. Somewhere, away back
yonder, that boy's forefathers were pirates or cannibals or butchers.

When the fog had cleared out of his brain the reaction was just as
powerful. I took him out alone while the others worked over the Alder
Creek party, and all at once my man fell apart like wet sawdust.

"What made me do it--what made me do it?" he cried. "I'm crazy. Why, I
tried to kill him! And yet what he said is true--that's the worst of
it--it's true. Think of it, and I fought for her. What am I coming to?"

After the clean-up we came to camp, waiting for the river to break and
the first boat to follow. It was then that the suspense began to tell on
our partner. He read and reread his letters, but there was little hope
in them, and now, with no work to do, he grew nervous. Added to
everything else, our food ran short, and we lived on scraps of whatever
was left over from our winter grub-stake. Just out of cussedness the
break-up was ten days late, the ten longest days I ever put in, but
eventually it came, and a week later also came the mail. We needed food
and clothes, we needed whisky, we needed news of the great, distant
world--but all we thought of was our mail.

The boy had decided to go home. We were sorry to see him leave, too, for
he had the makings of a real man in him even if he shaved three times a
week, but no sooner was the steamer tied than he came plunging into my
tent like a moose, laughing and dancing in his first gladness. The
mother was well again.

Later I went aboard to give him the last lonesome good wishes of the
fellow who stays behind and fights along for another year. The big
freighter, with her neat staterooms and long, glass-burdened tables,
awoke a perfect panic in me to be going with him, to shake this cruel
country and drift back to the home and the wife and the pies like mother
made.

I found him on the top deck with the Marceau girl, who was saying
good-by to him. There was a look about her I had never seen before, and
all at once the understanding and the bitter irony of it struck me. This
poor waif hadn't had enough to stand, so Love had come to her, just as
Kink had predicted--a hopeless love which she would have to fight the
way she fought the whole world. It made me bitter and cynical, but I
admired her nerve--she was dressed for the sacrifice, trim and
well-curried as a thousand-dollar pony. Back of her smile, though, I saw
the waiting tears, and my heart bled. Spring is a fierce time for
romance, anyhow.

There wasn't time to say much, so I squeezed Monty's hand like a
cider-press.

"God bless you, lad! You must come back to us," I said, but he shook his
head, and I heard the girl's breath catch. I continued, "Come on, Ollie;
I'll help you ashore."

We stood on the bank there together and watched the last of him, tall
and clear-cut against the white of the wheel-house, and it seemed to me
when he had gone that something bright and vital and young had passed
out of me, leaving in its stead discouragement and darkness and age.

"Would you mind walking with me up to my cabin?" Ollie asked.

"Of course not," I said, and we went down the long street, past the
theater, the trading-post, and the saloons, till we came to the hill
where her little nest was perched. Every one spoke and smiled to her and
she answered in the same way, though I knew she was on parade and
holding herself with firm hands. As we came near to the end and her pace
quickened, however, and I guessed the panic that was on her to be alone
where she could drop her mask and become a woman--a poor, weak,
grief-stricken woman. But when we were inside at last her manner
astounded me. She didn't throw herself on her couch nor go to pieces, as
I had dreaded, but turned on me with burning eyes and her hands tight
clenched, while her voice was throaty and hoarse. The words came
tumbling out in confusion.

"I've let him go," she said. "Yes, and you helped me. Only for you I'd
have broken down; but I want you to know I've done one good thing at
last in my miserable life. I've held in. He never knew--he never knew. O
God! what fools men are!"

"Yes," I said, "you did mighty well. He's a sensitive chap, and if you'd
broken down he'd have felt awful bad."

"What!"

She grasped me by the coat lapels and shook me. Yes! That weak little
woman shook me, while her face went perfectly livid.

"'He'd have felt badly,' eh? Man! Man! Didn't you _see_! Are you blind?
Why, he asked me to go with him. He asked me to marry him. Think of
it--that great, wonderful man asked me to be his wife--me--Olive
Marceau, the dancer! Oh, oh! Isn't it funny? Why don't you laugh?"

I didn't laugh. I stood there, picking pieces of fur out of my cap and
wondering if ever I should see another woman like this one. She paced
about over the skin rugs, tearing at the throat of her dress as if it
choked her. There were no tears in her eyes, but her whole frame shook
and shuddered as if from great cold, deep set in her bones.

"Why didn't you go?" I asked, stupidly. "You love him, don't you?"

"You know why I didn't go," she cried, fiercely. "I couldn't. How could
I go back and meet his mother? Some day she'd find me out and it would
spoil his life. No, no! If only she hadn't recovered--No, I don't mean
that, either. I'm not his kind, that's all. Ah, God! I let him go--I let
him go, and he never knew!"

She was writhing now on her bed in a perfect frenzy, calling to him
brokenly, stretching out her arms while great, dry, coughing sobs
wrenched her.

"Little one," I said, unsteadily, and my throat ached so that I couldn't
trust myself, "you're a brave--girl, and you're his kind or anybody's
kind."

With that the rain came, and so I left her alone with her comforting
misery. When I told Kink he sputtered like a pinwheel, and every evening
thereafter we two went up to her house and sat with her. We could do
this because she'd quit the theater the day the boat took Prosser away,
and she wouldn't heed Eckert's offers to go back.

"I'm through with it for good," she told us, "though I don't know what
else I'm good for. You see, I don't know anything useful, but I suppose
I can learn."

"Now, if I wasn't married already--" I said.

"Humph!" snorted Kink. "I ain't so young as neither one of my pardners,
miss, but I'm possessed of rare intellectual treasures."

She laughed at both of us.

When a week had passed after the first boat went down with Prosser, we
began to look daily for the first up-river steamer, bringing word direct
from the outside world. It came one midnight, and as we were getting
dressed to go to the landing our tent was torn open and Montague tumbled
in upon us.

"What brought you back?" we questioned when we'd finished mauling him.

It was June, and the nights were as light as day in this latitude, so we
could see his face plainly.

"Why--er--" He hesitated for an instant, then threw back his head,
squared his great young shoulders, and looked us in the eyes, while all
his embarrassment fled. "I came back to marry Olive Marceau," said he.
"I came to take her back home to the little mother."

He stared out wistfully at the distant southern mountains, effulgent and
glorified by the midnight sun which lay so close behind their crests,
and I winked at Martin.

"She's left--"

"What!" He whirled quickly.

"--the theater, and I don't suppose you can see her until to-morrow."

Disappointment darkened his face.

"Besides," Kink added, gloomily, "when you quit her like a dog I slicked
myself up some, and I ain't anyways sure she'll care to see you
now--only jest as a friend of mine. Notice I've cut my whiskers, don't
you?"

We made Monty pay for that instant's hesitation, the last he ever had,
and then I said:

"You walk up the river trail for a quarter of a mile and wait. If I can
persuade her to come out at this hour I'll send her to you. No, you
couldn't find her. She's moved since you left."

"I wouldn't gamble none on her meetin' you," Martin said,
discouragingly, and combed out his new-mown beard with ostentation.

She was up the moment I knocked, and when I said that a man needed help
I heard her murmur sympathetically as she dressed. When we came to our
tent I stopped her.

"He's up yonder a piece," said I. "You run along while I fetch Kink and
the medicine-kit. We'll overtake you."

"Is it anything serious?"

"Yes, it's apt to be unless you hurry. He seems to think he needs you
pretty badly."

And so she went up the river trail to where he was waiting, her way
golden with the beams of the sun whose rim peeped at her over the
far-off hills. And there, in the free, still air, among the virgin
spruce, with the clean, sweet moss beneath their feet, they met. The
good sun smiled broadly at them now, and the grim Yukon hurried past,
chuckling under its banks and swiggering among the roots, while the song
it sang was of spring and of long, bright days that had no night.




McGILL




The ice was running when McGill arrived. Had he been two hours later he
might have fared badly, for the ramparts above Ophir choke the river
down into a narrow chute through which it hurries, snarling, and the
shore ice was widening at the rate of a foot an hour. Early in the day
the recorder from Alder Creek had tried to come ashore, but had broken
through, losing his skiff and saving his life by the sheer good luck
that favors fools and drunken men. It was October; the last mail had
gone out a fortnight previous; the wiseacres were laying odds that the
river would be closed in three days, so it was close running that McGill
made--six hundred miles in an open whip-sawed dory.

They heard him calling, once he saw the lights, and, getting down to the
water-level, they could make out his boat crunching along through the
thin ice at the outer edge. He was trying to force his way inward to a
point where the current would not move him, but the Yukon spun him like
a top, and it looked as if he would go past. Fortunately, however, there
happened to be a man in the crowd who had learned tricks with a lariat
back in Oklahoma; a line was put out, and McGill came ashore with his
bedding under one arm and a sheet-iron stove under the other. Stoves
were scarce that winter, and McGill was no tenderfoot.

They obtained their first good look at him when he lined up with the
crowd at Hopper's bar, ten minutes later, by which time it was known who
he was. He had a great big frame, with a great big face on top of it,
and, judging from his reputation, he had a great big heart to match them
both. Some of the late-comers recalled a tale of how he had lifted the
gunwales out of a poling-boat that was wedged in a timber-jam above
White Horse, and from the looks of his massive hands and shoulders the
tale seemed true. He was not handsome--few strong men are--but he had
level, blue eyes, rather small and deep set, and a jaw that made people
think twice before angering him, while his voice carried the rumbling
bass note one hears at the edge of a spring freshet when the boulders
are shifting.

"I missed the last boat from Circle," he explained, "so I took a chance
with the skiff."

"Looks like you'd be the last arrival before the trails open," offered
Hopper. "I don't guess there's nobody behind you?"

"I didn't pass anybody," said McGill, and it was plain from his smile
that he had made good time.

"Aim to winter here, Dan?"

"I do. Minook told me, four summers ago, that he'd found a prospect near
here, and I've always figgered on putting some holes down. But it looks
like I'm late."

"Oh, there's plenty of ground open. You've got as good a chance as the
balance of us."

"Any grub in camp?"

"Nope. Ophir was struck too late in the fall."

McGill laughed. "I didn't think there would be; but that's nothing new."

"Didn't you bring none?"

"Nary a pound. There's women and children at the Circle, and there
wasn't more than enough for them, so I pulled out."

"There's plenty below," Hopper assured him.

"How far?"

"We don't know yet. There's a boat-load of 'chekakos' bound for Dawson
somewhere between here and Cochrane's Landing. They'll be froze in now,
and tenderfeet always has grub. Soon's we get some more snow we'll do
some freightin'."

Before he retired that night McGill had bought a town lot, and a week
later there was a cabin on it, for he was a man who knew how to work.
Then, during the interval between the close of navigation and the
opening of winter travel he looked over the country and staked some
claims. He did not locate at random, but used a discrimination based
upon ten years' experience in the arctics, and when cold weather set in
he felt satisfied with his work. Men with half his holdings reckoned
their fortunes at extravagant figures; transfers of unproved properties
for handsome terms were common; millions were made daily, on paper.

Soon after the winter had settled, two strangers "mushed" in from
down-river. For ten days they had pulled their own sled through the
first dry, trackless snow of the season, and they were well spent, but
they brought news that the steamboat was in winter quarters a hundred
and fifty miles below. They assured McGill, moreover, that there was
plenty of food aboard, so, a day later, he set off on their back trail
with his dog-team. By now the melancholy autumn was gone, the air was
frozen clean of every taint, the frost made men's blood gallop through
their veins. It changed McGill into a boy again. His lungs ached from
the throbbing power within them, his loping stride was as smooth as that
of a timber-wolf, his loud, deep laughter caused the dogs to yelp in
answer.

When he finally burst out of the silence and into the midst of the
gold-seekers with tidings of the new camp only a hundred and fifty miles
away they shook off their lethargy and awoke to a great excitement. He
told all he honestly knew about Ophir, and with nimble fancies they
added two words of their own to every one of his. They stopped work upon
their winter quarters and made ready to push on afoot--on hands and
knees, if necessary. Here was a man who had made a fortune in one short
autumn, for with the customary ignorance of tenderfeet they perceived no
distinction between a mining claim and a mine. A gold-mine, they
reasoned, was worth anything one wished to imagine, from a hundred
thousand to a million; thirty gold-mines were worth thirty
millions--figure it out for yourself. The conservative ones cut the
result in half and were well satisfied with it. They were glad they had
come.

The steamboat captain offered McGill a bed in his own cabin, for the log
houses were not yet completed, and that night at supper the miner met
the rest of the big family. Among them was a girl. Once McGill had
beheld her, he could see none of the others; he became an automaton,
directing his words at random, but focusing his soul upon her. He could
not recall her name, for her first glance had driven all memory out of
his head, and during the meal he feasted his hungry eyes upon her,
feeling a yearning such as he had never before experienced. He did not
pause to argue what it foretold; it is doubtful if he would have
realized had he taken time to think, for he had never known women well,
and ten years in the Yukon country had dimmed what youthful
recollections he possessed. When he went to bed he was in a daze that
did not vanish even when the captain, after carefully locking the doors
and closing the cabin shutters, crawled under the bunk and brought forth
a five-gallon keg of whisky, which he fondled like a mother her babe.

"Wait till you taste it," crooned the old man. "Nothing like it north of
Vancouver. If I didn't keep it hid I'd have a mutiny."

He removed a steaming kettle from the stove, then, unearthing some sugar
from the chart-case, mixed a toddy, muttering: "Just wait, that's all.
You just wait!" With the pains of a chemist he divided the beverage into
two equal portions, rolled the contents of his own glass under his
tongue with a look of beatitude on his wrinkled features, then inquired,
"What did I tell you?"

"It's great," McGill acknowledged. "First real liquor I've tasted for
months." Then he fell to staring at the fire.

After a time he asked, "Who's the lady I was talking to?"

"The one with the red sweater?"

"Yes."

"Miss Andrews. Her first name is Alice."

"Alice!" McGill spoke it softly. "I--I s'pose she's married, of course?"

"No, _Miss_ Andrews."

McGill started. "I thought she was the wife of that nice-looking feller,
Barclay."

The captain grunted, and then after a moment added, "She's an actor of
some kind."

McGill opened his eyes in genuine astonishment. He opened his mouth
also, but changed his mind and fell to studying the flames once more.
"She's plumb beautiful," he said at length.

"All actors is beautiful," the captain remarked, wisely.

McGill slept badly that night, which was unusual for him, but when he
went to feed his dogs on the following morning he found Miss Andrews
ahead of him.

"What splendid creatures!" she said, petting them.

"Do you like dogs?" he queried.

"I love them. You know, these are the first I have ever seen of this
kind."

"Then you never rode behind a team?"

"No. I have only read about such things."

McGill summoned his courage and said, "Mebbe you'd like me to--give you
a ride?"

"_Would_ you? Oh, Mr. McGill!" She clapped her hands, and her eyes
widened at the prospect.

He noted how the brisk air had brought the blood to her cheeks, but
broke off the dangerous contemplation of her charms and fell to
harnessing the team, his fingers stiff with embarrassment. He helped her
into the basket-sled and then, at her request, tucked in the folds of
her coat. It was a novel sensation and one he had never dreamed of
having, for he would not have dared touch any woman without a command.

It was not much of a ride, for the trails were poor, but the girl seemed
to enjoy it, and to McGill it was wonderful. He felt that he was making
an awful spectacle of himself, however, and hoped no one had seen them
leave; he was so big and so ungainly to be playing squire, and, above
all, he was so old.

He could think of nothing to say on the excursion, but when she thanked
him upon their return he was more than paid for his misery. As they
drove up, Barclay was watching them from the high bank, and Miss Andrews
waved a mitten at him. Later, when McGill had left for a moment, the
young man began, sourly:

"Making a play for the old party, eh?"

"He isn't old," said Miss Andrews, carelessly.

"What's the idea?"

"I don't know that I have any idea. Why?"

"Humph! I'm interested--naturally."

"You needn't be. It's every one for himself up here, and you don't seem
to be getting ahead very fast."

"I see. McGill's due to be a millionaire, and I'm down and out," Barclay
sneered. "Well, we're neither of us children. If you can land him, more
power to you."

"I wouldn't stand in your way," said Miss Andrews, coldly, "and I don't
intend that you shall stand in mine."

"Is that the only way you look at it?" Barclay wore an ugly frown that
seemed genuine. She met it with a mere shrug, causing him to exclaim,
hotly, "If you don't care any more than that, I won't interfere." He
turned and walked away.

Those were wonderful days for McGill. Instead of hurrying back to his
work he loitered. With a splendid disregard of convention he followed
the girl about hourly and was too drunk with her smiles to hear the
comment his actions evoked. He had moments of despair when he saw
himself as a great, awkward bear, more aptly designed to frighten than
to woo a woman, but these periods of depression gave way to the keenest
delight at some word of encouragement from Alice Andrews. He did not
fully realize that he had asked her to marry him until it was all over,
but she seemed to understand so fully what was in his heart that she had
drawn it from him before he really knew what he was saying. And then the
joy of her acceptance! It stunned him. When he had finally torn himself
away from her side he went out and stood bareheaded under the northern
lights to let it sink in. There were no words in his vocabulary, no
thoughts in his mind, capable of expressing the marvel of it. The
gorgeous colors that leaped from horizon to zenith were no more glorious
than the riot that flamed within his soul. She loved him, Dan McGill,
and she was a white woman! When he thought how beautiful and young she
was his heart overflowed with a gentle tenderness which rivaled that of
any mother.

Still in a dream, he related the miracle to the steamboat captain, who
took the announcement in silence. This old man had wintered inside the
circle and knew something of the woman-hunger that comes to strong men
in solitude. He was observant, moreover, and had seen good girls made
bad by the fires of the frontier, as well as bad women made good by
marriage.

There being no priest nearer than Nulato, it was, perforce, a contract
marriage. A lawyer in the party attended to the papers, and it pleased
the woman to have Barclay sign as a witness. Then she and McGill set out
for Ophir, a trip he never forgot. The sled was laden with things to
make a bride comfortable, so they were forced to walk, but they might
have been flying, for all he knew. Alice was very ignorant of northern
ways, childishly so, and it afforded him the keenest delight to initiate
her into the mysteries of trail life. And when night drew near and they
made camp, what joy it was to hear her exclamations of wonder at his
adeptness! She loved to see his ax sink to the eye in the frozen fir
trunks and to join his shout when the tree fell crashing in a great
upheaval of white. Then when their tiny tent, nestling in some sheltered
grove, was glowing from the candle-light, and the red-hot stove had
routed the cold, he would make her lie back on the fragrant springy
couch of boughs while he smoked and did the dishes and told her shyly of
the happiness that had come upon him. He waited upon her hand and foot;
he stood between her and every peril of the wilds.

And while it was all delightfully bewildering to him, it was likewise
very strange and exciting to his bride. The deathly silence of the
bitter nights, illumined only by the awesome aurora borealis; the
terrific immensity of the solitudes, with their white-burdened forests
of fir that ran up and over the mountains and away to the ends of the
world; the wild wolf-dogs that feared nothing except the voice of their
master, and yet fawned upon him with a passion that approached
ferocity--it all played upon the woman's fancy strangely. For the first
time in her tempestuous career she was nearly happy. It was worth some
sacrifice to possess the devotion of a man like McGill; it was worth
even more to know that her years of uncertainty and strife were over.
His gentleness annoyed her at times, but, on the other hand, she was
grateful for the shyness that handicapped him as a lover. On the whole,
however, it was a good bargain, and she was fairly well content.

As for McGill, he expanded, he effloresced, if such a nature as his
could be said to bloom. He explored the hindermost recesses of his
being, and brought forth his secrets for her to share. He told her all
about himself, without the slightest reservation, and when he was done
she knew him clear to his last, least thought. It was an unwise thing to
do, but McGill was not a wise man, and the stories seemed to please her.
Above all, she took an interest in his business affairs, which was
gratifying. Time and again she questioned him shrewdly about his mining
properties, which made him think that here was a woman who would prove a
helpmate.

Their arrival at Ophir was the occasion for a rough, spontaneous welcome
that further turned her head. McGill was loved, and, once his townsmen
had recovered from their amazement, they did their best to show his wife
courtesies, which all went to strengthen her belief in his importance
and to add to her complacence.

McGill was ashamed of his cabin at first, but she surprised him with the
business-like manner in which she went about fixing it up. Before his
admiring eyes she transformed it by a few deft touches into what seemed
to him a paradise. Heretofore he had witnessed women's handiwork only
from a distance, and had never possessed a real home, so this was
another wonder that it took time to appreciate. Eventually he pulled
himself together and settled down to his affairs, but in the midst of
his tasks it would sometimes come over him with a blinding rush that he
was married, that he had a wife who was no squaw, but a white woman,
more beautiful than any dream-creature, and so young that he might have
been her father. The amazing strangeness of it never left him.

But the adolescence of Ophir was short. It quickly outgrew its age of
fictitious values, and its rapturous delusions vanished as hole after
hole was put to bed-rock and betrayed no pay. Entire valleys that were
formerly considered rich were abandoned, and the driving snows erased
the signs of human effort. Men came in out of the hills cursing the luck
that had brought them there. The gold-bearing area narrowed to a proved
creek or two where the ground was taken and where there were ten men for
every job; the saloons began to fill with idlers who talked much, but
spent nothing. One day the camp awakened to the fact that it was a
failure. There is nothing more ghastly than a broken mining-town, for in
place of the first feverish exhilaration there is naught but the wreck
of hopes and the ruin of ambitions.

McGill's wife was not the last to appreciate the truth; she saw it
coming even earlier than the rest. Once she had lost the first glamour
and fully attuned herself to the new life she was sufficiently
perceptive to realize her great mistake. But McGill did not notice the
change and saw nothing to worry about in the town's affairs. He had been
poor most of his life, and his rare periods of opulence had ended
briefly, therefore this failure meant merely another trial. Ophir had
given him his prize, greater than all the riches of its namesake, and
who could be other than happy with a wife like his? His very optimism,
combined with her own fierce disappointment, drove the woman nearly
frantic. She felt abused, she reasoned that McGill had betrayed her, and
at last owned to the hunger she had been striving vainly to stifle for
months past. Now that there was nothing to gain, why blind herself to
the truth? She hated McGill, and she loved another! There had never been
an instant when her heart had not called.

And then, to make matters worse, Barclay came. He had spent most of the
long winter at the steamboat landing, being too angry to show himself in
Ophir, but the woman-hunger had grown upon him, as upon all men in the
North, and it finally drew him to her with a strength that would have
snapped iron chains. Hearing, shortly after his arrival, that McGill was
out on the creeks and never returned until dark, he went to the cabin.
Alice opened the door at his knock, then fell back with a cry. He shut
out the cold air behind him and stood looking at her until she gasped:

"Why have you come here?"

"Why? Because I couldn't stay away. You knew I'd have to come, didn't
you?"

"McGill!" she whispered, and cast a frightened look over her shoulder.

"Does he know?"

She shook her head.

"I hear he's broke--like the rest." Barclay laughed mockingly, and she
nodded. "Have you had enough?"

"Yes, yes! Oh yes!" she wailed, suddenly. "Take me away, Bob. Oh, take
me away!"

She was in his arms with the words, her breast to his, her arms about
his neck, her hot tears starting. She clutched him wildly, while he
covered her face with kisses.

"Don't scold me," she sobbed. "Don't! I'm sorry, I'm sorry. You'll take
me away, won't you?"

"Hush!" he commanded. "I can't take you away; there's no place to go to.
That's the worst of this damned country. He'd follow--and he'd get us."

"You must, Bob! You _must_! I'll die here with him. I've stood it as
long as I can--"

"Don't be a fool. You'll have to go through with it now until spring.
Once the river is open--"

"No, no, no!" she cried, passionately.

"Do you want us to get killed?"

Mrs. McGill shivered as if some wintry blast had searched out her
marrow, then freed herself from his embrace and said, slowly: "You're
right, Bob. We must be very careful. I--I don't know what he might do."

That evening she met McGill with a smile, the first she had worn for
some time, and she was particularly affectionate.

Instead of returning down-river, Barclay found lodgings and remained in
Ophir. He was not the most industrious of men, and before long became a
familiar figure around the few public places. McGill met him frequently,
seeing which Barclay's fellow-passengers from below raised their
eyebrows and muttered meaningless commonplaces; then, when the younger
man took to spending more and more of his time at the miner's cabin,
they ceased making any comment whatever. These are things that wise men
avoid, and a loose tongue often leads to an early grave when fellows
like McGill are about. Some of the old-timers who had wintered with the
miner in the "upper country" shook their heads and acknowledged that
young Barclay was a braver man than they gave him credit for being.

Of course McGill was the last to hear of it, for he was of the simple
sort who have faith in God and women and such things, and he might have
gone on indefinitely in ignorance but for Hopper, who did not care much
for the Barclay person. The saloon-man, being himself uneducated and
rough, like McGill, cherished certain illusions regarding virtue, and
let drop a hint his friend could not help but heed. The husband paid for
his drink, then went back to the rear of the room, where he sat for an
hour or more. When he went home he was more gentle to his wife than
ever. He brooded for a number of days, trying to down his suspicion, but
the poison was sown, and he finally spoke to her.

"Barclay was here again this afternoon, wasn't he?"

She turned her face away to hide its pallor. "Yes. He dropped in."

"He was here yesterday, and the day before, too, wasn't he?"

"Well?"

"He'd ought to stay away; people are talking."

She turned on him defiantly. "What of it? What do I care? I'm lonesome.
I want company. Mr. Barclay and I were good friends."

"You're my wife now."

"Your wife? Ha! ha! Your wife!" She laughed hysterically.

"Yes. Don't you love me any more, Alice?"

She said nothing.

"I've noticed a change, lately, and--I can't blame you none, but if you
loved me just a little, if I had even that much to start on, I wouldn't
mind. I'd take you away somewhere and try to make you love me more."

"You'd take me away, would you?" the woman cried, gaining confidence
from his lack of heat. "Away, where I'd be all alone with you? Don't you
see I'm dying of lonesomeness now? That's what's the matter. I'm half
mad with the monotony. I want to see people, and live, and be amused.
I'm young, and pretty, and men like me. You're old, McGill. You're old,
and I'm young."

Her husband withered beneath her words; his whole big frame sagged
together as if the life had ebbed out of it; he felt weary and sick and
burned out. His brain held but one thought--Alice did not love him,
because he was old.

"Don't go on this way," he said, finally, to check her. "I suppose it's
true, but I've felt like a daddy and a mother to you, along with the
other feeling, and I hoped you wouldn't notice it. I don't reckon any
young man could care for you like that. You see, it's all the loves of
my whole life wrapped up together, and I don't see, I don't see what we
can do about it. We're married!" It was characteristic of him that he
could devise no way out of the difficulty. A calamity had befallen them,
and they must adjust themselves to it as best they could. In his eyes
marriage was a holy thing, an institution of God, with which no human
hands might trifle.

"No," he continued, "you're my wife, and so we've got to get along the
best way we can. I know you couldn't do anything wrong--you ain't that
kind." His eyes roved over the homely little nest and the evidences of
their married intimacy. "No, you couldn't do that."

"Then you won't make it any harder for me than you can help?"

"No." He rose stiffly. "You're entitled to a fair show at anything you
want. I don't like Barclay, but if you want him around, I won't object.
Try to be as happy as you can, Alice; maybe it'll all come out right.
Only--I wish you'd known it wasn't love before you married me." He put
on his cap and went out into the cold.

During the ensuing week or two he devoted himself to his work, spending
every daylight hour on his claim, in this way more than satisfying
Barclay and the woman, who felt that a great menace had been removed.
But Hopper determined that his friend should know all and not part of
the truth, for good men are rare and weak women in the way, so he put on
his parka and walked out to the place where McGill was working, and
there, under a bleak March sky, with the snow-flurries wrapping their
legs about, he told what he had learned. Hopper was a little man, but he
had courage.

"I've heard it from half a dozen fellers," he concluded, "and they'd
ought to know, because they come up on the same boat with them. Anyhow,
you can satisfy yourself easy enough."

McGill moistened his lips and, thanking his informant, said, "Now you'd
better hustle back to camp; we're due for a storm."

It was still early afternoon when he walked swiftly out of the gulch and
into the straggling little town. On his way down from the claim the
blizzard had broken, or so it seemed, for the narrow valley had suddenly
become filled with a whirling smother through which he burst like a ship
through a fog. When he emerged upon the flats he saw that it was no more
than a squall and the wind was abating again.

His moccasins made no sound as he came up to his own house, and the
first inkling of his presence that the two inside received was when the
door opened and he stood before them. Something in his bearing caused
his wife to clutch at the table for support, and Barclay to retreat with
his back to the opposite wall, his hand inside his coat.

McGill never carried a weapon, having yet to feel the need of one. He
spoke now in a harsh, cracked voice. "Take your hand off that gun,
Barclay."

[Illustration: "Take your hand off that gun, Barclay."]

"What's the matter with you?" the younger man questioned.

Mrs. McGill's eyes were wide with terror, her frame racked by
apprehension, when her husband turned upon her and asked:

"Is it true? Do you love--him?" He jerked his head in Barclay's
direction. "Answer me!" he rumbled, savagely, as she hesitated.

Her lips moved, and she nodded without removing her gaze from him.

"How long have you loved him?"

When she still could not master herself, he softened his voice: "You
needn't be scared, Alice. I couldn't hurt _you_."

"A long--time," she said, finally.

McGill leveled a look at the other man.

"That's right," Barclay agreed. "You might as well know."

"They tell me that you and her had--" McGill ground his teeth, and his
little eyes blazed--"that she didn't have no right to marry
without--telling me something about you."

The former answered through white lips: "Well? Everybody knew it except
you, and you could have found out. I'd have married her sometime,
myself, if you hadn't come along."

McGill's fingers opened slowly, at which the woman burst forth:

"No, no! Don't--do that. You can't blame him, Dan. I did it. Don't you
understand? _I'm_ the one. I loved him in 'Frisco, long before I saw
you, and I've loved him ever since. Take it out on me, if you want to,
but don't hurt him."

"I don't reckon I'd have minded it much if I'd known the truth at the
start," said McGill. "Most women have made mistakes at one time or
another, at least most of those I've known have. No, it ain't that, but
you married me knowing that you loved him all the time."

"I tried to quit," cried the wife. "I tried to, but I couldn't."

"And what's the rottenest of all"--McGill's voice was ugly again--"you
made him best man at the wedding, or just the same. He stood up with us.
Didn't you, Barclay?"

The wife flung herself into the breach once more with a self-sacrifice
that wrenched her husband's heart. "He didn't want to, but I made him. I
thought you had money, and I was mad at him for letting me go, so I
tried to hurt him. I wanted him to marry me, but he wouldn't, and I took
you. When it was over and I saw the kind of man you are I tried to love
you--honestly I did, but I couldn't. You're so--I--I couldn't do it,
that's all." She broke into a torrent of tears, holding herself on her
feet by an effort. Her wretched sobbing was the only sound in the cabin
for a time, then Barclay inquired:

"Well, what are you going to do?"

McGill turned to his wife, ignoring Barclay. "I guess I understand
things pretty well now, and I'm beginning to see your side. Of course I
never aimed to hurt _you_, Alice--I couldn't; but I aimed to kill this
man, and I will if he stays here." Over his shoulder he flung out,
quickly: "Oh, the gun won't help you none. You've got to go, Barclay."

"I'll go with him," cried Mrs. McGill, desperately. "If he goes, I'll
go, too."

"That's exactly what you've got to do. You can't stay here now, neither
of you. If he ain't able to take care of you, why, I will as long as I
live, but you've both got to go."

"It's the best course under the circumstances," Barclay agreed, with
relief. "We'll take the first boat--"

"You'll go to-day, now," said the husband, grimly, "before I have time
to think it over."

"But where?"

"To hell! That's where you're headed."

"We can't go afoot," the woman cried in a panic.

"I've got dogs! And don't argue or I'll weaken. I'm letting him go
because you seem to need him, Alice. Only remember one thing, both of
you--there ain't no town big enough to hold all three of us. Now go,
quick, before I change my mind, for if the sun ever goes down on Barclay
and me together, so help me God! it won't rise on both of us. There
ain't no place in the world that's big enough for him and me, no place
in the world."

McGill stood on the river-bank and watched them vanish into the ghostly
curtain that sifted slowly down from the heavens, and when they were
finally lost to view he turned back to his empty cabin. Before entering
he paused as usual to note the weather--it was a habit. He saw that the
sky was strangely leaden and low, and in spite of the fact that the
"quick" was falling rapidly, the air was lifeless and close. If McGill
was any judge, that squall had been but a warning, and foretold more to
follow. He sighed miserably at the thought of the night his wife would
have to face.

He cooked his supper mechanically, then sat for hours staring at it. The
wind rattling at his door finally roused him to the knowledge that his
fire was out and the room chilly. Being unable longer to bear the
silence and the mute evidences of her occupation that looked at him from
every side, he slipped into his parka and went down to Hopper's place,
where there were life and human voices at least.

The night was yelling with a million voices when he stepped out. The
bitter wind snapped his fur garment as if to rend it to ribbons, the
whirling particles of snow rasped his face like the dry grains from a
sand-blast. Boreas had loosed his demons, and they were lashing the
night into chaos. McGill felt a sudden tender concern for the woman, a
concern so great as almost to destroy his bitterness, but he reflected
that he had seen to loading the sled himself, and among the other
paraphernalia had included a tent and a stove. Unless Barclay was a
fool, therefore, Alice was perfectly safe. There was wood aplenty, and
the spruce forests offered shelter from the gale. The thought awakened a
memory of those night camps he had made on that dreamlike
wedding-journey and brought forth a groan. How old and spiritless he had
become; he could scarcely stand against the wind!

Of course the story had gone broadcast, hours before, for other eyes
than his had watched the man and woman take the outbound trail that
afternoon, so when he came stumbling into Hopper's place a sudden
silence fell. He went directly to the bar and called for straight
"hootch," to drive the cold from his bones, but, although it warmed his
flesh, his soul remained numb and frozen. Inside him was a great aching
emptiness that even Hopper's kindly words could not reach.

"Looks like the worst night we've had this year," said the proprietor.
"Better have a drink with me."

McGill's teeth rattled on the glass when he put it to his lips. "She's
gone!" he whispered, staring across the bar, "and I didn't kill him. I
couldn't--on her account."

Hopper nodded. "I'm awful sorry it came out this way, Dan."

McGill shivered and drew his head down between his gaunt shoulders.
"Talk to me, will you?" he begged. "I'm hit hard."

His friend did as he was directed, but a few minutes later in the midst
of his words the big man interrupted:

"There wasn't room for all of us here," he declared, fiercely. "I told
her that, but she wanted him worse than her own life, so I had to give
in."

They were still talking at midnight, after all but a few loiterers had
gone home, when they heard a man's voice calling from outside. An
instant later the front door burst open and a figure appeared; it was
Cochrane, the trader from down-river.

"Here! Give me a hand!" he bellowed through his ice-burdened beard, then
plunged back into the hurricane to reappear with a woman in his arms.

"I thought I'd never make it," he declared. "There's a man in the sled,
too. Get some 'hootch' and send for a doctor, quick."

McGill uttered a cry, while the hand with which he gripped the bar went
white at his pressure. "Where did you get them?" he questioned.

"Ten miles below," said Cochrane. "I was camped for the night when their
dogs picked up my scent. They were half dead when they got to me, and he
was in mighty bad shape, so I came through. I've been five hours on the
road."

Two men brought in Barclay, at which McGill flung out a long arm and
cried in a loud voice, "Is that man dead?"

No one answered, so he strode forward, only to have the weakened
traveler raise his head and say:

"No, I'm not dead, McGill. But we had to come back."

The wife was calling to her husband, wretchedly: "Don't do it, Dan. We
couldn't help it. We'll go to-morrow. We'll go. Please don't! We'll go."

The onlookers, knowing something of the tragedy, drew back, watching
McGill, who still stared into the face of the man who had robbed him of
everything.

"Do you remember what I told you?" he questioned, inflexibly.

Barclay nodded, and the woman shrilled again:

"Don't let him do it, men. _Don't!_"

"There ain't room for us here," went on McGill.

"Only to-night," supplicated his wife, the frost-bitten spots in her
cheeks no more pallid than the rest of her countenance. "He _can't_ go.
Don't you see he isn't able? Wait, Dan; I'll go if you want me to"--she
struggled forward. "I'll go, but he'll die if you send him out."

"It's always him, ain't it?" said the miner, slowly. "You seem to want
him pretty bad, Alice. Well, you can have him. And you can stay, both of
you." He drew his cap down over his grizzled hair and turned toward the
door, but Hopper saw the light in his eye and intercepted him.

"I'll go home with you, Dan," said he.

"I ain't going home."

"You mean--"

"There ain't room enough in Ophir for Barclay and me and the woman."

"My God, man, listen to that blizzard! It's suicide!"

But McGill only repeated, dully: "There ain't room, Hopper. There ain't
room!" and with the gait of an old man shambled to the door. When he
opened it the storm shrieked in glee and rushed in, wrapping him up to
the middle in its embrace. He closed the door behind him, then went
stumbling off into the night, and as he crept blindly forth upon the
frozen bosom of the river the bellowing wind wiped out his footprints an
arm's-length at his back.




THE BRAND




I


The valley was very still. No breath of wind had stirred it for many
days. It was smothered so heavily in snow that the firs were bent; even
the bare birch limbs carried precarious burdens, and when gravity
relieved some sagging branch the mass beneath welcomed the avalanche so
softly that the only sound was a whisper as the bough returned to its
position. The brooding cold had cleared the air of sound as it had of
moisture. No birds piped, there was no murmur of running water, no
evidence of animal life except an occasional wavering line etched into
the white by the feet of some tiny rodent.

The rolling hills were sparsely timbered, against an empty north sky a
jumble of saw-toothed peaks were limned like carvings, and everywhere
was the same unending hush of winter. The desolation was complete.

Yet there was life here, for spaced at regular intervals across the
gulch were mounds of white, each forming the lips of a rectangular
cavity resembling an open grave. They were perfectly aligned and
separated from each other by precisely thirty paces; surrounding each
was a clearing out of which freshly cut stumps protruded bearing snow
caps fashioned like the chapeau of a drum-major. There were six of these
holes, and a seventh was in process of digging. Over the last one a
crude windlass straddled and the heap of debris at its feet showed raw
and dirty against the snow. Out of the aperture a thin vapor rose
lazily, coating the drum and rope with rime; from the clearing a narrow
trail wound to a cabin beside the creek-bank.

McGill came out into the morning and with him came his three giant
malamutes, wolf-gray, shaggy, and silent like their master. He eyed the
drooping, white-robed forest and the desolate ridges that shut him in,
then said, in a voice harsh from disuse:

"Hello, people! Anything happened yet?"

He made it a practice to speak aloud whenever he thought of it, for the
hush of an arctic winter plays pranks with a person's mind, and there is
a certain effect of sanity in spoken words, senseless though they be.

After a moment he repeated his greeting: "Good morning, I said. Can't
you answer?" Then his cheeks flamed above his heavy beard and he yelled,
loudly, "_Good morning_, you ----! Can't you say anything?" He glared
reproachfully at a giant spruce from the lower limbs of which depended
the quarters of several caribou. "Tom, you ain't gone back on me? Say
hello. You and me are friends. Speak up!" After a time he shook his
head, murmuring: "It's no use. I've got to make all the noise there is.
If it would only blow--or something. I'd like to hear the wind."

He strode toward the prospect hole, the dogs following sedately, their
feet making no sound in the snow. They, too, felt the weight of
isolation and never left his side. Arriving at the dump, McGill stood
motionless beside the windlass for a long time, staring into nothingness
with eyes that were strained and miserable. When the cold bit him he
roused himself and addressed the steam-filled opening dispiritedly:

"So, you didn't freeze up on me. That's good. I'll get bed-rock to-day
and show you up for a dirty cheat. Pay! Bah! there ain't none!"

He descended a ladder at one end of the shaft, gathered the charred
logs, tied them into a bundle with the end of the windlass rope, then,
mounting the ladder, hoisted them to the surface. Next, hooking on the
ungainly wooden bucket, he lowered it, after which he descended for a
second time.

There began a long and monotonous series of ascents and descents, for
every bucket of gravel meant two journeys the full depth of the pit. It
was a tedious and primitive process, involving a tremendous waste of
effort, but he was methodical, and each time the tub rose it carried a
burden sufficient to tax the strength of two men. He handled it easily,
however, and by midday had removed the thawed ground and scraped a
sample from close to frost. He laid a light fire, then took the heaping
gold-pan under his arm and set off for his cabin, accompanied by the
malamutes.

When he had prepared and eaten his lunch he seated himself before his
panning-tub, a square box half filled with water melted from the creek
ice, and began the process of testing his prospect.

Having worked down the gravel and sediment to a half-handful, he spread
it with a movement of his wrists, leaving stranded at the tail of the
black sand a few specks of yellow. These he eyed for a moment before
washing them away.

"Too light--as usual," he said, aloud. The dogs stirred and raised their
heads. "Always pretty near, but not quite. But it's here, somewhere, and
I'll get it if I can last out this damned silence. That rim-rock didn't
lie. And old Pitka didn't lie, either. Nobody lies except--women." He
scowled at some remembrance, his whole face retreated behind a bristling
mask of ferocity. He sat motionless over the tub of muddy water until
the fire died out of the stove and the chill warned him that it was time
to resume work.

For many weeks--how many McGill neither knew nor cared--he had pursued
the routine of his search. He had penetrated this valley alone, unseen,
in the late autumn, and every day since then he had labored steadily,
mechanically, almost without physical sensation, for all feeling was
centered in his memory, which never gave him time to consider his
surroundings. Spring was coming now--the sun was already peeping over
the southern hills in the middle of its daily journey--and during this
time there had been but two interruptions which had roused him from his
apathy. One had occurred when, in quest of fresh meat, he had discovered
that he had neighbors ten miles to the west. He had seen their camp from
the divide, then had turned and slunk away, cursing them for intruding
upon his privacy. The other was when a herd of caribou had crossed. At
that time he had given brief rein to his desire to kill, seeing ahead of
his sights the face of the man who had sent him into the wilderness. He
could have bagged half the herd, but checked himself in time, realizing
that it was not Barclay at whom he leveled his rifle, but defenseless
animals, the carcasses of which were useless.

Barclay! The name maddened McGill. He wondered dully why he continued to
work so steadily when Barclay had robbed him of the need for gold. The
answer to this, he supposed, was easier than the answer to those other
questions that forever troubled him--he had to do something or die of
his thoughts, and he knew no other work than this. Even in his busiest
hours memories of Barclay and the woman obtruded themselves.

It was after dark when he had fired the hole a second time and returned
to his cabin. He had not reached bed-rock and this fact irritated
him--he was growing very irritable, it seemed. Lighting his pipe of rank
"sheep-dip" tobacco when the supper-dishes were finally cleaned and the
dogs fed, he once more prepared for the profitless process of panning.
But he noticed that this sample of gravel was different to any he had
yet found, being of a peculiar ashen color. He felt it with practised
fingers and discovered it to be gritty and full of sediment.

"Feels good," he said, aloud, "but I'll bet it's barren."

He had panned so many samples that all eagerness, all curiosity as to
the outcome, had long since disappeared, therefore his movements were
purely perfunctory as he dissolved the clay lumps and washed the gravels
down. He paused half-way through the operation to dry his hands and
relight his pipe, then fell to thinking of Barclay and the woman once
more, and remained so for a long time. When he resumed his task it was
with glazed, unseeing eyes. He was about to dump the last dregs
carelessly when something just slipping over the edge of the pan caught
his eye and caused him to tilt the receptacle abruptly.

The breath whistling in his throat roused the dogs. McGill closed his
eyes for an instant, then reached unsteadily for the candle. A movement
of his wrist ran the water across the pan bottom and spread the black
sand thinly. Instantly there leaped out against the black metal a heap
of bright, clean, yellow particles which lay as if glued together.

"Coarse gold! Coarse gold!" he whispered, then cursed in the weak,
meaningless manner of men under great excitement. Not trusting himself
to hold the pan, he set it upon the table, but without removing his eyes
from it. When his nerves had steadied he ran the prospect down, all the
time muttering in his beard. He dried it over the fire, blew the iron
sand free with his breath, then pushed the particles into a heap,
striving to estimate their value.

"There's half an ounce," he said, finally. "Eight dollars a pan! God!
that's big! Big! It's another Klondike." He rose and ran bareheaded out
into the night, followed by the dogs, then stood staring at the smoke as
it ascended vertically above his shaft, like a giant night-growing plant
of some kind. He was tempted to descend the ladder and tear the
crackling logs apart, but thought better of it. Swinging his eyes along
the valley rim that stood out black against the aurora, he lifted his
long arms. "It's mine, all mine! Understand?" He cried the words loudly,
wildly, as if challenging the silence. "It's no good to me, but it's
mine, and, by God, I'll keep it!"

McGill reached bed-rock the next evening and spent most of the night
panning the pile of scrapings he had collected from the bottom of the
pit. If the top of the streak had been rich, the lower concentration was
amazing. Every seam in the shattered limestone, which stood on end like
sluice riffles, contained little flattened pumpkin-seeds of gold; they
lay embedded in the clay stringers like plums in a pudding or as if some
lavish hand had inserted them there, as coins are slipped into the slot
of a child's savings-bank. He could see them before the dirt was half
washed, but took a supreme pleasure, nevertheless, in watching the
yellow pile grow as the sediment disappeared. A baking-powder can was
half filled when he had finished; it told him unmistakably the magnitude
of his riches. He was a wealthy man, wealthier than he had ever dreamed
of being there was more where this came from and the gulch lay
unappropriated from end to end. Fortune had come in a day, and he would
never want so long as he lived. His thoughts were wild and chaotic, for
he was half mad from the silence.

But what use to make of his discovery he hardly knew, since he had slunk
away from the world, ablaze with hatred for his fellow-men, intending to
live alone for the rest of his days. His grudge was as bitter now as
then, and he determined, therefore, to keep his find a secret. That
would be a grim, if unsatisfactory, sort of revenge, he reflected. He
would take what he wished, and let other men wear out their lives
searching unsuccessfully. Those strangers to the westward, for instance,
would toil and suffer through the long winter, then leave discouraged.
There was money here for them and for hundreds--thousands--like them,
but he decided to guard his secret and to let it die with him.

McGill pictured the result of this news if he gave it out; the stampede,
the headlong rush that would bring men from every corner of the North.
He saw this silent valley bared of its brooding forest and filled with
people; he saw a log city in the flats down by the river; he heard the
bass blasts of steamboats, the shrilling of saw-mills, the sound of
music from dance-halls, the click of checks and roulette-balls, the
noise of revelry--

"No! No! _No!_" He rose and shouted into the empty silence of his cabin.
"I won't do it! I won't! I won't!"

But the voices called to him all through the night.

He rose early, for they would not let him rest, and during the darkness
a terrible hunger had grown upon him. It was the hunger for
companionship, for speech. His secret was too great for imprisonment, it
threatened to burst the confines of the valley by its own tremendous
force; he knew he could never sleep with it, for it would smother him;
vampire-like, it would suck the life from his veins and the reason from
his brain.

When he had eaten he pocketed the baking-powder tin, slipped into his
snow-shoes and, crossing the gulch, climbed the westward hills that hid
his neighbors. The dogs went with him.




II


News of the John Daniels strike reached Ophir in July, when a ragged,
unkempt man arrived in a poling-boat. He was one of the party that had
camped west of McGill, and he ate a raw potato with the ravenous
appetite of an animal while waiting for his first meal at the Miner's
Rest. Between mouthfuls he gave the word that set the town ablaze.

When he had bought a ton of grub at the A. C. store and weighed out
payment in bright pumpkin-seed gold he went to Hopper's saloon and
handed the proprietor a folded paper.

Hopper read it uncomprehendingly.

"This is a location notice, recorded in my name," the latter said,
turning the document uncomprehendingly as if to see if it contained a
message on the reverse side.

The stranger nodded. "Number Four Above, on John Daniels Creek. John
staked for you, and told me to tell you to come. We've struck it rich."

Hopper's hand shook; he stared at the speaker in bewilderment. "John
Daniels? I don't seem to remember him."

"He's a big slab-sided man with a deep voice and eyes like ice."

The listener started. "Is he--skookum?"

"Stronger 'n any two men--"

"God! It's--McGill!"

"I thought so, but I never saw him only once--that was in Circle. He's
changed now--got a beard. He said you done him a favor once. You're his
friend, ain't you?"

"I am."

"What's the trouble with him?" There was a pause. "You can tell me. He
put me and my five pardners in on his strike. I'm taking grub to him and
the others."

"Oh, it was about a woman, of course. It always is. Everybody here knows
the story. She was no good, except to look at. Feller named Barclay
brought her into the country, but Dan didn't know it, so he up and
marries her. She thought he had money, and when she found he was broke
like the rest of us she and Barclay began cuttin' up again. It was
rotten. I came near putting Barclay away, but figgered Dan wouldn't like
nobody to do his work, so I told him. He went out to clean the slate,
but found his wife was crazy about the skunk and always had been, so he
sent 'em away together. He done it for her sake, but he warned 'em to
stay off his trail, because no camp was big enough to hold all three of
'em. It was blizzardy, and what did the blame' fools do but get caught
ten miles below here. Cochrane brought 'em back that night on his sled.
McGill was here, right where you're standing, when they were lugged in.
When he seen Barclay he went after him again, figgerin', I suppose, that
God was disgusted with his proposition and had sent the feller back to
be finished."

"Good!" said the stranger. "And he got him, eh?"

"No! Barclay wasn't more 'n half dead, and the woman fell to beggin' for
his life again. She appealed to all of us. McGill must have loved her
more 'n we give him credit for, because when he saw that neither one of
'em was able to leave, he left instead. He walked right out of that door
into the wickedest storm we had that season, and we never seen him
again. Everybody thought he froze or the wolves got him. That was a year
ago last winter."

[Illustration: "Barclay wasn't more 'n half dead, and the woman fell to
beggin' for his life again."]

"What become of the woman?"

"Oh, her and Barclay left for Dawson on the first boat. I guess they saw
we didn't enjoy 'em here."

"And Barclay? Didn't nobody offer to bump him off?" The ragged stranger
was incredulous.

"No, we just left him and the woman alone. Most of us was kind of sorry
for her."

"Sorry? Why?"

"Well--" Hopper hesitated. "I don't think she exactly understood what
she was doin'. You know the first winter up here is hard on tenderfeet,
especially women. Most of 'em act mighty queer before they ca'm down.
She'd have come to herself if McGill had given her time."

"Hm-m! It's too late now." Both men nodded. "When 'll you leave for John
Daniels Creek?"

"When? _Now!_ I've got enough of this camp, and I'll have these
bar-fixtures packed in two hours."

       *       *       *       *       *

McGill--or John Daniels, as he chose to call himself--saw his dream come
true. The first stampeders came in August; gaunt fellows worn by
sleepless days and nights during which they had fought the swift waters
and the fear of pursuit. They were followed by a tiny river boat, then
an A. C. packet, loaded heavy and carrying Hopper with his bar-fixtures
and fifteen barrels of whisky. She had been aground a hundred times and
had passed other stranded craft laden with men who cursed her as she
gained the lead. A city of tents sprang up on the flats; it changed to
one of cabins when the first snow flew. John Daniels Creek was overrun,
at nights its tortuous course was lit by glowing fires, smoke hung above
it constantly, it became pitted with prospect holes. Trails were broken
to adjoining creeks where similar scenes were enacted. But of all who
came, few saw, and almost none spoke to, John Daniels himself, for he
never went to town and there was no welcome at his cabin. Of course his
name was on every tongue, but he toiled underground by day and hid
himself by night. Sometimes Hopper, on his way to or from Number Four
Above, would stop over and spend an evening with him, but not often.

Meanwhile great ash-gray pay dumps grew upon Discovery, and there were
rumors of a fabulous bed-rock, inlaid with gold, but Daniels did all his
own sampling, so there was no way of verifying the reports. When the
spring sluicing was finished it was said that he had cleaned up half a
million.

Daniels himself, huge, gaunt, gray-bearded, and silent, saw his gold
loaded aboard the first steamer and accompanied it to the
"outside"--this being his first trip to the States in ten years.

During his absence the new camp of Arcadia grew, for its fame had
spread. It changed from a formless cluster of log shacks to a small city
of sawed lumber and paint. One season had made the wilderness into a
frontier town, the next made of it a metropolis. With the current that
flowed thither from the distant camps came the scum of the north
country. Following the first tide of venturesome, strong-limbed men came
the weaklings, the maimed and crooked of body and soul, the parasites
and idlers. Among these there were women of the customary kind and a
number of men who lived upon their earnings. Barclay was one of them.

Arcadia was in the fullest riot of its growth when John Daniels
returned, late in the autumn. He had expected to find a change, but he
was unprepared for the startling transformation that greeted his eyes.
It stirred him deeply, for the town was his, he had made it, his hands
had given it life. He wondered if this could be his desolate
camping-place of two seasons before. Where was the melancholy forest?
the brooding silence? As he walked up the front street past the painted
stores the vigorous life and optimism of the place electrified him; he
heard laughter and music, the tinkle of pianos from the dance-halls, the
sounds of revelry. The air was filled with clamor, it was pungent with
smoke and with the manifold odors of a city. Everywhere was activity and
haste.

Of course the news of his return spread swiftly, for he was a personage,
but before the curious could mark him he had left for the creek that
bore his name, where a hundred men were preparing to drift out Discovery
pay-streak under his supervision. He remained there a month, during
which the first gray snows turned white and brought that peculiar
loneliness, that depression of spirit which marks the beginning of
winter.

Then one day he decided to go to town. The impulse surprised him, for he
had meant to shun the place, as always, but his summer in the world
outside had worked a change and something within him hungered for
companionship, the glare of lights, the sight of animated faces. Then,
too, he was curious to examine this town of his at closer range.

It was worth seeing, he decided proudly, during his inspection; it was a
splendid, healthy camp. He walked the front street, then prowled through
the regions behind. There were women in this part of Arcadia, and these
he regarded distrustfully, although he was more than once arrested by a
glimpse of some cozy home, and stood staring until warned by the frowns
of indignant housewives that his presence was suspicious. He remembered
another cabin like these--his own. He had never quite grown accustomed
to its white curtains and china dishes and similar delights, any more
than he had grown accustomed to the presence of that wonderful,
mysterious creature who had filled the place with light. It was all part
of another life, a bewildering dream too agreeable to last.

In the course of his wanderings, however, he came into a different
district, one which offended him sorely. Immediately behind the saloons
he found a considerable cluster of meaner shacks which were inhabited by
women and yet which were not homes. These gaudily curtained houses
huddled close together, as if for moral support or as if avoiding
contact with their surroundings; they crouched in the shelter of the
gilded dance-halls, seeking a sort of protection in one another's
disreputable company. From some of the windows haggard faces smiled at
Daniels, and he heard sounds of a merrymaking that were particularly
offensive at this hour. Until this moment he had regarded Arcadia with
fatherly pride, and had not dreamed it was wicked, hence this discovery
enraged him. He was not a sensitive man, having trod the frontier where
vice is naked, but something about the rotten core of this new community
sickened him. It reminded him of a child diseased.

And then, as if to point the comparison, he saw a child, a tiny, fat,
round-faced person leading a puppy by a string.

Now, women were strange to John Daniels, since there had been but one in
his life, and he had possessed her only briefly, but children were
mysterious, incomprehensible creatures; phenomena which excited at once
his awe and his amazement. They made him ill at ease; he had never
touched one, with the possible exception of an Indian papoose, now and
then, therefore his present meeting constituted an experience--almost an
adventure. It was a white child, too, and it gazed at him with the
disconcerting calmness of a full-grown person. Daniels was both
embarrassed and shocked at its presence in this locality. He hesitated,
then summoned his courage and said, timidly:

"Say, kid, ain't you lost?"

The child continued to stare at him in unaffected wonder, leaving him
painfully conscious of his absurd size and forbidding appearance. He
feared that once it had overcome its first amazement it would begin to
cry and thus cover him with ignominy. But, happily for him, the puppy
experienced none of its owner's doubts and uncertainties; it flattened
its round stomach, thumped its soft paws upon the sidewalk, then
approached the giant in a delirious series of wobbly leaps, wiggling an
eloquent, if awkward, declaration of friendship.

"Fine dog-team you're driving, sonny!" Daniels smiled, congratulating
himself upon an admirable display of wit, only to realize with a start
that he had made a mistake. Some sixth sense informed him that this was
not a boy. It was a humiliating error.

"Say, missie, you--you don't belong here. You're plumb off your trail.
That's a cinch!" He cast a worried glance over his shoulder and saw a
hideous blanched face smile at him between a pair of red curtains. He
glared back at the woman, and his cheeks grew hot. Meanwhile the little
girl continued her unwinking examination.

She wore a ridiculous fur parka, scarcely larger than Daniels's cap, and
tiny mukluks that made her legs look shorter and fatter than they were.
Her mittens were the littlest things he had ever seen and he was
regarding them wonderingly when she amazed him by approaching and laying
one in his hand.

Now, this frank and full declaration of friendship reduced Daniels to a
helpless condition; he had never been more troubled in his life. He was
vaguely frightened, and yet he thrilled in an unaccountable manner at
the touch. He was half minded to withdraw his hand from his glove and
retreat, leaving it in her possession, but thought again of these evil
surroundings, and of the responsibility that had devolved upon him with
her surrender. In the midst of his dumbness the young lady burst into a
bubbling and intimate recital of her adventures, which doubtless would
have been perfectly intelligible to her mother, but which left the
discoverer of John Daniels Creek floundering for a translation.

He concealed his disgraceful ignorance by an easy assumption of
understanding. He nodded, he winked, he grinned. He eyed the
infinitesimal hand that lay in his, then gingerly removed his own glove
the better to safeguard its treasure, whereupon the small mitten
promptly closed over one of his big knuckled fingers. Daniels gasped and
held his digit as rigid as a pick-handle. Escape was no longer possible.

Having finished her recital the tot burst into a funny gurgle which
plainly established a deep and undying intimacy between them, then, like
all maidens who have pledged their affections, she made plain her
readiness to accompany her protector to the end of the world.

But the puppy held back and delayed progress as effectively as a ship's
anchor, so, fearing to exert too great a strain upon his extended
finger, Daniels gave the animal bodily into her embrace. One short arm
encircled the dog's neck, whereupon, as if by habit, it limply resigned
itself to misery. The three went slowly out of that sin-ridden place,
the man dazed and delighted, the child loquacious and trustful, the
puppy with lolling tongue and legs protruding stiffly.

Daniels had mastered many dialects in his time, from Chinook to Pidgin
English, but to save himself he could make nothing out of this language.
Some words were plain, but they were lost in a bubbling flow of strange,
moist, lisping articulations that left the general meaning obscure.

She answered all his questions eagerly, fully, and he acknowledged:

"She knows what she's sayin', all right, but I'm as rattled as a
tenderfoot."

Nevertheless he derived a preposterous delight from this experience,
until he realized that they were wandering aimlessly. Then thoughts of a
possible encounter with a distracted parent filled him with such dismay
that he appealed to the first woman he met.

"Lady! If you know where this baby lives--"

"Certainly I know."

"Then take her home. Her mother'll think I'm a kidnapper." Daniels
perspired at the thought.

The woman laughingly accepted the responsibility of a full explanation,
but as she lifted the child it turned up its face to Daniels, quite as a
matter of course. The rosebud lips awaited him, yet he did not
understand. He inquired, blankly:

"_Now_ what does she want?"

"A kiss. Don't you, dearie?"

"God'lmighty!" breathed the man. Then he lowered his bearded face.

He was trembling when the strangers had gone; he felt those moist baby
lips against his and the sensation almost overcame him. He didn't like
the woman's appearance, but she seemed tender-hearted and--there was no
better way of insuring the safety of his little charge than to give her
over.

But that kiss! It remained upon his lips more fragrant, more holy than
anything he had ever conceived. It left him conscious of his own
uncleanliness and shortcomings.

Still in a daze, he looked down at his index finger, which remained
rigid; it was blue with the cold, but he felt nothing except the clasp
of a tiny woolen mitt.

"_Well!_" he exploded. "I--don't _seem_ to be dreaming. She liked
me--she must of--or she wouldn't of kissed me. She sure did, and I--God!
I'd trade Discovery for another one."

He felt no further interest in Arcadia; he thought only of the child and
the amazing adventure that had come to him; he could think of nothing
else during the afternoon. More than once he touched his lips timidly
with his tongue and bared his hand to stare at his big finger.

When he had dined that evening he began a leisurely round of the saloons
and gambling-halls, pausing in each to invite every one to drink, as
befitted a man of wealth. He played, more or less, without knowing
whether he won or lost, for his thoughts were directed in other and
stranger channels.

The Elite was the most pretentious place of amusement in Arcadia and it
was running full blast when he strolled in, late that night. The show
was over in the theater, but a dance was going on. Beyond the people at
the gambling-tables he saw swiftly moving figures and heard the caller's
shouts through the rhythmic beat of the orchestra.

He looked on with some interest until he could engage the attention of a
bartender, then said:

"Call everybody up for a drink."

When the fellow eyed him distrustfully he explained:

"I'm John Daniels."

He was amused at the instant, almost ludicrous change of expression, and
at the alacrity with which the crowd responded to his invitation. They
stampeded, the games were deserted, the "sleepers" roused themselves,
even the dancers came trooping forth with his name upon their lips. The
music ended discordantly and the musicians followed them. The long bar
was lined six deep by people who elbowed one another for a glimpse of
the famous John Daniels. Those who succeeded beheld a huge,
grim-featured man, bearded to the cheek-bones, who seemed deaf to their
remarks and heedless of their stares. His hair was long and gray, his
eyes were small and bright and hard; he looked like a Mormon elder.

It took time to serve such an assemblage, and during the delay Daniels
stood motionless, vaguely resenting this curiosity. When the bartender
said "All set!" he raised his glass and exclaimed, "Drink hearty!"

As the glass left his lips his eyes ran down the bar and along the bank
of faces, clear to the end, where the dance-hall girls had squeezed
themselves in. There they rested, and widened.

His hand fell heavily, crushing the glass beneath it, for facing him,
clinging to the rail as if about to fall, stood his wife. Their eyes met
fairly. Daniels saw in hers the first flaming light of recognition, then
that expression of deathly terror that he remembered; he felt the floor
sinking, saw the near-by figures whirling, heard the clamor die.

After his first start not a muscle of his face moved, but his eyes began
slowly to search through the crowd as if for some one, and, seeing that,
she understood. With a hand to her throat she groped her way blindly out
of the crush, then made for the rear, but her knees forsook her and she
paused, leaning against the wall. It never occurred to her that she
might escape.

She knew without looking when he came toward her. He spoke in an
emotionless tone, saying, "Come!" and she followed, half
swooning--followed him up the stairs to the curtained boxes that ran
round the gallery.

When they were alone, she faced him, managing to utter: "So! _You_--are
John Daniels! They said you were dead."

She expected some violence--death, perhaps, but he only looked at her
silently with an expression she could not read. She felt she must
scream. She swayed, her eyes were filmed with terror.

"Well! Why don't you do it, McGill? Why don't you--?" she cried,
hysterically.

"Where is Barclay?" he inquired.

"He's here--somewhere. We came three weeks ago--We--I didn't know--"

He saw that she was not the woman he had known: she was frail, broken;
her fluttering hands were thin and bloodless; she had no spirit.

"So! He's got you working, eh? You're one of these--_rustlers_!"

"I had to do something. All I know is stage work."

"This ain't stage work!"

She nodded wearily. "He made me go the--limit."

"_Made_ you! Did you get a divorce?"

"N-no!"

Daniels cursed so harshly that she flinched, although she had long since
grown accustomed to profanity. Then he turned away, but, reading murder
in his face, she seized him with fingers that were like claws.

"Wait! Don't do that!"

"You love him, don't you?"

"No, no! But--he's bad now, and--and probably drunk. He'll kill you,
McGill. He's bad, I tell you--tough--don't you understand? He's bad, and
he's made me bad, too, that's why I'm here. He's not worth it, McGill;
neither am I!"

"You can't stay in Arcadia, neither of you. I got out of Ophir and let
you alone, but this is my town; I can't leave it."

"We'll go," she cried, wringing her hands; "anyhow, I'll go, if you'll
help me. But I'll need help--Oh, God! Yes, I'll need help! You don't
know--You and he can settle things afterward."

"You want to leave him?"

"I've tried to break away, I've been trying ever since that first day in
Ophir, but he won't let me. I kept trying--until I learned better; now
I'm afraid. He's broken me, Dan, but you'll help me to leave him, won't
you?"

After a time the husband answered, more to himself than to her: "I guess
I'm even with _you_, anyhow. You've gone to hell, hand in hand with him.
I won't interfere--not that way. I s'pose he beats you?"

She nodded, and saw his bearded face twitch. "Yes, and he'll make me
like these other women--you understand? I've fought until I'm tired,
worn out. I'm in a trap, McGill, and--I'm afraid--afraid for the little
soul I have left."

"You sprung the trap," he told her, bitterly.

But his wife had seen a way to freedom and clutched at it with desperate
persistence.

"Listen! I want to talk to you. Come with me for a minute."

"Come? Why?"

"Never mind. Oh, it's all right. You owe me something, for I still have
your name. Do this for me, please! It's only a step."

He yielded to her imploring eyes and followed grudgingly down the back
stairs and into the night, wondering the while at his own weakness. She
led the way, bareheaded, heedless of the cold. They were in that
ill-favored district he had penetrated earlier in the day, but if it had
been offensive then it was doubly so now, with its muffled sounds of
debauchery and wickedness. She paused finally, fumbling at the door of
one miserable structure, whereupon he growled:

"You live here? You're worse than--"

"'Sh-h!" She laid a finger on her lips as she let him in and lit a lamp,
then she beckoned him toward the single rear room, shading the light
with one hand and inviting him silently to peer over her shoulder.

The surprise of what he saw struck McGill dumb, for there in a crib lay
the tiny lass who had befriended him that afternoon. Her lips were
pouting sweetly, her face was flushed with dreams, one plump little arm
was outside the covers, and just below the doubled fist McGill saw the
deep dimpled bracelet of babyhood. Her presence made of these squalid
surroundings a place of purity; the room became suddenly a shrine.

"The son-of-a-gun!" said McGill, inanely, then his face darkened once
more. "I know her," he announced, grimly. "What are _you_ doing with
that kid--in this hell-hole?"

From the alleyways near by came a burst of ribaldry, but the woman's
face was shining when she answered:

"Why, she's mine--my baby. We have no other home."

He did not--could not--speak, so she said, simply:

"Now you see why I must leave Barclay, and--all this."

"_Your_ baby!" McGill's eyes dropped to the index finger of his right
hand, then he touched his lips curiously.

"Barclay won't let me run straight. I've always wanted to, and now I
must, for the baby's sake." When this brought no response she continued,
with growing intensity, but in a lowered tone. "She'll begin to
understand things before long. She'll hear about him--and me. Then what?
She'll think for herself, and she'll never forget a thing like that,
never. How can she grow up to be good if she learns the truth? It
wouldn't let her. Nobody could stay good around Barclay. Even I
couldn't, and I was a woman when I met him. I'm decent, inside, McGill.
Honestly I am, and I've been sorry every day since you left. Oh, I've
paid for what I did! And I'll pay more, if I have to, but she mustn't be
part of the price. No! You've got to help me. Don't you see?"

She mistook his gesture of bewilderment for one of refusal, then hurried
to one final, frenzied appeal, although at a fearful cost to herself. It
was this which had come to her in the dance-hall; it was this that she
had led up to without allowing herself time in which to weaken.

"Listen! She shouldn't stay with me, even if I get away; it wouldn't be
good for her; besides, Barclay would find us some time; or, if he
didn't, I'm too sick to last much longer. Then she'd be alone. You're
rich, McGill. You're John Daniels. You'll have to take her--not for my
sake, understand, but--"

"_I?_" The man started. "I take Barclay's baby? Great God!"

There was a moment of silence during which the wife strove to steady
herself, then she said:

"She's not his--she's yours--ours."

McGill uttered a great cry. It issued from the depths of his being and
racked him dreadfully. He swung ponderously toward the rear room, then
fell to trembling so that he could not proceed. He stared at the woman,
lifted his hands, then dropped them; his lips shook. A fretful, sleepy
complaint issued from the chamber, at which the mother raised a warning
finger, and the necessity for silence calmed him more quickly than
anything else could have done.

"_My--baby!_" he whispered, while he felt something melt within him and
was filled with such an aching joy that he sobbed with the agony of it.

His wife's punishment overflowed when he breathed, fiercely:

"Then give her to me. You can't keep her. You can't touch her. You ain't
fit."

She bowed her head in assent, although his torture was nothing as
compared with hers.

"You'll help me get away from Barclay, won't you?" she asked, supporting
herself unsteadily.

"Barclay! I forgot him! He's the one that did all this, ain't he? He
brought you to--this; and my baby, too. He made her live among women
like these. He raised her in slime--" The speaker's face became slowly,
frightfully distorted.

His wife went swiftly to him; she struggled to fend him away from the
door, but he moved irresistibly. They wrestled breathlessly so as not to
awaken the child, while she begged him in the baby's name not to go, not
to bring blood upon her; but he plucked her arms from around him and
went out, closing the door softly.

When he had gone Mrs. McGill stood motionless, her eyes closed, her
palms pressed over her ears as if to shut out a sound she dreaded.

Barclay was dealing "bank" in one of the saloons when McGill entered and
came toward him down the full length of the room. They recognized each
other as their eyes met, and the former sat back stiffly in his chair,
feeling that the dead had risen. What he saw written in the face of the
bearded man drove the blood from his cheeks, for it was something he had
dreaded in his dreams. He knew himself to be cornered, and fear set his
nerves to jumping so uncontrollably that when he snatched the Colt's
from its drawer and fired blindly, he missed. The place was crowded, and
it broke into a frightful confusion at the first shot.

None of those present told the same tale of what immediately followed,
but the stories agreed in this, that John Daniels neither hesitated nor
quickened his approach, although Barclay emptied his gun so swiftly that
the echoes blended, then snapped it on a spent cartridge as the two
clinched. Curious ones later searched out the bullet-marks in wall and
ceiling which showed beyond doubt the nervous panic under which the
gambler had gone to pieces, and so long as the building stood they
remained objects of great interest.

Now McGill--or Daniels, as he was known to the onlookers--never went
armed, having yet to feel the need of other weapons than his hands. He
tore the gun from his victim's grasp, then mauled him with it so
fearfully that men shouted at him and hid their faces. Meanwhile he was
speaking, growling something into Barclay's ears. No one understood what
it was he said until the confusion died and they heard these words:

"--And you'll go with my brand on you where everybody 'll read it and
know you're a rat."

Next he did something that a great many had heard of but few, even of
the old-timers, had witnessed. He gun-branded his enemy. Barclay was
little more than a pulp by this time; he lay face up across the
faro-table with McGill's fingers at his throat. They thought the older
man was about to brain him, but instead he turned the revolver in his
hand and drew the thin, sharp-edged sight across Barclay's forehead from
temple to temple, then from forelock to bridge of nose. A stream of
blood followed as the sight ripped through to the skull like a dull
scalpel, leaving a ragged disfiguring cross above the gambler's eyes; it
scarred the bone; it formed a hideous mutilation that would last as long
as the fellow lived, and constitute a brand of infamy to single him out
from ten thousand, telling the story of his dishonor.

When he had finished, McGill raised the wretch bodily and flung him half
across the room as if he were unclean, then, without a glance to right
or left, he went forth as he had come.

His wife was waiting with her ears covered, but she saw the blood on his
hands when she opened her eyes, and cried out.

"It's his," he told her, roughly. "I don't think I killed him. I tried
not to, for her sake." He inclined his head toward the inner door. "But
it was hard to hold in, after all this time. He'll never trouble you
again."

"When do you--mean to take the baby?" she whispered.

"Now--She--"

"No, no! Not yet. Let her stay here a little while--till I'm strong
enough to let her go. Just a little while, McGill. You're a good man.
Don't you understand?" She was palsied, incoherent with dread; in her
eyes was a look of death.

But he held out his empty arms, crying, hoarsely, "Let me have my
kiddie!"

So she went in and gathered up the sleeping babe.

It may have been the father's heart-beats that awakened the little one
when she lay against his breast; at any rate the blue eyes opened and
stared up at him gravely. Astonishment, alarm gave way to recognition;
she smiled drowsily and her lids closed again, then a tiny hand curled
about one of McGill's fingers.

His face was wet when he raised it to the stricken woman and said,
gently, "We'll go now, if you're ready, Alice."

"What do you--?" She stared at him wildly. "You don't want _me_, McGill;
not after all I've done, all I--am?"

"I've always wanted you," he told her, simply. "You'll have to come, for
_she_ needs you." Holding the baby close with one arm, he extended the
other to his wife, but she drew back, choking.

"Not yet!" she managed to say through her tears. "Not until you know I'm
not all bad--only weak."

He took her hand and together they went out, walking slowly so as not to
awaken the child.


THE END




Books by REX BEACH

THE CRIMSON GARDENIA AND OTHER TALES OF ADVENTURE.
HEART OF THE SUNSET.
THE AUCTION BLOCK.
THE IRON TRAIL.
THE NET.
THE NE'ER-DO-WELL.
THE SPOILERS.
THE BARRIER.
THE SILVER HORDE.
GOING SOME.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Crimson Gardenia and Other Tales
of Adventure, by Rex Beach

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CRIMSON GARDENIA ***

***** This file should be named 32101.txt or 32101.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/1/0/32101/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
