The Project Gutenberg eBook, Characters from Life, by James Parkerson


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Characters from Life
       or Moral Hints. In Verse


Author: James Parkerson



Release Date: May 6, 2010  [eBook #32277]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHARACTERS FROM LIFE***


Transcribed from the early 1800's edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org.  Many thanks to Norfolk and Norwich Millennium Library,
UK, for kindly supplying the images from which this transcription was
made.

                  [Picture: Photograph of this pamphlet]





                             CHARACTERS FROM
                                  LIFE;


                                   OR,

                               MORAL HINTS.

                               _IN VERSE_.

                                   Viz.

Admonitions to the Dissipated       An address to a Man of the World
On Viewing the Cattle Market        Serious Reflections
Lion and Orange Grove               An address to Calista.
The Convict's Farewell

                      [Picture: Decorative divider]

                          BY J. PARKERSON, JUN.

                      [Picture: Decorative divider]

                 WALKER, PRINTER, NEAR THE DUKE'S PALACE.




ADMONITIONS
TO THE
DISSIPATED.


                      [Picture: Decorative divider]

   Excess to mankind oft'times brings,
   Remorse with all its bitter stings;
   When cares oppress us in this life.
   At times we drink to banish strife;
   But when its feeble aid is o'er,
   We are more wretched then before.
   Oft poverty the man disgrace,
   And shows a drunkard in his face;
   Suppose he is a man of wealth,
   Excess of liquor injures health;
   Not only health but sad to name,
   Such characters the sober blame.
   The artful villain tries his skill,
   When Bacchus gains us to his will;
   At such unguarded times disclose,
   What makes our valued friends our foes;
   And many an injured wife declares
   That Bacchus cause her many tears.
   The husband oft to harlots stray,
   Whene'er he bears a sovereign's sway;
   And by his aid the thoughtless youth,
   Is led from virtues paths and truth:
   Oh gentle youth the harlot's smile,
   Is given only to beguile;
   Their conversation so impure,
   That men of sense them can't endure;
   Be chaste in every thought I pray,
   Sweet modesty will gain the day;
   Bacchus with her can not contend,
   She is to every youth a friend.
   Oft do I see a good man's son,
   By harlots ruined and undone;
   A tipling farmer oft complain,
   Much is too low the price of grain;
   He must acknowledge oft he meet,
   His wealthy landlord in the street;
   On Saturdays his landlord roam,
   A few miles from his gaudy home;
   To this tho' ancient pretty city,
   To see a play denoted pretty:
   Oft in the boxes folks call green,
   The tenant with his wife is seen;
   His spending money in that way,
   Good sense and learning then display;
   When farmers hurt themselves is clear,
   Is riding home and drunk appear.
   Driving their horses at a rate,
   As plain foretell they staid too late;
   The gig turn'd o'er an arm is broke,
   Don't this his landlord much provoke.
   Some neighbour who may want his farm,
   Take care the village to alarm;
   Informs his neighbours he can't pay
   His tithe till sold both corn and hay;
   And to his landlord slyly state,
   That ruin'd soon must be his fate;
   His neighbour was in liquor found,
   Senseless and bleeding on the ground;
   On going home he drove so fast,
   As if each minute was his last;
   He'd broke his gig and spoilt his mare,
   This Sir is true I do declare;
   What I now state to others name,
   And they will tell you just the same;
   Sir cried the landlord in a pat,
   He knows not what he would be at;
   Quickly his mind I will alarm,
   For I will turn him out his farm;
   To me he's tenant but at will,
   Soon soon he'll be on Castle-Hill;
   I instant will the sot distress,
   And others will him sharply press;
   Sir cries his neighbour should that be,
   I hope you'll give me liberty;
   To offer you a great deal more,
   Then ere you let his farm before;
   I have two bondsmen at my call,
   One lives you know at such a hall;
   The other friend is Banker Steady,
   They both to serve me Sir are ready!
   Sir cries the landlord you keep sober,
   And only drink your own October;
   I'll promise what you've ask'd of me,
   And you my tenant soon shall be;
   I'll send the bailiffs on his place,
   And that will bring him to disgrace;
   The slanderer says pray sir don't state,
   What I to you this day relate;
   No says the landlord, I'll not say,
   What you have told me on this day;
   This slanderer I do know well,
   And only do the truth now tell;
   Most farmers whose estates are large,
   Their public duty well discharge;
   They live on such a handsome plan,
   As note and mark them gentlemen;
   I do protest it is great pity,
   Some drink so hard when in this city;
   As when rattling o'er the stones,
   They break a poor old woman's bones;
   Or by his trotting horse knock'd down,
   Before he leaves a market town;
   I do but state what many view,
   And Norwich surgeons know its true.
   Good farmers I do much esteem,
   And therefore make them oft my theme;
   May every farmer when he dine,
   Have means to drink a pint of wine.




ON VIEWING THE
CATTLE MARKET
ON THE
CASTLE HILL.


   The wealthy farmer with a rosy hue,
   Weekly attends the hardy scot to view;
   The pretty homebred soon his eye detain,
   Views and admires, then chat in lively strain;
   Of natures produce till his business call
   Him from such pleasing sights to pace the hall;
   Soon as he sees his merchant at his stand,
   He shows the produce of his fertile land;
   I'll give you such a price the merchant say,
   A higher bidder you'll not find this day.
   But ere the farmer quits the hill he view,
   All other stock to find out something new;
   A thought then strikes him as the season's fine,
   I'll buy a few score sheep before I dine;
   Into the pens he hies, the bargain struck,
   The jobber takes his cash, wish him good luck.
   Prehaps his steed don't travel to his mind,
   Looks at the nags, and do a good one find;
   The price he thinks too high, but not refrain,
   Making another bid the horse to gain;
   The dealer tempted by the offer say,
   Sir I'll comply don't hurry so away;
   Lets take a glass of wine to wish success
   To your new purchase--hard the farmer press,
   The nag is taken from the stand with glee;
   Another takes his place with broken knee,
   The buyer says what have you standing here?
   A damaged one a tumbling one I fear;
   Sir cries the dealer as your land is light,
   Take him for plough he's pretty to the sight;
   No it can't be, you must be in a joke,
   Sure I can't see, or else his knees are broke;
   But Sir the price I ask will claim a bid,
   I have so many that I want to rid;
   Ten guineas for him Sir to you I'll take,
   A useful one to you I'm sure he'll make:
   The farmer cries before I quit the ground,
   I'll make an offer which is Sir ten pound;
   It is accepted--and away goes nag,
   The wealthy farmer draws the canvas bag.
   Now to the tavern blithsome they repair,
   Take wine and wish that liquor wan't so dear;
   Looks at his watch, then loud the buyer cry,
   Its half past one, I to the hall must hie!
   Sell as much corn as shall be in my power,
   I'm much afraid the markets will be lower.
   I've sold he cried my wheat and barley well,
   I wish I could my oats and horse beans sell;
   Straight to his merchant 'gain the farmer hop,
   Fearful next market day all things will drop;
   The cautious merchant on his skill rely,
   And thinks Mark-Lane will have a small supply;
   Contrary winds will keep the vessels back,
   And in his purchase he will not be slack.
   Only one thought now harass much his brain,
   He fears to Banker's shop to go again;
   Least he should meet rebuke and irksome scorn,
   On casting up he found he'd overdrawn
   A running mortgage please the banker's mind,
   Gains it and to the merchant is more kind;
   But disappointment all his efforts blast,
   A large supply is usher'd in at last;
   Mark-Lane is full and markets now decline,
   A large supply and weather very fine;
   The malsters leaving off they'll wet no more,
   And only clear what is upon the floor;
   Merchants there are now dwelling in this place,
   That often routs their handsome houses grace;
   Gigs very fine a livery servant too,
   Is always kept to hide what's known by few;
   That his expences far exceeds his gain,
   And that the banker mortgages retain;
   On each estate the gaudy thing has bought,
   And that in real wealth not worth a groat.
   Still he goes on till on a sudden stray,
   Away awhile and cant the farmer pay;
   Flies to his factor in the time of need,
   For an advance but do not there succeed.
   Some characters like those I do know well,
   They can't last long they cut so great a swell;
   Oft do we see a very handsome coach,
   A merchant sport, and meriting reproach;
   Because full well he knows his books must show,
   His ranting on has brought him very low;
   When that's the case too often others find,
   A gig or coach is kept the eye to blind;
   To every honest man I wish success,
   And may misfortune never on them press.




THE LION
AND THE
_ORANGE GROVE_.


   Three Jackalls were a prawling sent
   It is supposed with ill intent,
      At least to make a prey:
   On any thing they saw was good;
   So dashing furious in a wood,
      They seiz'd without delay,

   An Orange Tree well hung with fruit,
   It apt the Lion's taste to suit,
      By Jackalls forced away.
   The owner of the tree declares,
   He'll strip the Lion of his ears,
      Or make him sharply pay.

   So to it furiously they went,
   He'll make the Lion soon repent,
      For seizing others store.
   He crav'd for mercy night and day;
   The Owner of the fruit won't stay!
      But will him sadly gore.

   Sharp pains ran down his aching side,
   The Lion on his knees loud cried,
      I will do so no more.
   The orange man declar'd with glee,
   Your minion sha'nt have liberty
      To enter here no more.

   Ne'er shall you have the power to take
   My fruit away for hunger sake,
      But I will have a change;
   My tale of woe none can deny,
   You know your master dwells on high,
      He soon will stop your range.

   He wears a fur more grand to view,
   And is more merciful than you,
      Your arrogance he'll stop;
   He'll quickly with a little chain,
   Your nightly prowlings soon restrain;
      And your ambition lop.

   He was allowed no more to stray,
   With hungry Jackalls night or day;
      Where Orange trees are seen.
   It serv'd him right to stop his power,
   Or he would each succeeding hour,
      Pluck Oranges too green.

   Besides there is a law that's known,
   We should take nothing but our own,
      From either beast or man.
   Tho' power is given to us here,
   We should the little lambs revere,
      And serve them if we can.

   I hope this will a warning prove,
   To other Lions in the grove,
      Who may hereafter stray:
   By power or order to a place,
   And not incur the like disgrace,
      We witness'd t'other day.

   The low bred minions seek to bind,
   The smaller ones of gentler kind,
      But in this happy Isle;
   A savage beast is laid aside,
   For every Reptile to deride,
      Or hourly to revile.




THE CONVICT'S FAREWELL.


                      [Picture: Decorative divider]

   Farewell ye partner of my woes, farewell!
   The finest language could but faintly tell,
   What I now feel in writing this adieu,
   What you must suffer when I'm far from you.
   There was a time when happiness my lot,
   I liv'd serenely in my little cot;
   No wicked thoughts did then disturb my rest,
   My children round me, by a father prest;
   No father now, methinks I hear them say,
   He's gone from us, he's hurried far away.
   Nightly I've view'd them in my flurri'd dreams,
   Seen their wet eyes and heard their dreadful screams;
   Methought my wife came to my lonely cell,
   To say adieu, to bid a long farewell;
   Soon I awoke and to increase my pains,
   I felt my legs encompass'd round with chains;
   Then, then I cried oh drunkenness thou cause,
   Of this distress, and made me break those laws
   That wise men made for every man to keep,
   By them deluded, plung'd in crimes so deep.
   First step to ruin was a love of dice,
   With cards the great promoter of our vice;
   I wish those men who do with such things play,
   Would ever cast them from their hands away;
   I wish all Magistrates would search around,
   And punish Publicans where they are found:
   They caused me first my Master to neglect,
   And after lost me honest men's respect;
   They also led me from a virtuous wife,
   And mostly caused me sad disgrace and strife.
   View Public Houses, every wealthy Squire,
   And force by ten, the spendthrift to retire;
   By such a plan, the labouring poor would rise,
   Soon as the Sun adorns the heavenly skies:
   I've stated what have brought me to this end,
   And what has lost me every earthly friend;
   Except a wife--oh God protect and bless,
   Her and our offspring now in great distress.
   Young men be cautious how ye spend your time,
   A bad acquaintance hurries on a crime;
   Sometimes an artful female tries her power,
   To trap the giddy in a thoughtless hour;
   When she has work'd the captive to her will,
   She gladly sees you taking sorrow's pill;
   Cause you to leave a virtuous homely wife,
   And lead a sad disgraceful wicked life;
   Allur'd by art she'll bring you to distress,
   And like a Millwood to you falsely press;
   Then be the first your actions to betray,
   A fiend like such caused me to go astray
   From them I love, from those my heart hold dear,
   And shall till death their memories revere;
   When I am clos'd in transport on the sea,
   Doubtless my love you'll sometimes sigh for me.
   Bring up my little ones in such a way,
   As they will holy keep the sabbath-day;
   Early in life do in their minds reveal,
   The dreadful crimes to swear, to lie, or steal.
   Hannah my eldest daughter place her where,
   She's constant under virtue's eye and care;
   Let her not learn the weaving trade, you'll find,
   That such a course may injure much her mind;
   Females are ready to acquire that art,
   Soon as they wish fair virtue to depart;
   Unwilling oft in service for to be,
   Where they can't dress and have their liberty;
   But if with parents they can work at home,
   Nightly they hope with idle folks to roam:
   At my late sentence I can not complain,
   Altho' the law my body do detain;
   Justice tho' slow has overtaken me,
   Abroad for life, I shall be kept from thee;
   On a just God for ever I will trust,
   I know his will is always right and just.
   Tis now too late again to speak to you,
   Which is the cause of writing this adieu.
   No partner now to sooth my aching heart,
   Reflection galls me, at myself I start,
   With aching heart and in my lonely cell,
   I bid my babes and you--a long farewell.
   Methinks I see the transport full in view,
   And I with horror meet the harden'd crew;
   Full well I know I ne'er shall see you more,
   Nor plant a foot-step on my native shore;
   On foreign land I'm doom'd my days to toil,
   And with vile wretches cultivate the soil.
   Stripes I must bear perhaps when quite unwell,
   And hear the convicts' melancholy yell;
   A pang I feel when e'er I close the night,
   And wish a virtuous wife was in my sight:
   England adieu, may you in trade increase,
   And free from inward tumults rest in peace.
   Our chaplain well I know, will soon impart,
   His friendly aid to cheer the drooping heart;
   I hope my children he will learn to read,
   And teach them early to peruse the creed:
   The bell is rung, the waggon is in view,
   Wife and dear children now, adieu! adieu!
   At thoughts of leaving this my native shore,
   Unmans me quite and I can say no more;
   I will thro' life, a better course pursue,
   Tho' far away still leave my heart with you.




_ADVICE_, &c.


   Vile man, abstain from every artful plan,
   When found out disgrace the name of man;
   Let those who steal, repent and sin no more,
   Ere Law decrees, it's vengeance on them pour;
   From trifling things, we greater ills pursue,
   Till the Law's fangs are brought within our view;
   Stop, stop bad courses, ere it be too late,
   And justice dooms you to a culprit's fate.
   Riots avoid, tho' mischief none you do,
   Your being at them, brings a stain on you;
   Those who look on, will afterwards repent,
   And share alike in point of punishment:
   The Law expressly properly declare,
   He adds to tumult, that is present there;
   Take my advice, let reason bear her sway,
   From scenes of discord, always keep away;
   You'd think it hard, a worthless savage crew,
   Should gain by plunder, all your goods from you:
   The worst of men are foremost on a plan,
   To gain by rapine every way they can;
   Do you suppose, that wasting others store,
   Can ease the hardships of the labouring poor;
   No such a course, our present ills increase,
   And robs the Nation of its inward peace.
   From late example, all are taught to know,
   Dreadful his fate, that strikes confusion's blow;
   Then let us quiet at our cots remain,
   And better times will cheer us once again.
   All means are trying comforts to restore,
   To ease the hardships of the labouring poor;
   Think what distress awaits dishonest ways,
   Immured in prison many wretched days;
   Not only days, perhaps they shed their tears,
   In Foreign Lands for many dismal years;
   Not only years perhaps are doom'd for life,
   Abroad to roam, from children, home and wife:
   Should it your lot in prison for to be,
   Implore with fervent prayer the Deity;
   Who will in time if you sincerely pray,
   Lessen your troubles each succeeding day:
   It's thro' our Saviour's aid that we should crave,
   A gracious pardon ere we meet the grave;
   His intercession with the King of Kings,
   Alone can save you from eternal stings.
   When at the court, for trial you appear,
   Speak nought but truth, you better for it fare;
   For should you dare to introduce a lie,
   Justice's sharp eye each falsehood will descry:
   I've known a perjur'd witness brought to swear,
   The guilty felon, of his crime is clear:
   Dismay'd, confus'd, he feels alas! too late,
   Such impious conduct greatly aggravate;
   Besides he answers at the awful day,
   For causing others from the truth to stray.
   Whatever happens in this vale of tears,
   Our Maker knows, give him your fervent prayers:
   Let your demeanor if in prison be,
   Such as the jailor can contrition see;
   For his report may mitigate your doom,
   And sometimes save you from a prison's gloom.
   Religious Books if you can read attend,
   They are in solitude the pris'ner's friend;
   When at the Chapel, do not cast away,
   By inattention what the Chaplain say:
   It's pure Religion cheers each good man's heart,
   And will in time its blessings soon impart;
   Such as perhaps you never knew before,
   And doubtless will your peace of mind restore.
   The Bible read when in your dismal cell,
   Read it attentive, ere you bid farewell;
   To him who may companion with you be;
   Your soul that night may be required of thee.
      A scene I witnessed, and not long time since,
   Would stop the errors of an hardened prince;
   Three men were sentenc'd by the law to die,
   To hear them mourn, to see the drooping eye;
   Would cause sensations of a painful kind,
   While anxious cares oppress the tortur'd mind.
   A pious Chaplain strove, to bring in view,
   The proffer'd pardon if repentants true.
   He said that God was merciful and just,
   To implore forgiveness, on his word to trust;
   There is a record where the scripture say,
   Those that repent he will not cast away;
   A sigh or tear cannot that boon impart,
   It must be fervent from the head and heart:
   Thro' Jesus' aid vile sinners doth he save,
   If true repentants, ere they meet the grave.
   Each wish'd they could recal, the time that's past,
   And they would live as if each day the last:
   Just before death, they pray'd me to implore,
   An erring mortal to transgress no more;
   Hope their lov'd Chaplain might for ever be
   When call'd on high, blessed to eternity;
   They knew his worth his heart is of a kind,
   That plants soft pity to a feeling mind;
   Deeker as Chaplain, few can e'er excel,
   Belov'd by all who bid the jail farewell.
   When first I saw these wretched men in jail,
   Before their trial did their fate bewail;
   Soon as the sentence met each anxious ear,
   Resign'd and true repentants did appear;
   One and all cried out, oh that God how just!
   To stop our sad career, on thee we'll trust;
   One cause alone have made this sad distress,
   Neglecting Lord's day and our drunkenness.




AN ADDRESS
_TO A MAN OF THE WORLD_.


   Reflect ere death, call you away,
   To answer at the awful day;
   Your thousands cannot purchase life,
   But as you waste it cause you strife.
   Many a pang you've felt of late,
   I must pronounce you vile ingrate;
   By art you gain a Lady's smile,
   Soon as acquired would her beguile;
   Careless the pangs a husband feel,
   To you I make this sad appeal;
   Was you a married man what pain,
   Was e'er a faithless friend to gain.
   Your wife's affection from your view,
   And bid each moral plan adieu;
   This truth to you I'm sure is known,
   Then scan such case as if your own:
   Juries are often kind its true,
   I'm sure they have been so to you.
   There is a judge that dwells on high,
   Will all the arts of man descry:
   Admit you didn't your game obtain,
   Did you from wicked thoughts abstain?
   While ranging o'er the shady grove,
   Doubtless you thought of nought but love;
   The prying eye of searching man,
   Foil'd in its bud your artful plan.
   The education of this age,
   Makes fit the wanton to engage;
   On lavities unblushing plan,
   With many a vile unthinking man.
   Wealth may a short time foibles blind,
   But, does it ease the guilty mind?
   The adultress with her paramour
   Ought personally sharp pains endure.
   Send them afar to foreign land,
   Let each be branded on the hand;
   There's scarce a crime on earth more vile,
   Then artless women to beguile.
   The wretch that's guilty of that sin,
   On females does great anguish bring,
   Levity too often leads astray,
   The lovely female that is gay.
   A love of dress too often cause,
   Women to break the marriage laws;
   And pity 'tis I do declare,
   Many so gaudy should appear:
   Soon as distress awaits the fair,
   Madam is clad in deep despair;
   Her sorrow is of selfish kind,
   Not gaining things quite to her mind.
   Her mind is fixed soon to impart,
   The fondest darling of her heart,
   To the first artful man she see,
   A strong desire for liberty.
   This from her home without delay,
   To taste the pleasures of the day;
   Now had the husband taught his wife,
   Economy throughout his life
   More easy she'd have kept at home,
   But he allowed her oft to roam;
   To plays and balls and such like places,
   Where giddy wantons show their faces.
   Actions are brought large damages to gain,
   Which must give every thinking bosom pain;
   Some trifling want of proper evidence,
   May give a british jury just pretence,
   To give acquittal, then the parties smile,
   To think how much the public they beguile.
   Still keen remorse embitters every joy,
   Altho' the parties can by bribes decoy:
   Such hirelings as their influence can bind,
   And clap a padlock on the tongue and mind.

                                * * * * *




SERIOUS REFLECTIONS.


   My life is embittered with cares,
      The reason to me is quite plain;
   I have caused many sighs and sad tears,
      To her I shall ne'er see again.

   She is fled from my presence above,
      I shortened her days in this life;
   To share true angelical love,
      She is free'd from all pain care and stife.

   How could I the dictates disdain,
      Of a parent so kind and so just;
   Or give her sweet bosom such pain,
      She is happy, I hope and I trust.

   That God who is setting on high,
      Have planted remorse in my heart;
   Its pangs I shall feel till I die,
      May I then from my troubles depart.

   Repent oft she cried ere too late,
      To her precepts I did not attend;
   My consience pronounce me ingrate,
      To disdain such advice from a friend.

   Such a friend I shall ne'er more attain.
      To me she was always sincere;
   I hope I shall meet her again.
      When I'm summoned on high to appear

   May repentance atone for the past,
      And cleanse me from every stain;
   May the tears of sincerity last,
      That my parent I do meet again.

   Sometimes I revisit the spot,
      Where my parent was used for to dwell;
   I sigh when I enter the cot,
      Where I bade the lov'd object farewell,

   Ere death had releaved her from pain,
      I pray'd that her son she'd forgive;
   She implor'd me from vice to abstain,
      And in future more pious to live.

   Scarce had I her blessing received,
      And had faintly sigh'd out an adieu;
   When I found her from troubles reliev'd,
      While mine where arising anew.

   Emotion of grief tears my heart,
      More painful then e'er felt before;
   When compell'd from her tomb to depart,
      Her loss I shall daily deplore.

                                * * * * *




AN ADDRESS
_TO CALISTA_,
Taken from life.


   Calista, tho' you waft a smile,
      And blithsome still appear;
   It does not censure ought beguile,
      Or stop the stifled tear.

   Its levity your conduct sway,
      And tarnish much your name;
   Too much her dictates you obey,
      The prudent must you blame.

   A married woman never can,
      Meet in a secret place;
   An artful gay and single man,
      And not incur disgrace.

   Censure you long have borne it's true,
      At that you can't complain;
   That fiend will harass you anew,
      If you transgress again.

   Ne'er listen to each tale of love,
      The Siren fain would tell;
   Chaste to your husband ever prove,
      Lothario bid farewell.

   Tho' guilt is vanished from the eye,
      Of mortals here below;
   A God above can all descry,
      Our secret thoughts he know.

   Sometimes the guilty are set free,
      And wears no more the chains;
   Yet tho' he gains his liberty,
      The stain on him remains.

   Tho' rich the female that portray,
      A wanton's smile to view;
   Or cast her husband's love away,
      Bid chastity adieu.

   It is the duty of a wife,
      Whene'er the ring she gain;
   To lead a virtuous steady life,
      From wanton acts refrain.

   Calista oft you did retire,
      To an appointed place;
   To hold a converse with the squire,
      It brought on you disgrace.




A Dierge to
THE MEMORY OF
PRINCESS CHARLOTTE.


   Britons wept when they heard brave Nelson was wounded,
      Cried aloud when they knew that a ball pierced his heart;
   Yet it eas'd our distress to find him surrounded,
      By those friends he loved, when compell'd to depart.

   He requested to know the fate of the battle,
      If t'was likely that England would conquor that day;
   When they answer'd him Sir, by the weight of our metal,
      More colours are struck and the reat in dismay.

   Now Britons again feel a painful sensation,
      For the loss of a Princess, beloved by us all;
   There ne'er was a Lady fill'd better her station;
      Yet Grim Death with his mandate alike strikes the ball.

   Neither Princes, or Kings, can induce him to tarry,
      Away from the object he's order'd to strike;
   To the aged, or young, to the giddy, or merry.
      He darts out his arrows and wounds them alike.

   Scarce had Providence made our lov'd Princess a mother,
      When God thought it fit to call her above,
   To taste of those joys rolling time cannot smother,
   And share of those blessings that flows from his love,

   To protect and to cherish the aged and helpless,
      Her purse would be drawn, and its comforts expend;
   When any misfortune were known for to hard press,
      She'd find out the object and would them befriend.

   Well may Brittons mourn, for tho' in high station,
      To enliven fair Commerce was always her care,
   Her loss will be felt a long time by the Nation;
      And sincere is the tear that is shed o'er her Bier.

   Her donations were such as noted the sorrow,
      She felt for the poor that were heard in distress;
   And used for to say, I'll assist them to morrow,
      And try all my aid many cares to make less.

   To England she's left an example for others,
      Which I hope will be copied till time is no more;
   May all foreign nations, regard us as brothers,
      And a free commerce gladden old Albion's Shore.




_TO THE MEMORY_
OF AN
AFFECTIONATE PARENT.


   My pen can not describe or tears convey,
   The pains I felt when late I bade farewell;
   I view'd in death's embrace a parent lay,
   And heard the passing of the mournful bell.

   Nine Month's disease its ravages had made.
   E'er death reliev'd her from all sufferings here;
   I saw the Sexton with his Iron spade,
   Mark out the spot, and place the gloomy bier.

   Affecting scene! while recollection last,
   I'll trace the parting of our sad adieu;
   Dwell on those scenes that are for ever past,
   Tho' in my mind it troubles fresh renew

   Just before death had wield the fatel blow,
   That stops the power of utterance or sigh;
   She with a voice angelic soft and low,
   Cried, Lord! forgive me e'er my spirit fly.

   Oft have I seen my virtuous parent stray,
   O'er her lov'd garden pensive and forlorn;
   To cull the flowers each succeeding day,
   And view the beauties of a summer's morn.

   Scarce did a flower adorn the spot around,
   But her hand planted in its proper place;
   No fonder lover of those sweets were found,
   While she their beauties in her mind could trace.

   Three days before her sufferings were o'er,
   She craved assistance to her favourite spot;
   And said my roses I shall see no more,
   And when I'm absent they will be forgot.

   But for her sake a faithful servant toil,
   To free the flowers from weeds from morn till night;
   Or bring fresh water to the thirsty soil,
   To that lov'd spot that gave her oft delight.

   Anticipation to the panting heart,
   Convey'd the dread decree of fate's ordain;
   To say she must from earthly scenes depart,
   And not to them for ever turn again.

   Meekness thro' life had marked her for her care,
   While resignation claim'd her for her own;
   Sometimes her mind wou'd cheerful still appear,
   And strive to stifle pain's afflicting groan.

   Oh God! she cried, thy mercy let me crave,
   Till life's short span is taken quite away;
   Then may I rest at peace within the grave,
   To wait thy summons for the awful day.

   Scarce had religion brought sweet hope to aid
   The virtuous victim in the pangs of death;
   When soft a guardian angel gently said,
   You'll dwell with me when time extinguish breath.

   A few short struggles and the scene was o'er,
   Death with his victim flew above the skies;
   I shall thro' life her absence oft deplore,
   Till recollection from my memory flies.

   The humble cottagers their Mistress bore,
   To her cold home each face bedew'd with tears;
   She to her mansion to return no more,
   For death has silenc'd all her hopes and fears.

   Oh! had you seen my good and worthy sire,
   In sorrow's garment his last duty pay;
   To her whose virtues did esteem acquire,
   Or ease the troubles of a luckless day.

   Two sorrowing sons increas'd the gloomy day.
   Who will while life remain her loss deplore;
   Till recollection from them fade away,
   Or erring Mortals here do sin no more.

   Each little Mourner drop'd affection's tear,
   When dust on dust the coffin hid from view;
   Their youthful sighs denoted their despair,
   When they to Grandma' bid a long adieu.

                                * * * * *




_ALBERT TO HANNAH_.


   I've read your letter o'er and o'er again,
   Happy to find you faithful do remain,
   Besides forgiveness; though too much I fear,
   I long have made you victim to despair.
   You say two years with fervency I strove
   To keep affection, constancy, and love;
   But soon as crosses came upon my mind,
   Was careless of you and appear'd unkind.
   I know my home was neat serene and nice;
   But, ah! that home I lost, allured by vice.
   Soon as you fled, a different scene in view,
   Gone all attention soon as I lost you.
   The quick retort was always in my ears,
   You've drown'd a virtuous wife in sorrow's tears.
   Soon as I found all hopes to meet you fled,
   I pray'd I might be numbered with the dead:
   Oblivion's aid I oft invoked by drink,
   I could not meditate nor dared to think.
   You say it cost you tears to write to me,
   But they'll disperse when you a convert see.
   Long I've invok'd a pardon from above,
   To make me worthy of the wife I love:
   Return, and till my days are at an end,
   I'll prove protector, guardian, and a friend.
   The converse delicate; the smile sincere,
   Will check the sigh, and stop the rising tear;
   Cheerful as formerly we'll pass our life,
   A happy husband I, and you the wife.

                                * * * * *




ON THE DEATH
OF
LORD NELSON.


   The fleet of haughty France and Spain,
   No more will triumph on the main,
         Though Nelson is no more:
   Our hero's blood was dearly bought;
   To conquer them he bravely fought,
         And died in vict'ry's arms.

   'We'll avenge his death,' the seamen cry,
   'We'll fight, we'll conquer, or we'll die,
         And will their force deride:
   Our little ones shall lisp his name,
   And to acquire a Nelson's fame,
         Will ever be their pride.'

   Before cold death had closed his eyes,
   Cover'd with wounds, the hero cries,
         'Is victory our own?'
   'We've conquer'd,' cried the valiant crew,
   He smiling bade them all adieu,
         And died without a groan.

   Yet, e'er he died, he did require,
   How many ships were then on fire,
         And others that had struck:
   Well pleased the hero then was seen,
   When told the number was fifteen;
         For England was his care.

   Then with a bright benignant smile,
   Imploring blessings on our Isle,
         Bade Collingwood adieu;
   Oh, gracious God! my soul receive,
   From troubles England quick relieve,
         And peace again renew.

   Oh death! thy keen unwelcome blow,
   Laid England's darling bleeding low,
         The hour he gain'd the day;
   Soon as thy hand had clos'd his eyes,
   A beauteous angel from the skies;
         Flew with his soul away.

   To taste sweet joys beyond the grave,
   That are allotted for the brave,
         Who fall in victory's arms:
   Many a tar we hope to find,
   Will prove he has the hero's mind,
         When signals raise alarms

                 WALKER, PRINTER, NEAR THE DUKE'S PALACE




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHARACTERS FROM LIFE***


******* This file should be named 32277.txt or 32277.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/2/2/7/32277



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

