The Project Gutenberg EBook of Oogie Finds Love, by Berkeley Livingston

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Oogie Finds Love

Author: Berkeley Livingston

Release Date: May 16, 2010 [EBook #32396]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OOGIE FINDS LOVE ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Amazing Stories November 1948. Extensive
    research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this
    publication was renewed.


                           OOGIE FINDS LOVE


                        by Berkeley Livingston


     It took a fierce battle with the prehistoric Cro-Magnons,
     and a modern wrestling match with the Russian Bear, before
     Oogie, the Caveman, finally won beautiful Sala for his woman

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: From the caves men appeared, dragging after them the
women who had been clubbed into submission]


"Kill him...!" "Moider 'im...!" "Tear his arm off!" The cries and
shrieks and boos and confusion were general throughout the auditorium,
and the tenor of them was about the same, that the Russian Bear should
be annihilated. Alas for the public's pleas. Oogie the Caveman was
underneath, and already the referee was on his knees, his head bent
almost to the canvas, his nose almost touching the muscled shoulder of
Oogie who was underneath the Russian Bear. The two wrestlers were
almost in the center of the ring and the nearest of the spectators was
some eight feet off. The front row could see the lips of the ref
moving but none could hear the words, nor even imagine. For what the
ref said, was:

"Boss wants to see you after the match...."

Oogie rolled a face toward the ref upon which was writ the tortures
of the damned, and blinked his right eyelid. Then the ref slapped the
Russian Bear on the shoulder and the match was over....

"... Hi boss," Algernon Allerdyce called in greeting. His nose sniffed
appreciatively at the aroma of coffee.

"Hi Oogie," Sam Grogan replied without turning from what he was doing,
lifting the cover of the percolator on the electric plate. "Squat
Oog," he directed. "This is just about done. Be with you...."

The fragrant aroma of Mocha, Java and Brazilian coffee beans, ground,
mixed and blended until they had achieved a perfect harmony, perfumed
the air. Two cups, saucers and spoons lay on the desk. Beside them was
a bottle of brandy. Oogie and Sam shared the same vice, _coffee_.

Sam did the honors, and after both men sniffed with the deepest
delight of the brew, he leaned back in his chair and regarded the
muscular man at his side with both affection and speculation. After
all, Algernon Allerdyce, known to the wrestling public as Oogie the
Caveman, had been Sam's own discovery, and he was proud of it.

A flashback of memory brought a clear picture to Sam's mind: A huge
bulk of a man whose face could have served as a model for the drawing
of _Pithecanthropus Erectus_, entering his offices at the old
Hippodrome Building. The wonder he felt at the gentleness of the
voice, as the stranger asked:

"Sam Grogan?" And at Sam's nod, "I'm here in answer to the ad you had
placed in the _Sun_...."

That had been the beginning of a strange and very profitable
friendship. For Grogan had advertised for wrestlers and Allerdyce had
been the first of those to answer. It was Sam who gave him the name of
Oogie the Caveman. As such he had achieved fame around the wrestling
circuits, fame and fortune. Sam had learned many facts in the life of
Allerdyce during the three years of their association. How when
Allerdyce was fifteen a truck had struck the bike he was riding and
hurled the unfortunate boy into a tree which mashed his face to a
pulp. How the family had brought the injured youth to a famous plastic
surgeon who had performed surgery on him. The next day it was found
the surgeon was insane, and had been insane when he performed the
plastic work on the boy. The result was the ape-like face he had given
him.

"... Oogie," Sam said from the depth of his introspection, "I've got
news for you...."

Allerdyce took another appreciative sip of the brew before bending his
attention to the other. And then it was only with lifted brow and
questioning eyes.

"... The Big Deal we've been waiting for is on the fire," Sam said.

"At last, eh?" Allerdyce said.

"Yep! The big clean-up! A hundred grand guarantee plus a percentage.
It will mean at least two hundred thousand for you...."

Allerdyce's lips twisted in a smile though to the casual observer,
those lips seemed to snarl. "I can't say I won't be glad that this
long grind is over. Three years of this fakery is enough to try the
soul of a saint. But now that the goal is in sight I can only feel a
sort of fear that maybe...."

Grogan knew what the other meant. For on that afternoon, long, long
gone, Allerdyce had told him why he had answered the ad. It was to
achieve enough money to permit the building of a dream, a laboratory
of research in plastics. For Algernon Allerdyce had graduated _cum
laude_ from one of the finest technical schools in the country, his
heart set on research, but with his goal closed to him because of his
fearsome appearance. He had tried time and again to enter any of the
phases of his calling but after the first interview there had never
been a second. Sam Grogan had shown him how enough money could be made
at wrestling to do what he wanted to. Allerdyce had not always been
Oogie the Caveman. Once he had been billed as The Gentleman Grunter,
but laughter had only greeted his appearance. As Oogie, he looked the
part and the fans had never failed him.

"So don't go soft now!" Grogan said sharply. "It's in the bag,
kid...."

       *       *       *       *       *

Allerdyce leaned back and the chair creaked loudly at the unexpected
movement.

"What's the set-up, Sam?" he asked.

"The whole troupe goes; the Bear, the Irishman, the Masked Marvel and
all the others. London, Paris, Berlin, Moscow.... Yep, Oog, all
eighteen of us on the European circuit.... Hey! What's wrong?"

Grogan had observed the darkening thunderhead of a frown on the
wrestler's forehead.

"Sam, this may sound a bit childish because the whole thing is
childish, but I don't like Ed Finster.... Now wait! I know we've been
packing them in with our act, the Russian Bear and Oogie the Caveman.
But Ed's been taking the deal a little more seriously than it
warrants. Like tonight. He threw a double hammer on me and _really_
used pressure. Nor was tonight the first time.

"A week ago in Omaha he almost tore my ears off with a headlock...."

Sam Grogan beamed. Allerdyce didn't know it but Sam had been the
motivating force behind the grudge which had developed between the two
men. Finster had complained one night that the public didn't like him,
said that the name he had been given made them mad. Sam had mentioned
the name was Oogie's idea. Finster then took personal exception to it
and made a personal issue out of it. So the grudge begun in jest
developed until it was noticeable to the rest of the troupe.

Grogan chuckled and in a few words made clear how the thing started.
But the smile was wiped from his lips at Allerdyce's words:

"Too late now, Sam. I'd just as soon forget it but not Ed. He's got
that excuse for a brain thinking the whole thing is real. I'd suggest
you get to work on him before it's too late altogether...."

"That bad, huh? Maybe I'd better straighten the yuk out...."

       *       *       *       *       *

Flight 243 was well out over the Atlantic, thirty thousand feet below.
The super-cruiser _Orion_ of the _TWP_ lines held a full complement of
passengers among whom was the wrestling circus of Sam Grogan and his
partner Algernon Allerdyce, more affectionately known to the
wrestling public as Oogie the Caveman.

The hour was for sleep and everyone but two were observing it. These
two, Allerdyce and Finster, were in the lounge, playing gin. Finster
had challenged Allerdyce to a couple of games to pass the time. But
those two games had long been played. Finster played a wild and woolly
game, never remembering discards, or trying knocks when they would be
to his advantage, but always playing for gin. So it was that Allerdyce
had won almost every game. And since they were playing for a cent a
point, Finster was out money. That was why they were still playing
while the rest had gone to bed.

"... I'll knock with two, Ed," Allerdyce said.

"Now why the hell didn't you give that ten!" Finster yelled. He held
up the discard and looked at it with savage eyes. "That would have
ginned me...."

Allerdyce shrugged his shoulders and replied:

"That's what I figured. Well, Ed, let's call it quits, huh?"

"Sure! Call it quits when you got me stuck for dough. But that's the
way you operate. Why you yellah...."

It was at that instant the horror descended on the _Orion_. There was
a screaming cacophonous whirlwind of sound, a shriek of metal parting,
flames suddenly bursting into full bloom, and the thin voices of men
and women in mortal fear. Above all there was a _whooshing_ noise, as
though a giant hand was gripping them. Finster and Allerdyce felt
themselves lifted from the depths of the ship and plunged into a
maelstrom of storm in space.

For a full ten seconds Algernon Allerdyce looked into the face of
terror beyond words, then unconsciousness descended on him....

       *       *       *       *       *

The air was hot and damp and the slight breeze which fanned his cheek
was of little solace. Allerdyce turned his head from side to side; a
quiver stirred the heavy frame of his body, and awareness came in a
rush to him as he opened his eyes. He sat erect and looked about him.

A figure lay sprawled on the ground some ten feet away. It was that of
a man and one glance showed Allerdyce that the man was Ed Finster and
that he was alive, though not yet conscious. Allerdyce rose to his
feet and grunted at the effort. It seemed as if every bone and muscle
creaked and groaned in protest. Awe and amazement made his brows lift
and his eyes widen as he looked about. The two men had fallen among
some ferns in a shallow glade bound about by dense jungle growth.
Allerdyce caught a glimpse of hills in the near distance. Then he saw
Finster stir and he stepped to the other's side.

"Wha-what happened?" Finster asked while he turned his head from one
side to the other.

"I don't know exactly," Allerdyce replied in a low voice. "But I'm
going to make a guess, fantastic as it may sound. I think we fell or
were sucked into a space fault. From the looks of this jungle and from
the feel of the atmosphere, I'll bet we've landed in a time long
before the dawn of men such as we know...."

And as though in corroboration there came to their ears a low,
grunting sound. Instantly Finster leaped to his feet and jumped the
several feet to the side of the other. The sharp movement brought
another coughing grunt, this time from the opposite side. And as they
watched, a huge striped shape stepped into the open from the depths of
the thick jungle growth. It was fully ten feet long and high as their
shoulders, and the head of it was that of a tiger but such as they had
never seen, for twin tusks, a foot long protruded down the length of
the jowls....

"A saber tooth!" Allerdyce whispered hoarsely.

Ed Finster could only stare in open-mouthed horror at the thing. His
muscled jaws began to quiver as the tiger began a sinuous advance
toward them, and then, as the animal suddenly crouched in preparation
for its leap, Finster screamed.

But the tiger never moved from his crouch. As if by magic a half dozen
spears pierced its sides and two found a resting place in the tiger's
throat. Then the silence was broken by the hoarse shouts of human
voices, and a dozen men leaped into the glade and advanced on the two.

"Cro-Magnons," Allerdyce said aloud.

They were tall, broad-shouldered, deep of chest and long of limb. The
skins of wild animals covered their nakedness. Their faces showed
intelligence, though it was all too apparent that it was limited. But
whatever speculations about their origin was in Allerdyce's mind, were
wiped from it by their attitudes. They were definitely hostile. Most
of them were armed with spears, as if those they had hurled were just
one of a number they carried. Those who bore no spears, held clubs
from the heads of which wooden spikes stuck out in vicious fingers of
anger.

       *       *       *       *       *

Allerdyce acted from instinct. His right hand shot up to the height of
his head and stuck out in front of his face. At that the advancing
cavemen stopped and looked at each other. There were gutteral sounds
of consultation, then the largest most-fearsome stepped forward and
moved toward the two until he was at arm's length.

"Who are you?" he asked. "What do you here in the land of Ugg the
Mighty? From whence come you?"

Allerdyce's mind worked at lightning speed. The solution to their
problem lay in but a single direction, whatever their position. He
looked up to the cloudless, sun-scorched sky and said:

"From the Great Spirit we come. For see ... are we not different than
you? So we were sent to look into the affairs of the Great Spirit's
children...."

The caveman knitted his brows, shook his head in wonder, then, as a
child does at an elder's invitation to inspect a doll, he stepped
forward and fingered the suiting of the two men. Little clucking
sounds came from the lips as he did so. Then whirling, he shouted:

"The Great Spirit has sent them! Let us do them honor...."

At the same time Allerdyce whispered, "Don't act scared," to Finster.

Their leader's words were as a signal for the rest. They came forward
in dancing steps, raising their spears and clubs on high and shouting
gleefully words of exultation and praise of their leader Ugg. They
surrounded the two strangers and after their leader stepped in the
lead they started on a march through the brush. The way seemed endless
and after a while Allerdyce shed his upper garments, leaving only his
trousers to cover him. Finster followed suit. Oddly, there was a
complete absence of insect life.

The way led straight toward the hills they had glimpsed. The wall of
jungle ended with startling abruptness and they entered on a rolling
plain which after a while became more and more rocky as the upland
sweep began. Quite suddenly Ugg stopped, his head tilting to one side
in a listening attitude and one hand held in warning.

The others, with the two strangers in their midst, crowded close.

"Sobar!" Ugg grunted hoarsely. "He is after our young and women.
Listen...."

They heard it then, shouts and screams from up above. But what was
going on was hidden from them. Ahead lay a narrow cleft between two
sides of sheer rock some fifty feet high. The way on the right was
clear though at a strong angle. Ugg motioned for Allerdyce to follow
and the two climbed to the top of the rock where they lay on their
bellies and looked slightly downward at the scene. Ahead were some
dozen caves and a common compound. Men were struggling here and there
but for the most part those were few. The screams came from the caves.
In a matter of seconds men appeared, dragging after them the women and
some children. When a woman failed to go along too readily or when one
of the men lost his patience, the club was used. Ugg nudged Allerdyce
and motioned with a silent shake of the head for them to return.

"... It is the tribe of Sobar," Ugg explained to his men. "They must
have learned I sent my son, Ugg the Younger, on a hunting expedition
with most of the tribe and that we few went on the hunt for the
saber-tooth. They are too many for us...."

"But they must come through the cleft in the rock," Allerdyce said.
"We can lie in wait for them. Hidden, they cannot know how many we are
and when the spears are thrown they will think they have been
ambushed."

"But there are only the few of us," Ugg objected.

"Even a few will be enough."

But Ugg had an even better idea:

"They will not fear us. But the Spirits.... They will run from you
after they see how little their weapons do against you...."

Now we're in for it, Allerdyce thought. Right in the middle. If we
don't, these boys will let us have it. If we do, the others will. And
what is worse we can't ask for weapons.... H'm! Maybe.... An idea had
come to him, a silly idea. Yet if it succeeded....

"Come on, Ed," he said, turning to Finster. "Follow my lead, fellah.
Otherwise...."

He didn't have to finish. The other understood.

       *       *       *       *       *

Allerdyce felt the quiver in his legs and arms as they reached the top
of the cleft. One look and he saw the enemy tribe was about to
descend. They saw the two men at the same time. For a long moment the
modern and the prehistoric stared at each other. It was the modern who
made the first move:

"Men of Sobar!" Allerdyce shouted. "Hear me!"

There were a full fifty of them. Three of them stepped forward, spears
held ready for the throwing. One of them was a giant of a man, a full
seven feet tall and wide as a barn door.

"Who calls Sobar," the giant asked.

"I do," Allerdyce replied. "The messenger of the Great Spirit...." He
hoped Sobar knew of this Great Spirit. "He has sent me because Sobar
has displeased him...."

For a few seconds silence reigned. Then the giant stepped forward a
few more steps, and his brow tight in a scowl of anger, asked:

"I do not believe you. You look like one of the swamp people, face of
an ape...."

Allerdyce felt the brittle coldness of a terrible anger sweep through
him. He had been called ape before. And always the one who had done
the calling had suffered for his temerity. But mixed with his anger
was the knowledge that death could be the result of an unwise move or
word. Yet time was not on his side, for Sobar was taking the
initiative and was stepping even closer and behind him the other two
were also coming toward him in imitation of their leader.

"Hold!" Allerdyce suddenly called in a ringing, imperative voice. "You
do not believe me, then, eh? A test, Sobar...?"

The other was silent, waiting for the stranger to continue.

"Drop your weapon," Allerdyce said. "You and I, unarmed, to the
death...."

Then gone was the scowl, gone the furrowed brow. Here was meat to
Sobar's liking. Here was something he was not frightened of. Spirit or
man, Sobar was not afraid of combat of arms. Flinging the spear to one
side Sobar motioned for the other to come to him.

Allerdyce made a feint to come in low but the other merely waited,
arms wide, legs spread, and body shifting from the waist. Once again
Allerdyce feinted, and as Sobar's body shifted to the side the other
seemed to want to come from, Allerdyce leaped forward and grabbed
Sobar by his right wrist and using the hand as a lever pivoted on it
until he was behind the giant. Then Allerdyce began to exert pressure
in a hammerlock.

All the while he had been moving the giant had been still, as if
confused. But as pain came in a rush to his shoulder blade, he moved.
Never had Allerdyce felt such strength. For though the wrestler was
using all his strength on the grip, Sobar broke it with one gigantic
movement of his huge body.

Allerdyce knew then that the rules of fair play were out. This
prehistoric baby was dynamite.... Allerdyce staggered away from the
other but recovered quickly as the giant came in, both arms
outstretched. And once again Allerdyce grasped one of those huge
wrists. Only it was in a judo grip this time, a grip where when a man
tries to break it, pressure simply multiplies until either the arm
breaks or one cries quits. In this case Sobar waited too long.

       *       *       *       *       *

Even as his face contorted in pain Allerdyce whipped around to one
side and delivered a blow with the side of his palm to the side of
Sobar's neck. The crack of the breaking neck was like that of a branch
breaking. Sobar pitched to his face and lay still.

Instantly Ugg leaped to Allerdyce's side.

"Your chieftain was bested in fair play!" he shouted to the warriors
of Sobar's tribe. "By our laws you have now become our prisoners."

"But not by mine!" a strange voice yelled.

And before Allerdyce could do more than turn, Finster was on him. What
made Ed Finster do what he did was never explained. Perhaps the
realization of what had happened came to the man. Perhaps his mind,
twisted by jealousy and hate snapped at that moment. Whatever the
reason, he turned on Allerdyce. It was the signal for a general
battle. For of all the cavemen who were present, only one was
quick-witted enough to take advantage of the situation. This one was
one of the two who had come forward with Sobar.

He yelled:

"Gomar is now chief. One of the Spirits is on our side.... Kill Ugg
and his...."

Had it been one of the cavemen attacking, Allerdyce would have managed
to get away for the moment he needed to recover. But it wasn't. It was
a trained wrestler, one who knew all the tricks, who had leaped at
him. So Finster worked his surprise vantage for all it was worth.

But even then Allerdyce might have won out had it not been for Gomar's
call to arms. His men forgot the booty they had taken, the women and
children and leaped forward with savage shouts, spears and clubs used
indiscriminately. Allerdyce had broken Finster's first hold, and was
turning to get a grip on the other, when a club thrown by one of the
cavemen caught him a blow on the temple and stretched him senseless to
the ground.

       *       *       *       *       *

Allerdyce's awakening this time was not as pleasant as before. Someone
was kicking him in the face. He opened his eyes, one of them anyway.
The other was closed shut. He was in a cave. It was a smelly cave, the
walls blackened from the smoke of many fires. Nor was he alone. He
tried to move his arms and discovered he had been securely bound.
Suddenly from behind, a foot came swinging out and pain shot up the
side of his jaw as the bare toes connected with it.

"Enough," a voice called.

"Aah! I've been wanting to do this for a long time," Ed Finster said.

There was disgust in Gomar's voice as he replied:

"The Great Spirit has small men for messengers.... Remove the other's
bonds."

"Hey!" Finster yelped in protest.

But no one paid attention. Hands tore the fibre ropes loose from about
Allerdyce's figure and helped him to his feet where he stood swaying
like a tree in a high wind.

"The Great Spirit sent two messengers," Gomar said. "But He had a
reason. One was sent to conquer Sobar so that I could become chief.
The other was to conquer you. The light is clear.... Take him to the
women...."

Only Finster laughed at the edict. He had reason for the laughter. In
all the years of their association Allerdyce had never been known to
go for the fillies. And now he was to be thrown to a pack of them.
With that puss, Finster thought, they'd throw him right back.

Spear points pressed against his back, a rope around his wrists, and
while the rest walked behind, one man led Allerdyce from the cave into
the open, across a level stretch of ground and into a very large cave.
Here his wrists were unbound and to the jibes and laughter of the
warriors who had accompanied him, Allerdyce was shoved into the cave
proper itself.

The cave was immense, and seemed to be filled entirely with women and
children. For a second there was silence. Then as their eyes saw this
almost naked stranger, a wild shriek of laughter went up. Hands went
out, pointing to his shorts which seemed to be all the clothing he
had, to his face, puffed into a gargoylish mask, and to his hairy
chest, which looked like the stuffing of a mattress.

Allerdyce stared in horror at the women, turned and started for the
cave entrance. But the cavemen had anticipated his move. They stood
guard, spears thrust point forward, and after a few hesitant seconds,
Allerdyce turned back.

But now they were no longer scattered about the cave. They came over
in a rush, forcing him to the wall, his hands pawing in futile
attempts to prevent them from touching him. For some reason this made
them angry. Their hands clenched and spiteful words came from their
lips, and several turned aside and called something to the children,
who after a moment returned, with stones and sticks.

"Hey!" Allerdyce called in alarm. "Take it easy...."

The alarm in his voice was the signal for them to attack. In a moment
he was the center of a mob of women all bent, it seemed, on his
destruction. He fought at first as gently as he could. But as some of
the stones hit and some of the clubs struck vulnerable parts of his
anatomy, he fought with less gentleness. Finally, he was forced to
club one of the women with his fist. She went flying backward and
landed flat on her back.

       *       *       *       *       *

Instantly the attack ceased.

He watched them move away from him and wondered why. His question was
answered as the woman he had struck crawled to him and embraced his
legs. He tried to withdraw her hands but she held only tighter and
said:

"We are mated. You made the choice. I am Sala...."

"You're nuts!" Allerdyce said sharply. He turned to call the guards to
help him with the woman when he discovered that they were gone.

"Are customs different in your tribe?" Sala asked. "Do you not mate
with a woman in this manner?"

The beginning of a hope came to him in a rush as he realized the
consequences of what had happened. He was free now. He tried to put
the proper authority in his voice, when he said:

"Go woman! Find me a corner and bring me food...."

Without the slightest hesitation Sala rose and trotted to a far corner
of the cave. Allerdyce followed and squatted beside her. He had always
been a shy man and had never known many women, especially women with
as little clothes as Sala wore. She was beautiful by any standard he
thought. But only for a moment. His thoughts for the first time
centered on his predicament.

His mind allowed for but a single conclusion. That the plane had run
into a time-fault and that he and Ed Finster had been drawn into it.
The others must have died in the plane crash. Since the giant ship was
over the Atlantic at the time of the crash it was reasonable to assume
that time only was involved and not space. Therefore, by the same line
of reasoning, he and Ed were to be here for the rest of their lives.
That is unless somehow they found the same fault again. But that was
not probable, he realized.

For a moment fear lay heavy on him. Then the scientist came uppermost.
What an opportunity he had. A man of science among these children. The
chance to build a civilization. It could be done with his knowledge.
But first he had to get the power over these people.

Sala came back just then with what looked like the leg of a rabbit. It
was very underdone but Allerdyce didn't quibble. If he were going to
live as they did then he might as well start right there.

       *       *       *       *       *

Three days went by and nothing changed. He learned all about his mate.
She had been one of Ugg's tribe. Now she was part of the tribe of
Gomar. It was that simple. She was a tigress when she thought another
woman was even looking at her mate and fought with the savagery of a
beast for him. And he had been granted his freedom with his
acquisition of a mate. He learned to hunt as the others did, with
spear and club. But already he had fashioned his first bow and arrow,
and knew it would be a matter of time before he was taught the rest.
There was but one fly in the ointment, Ed Finster. As yet he had no
mate. And he looked with avaricious eyes on Sala.

It was on the fourth day.

Allerdyce had returned from the hunt. He had killed an animal with his
arrow and the tribe looked on him with respect. As he neared his cave
he heard shrieks of pain and anger. And as he watched with amazement,
Ed Finster appeared, dragging Sala by her hair. His action was
instinctive. Rushing forward, he threw his bow to one side and knocked
Ed to the ground.

Immediately a circle of warriors were drawn about the two men and
Gomar stepped forward.

"It is time," he said. "I have wondered about this. A combat of arms
will settle it. Whoever wins will have the woman ... and his freedom."

As they stood facing each other, Finster turned aside as though to say
something to Gomar. Allerdyce relaxed naturally. But Finster had done
it with that view in mind. Like a flash he whirled on Allerdyce and
grabbed a headlock. It would have ended right then had not both men
been barefoot. For Allerdyce had not stiffened his neck muscles. But
Finster stepped on a thorn and the shock made him loosen his grip for
an instant. It was enough for Allerdyce to break free.

There were no more surprises.

Bit by bit Allerdyce wore the other down. At last he straddled
Finster, who lay face down on the ground. Then Allerdyce grabbed the
other by the shock of black hair, pulled his neck up until he could
get his arm under it. Then slowly, using all his strength, Allerdyce
pulled back until after a moment there was a sharp crack. Finister
would be no more trouble.

Algernon Allerdyce rose and throwing his head back let out a bellow of
triumph, and knew then he was no longer Algernon Allerdyce. He was in
fact Oogie the Caveman, replete with wife. For Sala had been the first
to rush to his side. And as he threw his arms around her he knew love
had come to him. She was his and woe betide the one who tried to take
her from him.

But when Gomar stepped to his side and asked:

"This sliver of wood you made and the bow of elk thong.... Could you
make another for me...?" Oogie the Caveman knew his life had begun in
earnest....

THE END

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Oogie Finds Love, by Berkeley Livingston

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OOGIE FINDS LOVE ***

***** This file should be named 32396.txt or 32396.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/3/9/32396/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
