Project Gutenberg's Mrs. Turner's Cautionary Stories, by Elizabeth Turner

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Mrs. Turner's Cautionary Stories

Author: Elizabeth Turner

Editor: E. V. Lucas

Release Date: May 25, 2010 [EBook #32523]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MRS. TURNER'S CAUTIONARY STORIES ***




Produced by David Edwards and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net. (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive.)








MRS. TURNER'S CAUTIONARY STORIES

[Illustration]


The Dumpy Books for Children

Selected by E. V. LUCAS

I. THE FLAMP, THE AMELIORATOR, and THE SCHOOLBOY'S APPRENTICE.

_Written by E. V. LUCAS._

II. MRS. TURNER'S CAUTIONARY STORIES

_Other Volumes in the Series are in preparation_

1s. 6d. each




Mrs. Turner's Cautionary Stories

LONDON: GRANT RICHARDS

1897




_CONTENTS_


                                        PAGE


INTRODUCTION                            xiii


BAD BOYS AND GOOD--

  _The Window-Breaker_                       3

  _A Gunpowder Plot_                         5

  _Peter Imitates the Clown_                 7

  _Ben's Heavy Punishment_                   9

  _The Chimney-Sweeper_                     11

  _The Fighting Wicket-keeper_              13

  _The Good Scholar_                        15

  _The Good Scholar Fights_                 16

  _The Death of the Good Scholar's Foe_     17

  _Robert's Thoughtless Brothers_           19

  _Joe's Light Punishment_                  20

  _Falsehood "Corrected"_                   22

  _The Superior Boys_                       24

  _George's Curious Taste_                  25

  _Thomas Brown's Disappointment_           27

  _Considerate Philip_                      28

  _The Models_                              29

  _Politeness_                              30

  _Richard's Reformation_                   31

  _James's Sacrifice_                       32

  _The Excellent Lord Mayor_                34

  _Clever Little Thomas_                    36

  _William's Escape_                        37


GOOD GIRLS AND BAD--

  _Rebecca's Afterthought_                  41

  _A Hint to Mary Anne_                     42

  _How to Write a Letter_                   44

  _News for Papa_                           46

  _Maria's Charity_                         48

  _The Neglected Turk_                      50

  _Pride and Priggishness_                  52

  _How to Look when Speaking_               54

  _Isabella's Parachute_                    56

  _Maria Snubbed_                           57

  _Matilda's Extravagance_                  58

  _Papa's Watchfulness_                     60

  _Isabella's Defeat_                       61

  _The Two Patients_                        62

  _Fanny's Bad Habit_                       63

  _Sarah's Danger_                          64

  _The Hoyden_                              65

  _The Giddy Girl_                          67

  _A Warning to Frances_                    69

  _Playing with Fire_                       71

  _How to Heal a Burn_                      72

  _Mary Anne's Kindness_                    74

  _Ambitious Sophy_                         75

  _Dressed or Undressed_                    76

  _Mrs. Birch's Influence_                  78

  _Rebellious Frances_                      80


KINDNESS AND CRUELTY--

  _The Harmless Cow_                        83

  _The Harmless Worm_                       84

  _The Bad Donkey-Boy's Good Fortune_       86

  _Grateful Carlo_                          88

  _Grateful Lucy_                           90

  _Grateful Trusty_                         91

  _Something in Store for Richard_          92

  _The Result of Cruelty_                   93


THINGS TO EAT--

  _What is Best for Children_               97

  _Billy Gill's Good Fortune_               99

  _Civil Speech_                           101

  _The Cook's Rebuke_                      103

  _The Lost Pudding_                       105

  _Sammy Smith's Sad Fate_                 106

  _Stupid William_                         107

  _Poisonous Fruit_                        109

  _Harry's Cake_                           111

  _Peter's Cake_                           113

  _William's Cake_                         115

  _How to Make a Christmas Pudding_        117




Introduction


The sixty-nine Cautionary Stories that follow have been chosen from five
books by Mrs. Elizabeth Turner, written for the pleasure and instruction
of our little grandparents and great-grandparents. The books are _The
Daisy_, _The Cowslip_, _The Crocus_, _The Pink_ and _Short Poems_.
Between the years 1810 and 1850 they were on the shelves of most
nurseries, although now they are rarely to be met with. There was also
_The Rose_, but from that nothing has been taken for these pages, nor
are the original pictures again offered. Except for these pictures, a
frequent change of title, and a few trifling alterations for grammar's
sake, the pieces selected are now printed exactly as at first.

Mrs. Turner's belief, as stated by Master Robert in the verses called
"Books better than Toys" in _The Pink_, was that the children of her
day, when they had money to spend and wanted a real treat, could not
choose anything more suitable than her Cautionary Stories. The piece
runs:

     'My dear, as Robert is so good,
     I'll give him what I said I would,
     Two shillings for himself to spend;
     He knows the shop of our good friend.'

     'Yes, I know well the pretty shop
     Where folks, you know, so often stop
     To view the prints. The windows--look!--
     Are filled with toys and many a book.

     'They have a thousand books and toys
     For little girls and little boys;
     At toys, indeed, I love to _look_,
     But I prefer to _buy_ a book.

     'These two bright shillings, I suppose
     Will buy _The Cowslip_ and _The Rose_;
     And when two more I get, I think
     I'll buy _The Daisy_ and _The Pink_.'

In our own time Robert's opinion is not very widely shared: most of us
would not care to give up a cannon or a doll in order that we might be
cautioned; but Mrs. Turner is not the less an entertaining author
because her volumes have fewer attractions for us than some of the
things in a Christmas bazaar. She told her tales with such spirit: her
verses are so straightforward, the rhymes come so pat at the end of the
lines, and you may beat time with your foot and never be put out.

In another piece, "Kitty's Favourites," Mrs. Turner wrote:

     The stories Kitty likes so well,
     And often asks her aunt to tell
     Are all about good girls and boys.

Kitty's taste, like Robert's, is no longer general. The common view is
that stories about bad children are more fun; and therefore I think you
will be amused by these pages. Whether or not punishment always did
follow the offences as surely and swiftly as Mrs. Turner declares, I am
not prepared to say. If you are in any doubt you had better ask your
parents.

                                  E. V. LUCAS.

    _November 1897._




Bad Boys and Good




THE WINDOW-BREAKER


       Little Tom Jones
       Would often throw stones,
     And often he had a good warning;
       And now I will tell
       What Tommy befell,
     From his rudeness, one fine summer's morning.

       He was taking the air
       Upon Trinity Square,
     And, as usual, large stones he was jerking;
       Till at length a hard cinder
       Went plump through a window
     Where a party of ladies were working.

       Tom's aunt, when in town,
       Had left half a crown
     For her nephew (her name was Miss Frazier),
       Which he thought to have spent,
       But now it all went
     (And it served him quite right) to the glazier.

_Note._--The foregoing story is stated to be "founded on fact."




A GUNPOWDER PLOT


     "I have got a sad story to tell,"
       Said Betty one day to mamma:
     "'Twill be long, ma'am, before John is well,
       On his eye is so dreadful a scar.

     "Master Wilful enticed him away,
       To join with some more little boys;
     They went in the garden to play,
       And I soon heard a terrible noise.

     "Master Wilful had laid a long train
       Of gunpowder, ma'am, on the wall;
     It has put them to infinite pain,
       For it blew up, and injured them all.

     "John's eyebrow is totally bare;
       Tom's nose is bent out of its place;
     Sam Bushy has lost all his hair;
       And Dick White is quite black in the face."

_Note._--As a matter of fact, a train of gunpowder does not make a
terrible noise; it makes hardly any noise at all--a mere _pfff!_ and
though John, Sam Bushy, and Dick White are shown to have been hurt as
they might have been, a train of gunpowder could not bend Tom's nose, it
could only burn it. Probably Mrs. Turner did not often play with
explosives herself, and therefore did not know. Master Wilful seems to
have escaped altogether.




PETER IMITATES THE CLOWN


     Poor Peter was burnt by the poker one day,
       When he made it look pretty and red;
     For the beautiful sparks made him think it fine play,
       To lift it as high as his head.

     But somehow it happen'd his finger and thumb
       Were terribly scorched by the heat;
     And he scream'd out aloud for his mother to come,
       And stamp'd on the floor with his feet.

     Now if Peter had minded his mother's command,
       His fingers would not have been sore;
     And he promised again, as she bound up his hand,
       To play with hot pokers no more.




BEN'S HEAVY PUNISHMENT


     'Tis sad when boys are disinclin'd
       To benefit by kind advice;
     No little child of virtuous mind
       Should need receive a caution twice.

     The baker on a pony came
       (Oft us'd by them, and butchers too),
     And little Ben was much to blame
       For doing what he should not do.

     They told him _not_ to mount the horse;
       Alas! he did; away they flew;
     In vain he pull'd with all his force,
       The pony ran a mile or two.

     At length poor little Ben was thrown;
       Ah! who will pity? who's to blame?
     Alas! the fault is all his own--
       Poor little Ben for life is lame!




THE CHIMNEY-SWEEPER


     "Sweep! sweep! sweep! sweep!" cries little Jack,
     With brush and bag upon his back,
       And black from head to foot;
     While daily, as he goes along,
     "Sweep! sweep! sweep! sweep!" is all his song,
       Beneath his load of soot.

     But then he was not always black.
     Oh no! he once was pretty Jack,
       And had a kind papa;
     But, silly child! he ran to play
     Too far from home, a long, long way,
       And did not ask mamma.

     So he was lost, and now must creep
     Up chimneys, crying, "Sweep! sweep! sweep!"

_Note._--This was written in the days when little boys, like Tom in
_Water Babies_, were sent actually up the chimneys to clean them out.




THE FIGHTING WICKET-KEEPER


       In the schoolroom the boys
       All heard a great noise.
     Charles Moore had just finish'd his writing,
       So ran out to play,
       And saw a sad fray:--
     Tom Bell and John Wilson were fighting.

       He cried, "Let's be gone,
       Oh, come away, John,
     We want you to stand at the wicket;
       And you, Master Bell,
       We want you as well,
     For we're all of us going to cricket.

       "Our playmates, no doubt,
       Will shortly be out,
     For you know that at twelve study ceases;
       And you'll find better fun
       In play, ten to one,
     Than in knocking each other to pieces."




THE GOOD SCHOLAR


       Joseph West had been told,
       That if, when he grew old,
     He had not learned rightly to spell,
       Though his writing were good,
       'Twould not be understood:
     And Joe said, "I will learn my task well."

       And he made it a rule
       To be silent at school,
     And what do you think came to pass?
       Why, he learnt it so fast,
       That from being the last,
     He soon was the first in the class.




THE GOOD SCHOLAR FIGHTS


     One afternoon as Joseph West,
     The boy who learnt his lesson best,
     Was trying how his whip would crack,
     By chance he hit Sam Headstrong's back.

     Enraged, he flew, and gave poor Joe,
     With all his might, a sudden blow:
     Nor would he listen to one word,
     When Joe endeavoured to be heard.

     Joe, finding him resolved to fight,
     For what was accidental quite,
     Although he never fought before,
     Beat Headstrong till he'd have no more.




THE DEATH OF THE GOOD SCHOLAR'S FOE


       "My dear little Ned,"
       His grandmamma said,
     "I think I have caution'd you twice;
       I hope you'll take heed,
       I do, love, indeed,
     And I beg you'll not venture on ice.

       "Good skaters, I know,
       On the ice often go,
     And also will others entice,
       When there has not been frost
       Two days at the most,
     And when very thin is the ice."

       He went to the brook,
       Resolv'd but to look,
     And though he could slide very nice,
       And the slides were _so long_,
       He knew 'twould be wrong,
     So he did not then go on the ice.

       He wisely behav'd,
       And his life thus he sav'd;
     For Sam Headstrong (who ne'er took advice)
       Went where it was thin--
       Alas! he fell in:
     He sank, and went under the ice.




ROBERT'S THOUGHTLESS BROTHERS


     Robert, when an infant, heard
     Now and then a naughty word,
     Spoken in a random way
     By his brothers when at play.
     Was the baby then to blame
     When he tried to lisp the same?

     No! he could not, whilst so young,
     Know what words were right or wrong,
     But for boys who better knew,
     Punishment was justly due,
     Which the thoughtless brothers met
     In a way they won't forget.




JOE'S LIGHT PUNISHMENT


       As Joe was at play,
       Near the cupboard one day,
     When he thought no one saw but himself,
       How sorry I am,
       He ate raspberry jam,
     And currants that stood on the shelf.

       His mother and John
       To the garden had gone,
     To gather ripe pears and ripe plums;
       What Joe was about
       His mother found out,
     When she look'd at his fingers and thumbs.

       And when they had dined,
       Said to Joe, "You will find,
     It is better to let things alone;
       These plums and these pears
       No naughty boy shares,
     Who meddles with fruit not his own."




FALSEHOOD "CORRECTED"


     When Jacky drown'd our poor cat Tib,
     He told a very naughty fib,
       And said he had not drown'd her;
     But truth is always soon found out--
     No one but Jack had been about
       The place where Thomas found her.

     And Thomas saw him with the cat
     (Though Jacky did not know of that),
       And told papa the trick;
     He saw him take a slender string
     And round poor Pussy's neck then swing
       A very heavy brick.

     His parents being very sad
     To find they had a boy so bad,
       To say what was not true,
     Determined to correct him then;
     And never was he known again
       Such naughty things to do.




THE SUPERIOR BOYS


     Tom and Charles once took a walk,
       To see a pretty lamb;
     And, as they went, began to talk
       Of little naughty Sam;

     Who beat his younger brother, Bill,
       And threw him in the dirt;
     And when his poor mamma was ill,
       He teased her for a squirt.

     "And I," said Tom, "won't play with Sam,
       Although he has a top":
     But here the pretty little lamb
       To talking put a stop.




GEORGE'S CURIOUS TASTE


       On George's birthday
       Was such a display!
     He was dress'd in a new suit of clothes;
       And look'd so genteel,
       With his buttons of steel,
     And felt quite like a man, I suppose.

       Now at tea, with much care,
       He partakes of his share,
     Nor spills it, as careless boys do;
       He is always so clean,
       And so fit to be seen,
     That his clothes, you would think, were just new.

       Yet George loves to play,
       And is lively and gay,
     But is careful of spoiling his dress;
       So a pinafore wears,
       Which he likes, he declares;
     And I think he is right, I confess.




THOMAS BROWN'S DISAPPOINTMENT


     Young Alfred with a pack of cards
       Could make a pancake, build a house,
     Would make a regiment of guards,
       And sit as quiet as a mouse.

     A silly boy, one Thomas Brown,
       Who came to dine and spend the day,
     Took great delight to throw it down,
       Then, rudely laughing, ran away.

     And what did little Alfred do?
       He knew lamenting was in vain,
     So patiently, and wisely too,
       He, smiling, built it up again.




CONSIDERATE PHILIP


     When Philip's good mamma was ill,
     The servant begg'd he would be still;
     Because the doctor and the nurse
     Had said that noise would make her worse.

     At night, when Philip went to bed,
     He kiss'd mamma, and whisp'ring said,
     "My dear mamma, I never will
     Make any noise when you are ill."




THE MODELS


     As Dick and Bryan were at play
       At trap, it came to pass
     Dick struck the ball, and far away,
       He broke a pane of glass.

     Though much alarmed, they did not run,
       But walk'd up to the spot;
     And offer'd for the damage done
       What money they had got.

     When accidents like this arise,
       Dear children! this rely on:
     All honest, honourable boys
       Will act like Dick and Bryan.




POLITENESS


     Good little boys should never say,
       "I will," and "Give me these";
     Oh no! that never is the way,
       But, "Mother, if you please."

     And, "If you please," to sister Anne,
       Good boys to say are ready;
     And, "Yes, sir," to a gentleman,
       And, "Yes, ma'am," to a lady.




RICHARD'S REFORMATION


     Miss Lucy was a charming child,
       She never said, "I wont";
     If little Dick her playthings spoil'd
       She said, "Pray, Dicky, don't."

     He took her waxen doll one day,
       And bang'd it round and round;
     Then tore its legs and arms away,
       And threw them on the ground.

     His good mamma was angry quite,
       And Lucy's tears ran down;
     But Dick went supperless that night,
     And since has better grown.




JAMES'S SACRIFICE


       Little James, full of play,
       Went shooting one day,
     Not thinking his sister was nigh;
       The arrow was low,
       But the wind raised it so,
     That it hit her just over the eye.

       This good little lad
       Was exceedingly sad
     At the pain he had given his sister;
       He look'd at her eye,
       And said, "Emma, don't cry,"
     And then, too, he tenderly kiss'd her.

       She could not then speak,
       And it cost her a week
     Before she recover'd her sight;
       And James burn'd his bow
       And his arrows, and so
     I think little James acted right.




THE EXCELLENT LORD MAYOR


     "Oh dear papa!" cried little Joe,
     "How beautiful the Lord Mayor's show!
     In that gold coach the Lord Mayor see--
     How _very_ happy he must be!"

     "My dear," the careful parent said,
     "Let not strange notions fill your head:
     'Tis not the gold that we possess
     That constitutes our happiness.

     "The Lord Mayor, when a little boy,
     His time did properly employ;
     And, as he grew from youth to man,
     To follow goodness was his plan.

     "And that's the cause they love him so,
     And cheer him all the way they go;
     They love him for his smiling face
     More than for all his gold and lace."




CLEVER LITTLE THOMAS


       When Thomas Poole
       First went to school,
     He was but scarcely seven,
       Yet knew as well
       To read and spell
     As most boys of eleven.

       He took his seat,
       And wrote quite neat,
     And never idly acted;
       And then beside
       He multiplied,
     Divided, and subtracted.

       His master said,
       And stroked his head,
     "If thus you persevere,
       My little friend,
       You may depend
     Upon a prize next year."




WILLIAM'S ESCAPE


     'Tis winter, cold winter, and William has been
       To look at the place on the pool
     Where Henry was drown'd by the ice breaking in,
       About half a mile from the school.

     And Henry was told on that very same day
       He must not go into that field,
     But then, as he thought, if he did disobey,
       The fault might for once be conceal'd.

     A lesson for William, who hangs down his head,
       Without any spirits for play;
     His favourite friend and companion is dead
       Because _he would have his own way_.




Good Girls and Bad




REBECCA'S AFTERTHOUGHT


     Yesterday Rebecca Mason,
       In the parlour by herself,
     Broke a handsome china basin,
       Plac'd upon the mantel-shelf.

     Quite alarm'd, she thought of going
       Very quietly away,
     Not a single person knowing
       Of her being there that day.

     But Rebecca recollected
       She was taught deceit to shun;
     And the moment she reflected,
       Told her mother what was done;

     Who commended her behaviour,
     Lov'd her better, and forgave her.




A HINT TO MARY ANNE


     "Mamma, dear mamma," cried in haste Mary Anne,
     As into the parlour she eagerly ran,
     "I hear that a giant is just come to town,
     So tall, he is often obliged to stoop down;
     Oh, pray let us see him, oh, do let us go;
     Indeed, dear mamma, he's a wonderful show."

     "You are earnest, my love, and shall not be denied,"
     Her truly affectionate mother replied.
     "A lady this morning has also arrived
     Who of arms and of legs from her birth was deprived,
     Yet is in a number of ways as expert
     As if she were able these limbs to exert.

     "We'll visit Miss Beffin to-morrow, and then
     I'll speak of the giant and lady again;
     You are not mistaken, his overgrown size
     We cannot behold without feeling surprise,
     Whilst Beffin's example most forcibly stands
     A silent rebuke to all--_indolent hands_."




HOW TO WRITE A LETTER


     Maria intended a letter to write,
     But could not begin (as she thought) to indite,
     So went to her mother with pencil and slate,
     Containing "Dear Sister," and also a date.

     "With nothing to say, my dear girl, do not think
     Of wasting your time over paper and ink;
     But certainly this is an excellent way,
     To try with your slate to find something to say.

     "I will give you a rule," said her mother, "my dear,
     Just think for a moment your sister is here:
     And what would you tell her? consider, and then,
     Though silent your tongue, you can speak with your pen."




NEWS FOR PAPA


     When Sarah's papa was from home a great way,
     She attempted to write him a letter one day.
     First ruling the paper, an excellent plan,
     In all proper order Miss Sarah began.
     She said she lamented sincerely to tell
     That her dearest mamma had been very unwell;
     That the story was long, but that when he came back,
     He would hear of the shocking behaviour of Jack.
     Though an error or two we by chance may detect,
     It was better than treating papa with neglect;
     And Sarah, when older, we know will learn better,
     And write single "I" with a capital letter.




MARIA'S CHARITY


     Maria's aunt, who lived in Town,
       Once wrote a letter to her niece,
     And sent, wrapp'd up, a new half-crown,
       Besides a pretty pocket-piece.

     Maria jump'd with joy and ran
       To tell her sister the good news;
     She said, "I mean to buy a fan,
       Come, come along with me to choose."

     They quickly tied their hats, and talk'd
       Of yellow, lilac, pink, and green;
     But far the sisters had not walk'd,
       Before the saddest sight was seen.

     Upon the ground a poor lame man,
       Helpless and old, had tumbled down;
     She thought no more about the fan,
       But gave to him her new half-crown.




THE NEGLECTED TURK


     Miss Alice was quietly seated at work
     When Susan, her cousin, came quite in a hurry,
     Exclaiming, "Come, Alice, and look at a Turk,
     Oh, if you don't see him, I shall be so sorry.

     "His dress is so grand, but you don't seem to stir."
     "I cannot," said Alice, "mamma has requir'd me
     To stop in this room; I am waiting for her,
     And hope I shall finish the work she desir'd me."

     "All nonsense," said Susan, "I beg you will come";
     But Alice resolv'd on obedient behaviour,
     For which she felt glad, when her mother came home,
     And gave her a smile of approval and favour.




PRIDE AND PRIGGISHNESS


     "See, Fanny," said Miss Charlotte Pride,
       "How fine I am to-day:
     A new silk hat, a sash beside;
       Am I not very gay?

     "Look at my necklace--real pearls!
       My ear-rings, how they shine;
     I think I know some little girls
       Would like to be as fine."

     Said Fanny, "Your papa, 'tis true,
       Your dress can well afford;
     But if you think I envy you,
       I don't--upon my word.

     "My father loves to see me dress
       Quite modest, neat, and clean;
     In plain white muslin, I confess,
       I'm happy as a queen.

     "_Your_ Parents after pleasures roam,
       Not like papa, for he
     Delights to stay with me at home--
       _Now_ don't you envy me?"




HOW TO LOOK WHEN SPEAKING


     "Louisa, my love," Mrs. Manners began,
       "I fear you are learning to stare,
     To avoid looking bold, I must give you a plan,
       Quite easy to practise with care.

     "It is not a lady's or gentleman's eyes
       You should look at, whenever address'd,
     Whilst hearing them speak, or in making replies,
       To look at the _mouth_ is the best.

     "This method is modest and easy to learn,
       When children are glad to be taught;
     And ah! what a pleasure it is in return,
       To speak and to look as you ought!"




ISABELLA'S PARACHUTE


     Once as little Isabella
     Ventured, with a large umbrella,
     Out upon a rainy day,
     She was nearly blown away.

     Sadly frighten'd then was she,
     For 'twas very near the sea,
     And the wind was very high,
     But, alas! no friend was nigh.

     Luckily, her good mamma
     Saw her trouble from afar;
     Running just in time, she caught her
     Pretty little flying daughter.

_Note._--This story recalls the adventures of Robert at the end of
_Struwwelpeter_. Robert, however, was not caught.




MARIA SNUBBED


     Maria had an aunt at Leeds,
     For whom she made a purse of beads;
     'Twas neatly done, by all allow'd,
     And praise soon made her vain and proud.

     Her mother, willing to repress
     This strong conceit of cleverness,
     Said, "I will show you, if you please,
     A honeycomb, the work of bees!

     "Yes, look within their hive, and then
     Examine well your purse again;
     Compare your merits, and you will
     Admit the insects' greater skill!"




MATILDA'S EXTRAVAGANCE


     That beautiful cottage not far from the road
     In holiday time was Matilda's abode,
     Who, taken one day by her aunt to the town,
     Had put in her purse rather more than a crown:
     'Twas either to keep, or to give, or to spend
     In what she lik'd best, for herself or a friend:
     Soon trinkets and ribbons in turn made her stop
     To purchase a trifle at every shop,
     Before she remember'd the canvas and wool
     She intended to buy when her purse appear'd full;
     Then wanted to borrow, a favour her aunt
     Refus'd, because very improper to grant.
     Young ladies' extravagance ought to be met
     By teaching them--_never to run into debt_.




PAPA'S WATCHFULNESS


     Mamma had ordered Ann, the maid,
       Miss Caroline to wash;
     And put on with her clean white frock
       A handsome muslin sash.

     But Caroline began to cry,
       For what you cannot think:
     She said, "Oh, that's an ugly sash;
       I'll have my pretty pink."

     Papa, who in the parlour heard
       Her make the noise and rout,
     That instant went to Caroline,
       To whip her, there's no doubt.




ISABELLA'S DEFEAT


     "Mamma, I quite dislike these shoes,
       I hope you'll send them back;
     They are so ugly! I should choose
       Much prettier than black!

     "I thought you mention'd blue or buff
       When ordering a pair,
     Or green I should like well enough,
       But black I cannot bear!"

     Young Isabella's prattle o'er,
       Her mother soon express'd
     A wish that she would say no more,
       Since _black_ ones suited best.

     Which, when the little lady heard,
     She did not say another word.




THE TWO PATIENTS


     Miss Lucy Wright, though not so tall,
     Was just the age of Sophy Ball,
     But I have always understood
     Miss Sophy was not half so good:
     For as they both had faded teeth,
     Their teacher sent for Doctor Heath,
     But Sophy made a dreadful rout,
     And would not have hers taken out;
     But Lucy Wright endured the pain,
     Nor did she ever once complain.
     Her teeth return'd quite sound and white,
     While Sophy's ached both day and night.




FANNY'S BAD HABIT


     Fanny Fletcher is forgetful,
       Never wilful in her life,
     Neither obstinate nor fretful,
       Loving truth and shunning strife.

     From a girl of so much merit,
       May we not in time expect
     She will show a proper spirit
       _One_ wrong habit to correct?

     Friends will say it is a pity
       If her resolution fails--
     Fanny looks both good and pretty
       When she does not bite her nails!




SARAH'S DANGER


     Those who saw Miss Sarah gaping
       In the middle of the day,
     This remark were often making
       On this dull and drowsy way:

     "Half asleep, and yet she's waken!
       If, poor child, she is not sick,
     Some good method must be taken
       To correct this idle trick."




THE HOYDEN


     Miss Agnes had two or three dolls and a box
     To hold all her bonnets and tippets and frocks;
     In a red leather thread-case that snapp'd when it shut,
     She had needles to sew with and scissors to cut;
     But Agnes liked better to play with rude boys
     Than work with her needle, or play with her toys.

     Young ladies should always appear neat and clean,
     Yet Agnes was seldom dress'd fit to be seen.
     I saw her one morning attempting to throw
     A very large stone, when it fell on her toe:
     The boys, who were present and saw what was done,
     Set up a loud laugh, and they call'd it fine fun.

     But I took her home, and the doctor soon came,
     And Agnes, I fear, will a long time be lame:
     As from morning till night she laments very much,
     That now when she walks she must lean on a crutch;
     And she told her dear father, a thousand times o'er,
     That she never will play with rude boys any more.

_Note._--"Hoyden" is not used now. We say "Tomboy."




THE GIDDY GIRL


     Miss Helen was always too giddy to heed
       What her mother had told her to shun,
     For frequently over the street in full speed
       She would cross where the carriages run.

     And out she would go to a very deep well,
       To look at the water below;
     How naughty! to run to a dangerous well,
       Where her mother forbade her to go!

     One morning, intending to take but one peep,
       Her foot slipp'd away from the ground:
     Unhappy misfortune! the water was deep,
       And giddy Miss Helen was drown'd.




A WARNING TO FRANCES


     As Frances was playing and turning around,
     Her head grew so giddy she fell to the ground;
       'Twas well that she was not much hurt;
     But, O what a pity! her frock was so soil'd
     That had you beheld the unfortunate child,
       You had seen her all cover'd with dirt.

     Her mother was sorry, and said, "Do not cry,
     And Mary shall wash you, and make you quite dry,
       If you'll promise to turn round no more."
     "What, not in the parlour?" the little girl said.
     "No, not in the parlour; for lately I read
       Of a girl who was hurt with the door.

     "She was playing and turning, until her poor head
     Fell against the hard door, and it very much bled;
       And I heard Dr. Camomile tell
     That he put on a plaster and cover'd it up,
     Then he gave her some tea that was bitter to sup,
       Or perhaps it had never been well."




PLAYING WITH FIRE


     The friends of little Mary Green
       Are now in deep distress,
     The family will soon be seen
       To wear a mournful dress.

     It seems, from litter on the floor,
       She had been lighting straws,
     Which caught the muslin frock she wore,
       A sad event to cause.

     Her screams were loud and quickly heard,
       And remedies applied,
     But all in vain, she scarcely stirr'd
       Again, before she died!




HOW TO HEAL A BURN


     O, we have had a sad mishap!
     As Clara lay in Nurse's lap,
     Too near the fire the chair did stand--
     A coal flew out and burnt her hand.

     It must have flown above the guard,
     It came so quick and hit so hard;
     And, would you think it? raised a blister.
     O, how she cried! poor little sister!

     Poor thing! I grieved to see it swell.
     "What will you put to make it well?"
     "Why," said Mamma, "I really think
     Some scraped potato, or some ink,

     "A little vinegar, or brandy,
     Whichever nurse can find most handy:
     All these are good, my little daughter,
     But nothing's better than cold water."




MARY ANNE'S KINDNESS


     How mischievous it was, when Will
     Push'd his young sister down the hill,
     Then ran away, a naughty boy,
     Although he heard her sadly cry!

     Their mother, who was walking out,
     Saw the rude trick, and heard him shout;
     With gentle voice, but angry nod,
     She threaten'd Willy with the rod.

     But Mary Anne, afraid of this,
     Begg'd they might now be friends and kiss:
     She said, "Mamma, I feel no pain,
     And Willy won't do so again."

     Then Willy call'd his sister "good,"
     And said he "never, never would."




AMBITIOUS SOPHY


     Miss Sophy, one fine sunny day,
     Left her work and ran away.
     When she reach'd the garden-gate,
     She found it lock'd, but would not wait,
     So tried to climb and scramble o'er
     A gate as high as any door.

     But little girls should never climb,
     And Sophy won't another time;
     For when upon the highest rail,
     Her frock was caught upon a nail:
     She lost her hold, and, sad to tell,
     Was hurt and bruised--for down she fell.




DRESSED OR UNDRESSED


     When children are naughty and will not be dress'd,
       Pray, what do you think is the way?
     Why, often I really believe it is best
       To keep them in night-clothes all day!

     But then they can have no good breakfast to eat,
       Nor walk with their Mother or Aunt;
     At dinner they'll have neither pudding nor meat,
       Nor anything else that they want.

     Then who would be naughty, and sit all the day
       In night-clothes unfit to be seen?
     And pray, who would lose all their pudding and play,
       For not being dress'd neat and clean?




MRS. BIRCH'S INFLUENCE


     "Indeed you are troublesome, Anne," said her aunt,
       "You begg'd me to bring you abroad,
     And now you are cross and pretend that you want
       To be carried the rest of the road.

     "I hope you know better than cry in the street:
       The people will think it so odd,
     And if Mrs. Birch we should happen to meet,
       She will ask if we want a new rod.

     "Then dry up your tears; with a smile on your face
       You will speak in a different tune.
     And now you have cleverly mended your pace,
       We shall both be at home very soon."




REBELLIOUS FRANCES


     The babe was in the cradle laid,
       And Tom had said his prayers,
     When Frances told the nursery-maid
       She would not go upstairs.

     She cried so loud her mother came
       To ask the reason why,
     And said, "Oh, Frances, fie for shame!
       Oh fie! Oh fie! Oh fie!"

     But Frances was more naughty still,
       And Betty sadly nipp'd:
     Until her mother said, "I will--
       I must have Frances whipp'd.

     "For, oh! how naughty 'tis to cry,
       But worse, much worse to fight,
     Instead of running readily
       And calling out, 'Good-night!'"




Kindness and Cruelty




THE HARMLESS COW


     A very young lady,
       And Susan the maid,
     Who carried the baby,
       Were one day afraid.

     They saw a cow feeding,
       Quite harmless and still:
     Yet scream'd, without heeding
       The man at the mill,

     Who, seeing their flutter,
       Said, "Cows do no harm;
     But send you good butter
       And milk from the farm."




THE HARMLESS WORM


     As Sally sat upon the ground,
     A little crawling worm she found
       Among the garden dirt;
     And when she saw the worm she scream'd,
     And ran away and cried, and seem'd
       As if she had been hurt.

     Mamma, afraid some serious harm
     Made Sally scream, was in alarm,
       And left the parlour then;
     But when the cause she came to learn,
     She bade her daughter back return,
       To see the worm again.

     The worm they found kept writhing round,
     Until it sank beneath the ground;
       And Sally learned that day
     That worms are very harmless things,
     With neither teeth, nor claws, nor stings
       To frighten her away.




THE BAD DONKEY-BOY'S GOOD FORTUNE


     "How can you bear to use him so,
       You cruel little monkey?
     Oh give him not another blow,
       But spare the patient Donkey."

     "I own," his mother said, "dear James,
       You please me by your feeling;
     But you do wrong to call him names,
       Your anger too revealing."

     "Well then," said James, "if what I say,
       Poor Donkey, won't relieve you--
     Here, boy, don't beat him all to-day,
       And sixpence I will give you."

     "You now behave," said she, "my dear,
       Like many much above you;
     In these kind actions persevere,
       And all your friends will love you."




GRATEFUL CARLO


     "Oh, do not drown that pretty thing,"
       One morn I heard Matilda say--
     "Do, now, untie that cruel string,
       And do not drown him, Robert, pray.

     "His feet, how drolly mark'd they are;
       And feel his coat, as soft as silk;
     Oh, let me have him, dear mamma,
       And let him share my bread and milk."

     Now little Carlo wagg'd his tail,
       And, looking up, he seem'd to say,
     "My gratitude shall never fail
       To you for saving me to-day."

     And some months after, so it proved,
       Carlo, the grateful, strong, and brave,
     His mistress (whom he dearly loved)
       Deliver'd from a watery grave.




GRATEFUL LUCY


     As Lucy with her mother walk'd,
     She play'd and gambol'd, laugh'd and talk'd
     Till, coming to the river side,
     She slipp'd, and floated down the tide.

     Her faithful Carlo being near,
     Jump'd in to save his mistress dear;
     He drew her carefully to shore,
     And Lucy lives and laughs once more.

     "Dear gen'rous Carlo," Lucy said,
     "You ne'er shall want for meat and bread;
     For every day, before I dine,
     Good Carlo shall have some of mine."




GRATEFUL TRUSTY


     Philip's playful dog was willing
       Always to be set on watch;
     When a whelp, by daily drilling,
       Trusty seldom found his match!

     Philip bought him very early
       From a beggar going round,
     Who, from being poor or surly,
       Said he should be "sold or drown'd."

     Trusty well repaid his master
       For the care of rearing him,
     For he sav'd from like disaster
       Philip, when he learn'd to swim!




SOMETHING IN STORE FOR RICHARD


     Richard is a cruel boy,
       The people call him "Dick,"
     For every day he seems to try
       Some new improper trick!

     He takes delight in whipping cats
       And pulling off their fur;
     Although at first he gently pats,
       And listens to their purr!

     A naughty boy! unless he mends,
       He will be told to strip,
     And learn how such amusement ends
       By feeling his own whip.




THE RESULT OF CRUELTY


     Jack Parker was a cruel boy,
     For mischief was his sole employ;
     And much it grieved his friends to find
     His thoughts so wickedly inclined.

     He thought it clever to deceive,
     And often ramble without leave;
     And ev'ry animal he met
     He dearly loved to plague and fret.

     But all such boys, unless they mend,
     May come to an unhappy end,
     Like Jack, who got a fractured skull
     Whilst bellowing at a furious bull.




Things to Eat




WHAT IS BEST FOR CHILDREN


     "Mamma, why mayn't I, when we dine,
     Eat ham and goose, and drink white wine?
     And pray, why may not I, like you,
     Have soup and fish, and mutton too?"

     "Because, my dear, it is not right
     To spoil a youthful appetite;
     By things unwholesome, though enjoy'd,
     The infant appetite is cloy'd.

     "A slice of mutton, roast or boil'd,
     Or good roast beef, best suits a child;
     A bread, or ground-rice, pudding too
     Is food adapted well for you.

     "From eating highly flavour'd things
     Illness or inconvenience springs;
     You lose the love of common food,
     Nor relish what will do you good."




BILLY GILL'S GOOD FORTUNE


     "Come, let us play,"
     Said Tommy Gay;
     "Well then, what at?"
     Said Simon Pratt;
     "At trap and ball,"
     Said Neddy Hall;
     "Well, so we will,"
     Said Billy Gill.

     "What a hot day!"
     Said Tommy Gay;
     "Then let us chat,"
     Said Simon Pratt;
     "On yonder hill,"
     Said Billy Gill.
     "Ay, one and all,"
     Said Neddy Hall.

     "For cakes I'll pay,"
     Said Tommy Gay;
     "I'm one for that,"
     Said Simon Pratt;
     "I'll bring them all,"
     Said Neddy Hall;
     "And I'll sit still,"
     Said Billy Gill.

     "Come with me, pray,"
     Said Tommy Gay;
     "Trust me for that,"
     Said Simon Pratt;
     They ate them all,
     Gay, Pratt, and Hall;
     And all were ill
     But Billy Gill.




CIVIL SPEECH


     "Give me some beer!" cried little Jane,
       At dinner-table as she sat.
     Her mother said, "Pray ask again,
       And in a prettier way than that.

     "For 'give me that,' and 'give me this,'
       Is not the best way to be heard:
     To make Ann hear, a little Miss
       Must add another little word."

     "Pray, give me, Ann, a glass of beer,"
       Jane blushing said--her mother smiled:
     "Now Ann will quickly bring it here,
       For you ask properly, my child."

     You little Misses, Masters too,
       Who wish to have a share of praise,
     Pray copy Jane, and always do
       Directly what your mother says.




THE COOK'S REBUKE


     James went to the door of the kitchen and said,
     "Cook, give me this moment, some honey and bread;
     Then fetch me a glass or a cup of good beer.
     Why, Cook, you don't stir, and I'm sure you must hear!"

     "Indeed, Master James," was the Cook's right reply,
     "To answer such language I feel rather shy;
     I hear you quite plainly, but wait till you choose
     To civilly ask, when I shall not refuse."

     What a pity young boys should indulge in this way,
     Whilst knowing so well what is proper to say;
     As if civil words, in a well-manner'd tone,
     Were learn'd to be us'd in the parlour alone!




THE LOST PUDDING


     Miss Kitty was rude at the table one day,
       And would not sit still on her seat;
     Regardless of all that her mother could say,
     From her chair little Kitty kept running away
       All the time they were eating their meat.

     As soon as she saw that the beef was remov'd,
       She ran to her chair in great haste;
     But her mother such giddy behaviour reprov'd
     By sending away the sweet pudding she lov'd,
       Without giving Kitty one taste.




SAMMY SMITH'S SAD FATE


     Sammy Smith would drink and eat,
       From morning until night;
     He filled his mouth so full of meat,
       It was a shameful sight.

     Sometimes he gave a book or toy
       For apple, cake, or plum;
     And grudged if any other boy
       Should taste a single crumb.

     Indeed he ate and drank so fast,
       And used to stuff and cram,
     The name they call'd him by at last
       Was often Greedy Sam.




STUPID WILLIAM


     William has a silly trick--
       On everything his hand he lays;
     He made himself extremely sick,
       One morning, by his greedy ways.

     I promised him I'd write it here
       (Although he owns he's much to blame),
     That all may read it far and near,
       Lest other boys should do the same.

     No scatter'd bits his eye can pass,
       He tastes and sips where'er he comes,
     He empties everybody's glass,
       And picks up everybody's crumbs.

     He'll not do so again, I hope:
       He has been warn'd enough, I think;
     For once he ate a piece of soap,
       And sipp'd for wine a glass of ink.




POISONOUS FRUIT


     As Tommy and his sister Jane
     Were walking down a shady lane,
     They saw some berries, bright and red,
     That hung around and overhead;

     And soon the bough they bended down,
     To make the scarlet fruit their own;
     And part they ate, and part, in play,
     They threw about, and flung away.

     But long they had not been at home
     Before poor Jane and little Tom
     Were taken sick, and ill, to bed,
     And since, I've heard, they both are dead.

     Alas! had Tommy understood
     That fruit in lanes is seldom good,
     He might have walked with little Jane
     Again along the shady lane.




HARRY'S CAKE


     "Betty, attend to what I say,
     This is my little boy's birth-day;
     Some sugar-plums and citron take,
     And send to school a large plum-cake."

     "That, madam, I will gladly do;
     Harry's so good and clever too:
     So let me have some wine and spice.
     For I would make it very nice."

     When it arriv'd, the little boy
     Laugh'd, sang, and jump'd about for joy;
     But, ah! how griev'd I am to say,
     He did not give a bit away.

     He _ate_, and _ate_, and _ate_ his fill,
     No wonder that it made him ill;
     Pain in his stomach and his head
     Oblig'd him soon to go to bed.

     Oh! long he lay, and griev'd the while,
     Order'd by Dr. Camomile
     Such physic, and so much to take,
     He now can't bear the name of cake.




PETER'S CAKE


     Peter Careful had a cake
     Which his kind mamma did bake;
     Of butter, eggs, and currants made,
     And sent to Peter--_carriage paid_.

     "Now," said Peter, "they shall see,
     Wiser than Harry I will be;
     For I will keep my cake in store,
     And that will make it last the more."

     He, like Harry (sad to say),
     Did not give a bit away,
     But, miser-like, the cake he locks
     With all his playthings in his box.

     And sometimes silently he'd go,
     When all he thought engag'd below,
     To eat a _very little_ piece,
     For fear his treasure should decrease.

     When next he went (it makes me laugh)
     He found the mice had eaten half,
     And what remain'd, though once a treat,
     So mouldy, 'twas not fit to eat.




WILLIAM'S CAKE


     Young William Goodchild was a boy
     Who lov'd to give his playmates joy;
     And when his mother sent _his_ cake,
     Rejoic'd for his companions' sake.

     "Come round," he cried, "each take a slice,
     Each have his proper share of ice;
     We'll eat it up among us, here:
     My birth-day comes but once a year."

     A poor blind man, who came that way,
     His violin began to play;
     But though he play'd, he did not speak,
     And tears ran slowly down his cheek.

     "What makes you weep?" young William cried.
     "I'm poor and hungry," he replied,
     "For food and home I'm forced to play,
     But I have eaten nought to-day."

     "Poor man!" said William, "half my share
     Remains, which I will gladly spare;
     I wish 'twas larger for your sake,
     So take this penny and the cake."

     I need not ask each youthful breast
     Which of these boys you like the best;
     Let goodness, then, incitement prove,
     And imitate the boy you love.




HOW TO MAKE A CHRISTMAS PUDDING


     Now, little Sophy, come with me,
     To make a pudding you shall see;
     Now sit quite still, and see me do it;
     See, here's the flour and the suet.

     The suet must be chopped quite small,
     For it should scarce be seen at all;
     A pound of each will nicely suit,
     To which I put two pounds of fruit.

     One is of currants, one of plums
     (You'll find it good when boiled it comes);
     Then almonds, sugar, citron, spice,
     And peel, will make it very nice.

     Now see me stir and mix it well,
     And then we'll leave the rest to Nell;
     Now see, the pudding-cloth she flours,
     Ties it, and boils it full five hours.


THE END

_Printed by_ R. & R. Clark, Ltd., _Edinburgh_


_For a list of Children's books and others see the next pages._


"THE DUMPY BOOKS FOR CHILDREN"


No. I.

The Flamp,

The Ameliorator,

AND THE

Schoolboy's Apprentice

BY

EDWARD VERRALL LUCAS


_18mo. Cloth. 1s. 6d._

     _The Westminster Gazette._--"Very delightful stories they
     are. The great difficulty with books for children is that
     they are often so large, a difficulty which in the case of
     the bound annual really assumes formidable
     proportions--especially to the uncle or aunt who is seized
     by the juvenile press-gang and coerced into reading aloud.
     But this 'Dumpy Book' is quite perfect from that point of
     view, for it is no bigger than a prayer-book. All three
     tales are capital fun, and admirably suited to children....
     We have unreserved praise for this child's book, dainty and
     attractive in what it contains and in the way in which it is
     produced."


TOM, UNLIMITED

_A STORY FOR CHILDREN_

BY

MARTIN LEACH WARBOROUGH


_Globe 8vo. Cloth. 5s._

[Illustration: LITTLE CAIUS.]

_With over Fifty Illustrations by Gertrude Bradley_


A CHILD'S ANTHOLOGY

       *       *       *       *       *

A BOOK OF VERSES FOR CHILDREN

COMPILED BY

EDWARD VERRALL LUCAS

_With Cover, Title-Page, and End Paper designed in colours by F. D.
Bedford_

Crown 8vo. Cloth Gilt. 6s.

       *       *       *       *       *

     _The Globe._--"Is, we think, the best of its kind--partly
     because it is so comprehensive and so catholic, partly
     because it consists so largely of matter not too hackneyed,
     partly because that matter is so pleasantly arranged. The
     verse here brought together is full of agreeable variety, it
     is from many sources, some hitherto not drawn upon; and it
     has been grouped in sections with a happy sense of congruity
     and freshness."


A BOOK OF VERSES--

(_Continued_)


PREFACE (ADDRESSED TO CHILDREN)

Unless you are very keenly set upon reading to yourself, I think I
should advise you to ask some one to read these pieces aloud, not too
many at a time. And I want you to understand that there is a kind of
poetry that is finer far than anything here: poetry to which this book
is, in the old-fashioned phrase, simply a "stepping-stone." When you
feel, as I hope some day you will feel, that these pages no longer
satisfy, then you must turn to the better thing.

                                                 E. V. L.

The following are the various headings under which the Contents are
grouped:--

     Two Thoughts--The Open Air--The Year--Christmas--The Country
     Life--Blossoms from Herrick and Blake--Birds--Dogs and
     Horses--Compressed Natural History--Unnatural History--Poets
     at Play--Counsel--Old-Fashioned Girls--Marjorie Fleming,
     Poetess--Old-Fashioned Boys--Looking Forward--From
     "Hiawatha"--Good Fellows--The Sea and the Island--A Bundle
     of Stories--Bedtime--A Few Remarks.


OTHER OF MR. GRANT RICHARDS'S PUBLICATIONS.

THE FLOWER OF THE MIND: A Choice among the Best Poems. By ALICE MEYNELL.
With Cover designed by LAURENCE HOUSMAN. Crown 8vo. Buckram, 6s.

REALMS OF UNKNOWN KINGS: Poems. By LAURENCE ALMA-TADEMA. Fcap. 8vo.
Paper covers, 2s. net. Buckram, 3s. net.

POEMS BY A. AND L. By ARABELLA and LOUISA SHORE. Crown 8vo. Cloth. 5s.
net.

RUBAIYAT OF OMAR KHAYYAM. A Paraphrase from several Literal
Translations. By RICHARD LE GALLIENNE. Long Fcap. 8vo. Parchment Cover.
5s.

       *       *       *       *       *

     GRANT RICHARDS

     9 HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN, W.C.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Mrs. Turner's Cautionary Stories, by 
Elizabeth Turner

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MRS. TURNER'S CAUTIONARY STORIES ***

***** This file should be named 32523.txt or 32523.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/5/2/32523/

Produced by David Edwards and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net. (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
