The Project Gutenberg eBook, A Little Freckled Person, by Mary Carolyn
Davies, Illustrated by Harold Cue


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: A Little Freckled Person
       A Book of Child Verse


Author: Mary Carolyn Davies



Release Date: May 27, 2010  [eBook #32553]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LITTLE FRECKLED PERSON***


E-text prepared by Juliet Sutherland, Jennifer Sahmoun, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 32553-h.htm or 32553-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/32553/32553-h/32553-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/32553/32553-h.zip)





A LITTLE FRECKLED PERSON

A Book of Child Verse

by

MARY CAROLYN DAVIES

With Illustrations by Harold Cue


[Illustration: A LITTLE FRECKLED PERSON WHO HAS NEVER MUCH TO SAY]







Boston and New York
Houghton Mifflin Company
The Riverside Press Cambridge
1919

Copyright, 1919, by Mary Carolyn Davies
All Rights Reserved




ILLUSTRATIONS


    A little freckled person who has never much
    to say                                          _Frontispiece_

    A rabbit works its ears, and tries To watch
    you with its rabbit eyes                                     4

    Weed the garden, carry wood                                  8

    I like the kitten of my friends                             30

    Unfinished wings Are such curious things                    36

    While I'm washing dishes, or scraping out
    the skillet                                                 58

    I'd like to be a pirate, A scarlet scarf about
    my neck, a cutlass at my wrist                              80

    They are thirsty, so we give Water first
    that they may live                                         100




A LITTLE FRECKLED PERSON


  They think I'm just a little girl
    At study, work, or play,--
  A little freckled person who
    Has never much to say.

  They do not know a princess oft
    In golden gown am I,
  With cheeks like apple petals soft
    And eyes like sea or sky.

  They only see my tumbled braids,
    They do not know I wear
  A crown with turquoises and beryls
    Upon my coiled-up hair.

  They do not know adventures dire
    Beset me, land and sea,
  That page and courtier, knight and squire,
    Before me bend the knee.

  That haughty ships with silken sails
    Upon my bidding go--
  All these, and other happy things,
    They cannot, cannot know.

  They only see a little girl
    At study, work, or play,--
  A little freckled person, who
    Has never much to say!




THE SELFISH SEA


  The sea is very, very wide:
  It takes up all the room outside;
  And when I stand beside the sea,
  It comes right up and pushes me!




THE RABBIT


  A rabbit works its ears, and tries
  To watch you with its rabbit eyes;
  Its saucy little tail it flounces,
  And when it hits the ground it bounces!

[Illustration: A RABBIT WORKS ITS EARS, AND TRIES TO WATCH YOU
WITH ITS RABBIT EYES]




THE UNCRITICAL KITTEN


  If I am selfish when I play
  My kitten likes me anyway!




NEXT-DOOR PEOPLE


  The next-door people have a bird,
  The yellowest you ever heard!
  It hops, and chirps, and sings--and sings!
  Aren't next-door people pleasant things!




PROBATION

  Mother says:
    If you're thoughtful and polite;
    Go to bed at eight each night;
    Always hasten to do chores
    And give up chairs for visitors,
    Weed the garden, carry wood,
    And be very still and good--

  Mother says:
    If you're faithful in your task;
    Never beg, but only ask;
    Fold your napkin, say your prayers;
    Put no gum upon the chairs;
    Keep your bureau drawer quite neat;
    Never walk through pools, but on
    The sidewalk till the mud is gone;
    And say "Thank you" often, and
    Sit erect and walk and stand;
    And wash well behind your ears;
    Always wait until it clears
    To wear your best clothes, and not fail
    To hang your coat upon its nail--
    You will find the people where
    You live, like to have you there!

       *       *       *       *       *

    Our house has a pleasant yard.
    I am trying very hard!

[Illustration: WEED THE GARDEN, CARRY WOOD]




PERHAPS!


  You never know, in this great world, what
    wonders there may be--
  Perhaps there's buried treasure out
    beneath our cherry tree!




'FRAID STARS


  The stars are like us children here,
    Not any older grown:
  At night, the little 'fraid stars stay
  Together in the Milky Way--
    The brave ones stand alone!



THE STARS


  The stars are lighted candles
    Upon a Christmas tree;
  (The branches, that they hang upon
    We cannot ever see:)
  On Christmas Eve the angels stand
    About it after tea.

  And if an angel's very good
  He gets a present, as he should.




AS YOU WOULD BE DONE BY


  Of course I believe in fairies!
    Of course I know they're true!
  --Just think, if you were a fairy,
    And no one believed in you!




DRAWING


  Upon my slate I draw
  Strange things I never saw,
  Nor you, nor any one!
  But oh, it is such fun!




THE FISHING-POLE


  A fishing-pole's a curious thing:
  It's made of just a stick and string:
  A boy at one end and a wish;
  And on the other end a fish!




SYMPATHY


 Little fishing-boat, a blur
    On the ocean blue,
  Don't you ever wish you were
    A little taller, too?

  I've a birthday! Look at me
    As you dart and dip!
  Grow, and maybe soon you'll be
    A white-sailed ship!




THE FOREST SCHOOL


  The little firs demurely stand
  In studious rows, on either hand,
  On winter days about like these,
  All learning to be Christmas trees.




WHITE CHERRY


  The moon's a white cherry,
    For sale in the sky,
  And each one admires it,
    But no one will buy.

  Oh, cherry that lies
    On the shop-window shelf,
  When I have a penny
    I'll buy you myself!




THE INDEPENDENT KITE


  A kite is very nice to own;
    It never, never grieves you,
  'Cept when it wants to play alone
    And just goes off and leaves you!




PRACTICING


  The black notes are the bridegrooms,
    The white notes are the brides!
  And I? Why, I'm the minister and all the guests besides!




FAIRYLAND SECRET SERVICE


  A snowflake is a letter
    A fairy in the sky
  Is sending to the fairies here,
  And, when they've read its message clear,
    Lest any one should spy,
  They purse their little lips and blow
  To melt that tell-tale note of snow.
  Oh, let us see if we can snatch
  And read a Fairyland dispatch!




A BOOK


  A book's a magic sort of thing
  That makes you sailor, chief, or king;
  When I am old, and own a shelf,
  I think I'll have a book myself!




THE LONESOME SEA


  The sea is so lonely
    Now winter is here,
  I wish we could only
    Go down to the pier,
  And say to him kindly, "Don't think, Mr. Sea,
  We've forgotten you quite, for we haven't, not we!

  "Last summer we scurried
    All sudden, I know,
  From the beach. Don't be worried!
    We hated to go!"
  I should like to go clear to the end of the pier,
  For he's lonesome; and tell him, "We're coming next year!"




THE MOUNTAINS


  The mountains do not stir, or show
  Emotion when Spring comes, I know;
  But though they are restrained by pride,
  I think that they are glad inside!




WHEN DOLLY IS AFRAID


  When lights are standing in the street;
  And on the sidewalk all the feet
  Are quiet, and it's growing late,
  And our brown clock is striking eight:

  I pack the animals and ark,
  And push them deep into the dark;
  And in a quiet row I lay
  My cups and saucers 'til the day.

  But who could ever say Good-night
  And leave her doll in such a plight?
  I couldn't let her stay without
  A friend, and hear the dark about!

  So she and I go straight upstairs;
  She shuts her eyes while we say prayers,
  And then we lie and count up sheep
  Until we both are fast asleep.

  It's not because I dread, at all,
  The darkness, that I keep my doll,
  But just because I think that she
  Would be _so_ frightened without _me_!




TREE-CHILDREN


  The little trees that to the breeze
  Make quaint and timorous courtesies:
  I like to come and play with these.

  Each grown-up pine that stands in line
  Is but a stranger great and fine--
  The _little_ trees are friends of mine!




THE COCKATOO


  Green and yellow cockatoo,
  Won't you let me talk to you?
  Or if you would kinder be
  Won't you come and talk to me?

  Tell me all about the places
  Where the children have black faces,
  Armlets, anklets, copper rings!
  Where the cannibals are kings!

  Has a hungry crocodile
  Ever met you with a smile?
  Have you taken many a trip
  In a rakish pirate ship?

  Cockatoo, cockatoo,
  How I'd like to talk to you!
  But as you can guess, I'd be
  Gladder if you'd talk to me!




HIGH COST OF LIVING


  Among the angels--it's a shame
  To tell it--prices are so dear,
  They use the blown-out candle-flame
  To mend the ragged stars, this year!




NEED


  I like the kitten of my friends,
    I like its claws caught in my lace,
  I like the way each small ear ends,
    I like the black upon its face.
  I feel its heart beat in my hand,
  And then I somehow understand
  So many things I didn't know:
  I'm kinder, and my voice is low;
  And I close doors more softly, too,
  And do the things I'm told to do,
  Instead of wishing they were done.
  --But mother says we mayn't have one.

  I want a kitten all my own
  To play with when I'm left alone,
  And when the family's gone away
  To shop, and work, and call, and play
  Tennis and other things. It's all
  So queer and lonely in the hall
  And in the parlor, too, and in
  The sitting-room, where words have been
  But are not now. The chairs and I
  Wait through the hours, till by-and-by,
  Our only playmates little fears--
  There's room in all our lives, I think,
  For one small kitten, black as ink
  With two white spots behind its ears.

[Illustration: I LIKE THE KITTEN OF MY FRIENDS]




SKY-COLOR


  Blue skies are very apt to fade;
    Dark colors wear the best, it's true--
  But who would choose a useful shade?
    I want mine blue!




LEFT OUT


  If shoemakers' children are left with feet bare
  I've wondered and wondered (I don't think it's fair)
  If maybe at Christmas there aren't any toys
  Left over for Santa Claus' own girls and boys!




THE WHITE BIRCH


  A white birch grows
  In the deepest wood.
  If you are good
  And the stars are right
  --Who knows?--
  You may see, some night,
  The nymphs stand under
  The sea-green heave
  Of its boughs, in a row.
  --But if you wonder,
  They will fade and go.
  --You must just believe!




THE PLAYMATE


  Last year I played with the country,
    This year, with the sea,
  Now the queer old city
    Stops and plays with me.--

  Stops in its counting of pennies
    (It never, never fails
  To know the time I'm going to bed)--
    And tells me fairy tales.




THANKSGIVING


  The turkey is a mournful bird
  From all that I have ever heard;
  If he could live this day to see
  How very thankful he would be!




THE NEST


  That tree has a nest,
  And if I lie
  Quite still, and if I
  Have luck, I may see
  Two heads or three
  Stretched out. Hark! hark!
  Wings sound! And a dark
  Shadow comes flying
  Through boughs. They are trying
  To reach the food that the large bird brings.
  Unfinished wings
  Are such curious things!
  They are almost old enough to fly,
    The three. If they knew
    As I do, and you,
  That nests are cozier than the sky!

[Illustration: UNFINISHED WINGS ARE SUCH CURIOUS THINGS]




THE ORANGE


  The sky is a greedy child
    Who holds one
  Yellow orange in her hand:
    It is the sun.

  She holds it primly:
    Then, hid from sight,
  All in the darkness,
    Eats it at night.




I ALMOST GOT TO FAIRYLAND ONE DAY--


  I almost got to Fairyland, one day--
  I walked out straight along the sun-path, so.
  And there were little hummings in the world,
  And moving things went through the grass, and all
  The air was just as glad as if there were
  A party, somewhere, at a fairy's house.
  I knew they had a party, and I knew
  That they had kept a seat for me, if I
  Could only find the right turn in the road.
  I was so near to Fairyland, so near
  That I could almost hear the fairy gates
  Swing open for me, waiting--just for me.
  I was so near to Fairyland--and then,
  Just then, I heard my mother calling me;
  "Come in to supper, dear," I heard her call;
  And so I never got to Fairyland.

  I know that there are fairies, though, because
  I almost got to Fairyland one day.




UNTRAINED TRAINS


  A train should never jump the track;
  Such rude behavior shows a lack
  Of poise--it's really a disgrace!
  A train should know its proper place!




HANDICAPPED


  I run as fast as I can go
    When trains run past our place;
  They're bigger far than I, and so
    They always win the race!




A SUNSET


  Life seems so sweet! I don't know why,--
  Perhaps 't is just because the sky
  Put on, to-night, to make me glad,
  A dress I didn't know she had.




TO SHIPS


  Tall ships, tall ships, sailing out to sea,
  Have you in your dreaming hearts any room for me,
  For a little singing maid who would sail with you
  Out to where the ocean miles are blue, blue, blue?

  Tall ships, tall ships, loosening from shore,
  Steering all by star-craft, and sailing evermore,
  Take a little wishful maid with you as you go!
  I would feel the ocean tempests blow, blow, blow!

  Tall ships, tall ships, see, I stretch my hands!
  Pray you, take me with you to far and foreign lands!
  Ships, an eager little maid prays that she may be
  Sailing, as you sail, forever free, free, free!




SEA-BUTTERFLIES


  The sea is like a garden green,
    The spray like daisies white;
  And one full rose alone is seen,
    The great red sun at night.

  A-fluttering in their loveliness
    The ships against the skies
  Are just--as any one can guess--
    The garden's butterflies!




BUDS


  The buds have come to town;
    Demure and brown
  Their coats; and under, see,
  How can such fragile, fairy colors be?

  The buds have come to us
    All tremulous.
  We're quite as glad as they.
  Take off your cloaks, dear little buds, and stay!




THE FLOWER CART


  The flower cart's coming down the street,
  With tulips red and tulips sweet;
  And from the wagon color spills
  Of hyacinths and daffodils.
  And purple rhododendrons grow
  Beside the roses in a row.

  Oh, let us hasten down to spend,
  Before the flower cart rounds the bend!
  Oh, let us bring our pennies and
  Hold all of Spring within our hand.




EAVESDROPPERS


  The stars lean down and listen,
    At fairy-story time;
  They twinkle and they glisten
    To hear each happy rhyme;
  To all our cheerful singing
    The little stars beat time.

  The stars lean down and hear us,
    They know it's not polite,
  But then, they cease to fear us,
    About this time of night.
  They creep and edge up near us,
    Although it isn't right.

  Eavesdroppers! But we love them,
    We leave a little space,
  And never crowd or shove them,
    Because, in any case,
  That stretch of blue above them
    Is such a lonely place!




SINGING SECRETS


  Bird up in the pine-tree-top,
    Tossing down to me
  Broken songs, to where I sit
    Underneath the tree,--

  Bird up in the pine-tree-top,
    What is it you hear
  That you try to say again
    In your singing clear?

  What is it you see up there
    In the green and blue?
  Does the world look very strange,--
    Strange and fair to you?

  Do you see some happy thing
    That you try to show
  In the eager chirps you toss
    Gayly down below?

  You are singing secrets, bird,
    I am very sure.
  I can understand no word,
    But, oh, try once more!

  Bird up in the pine-tree-top,
    Sing again to me!
  Maybe I can hear it now!
    Maybe I can see!




THE DAY BEFORE APRIL


  No, little brown bird, go away,
  I have no time to dream to-day,
  I must do certain things, you see.
  I know not why, but it must be!
  Here I must study foolish books,
  And not guess how the lilac looks!

  Hush, little bird, and do not sing!
  I have no time to play with Spring!




THE CORN

  The corn's like soldiers in a row.
    We'll stop and cheer them. Let's!
  The tassels are their waving flags;
    The leaves their bayonets.

  They march to meet King Frost, their foe,
    The fight will soon begin.
  King Frost will conquer them, I know--
    But oh, if they _could_ win!




IF A STAR--


  If a star were to say
  "I will stay
  And watch Dawn bring the day,"--
  If a star were so bold
  Would the Moon-Mother old
  Let it stay in the sky?
  --Try, star, try!




DRYAD


  Dryad, hidden in this tree!
  Break your bonds and talk to me!

  No one's watching, only peep
  From your cave! The town's asleep!

  No one knows I stand here, so
  Come! for they will never know!

  Tell me what you think of here
  When the moon is sharp and clear,

  When the clouds are over you,
  When the ground is wet with dew.

  Dryad, are you happy, say!
  Do you like to live this way?

  I will keep your secrets well,
  I will never, never tell!

  Dryad, hidden in our tree,
  Come, oh, come and talk to me!




THE DUEL


  Once a blotter met a blot
  In a still, secluded spot.
  Here's the blotter, brave to see;
  But the blot--Oh, where is he?




THE LITTLEST CLOUD


  O littlest cloud in all the blue,
    Don't go so fast, for, see,
  I'm just about the size of you!
    Come down and play with me!

  But oh, if that's the only way--
    To come in raindrops, why,
  I'll stay here by myself and play!
    I wouldn't have you cry!




PRINCES


  Cinderella sitting in her dingy chimney corner,
    Delving in the ashes, with the smoke upon her eyes,
  With pots and kettles waiting, all her kinfolk by to scorn her,
    Longed perhaps to meet a prince, handsome, young, and wise.

  Maybe Sleeping Beauty on her couch within the castle,
    While her golden hair crept down to touch her silent feet,
  Dreamed about a rider with a scarlet cap and tassel
    Who would hack away the hedge and cry, "Awaken, sweet!"

  While I'm washing dishes, or scraping out the skillet,
    Or when I am sprinkling, or folding up the clothes,
  Sometimes I too dream; it seems foolish-like to tell it...
    But their princes came at last and ... ah, who knows?

[Illustration: WHILE I'M WASHING DISHES, OR SCRAPING OUT THE SKILLET]




OUR SHARE


  Babies of Alaska, babies of Japan,
  Babies born to beads, or silk, or fez, or fur, or fan,
  None of all the babies that are toddling anywhere
  Is half so sweet a baby as the baby that's our share!




IF I WERE SANTA'S LITTLE BOY


  If I were Santa's little boy
    (If there's a family
  Of Santa Clauses in the sky
    Or where their home may be),
  If I were Santa's oldest son
  (I only hope that he _has_ one!)
  And my papa should say to me,
  "What Christmas present, son, would be
  The very thing you'd like to see
  Within your stocking Christmas Day?"
  I wouldn't stop to think, (would you?)
  But say,
  "I want to drive the sleigh!"

  And then when Christmas Week had come,
  At nearly dawn on Christmas Day,
  I'd load the sleigh with doll and drum;
  And find where the reindeer were tied,
  And hitch them quickly up, and I'd
  Shout very loudly, "Clear the way!"

  And crack the whip and drive the sleigh
  Down from the Pole and past the clang
  Of loud icicles in a row,
  Blown by the wind, to where the gang
  Lives, in our street, and then I'd shout,
  While frightened heads of boys stuck out
  From opened windows, in surprise,
  With tousled hair and sleepy eyes,
  I'd shout out loudly so that they
  Could hear each single word I'd say,

    "Hey, Dasher, Dancer!
    Faster, Prancer!
    Run as hard now as you can, sir!
    Stop your balking
    When I'm talking!
    We must fill each Christmas stocking
    In a hundred million places!
    Dasher, Dancer, mind your paces!
    Don't you dare to break the traces!"

  Then I'd shake the reins and shout
  To milkmen that might be about,
  "Clear the way
  For Santa's sleigh,
  Because I'm driving it to-day!"




THE PARTY DRESS


  All year long the timid maple has been dressed in prim and sober
    Little plain utilitarian gowns of quiet tints of green;
  But Spring is gone, and Summer's past, and now that it's October
    The modest little maple tree is costumed like a queen.
  Just look now, through our window, and I'm sure that you'll agree
  That her party dress is pretty as a party dress can be!




THE CLOCK THAT AUTUMN WINDS


  School is like a clock that stops
    In vacation time.
  --Tick, tock; tick, tock--
    A sing-song rhyme.
  Every school day is a minute.
  This clock has long minutes in it!

  In vacation time it stops!
    Not a sound at all!--
  Not a tick, not a tock!
    --Hanging on the wall
  Waits the clock until Fall finds it,
  Stands upon a chair and winds it!




CONVERSATION


  In proper sentences of purr
    And monosyllables of mews
  When I have told my news to her,
    My kitten tells me kitten news.




THE HOMESICK STAR


  The candle stood beside my bed
    And dropped a little tear;
  I sat up, shivering, and said,
    "I know you're lonesome here;

  "You'd rather have the sky than me;
    You've been too kind by far
  To say so. Now I've guessed, you see,
    That you're a homesick star!

  "I'll send you home again, for I
    Was homesick once, and know;
  And when you're safely in the sky
    And I am here below,

  "Then don't forget me, candle, please,
    But twinkle very plain
  On dark, dark nights about like these
    Above my window pane."

  Then, (though I am afraid at night
    That thieves might be about,)
  I screwed my eyes up very tight
    And blew the candle out!




THE LONESOMEST FAIRY


  There's a dewdrop shining bright
    On the grass by the sun undried,
  It's a tear that fell in the night
    When the lonesomest fairy cried.




THE PRESENT


  The sky is like a Christmas tree,
  The burning stars its candles be;
  The moon's a bulky gift and odd,
  Marked, "To the World, With Love, From God."




GRIEF


  Forget it soon? It's 'cause I know
  That I'll forget, I'm crying so!




THE SATURDAYS' PARTY IN FAIRYLAND


  All the Saturdays met one day
  (Each was very polite, they say),
  They shook each other by the hand,
  And had a party in Fairyland!

  They wouldn't let any Monday in,
  And not one Tuesday at all could win
  Her way past the supercilious crowd!
  And Wednesdays--why, they weren't allowed!

  Thursdays could only stand in the street
  And look through the door at the things to eat!
  And the Fridays and Sundays pretended they
  Didn't like parties, anyway!

  But the Saturdays had the greatest fun!
  They played "Hop-scotch" and "Run-sheep-run,"
  And "Frog-in-the-meadow," and "Pull-away!"
  And everything else they wanted to play!

  They used the Throne for "Musical Chairs"
  As if the Fairy Queen's house were theirs!
  In rooms enchanted they ran and hid,
  And whatever they wished they could do, they did!

  And after they'd played and played and played,
  They had pink straws in their lemonade!
  And the cookies and tarts were like a dream!
  And all the Saturdays had ice-cream!

  I'd my doubts when I heard--And you have yours--
  But strange things happen on Foreign Shores!
  And they say that the best fete ever planned
  Was the Saturdays' party in Fairyland!




THE SORROWS OF A SEAMSTRESS


  I'm learning to sew; I'm basting
    And hemming, and all that.
  But I wish that the eye were bigger
    Or the thread not quite so fat!




MY MOTHER'S GARDEN IS THE SEA--


  My mother's garden is the sea
    If it is viewed aright.
  The sweet alyssum borders are
    The ocean's breakers white;

  The butterflies and humming-birds
    Are sea-gulls flying o'er;
  And in our gravel garden path
    I pace a foreign shore!




THE GYMNASTIC CLOCK


  The little clock is friends with me,
  It talks as plain as plain can be,
  And says, each morning as it rises,
  "Now, don't forget your exercises!
  Both hands above your head, you know!
  Then lower them very slowly, so;
  Ho, don't get tired and stop, that way!
  _I_ exercise like this, all day!"
  Right in its face then, I say, "Pooh!
  I wouldn't boast of it, like you,
  But I can swing my arms 'round, too!"
  And so the clock then looks at me,
  And I look back, and I and he
  Each single morning, when we rise,
  Just exercise and exercise!




SNOWFLAKES


  The fairies called snowflakes all dressed up in white,
  They went to the dance, and were dancing all night.

  And now they lie tired, where sleep chanced to o'ertake them.
  Step lightly, speak softly, take care not to wake them!




PIRATE SONG


  A pirate, a pirate!
      I'd like to be a pirate!
  A black-bearded pirate, with a pistol at my side!
    With a crew to take my orders
    And scour the ocean's borders,
  I'd tramp along the quarterdeck, my ship upon the tide!

  A pirate, a pirate!
      I want to be a pirate
  A-sailing off to Tartary, to India, and Spain!
    I'd show them I was master,
    As we scudded fast and faster,
  We pirates bold, a-search for gold, across the Spanish Main!

  A pirate, a pirate!
      I'd like to be a pirate,
  A scarlet scarf about my neck, a cutlass at my wrist!
    With my boots of shining leather
    Creaking when they rubbed together,
  And a foeman lank, to walk the plank, whenever I'd insist!

  A pirate, a pirate!
      I want to be a pirate!
  To sail the seas for treasure, and to keep it in our hold!
    To fear no foe nor nation--
    What a splendid occupation
  To be a doughty pirate in the daring days of old!

  A pirate, a pirate!
      But if I were a pirate,
  I couldn't have a pair of skates, a football, or a sled!
    So, when I think it over,
    Though I'd _like_ to be a rover,
  I'd rather live in our house, and be myself, instead!

[Illustration: I'D LIKE TO BE A PIRATE A SCARLET SCARF ABOUT MY NECK,
A CUTLASS AT MY WRIST]




OUR PLAYHOUSE IS SO NEAR TO FAIRYLAND--


  Our playhouse is so near to Fairyland
  I think the fairies come and peep, to see
        How children play.

  So sometimes when there's something in the grass
  That sounds like fairies' footsteps very faint
        Not far away,

  We sit quite still, all on the playhouse wall;
  But though we wait and wait for them to speak
        They never do.

  Our playhouse is so near to Fairyland
  They'll come some day, and start to play with us,
        I think, don't you?




NEW LEAVES


  It doesn't do you any good to hide,
  Trees! Everybody knows you're there inside!
  Besides, although you think you're hid complete
  --We see your feet!




BEACH BIRDS


  Beach birds, beach birds, flying in to me,
  From the wide, blue palaces of your home, the sea,
  What have you to tell about, islands green and fair?
  Stories of the ships that tramp the trail to Everywhere?

  Have you seen a sailor lad dreaming at the wheel?
  Have you seen the great sharks flash, white beneath a keel?
  Have you seen the savages dancing in a ring?
  Have you, on a desert isle, ever seen a king?

  Beach birds, beach birds, flying in to me,
  In some far, blue palace-hall of your home, the sea,
  Will you tell the listening birds how, in a curious land,
  Once--you saw a little maid, playing in the sand?




THE SKY'S SONG


  The sky stands up to sing before us;
  Each star's a word, the moon's the chorus!




A SPRING THOUGHT


  The new birds tweet, and buds come sweet,
    And puffy clouds are in the sky.
  The world is full of little girls,
    But very few as nice as I!




THE ZOO


  We were walking in the zoo,
    And all the animals looked at us;
    The bear and the hippopotamus,
  And quite a few
  Lions and wolves and a yak and a gnu.
  And we were glad some one had made
    Cages around them, so that we
  Could walk there and not be afraid:
    But could just pretend that they were free;
  And could eat us both--if they wanted to.




SIX IN JUNE


  The leaves are born; the organ man
    Has got a new, quick tune.
  It's rained. The kitten's gone to sleep:--
    And I'll be six in June!




CLOUD MAGIC


  Beneath the comfortable sky
  All afternoon I love to lie,
  And think about the books I've read
  And all the things I dream in bed,
  When I am not quite sleeping yet--
  The things that day makes me forget.

  The white clouds looked like ships one day,
  And then like lambkins strayed away;
  And, as I look, I understand
  Just where it is that's Fairyland.

  It's only lying down, you know,
  The clouds make pictures for me, so
  When I stand up to see them, why,
  There's nothing there but clouds and sky!




AMBITION


  A lonely little desert isle
    That was not comforted
  By all the oceans mile on mile
    Sighed wistfully and said,
  "It's hard sometimes to be content.
  I wish I were a continent!"




TREE BIRTHDAYS


  Look! Look at me!
  To-day's my birthday, Tree!
  See, let me stand up, so,
  Beside you. How you grow!
  I'm tall, but oh,
  I'll never be as tall as you, I know!
  Tree, when's your birthday, please? Why don't you speak?
  I seem so small,
  And you're so tall,
  Perhaps you have a birthday every week!




IN AUTUMN


  I'm sorry, Trees,
  Your leaves have gone, and left you. But don't cry;
  Don't shiver so. You're luckier than I!
  When Summer's gone, and Fall's here stern and cool,
        I have to go to school.

  Don't tremble, Trees!
  You shouldn't mind. I wish that I were you!
  You don't have fractions, no, nor maps to do,
  And no one tries to make trees keep a rule--
        _I_ have to go to school!




STAR-CASTE


  A star looked down upon the sea,
  And to a lighthouse trim said he,
    "I wonder what you are!"
  The lighthouse twinkled instantly,
  "Why, you're the aristocracy,
    And I'm a working star!"




A NEWSBOY


  It must be hard to stand and stand ...
  But think of pennies in your hand!




A PLAYGROUND


  All the day, from dawn till dark,
  Nations play within this park.

  East and West are in that swing,
  Feet that crowd, and hands that cling.

  Europe leans to catch a ball.
  In the shadow of that wall,
  Asia sings and hugs a doll.

  All the day, from dawn till dark,
  Nations play within this park.




MOONS


  Mountain moons are large and white,
    Mountain moons are round;
  --I have seen the moons at night
    Growing from the ground,--
  And I like the seaside moons,
    In the sea-blue sky.
  But--in town, the moons are all
    So _very_ far and high!




THE DISCOVERY


  It often rains in our town. And, you know,
  It always happens when we've planned to go
  On walks or hikes, or somewhere out to play;
  It's curious how it seems arranged that way!

  We used to use those rainy days to pout,
  And stand there at the window looking out
  And wishing things about the weather--oh,
  I never knew a wish to change it, though!

  But now--the gladdest secret! We don't need
  Our dad to tell us stories. We can read!
  We've found that Fairyland is everywhere--
  You open up a book and, why, you're there!




GARDENING IS HEAPS OF FUN!


  Gardening is heaps of fun!
  We are partners with the sun,
  For we help him make things grow,
  With our spade and rake and hoe!

  First we spade the ground, then rake it;
  Ready for the seeds we make it;
  Then in furrows carefully
  Plant them as they ought to be.

  Soon above the ground we spy
  Tiny green things push and pry,
  Little plants that from their night
  Wake and climb to find the light.

  They are thirsty, so we give
  Water first that they may live;
  Then the weeds we vanquish, so
  Each wee shoot may thrive and grow.

  Busy raindrops, light, and air,
  Haste to come, our work to share.
  For to them too, every one,
  Gardening is heaps of fun!

[Illustration: THEY ARE THIRSTY, SO WE GIVE WATER FIRST THAT THEY
MAY LIVE]




FAIRY TOWN

(A LULLABY)


  In Fairy Town, in Fairy Town,
  Where Fairy folk go up and down,
  Where Fairy children, wee and gay,
  Frisk and romp in Fairy play,
  Every day's a holiday!
  And every night is sweeter still,
  For when, behind the Fairy hill
  The tiny Fairy sun goes down,
  It's sleepy time in Fairy Town!

    Sleepy time in Fairy Town!
      Sleep, sleep--sleep--
    While the stars of Fairy Town
      Safe watch keep.
    All the Fairy babies, so,
    Off to Dreamland softly go--
      Sleep--sleep--sleep!

  In Fairy Town, in Fairy Town,
  Each baby in a moonlight gown,
  Lies and dreams the livelong night.
  Fairy babies are so white,
  White and pink and wee and bright!
  Petals of a rose a-curl
  Make a Fairy baby girl;
  Autumn leaves, all dear and brown,
  Make the boys of Fairy Town!

    Sleepy time in Fairy Town!
      Sleep, sleep--sleep--
    While the stars of Fairy Town
      Safe watch keep.
    Like the Fairy babies, go
    Off to Dreamland, softly, so--
      Sleep--sleep--sleep!




STRAIGHT HAIR


  I wish my hair would curl!
  There isn't any other little girl
  With hair as straight as mine!
  I try to twine
  It round my finger, so;
  But oh,
  It just won't grow
  That way, no matter how I twist and whirl
  And coax it!--If, to-night,
  I wish upon a star that it would curl--
  Oh, then, to-morrow--do you think it _might_?




BEDTIME


  It's eight o'clock now, kitten, see!
  Good-night! Sweet dreams of mice and me!



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LITTLE FRECKLED PERSON***


******* This file should be named 32553.txt or 32553.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/2/5/5/32553



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

