The Project Gutenberg eBook, Freehold Land Societies, by J. Ewing Ritchie


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Freehold Land Societies
       Their History, Present Position, and Claims


Author: J. Ewing Ritchie



Release Date: June 14, 2010  [eBook #32807]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FREEHOLD LAND SOCIETIES***


Transcribed from the 1853 William Tweedie pamphlet by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.  Many thanks to Birmingham Central Library, England, for
allowing their copy to be used for this transcription.





                         FREEHOLD LAND SOCIETIES:
                              THEIR HISTORY,
                      PRESENT POSITION, AND CLAIMS.


                                    BY

                            J. EWING RITCHIE.

                                * * * * *

    "The laws of this country recognise nothing more sacred than the
    Forty-shilling Freehold Franchise; and a vote for the county obtained
    by these means is both constitutional and laudable."--LORD
    CHIEF-JUSTICE TINDAL.

    "What he had heard from hon. members told him nothing more than this,
    that the working population could easily, under the old system,
    acquire the right of voting; and that every man who owned forty
    shillings a-year could entitle himself to vote.  Were they to be told
    that the people of England were so degraded, so besotted, so dead to
    all sense of their true interests, that they could make no efforts to
    possess themselves of the franchise?"--MR. DISRAELI.

                                * * * * *

                                 LONDON:
                      WILLIAM TWEEDIE, 337, STRAND.

                                * * * * *

                             PRICE TWOPENCE.




ADVERTISEMENT.


The following pages are reprinted from the "WEEKLY NEWS AND
CHRONICLE"--the only Paper that aims to be the organ of the Freehold Land
Movement.  They are now published in the hope that they may win for that
movement a wider support and a heartier sympathy than it has already
secured.  It is a child--it will be a giant ere long.

3, Clifford's Inn.
   April 1853.




FREEHOLD LAND SOCIETIES:
THEIR HISTORY, PRESENT POSITION, AND CLAIMS.


The Freehold Land Movement is the great fact of the age.  We propose to
consider it in its origin, its present position as a means of investment
for the middle and working-classes, and in its political and social and
moral bearings.  We propose to tell what it has done, and what it seeks
to do.  Born of a working-man, it especially aims at the elevation of
working-men.  It comes to them, and offers them independence, wealth, and
political power.  Conceived in a provincial town, its ramifications now
extend through the land.  It demands no mean place in the consideration
of the influences now at work for realising a future brighter and better
than the past.  The philosopher, the political economist, and the
philanthropist must alike, then, deem it worthy of serious regard.  On
the part of a people, the absence of recklessness and waste is a great
good; but the formation of industrial and economical habits is a still
greater good.  From such plain, unpoetical traits of national character
are born the arts and the graces, and all that is civilised and refined
in life.  A rich people is not less virtuous, and is certainly far
happier, than a poor one.  Therefore we say, let the Freehold Movement
have wide support, for it is a schoolmaster, teaching the path leading
the people of this country to wealth, and to the power and independence
which wealth alone can give.  Thus much by way of introduction.  That our
readers may fully understand the subject, we shall begin at the
beginning, and explain.



I.--THE CONSTITUTION OF A FREEHOLD LAND SOCIETY.


Some time back the _Times_ asked scornfully, as Pilate of old did
concerning truth, what was a Freehold Land Society.  We reply, viewed in
a business light, it is simply a society for the purchase of land.  It
involves two commercial principles well understood--that purchasers
should buy in the cheapest market, and that societies can do what
individuals cannot.  Till the movement originated, the purchaser of a
small plot of ground had to pay in lawyer's expenses connected with the
purchase frequently as much as he paid for the plot itself.  A society
buys a large piece of ground.  They make roads through it; they drain it;
they turn it into valuable building-land; they thus raise its value; and
they divide it amongst their members, not at the price at which each
allotment is worth, but at the price which each allotment has cost.
Being also registered under the Friendly Societies Act, the conveyance
costs the purchaser generally from 25s. to 30s.; and thus a plot worth 50
pounds is often put into the fortunate allottee's hands for half that
sum.  Of course, different societies have different rules, but they all
aim at the same end, and effect that end in pretty nearly a similar
manner.  Thus a member generally, if he subscribes for a share of 30
pounds, pays a shilling a-week, and a trifling sum a-quarter for
expenses.  With the money thus raised an estate is purchased.  It is then
cut up into allotments, and balloted for.  If the subscriber has paid up,
he, of course, takes the land, and there is an end of the matter.  If he
has not, the society gives him his allotment, but saddled with a
mortgage.  In some societies the members are served by rotation, and
"first come" are "first served."  The more generally-adopted plan,
however, is division by ballot.  There has been some doubt as to the
legality of the ballot; the Conservative Society have taken the opinion
of eminent counsel upon this matter, and their opinion is, that the
ballot is perfectly legal.  The rotation societies offer no inducements
to new members to join them; so division by ballot has come to be almost
the universal rule.  In the National, for instance, there was a ballot
daily for all subscribers of three months' standing.  This has recently
been altered.  A ballot takes place every day, to which all are eligible
whose subscriptions are paid up.  If you join the National, you may go to
the ballot immediately.

As the National is the largest of the existing Freehold Land
Societies--last year its receipts being 190,070 pounds--we will briefly
allude to its prospectus as a still further illustration of what a
Freehold Land Society is.  The especial objects of this Society are
described as "to facilitate the acquisition of freehold land, and the
erection of houses thereon; to enable such of its members as are eligible
to obtain the county franchise, and to afford to all of them a secure and
profitable investment for money."  In the National, all the expenses are
defrayed out of a common fund; consequently, there are no extra charges,
and the net profits, after payment of interest on subscriptions in
advance and on completed shares, are annually divided amongst the holders
of uncompleted shares.  In this way last year the National divided 3,161
pounds 19s. 3d., and the directors credited each unadvanced share with
profit at the rate of 10 pounds 16s. 8d. per cent. per annum.  We only
add, as a still further explanation of the societies in general, that
they are all conducted on the most perfectly democratic principles.  Vote
by ballot and universal suffrage are the rule with them.  The members
elect their own officers.  In all the societies, also, provision is made
for casualties, such as sickness or death.  In case of death, the
subscriber's widow or heirs take his place.  If he be unable, from
sickness or poverty, to continue his subscription, he is not fined, but
is allowed to wait for better times.  If he wishes his money back, he can
have it returned, with a slight reduction for the working expenses of the
Society.  Juniors may be members.  Actually these societies so far
practically admit woman's rights as to offer to the ladies the same
desirable investments they offer to the sterner sex.  In short, the
Freehold Land Movement appeals to all ranks and conditions of the
community.  It may be said of a Freehold Land Society what has often been
said of the London Tavern, that it is open to all--who can pay.



II.  ORIGIN AND PRESENT POSITION OF THE MOVEMENT.


Primarily the movement was political, and was established for the purpose
of giving the people of this country the political power which they at
present lack.  Originally the forty-shilling freehold was established to
put down universal suffrage.  As a part and parcel of the British
constitution it has been religiously preserved to the present time, and
threatens to be an excellent substitute for what it was originally
intended to destroy.  During the Anti-Corn-Law agitation Mr. Cobden had
put the free-traders up to the idea of purchasing forty-shilling
freeholds, but it was reserved to Mr. James Taylor, of Birmingham, to
give to the idea of Mr. Cobden a universality of which the latter never
dreamed; Mr. Taylor had been a purchaser of land more than once, and with
the purchase he got an abstract, a legal document, which when he came to
understand it, showed him that he had paid to the vendor much more than
it cost him.  The idea then struck him that as the wholesale price of
land was much greater than the retail, if the working men could be got to
subscribe together a large sum for the purchase of land, they could thus
have, at a wholesale price, a stake in the country and a vote, and when
the general election came and excitement was created, Mr. Taylor felt
that the time for action was arrived.  Accordingly, when he went to
tender his vote, he said to a friend who accompanied him, "here's a lot
of fellows, and all that they can do is to grin and yawn when I go in to
poll; I have a strong notion that I can get them into the booth."  This
friend said, "How?"  The answer was, "Meet me to night in the Temperance
Hotel."  That same evening Mr. Taylor and his friend drew up an
advertisement, stating that "it is expedient that a Freehold Land Society
be formed for the purpose of obtaining freehold property at a most
reasonable cost to, and to get country votes for, the working men."
Simultaneously with the advertisement in the local paper appeared a
leader from the editor, recognising the immense importance of the
movement thus commenced.  Thus pledged to go on, Mr. Taylor threw his
heart and soul into the cause.  Within a week a committee was formed, and
the support of the principal men in the town secured.  December, 1849 is
the legal date of the Freehold Land Movement, although the Birmingham
Society had been in existence nearly two years previous.  In that month
the rules of the society were certified, and the glorious idea of Mr.
Taylor had a legal habitation and a name.  At the end of the first year
the Birmingham society reported that it had established six independent
societies, in which more than two thousand members had subscribed for
three thousand shares; that in Birmingham alone the subscriptions
amounted to 500 pounds per month, and that it had already given
allotments to nearly two hundred of its members.  Before the termination
of the second year a great conference was held in Birmingham in order to
organise a plan of general union and co-operation amongst the various
societies.  Delegates from all parts of the country were present.  In
Birmingham it appeared 13,000 pounds had been subscribed and four estates
purchased, two thousand five hundred shares being taken up by one
thousand eight hundred subscribers.  Wolverhampton, Leicester,
Stourbridge, had all co-operated zealously in the movement.  Nor was the
metropolis behind.  The National had started with seven hundred and fifty
members subscribing for one thousand five hundred shares, and already had
1,900 pounds paid up.  In Marylebone eight hundred shares had been taken
since the previous July.  This conference was attended by Messrs. Cobden,
Bright, G. Thompson, Scholefield, Bass, and Sir Joshua Walmsley.  This
conference, of course, attracted the notice of the press.  The coldly,
critical _Spectator_ termed it a "middle-class movement."  _Tait_ so far
forgot himself as to characterise it as "political swindling."  The
_Times_ said the working-classes were being deluded by it.  For once the
_Standard_ agreed with the _Times_ and said ditto.  However the
conference did its work, and started the _Freeholder_, which appeared on
the 1st of January, 1850.  A second conference was held at Birmingham in
November, 1850.  The report, as usual, was encouraging.  Eighty
societies, many of them with branches, were reported as existing.  The
number of members was thirty thousand subscribing for forty thousand
shares.  The amount of paid-up contributions was 170,000 pounds.  A third
conference was held in London in November, 1851.  The report then stated
there were one hundred societies with forty-five thousand members
subscribing for sixty-five thousand shares.  One hundred and fifty
estates had been purchased, twelve thousand allotments made, 400,000
pounds had actually been received, and two millions of pounds sterling
was actually being subscribed for.  At the fourth conference, held in
1852, it appeared still greater progress had been made.  One hundred and
thirty societies, with eighty-five thousand members subscribing for a
hundred and twenty thousand shares, were in existence, three hundred and
ten estates had been purchased, nineteen thousand five hundred allotments
had been made, and 790,000 pounds had been received.  Estimating the
shares at the average of 30 pounds per share, the total amount subscribed
for was three millions six hundred thousand pounds.  Such, then, is the
movement at the present time.  It has been obscured by no cloud.  Its
progress has been unchecked.  No disappointment has retarded its onward
way.  Forward to victory has been its march.  All classes and sects have
railed round it.  For churchmen there exists a Church of England Society.
The Conservatives have formed a large and flourishing society for the
manufacture of Conservative votes.  The movement sneered at, derided,
misrepresented, declared unconstitutional, a swindle like a celebrated
land scheme popular with the Chartists, has now come to be admitted by
all as the greatest fact of the age: to aid it, grave and reverend
churchmen, statesmen of all shades of political options, combine; even
coronetted lords now rejoice to lend it their sanction, and the weight of
their illustrious names.  Truly the mustard seed has branched out into a
giant oak.  A little leaven has leavened the whole lump.



III.--OF ITS FOUNDER.


We must tell our readers something of the founder of this movement.
James Taylor, junior, of Birmingham, deserves a passing notice at our
hands.  He was born in that town in 1814, and is consequently now in the
prime of his life, rather young considering the greatness he has already
achieved.  His father is a tradesman of the same town, where he has
acquired a limited competency by his honest industry, and where he still
carries on business for the benefit of the younger branches of his
family.  Like all other Birmingham boys James was put to work at an early
age, and became an apprentice in one of the fancy trades for which
Birmingham is so well known.  There his industrious habits soon acquired
for him the approbation of his master, who gave up Taylor his indentures
in consequence of his retiring from business before the latter was of
age.  About this time Taylor, earning good wages, and not having the fear
of Malthus before his eyes, got married, and lived happily till troubles
came and the demon of strong drink cast its fatal spell upon his domestic
hearth.  After years of utter misery and degradation Taylor, in a happy
hour for himself and society, signed the Temperance pledge, and became a
new man, and to the pledge, fortunately, he remained faithful, in spite
of ridicule and reproach from the boon companions with whom he had
thoughtlessly squandered so much of happiness, and health, and money, and
time.  No temptation ever led him back.  Nor was he satisfied with his
own reform alone.  He was anxious that others should be rescued from
degradation as he had already been.  For this purpose he identified
himself with the Temperance cause, and was Honorary Secretary to the
Birmingham Temperance Society till he became the Apostle of the Freehold
Land Movement.  Since then his life and labours have become public.  No
man has worked harder than Mr. Taylor.  Our readers would be astonished
if they knew the number of miles Mr. Taylor travels, and of public
meetings he attends in the course of the year connected with the
movement; sometimes the exertion has been too great, and his health has
given way for a time.  Those who have heard him once will never forget
him.  Those who have not heard him, if such there be, have indeed a treat
in store.  With but few or no adventitious aids--without even "little
Latin and less Greek"--an unassuming plain working man, in spite of all
this, so fascinating is his unadorned eloquence that no one can listen to
him without admiring his earnestness and moral worth--without feeling
that England has no worthier son than the originator of the Freehold Land
Movement--without feeling that time alone can tell what he has done for
the political, and social, and moral emancipation of her toiling race.
We may also add here that Mr. Taylor has been at times a contributor to
the press as well as a platform orator--that he has been twice
married--that he resides at Temperance Cottage, Birmingham, in the
enjoyment of a domestic felicity which we trust will attend him to a
green old age.  It may be said of Taylor what has been said of many
infinitely less useful men, that--

    "He is a man, take him for all in all,
    We ne'er shall look upon his like again."

This feeling has become common wherever Mr. Taylor has been known.  From
far and near have reached him testimonials of respect and esteem.  At an
early stage of its existence the Wolverhampton Society acknowledged its
sense of Mr. Taylor's services by presenting him with a valuable gold
watch; and at the last Annual Conference of the friends of the Movement,
held in December, 1852, it was unanimously resolved that "as it appeared
that various sums of money have been from time to time subscribed with a
view of offering some suitable recognition of the valuable and
disinterested services of Mr. James Taylor, it is desirable that a
committee be appointed to suggest the most suitable testimonial to that
gentleman, and to take such steps as may seem to them most desirable in
furtherance of the object."  In pursuance of this resolution a committee
was formed to receive subscriptions, of which Mr. Scholefield, M.P. for
Birmingham, is Treasurer.  This committee consists of most of the
gentlemen connected with the London societies, and it is to be hoped that
they are giving the subject the importance it really deserves.  A prophet
should be honoured in his own age and country.  In their lifetime the
world's benefactors should reap their reward.

Having thus explained the nature of Freehold Land Societies, and detailed
their rise and progress and present position, we propose to consider
their effects.  For this purpose we shall examine the Movement as
offering



IV.--AN INVESTMENT FOR THE MIDDLE AND WORKING CLASSES.


This, of course, is the principal point of view.  By their merits as
investments alone must Freehold Land Societies stand or fall.  If they
pay, they will flourish; if they do not, they cannot exist, whatever may
be the social, and moral, and political arguments advanced in their
favour.  Now, let us just see what means of investment are within the
reach of the Working man.  There is the savings bank--not always safe, as
recent examples have shown, and offering so small a rate of interest as
to be but little inducement to the classes to whom it appeals, to save.
Then there are the benefit societies, which hold out such fine promises,
which thus have won a support to which they have no claim, and have
excited hopes which they can never realise.  Of two thousand of these
societies, the accounts of which were submitted to one gentleman in
Liverpool a few years ago, _all_ were insolvent.  Much of the money
belonging to them is wasted in drink, in foolish show and mummery; but
the societies are based upon wrong principles, and can never become
right.  Two radical defects taint them all--the contributions have been
much too small in proportion to the proposed benefits, and an almost
indiscriminate regard to diversities in age has caused persons differing
as widely as from eighteen to thirty-five, forty, forty-five, and even
fifty years of age, to be admitted upon equal, or nearly equal, terms.
One of the chief of these friendly societies is that known as the
Manchester Unity.  In 1848 there was an inquiry into the subject before
the House of Lords, when it was stated by Mr. Neison, the eminent
actuary, "that it would take _three millions of money_ to bring the
Manchester Unity of Odd Fellows out of their present difficulties; and if
they went on at their present rates of contribution, no less than _ten
millions_ would be required to fulfil all their engagements."  So much
for friendly societies, which are, indeed, a delusion and a snare, and
have always failed when the hour of trial has come.  What the savings
banks are we have already seen; yet, actually, till the Freehold Land
Movement originated, these were the only investments within the reach of
the working man.  A Select Committee of the House of Commons has twice
reported "that the great change in the social position of multitudes,
arising from the growth of large towns and crowded districts, renders it
more necessary that corresponding changes in the law should take place,
both to improve their condition and contentment, and to give additional
facilities to investments of the capital which their industry and
enterprise are constantly creating and augmenting;" and "that they doubt
not ultimate benefit will ensue from any measures which the Legislature
may be enabled to devise for simplifying the operation of the law and
unfettering the energies of trade." But at present nothing has been done,
and the Laws of Partnership fetter the working man who would usefully
employ what little capital he has.  Clearly, then, the Freehold Land
Movement offers him an eligible means of investment.  Land cannot run
away.  So long as England exists, it will always be worth its price.
Nay, it will become more valuable every year, for by no effort of human
ingenuity can it be increased.

At Birmingham several of the allotments have realised premiums as high as
20 or 30 pounds.  On the East Moulsey estate of the Westminster Society
allotments, costing 23 pounds, have been let at a chief rent of 3 pounds
and 3 pounds 10s. per annum.  The Ross Society, in one of its annual
reports, stated that, out of thirty allotments made by the Society during
the past year, ten exchanged hands at premiums varying from 3 pounds 10s.
to 5 pounds, and ten working men each received 10 pounds premium.  At
Ledbury several allotments, costing 25 pounds each had realised premiums
of 15 pounds each.  On the Stoke Newington estate, belonging to the
National, premiums of 30 pounds and even of 40 pounds have been realised.
At the Gospel Oak estate, belonging to the St. Pancras Society,
allotments which cost 20 pounds each have been let off on building leases
of 50s. per annum each.  Greater sums have been made--but we would rather
understate than overstate our case.

We have inspected returns from one hundred and twenty societies, and in
every case the allotments have realised a handsome premium.  Yet, in the
face of all this, articles have recently appeared in _Chambers's Journal_
and the _Edinburgh Review_, deprecating these societies as investments.
The Edinburgh Reviewer says:--"Notwithstanding this rapid popularity
however; notwithstanding, also, the high authorities which have
pronounced in their behalf, we cannot look upon these associations with
unmixed favour; and we shall be surprised if any long time elapses
without well-grounded disappointment and discontent arising among their
members.  However it may be desirable for a peasant or an artisan to be
possessor of the garden which he cultivates, and of the house he dwells
in--however clear and great the gain to him in this case--it is by no
means equally certain that he can derive any adequate pecuniary
advantages from the possession of a plot of ground which is too far from
his daily work for him either to erect a dwelling on it, or to cultivate
it as an allotment, and which, from its diminutive size, he will find it
very difficult for him to let for any sufficient remuneration.  In many
cases a barren site will be his only reward for 50 pounds of savings; and
however he may value this in times of excitement, it will, in three
elections out of four, be of little real interest or moment to him."  Of
course we do not affirm that a badly-conducted society will pay in spite
of mismanagement.  We believe it will do nothing of the kind, and that
discontent will arise; but facts show that the reviewer is wrong; that
the allotments cost less than he supposes; that thus they offer a better
return for his money than the allottee can get in any other way.
Numerous as these societies are, multitudinous as are their members,
extensive as have been their dealings--no one yet has found fault with
them as a means of investment.  Indeed, every day they have come to be
more and more regarded in this light alone.  Where, we ask, can a man
make more by his shilling a-week than by putting it in a Freehold Land
Society?  This is the question which every man should ask himself; and if
he does this, we can await with satisfaction the result.  It is easy to
imagine difficulties, but we turn to the testimony of facts.  That is
unanimously in its favour.  The present time is void of all political
interest.  There are no great struggles, and no great hopes and aims.
England seems satisfied with coalitions.  Yet this precisely is the time
when the Freehold Land Movement finds most favour with the public.  The
reason is obvious.  The times are good.  The public has money to invest,
and the public finds no such desirable investments as those offered by
the Movement; hence it is the societies flourish; hence it is they gain
the hearty support of all who can only spare a little, but who would put
a little by against a rainy day.



V.--MOVEMENT CONSIDERED POLITICALLY.


But we may be told, politically the movement has been a failure.  Our
answer is, it has been nothing of the kind.  It is true, and we state the
fact more in sorrow than in anger, that Messrs. Newdegate and Spooner
still represent North Warwickshire; but it is also clear that whilst at
the election previous to the last Mr. Spooner had, in the Birmingham
district, a majority of 196, at the last election, in consequence of the
operation of the Freehold Land Societies of that district, he was
actually in a minority of 395.  But let us look nearer home.  At the
recent election for Middlesex, Bernal Osborne was returned, after a
severe struggle, by a majority of 195.  Now, when we recollect that the
National alone has purchased 152 acres in Middlesex, and that each acre
is capable, on an average, on subdivision, of making five votes--when we
also remember that the remaining London societies have purchased between
them another hundred acres in the same county--it is impossible not to
feel, even supposing all the allotments have not been taken up, that out
of the 250 acres thus cut up into allotments came the majority which
returned Bernal Osborne as the champion of Liberalism and Free Trade.  We
repeat, it is impossible not to feel that if it had not been for the
Freehold Land Societies, to the disgrace and shame of the county, Lord
Maidstone would have misrepresented Middlesex.  Then we remember that Mr.
Locke King was but 400 ahead of Mr. Antrobus at the Surrey election last
summer--we must also feel that that gentleman has some reason for
thankfulness to Freehold Land Societies.  If we pass to Herts, we shall
feel that it sadly failed in its duty by returning three pledged
Protectionists; but when we recollect that the National has purchased 300
acres in that county, we cannot but be persuaded that there is "a good
time coming" for our friend Mr. Lattimore and the Herts Reformers.  At
the last election, the lowest of the Protectionist candidates--the
quondam Reformer, Sir Bulwer Lytton--had 2,190 votes: the highest of the
Liberals had 2,043.  It is thus as clear as anything can be that a very
little effort will make Hertfordshire for ever safe.  It is in the power
of any two hundred persons desirous of a good investment to do so at
once.  Essex, the home of Sir J. Tyrrel and the delight of W. B., we
regret to write, is not so easily liberalised.  North Essex at present is
impregnable.  Its squires, as Barry Cornwall ironically writes,

          "With brains made clear
    By the irresistible strength of beer,"

are beyond salvation: there is no hope for this generation of them.  But
South Essex is not so hopelessly lost to the people's cause.  It is true
that last summer it did unseat Sir E. N. Buxton, and return Sir W. B.
Smijth by a majority of 600; but the National has purchased 242 acres in
that county, and out of that number can create 1,210 electors.
Evidently, then, there is hope for Essex yet.  But we need not continue
this scrutiny.  The people have placed within their hands the very
privilege they so much desire.  They need not wait for Government to
emancipate them; they can emancipate themselves.  For instance, the
National will put any person desirous of the same in possession of a
county qualification for North or South Essex, East or West Kent,
Hertfordshire, West Sussex, North Hants, North Lancashire, or Middlesex.
If, as some of the knowing ones maintain, we shall soon have a general
election, of course the sooner one is put on the register the better.  If
not, the purchaser can take no harm: he will have his _quid pro quo_; he
will have placed his money in that best of all banks, the land, and will
have become one of that important class appealed to on certain occasions
as the "Electors of the United Kingdom."  Heaven helps those who help
themselves.  Instead of the people waiting for Government to extend the
franchise, they can boldly help themselves.  No man deserves the
electoral privilege who cannot purchase it by his own industry and
self-denial.  At the present time, when provisions are cheap, when work
is abundant, when wages are high and labour scarce, there is not a man in
our streets who may not win the franchise if he has the will.  Half the
men who brawled in low pot-houses, while their wives and children were
starving, over their beer, for the Charter, and nothing but the Charter,
if they had stopped at home, and worked and saved their money, might, by
this time, have realised the manhood suffrage of which they so idly
dreamed; and if, at the next election, the men of progress are beaten,
and the friends of class legislation and injustice prevail, it will be
because the people were not true to themselves--because they had not
enough of self-denial, enough of earnestness and independence, to avail
themselves of the advantages offered by the Freehold Land Movement, and
thus to have a representation that shall be real, and not a sham.  By
means of the Freehold Land Movement, every county in England may be won.
To the very natural suggestion that that is a game that two can play at,
the answer is very obvious.  In such a contest numbers will tell.  A
qualification that may be had for 30 pounds will fall into very different
hands to what it would were its price 1,000 pounds.  For one aristocratic
voter thus made, the people will have ten.  An appeal to the masses can
have but one result.  Human nature must be changed before it can be
otherwise.  Be this as it may, the political result is undoubtedly
good--the emancipation of all who have the wit, and will, and worth to
win the franchise for themselves.



VI.  THE MORAL AND SOCIAL ADVANTAGES OF THE MOVEMENT.


Anything offering a man inducement to save must be attended with
beneficial results.  As society is constituted, a spendthrift is a
nuisance and a curse; the charge hitherto against the working classes of
this country has been, that they have been reckless and improvident--that
they are beggars one day and spendthrifts the next--that the money gained
with such difficulty is squandered away with a wicked wastefulness, such
as can be paralleled in no other part of the world.  The English lower
orders have always been thus improvident.  During the late war the
sailors, when on shore, would resort to every absurdity to get rid of
their money.  Colonel Landman tells us of one who had just received prize
money to the amount of 500 pounds, and, being allowed only one week in
which to get rid of it, had, to do so more effectually, hired a carriage
and four for himself, another for his hat, and another for his cudgel, in
which style he travelled to London.  A common sight at Plymouth was that
of sailors sitting on the ground breaking watches to pieces for a glass
of grog, for which they had previously paid 5 pounds each; one
hard-hearted captain having refused leave to a sailor to go on shore, the
man, in the bitterness of his disappointment, filled a pint pot with
guineas and threw them overboard, as he could not immediately derive
enjoyment from their use.  It is true a great change has been effected in
this respect, and society has reaped the benefit.  A man who saves money
is not a drain upon his friend; is not a dissipated man; costs society
less, and does more for it than another man.  The self-imposed taxation
of the working classes has been set down by Mr. Porter at fifty millions
a-year.  In reality it is much more: there is loss of time--there is
sickness induced by intemperance--there are the gaols, and
police-stations, and police, which would be much less expensive were the
intemperance of the country less.  Thus, if you change a nation of
spendthrifts into a nation of economical men, you bring about a great and
glorious result.  Such a nation never can be poor.  It will always have
capital, and capital is the fund out of which labour is maintained, out
of which the arts that humanise and bless mankind spring--out of which
the soft humanities of life arise.  Thus, then, the Freehold Land
Movement is attended with great moral and social good.  Viewed
politically, also, it must be considered to have had the same result.  It
is something to have made a man an independent voter--to have made him
feel that he has won his political rights for himself--that he has no
need to cringe and beg--to have taught him that--

    "Man who man would be
    Must rule the empire of himself."

Such a man will infuse fresh blood into the constituency.  He will not
give a vote like a browbeaten tradesman or a dependent tenant-farmer.
His landlord will not be able to drive him to the polling-booth like a
sheep.  On the contrary, he will go there erect and free--a man, and not
a slave.  In every point of view, indeed, the benefits of the movement
are immense.  In the neighbourhood of all our large towns estates are
being built on, where the members of the different societies living on
their own freeholds enjoy the blessings of pure air, and light, and
water, of which otherwise they would have been deprived.  In Birmingham
the mortality amongst children has been already lessened 2.5 per cent. in
consequence of this very fact.  If it be true that we cannot get the
healthy mind without the healthy body, this is something gained; but when
we further remember that the money thus profitably invested would most of
it have been squandered in reckless enjoyment--in body and soul
destroying drink--it is clear nothing more need be said.  It was
calculated that out of 25,000 pounds received by the Birmingham Society,
20,000 pounds have been saved from those sinks of poison, the dram-shop
and the beer-house.  Mr. James Taylor tells us, "Our working men are
beginning to ponder the often-quoted saying that every time they swallow
a glass of ale they swallow a portion of land.  From calculations which
have been made, it appears that the average price of land is 5.5d. per
yard, and therefore every time a man drinks a quart of ale he engulphs at
the same time a yard of solid earth."  Nor is Mr. Taylor alone in his
testimony.  A correspondent of the _Freeholder_ at Leominster stated,
that instead of money being spent in drink it was devoted to the society
there.  In a late report of the Committee of the Coventry Society we read
that "one of the most pleasing results of the society's operations is the
improved moral habits of many of its members."  The North and East Riding
Society also reported "The society's operations produce the best effects
on the habits of its poorer members by encouraging them to save money
from the public house."  Similar testimony was also borne by the
Newcastle Committee, and at Darlington we learn that the society has been
the means of converting many of its members into steady members of
society, and instead of finding them at the ale-bench, wrote a
correspondent, a few months since, "you may now see them at our
Mechanics' Institution, gaining all the information they can."  Thus,
then, the Freehold Movement is creating everywhere a great moral
revolution.  It teaches the drunkard to be sober and the spendthrift to
save.  It comes to man in his degradation and strikes away the chain and
sets him free.  To the cause of Temperance it has been a most invaluable
ally.  For the money saved from the public-house it has been the most
suitable investment.  No wonder, then, that most of the leading men
connected with the movement are also connected with the Temperance
societies, or that it originated with them.  It was born in a Temperance
Hotel.  Its founder was the Secretary of a Temperance society.  Did the
Temperance societies effect no other good, for this one fact alone would
they deserve lasting honour in the land.



VII.--HINTS FOR THE FORMATION OF FREEHOLD LAND SOCIETIES.


There are many counties yet to which the movement has not extended.  For
the sake of those who may wish to extend it to them, we state that the
first step to be taken is to procure a copy of the rules of some society
already in operation.  For this purpose, the Birmingham, the National and
the Westminster Societies' rules, which have been prepared with care, and
under the management of practical men, should be procured.  They are
virtually the same as the rules of an ordinary building society, and are
certified by Mr. Tidd Pratt.  The next step is the appointment of
trustees, directors, solicitor and secretary.  This is very important.
The greater part of the failures which take place in working men's
associations arise from the incapacity or dishonesty of the directors or
their officers.  Men of character and substance should be chosen for
trustees, and for directors men experienced in business, of persevering
habits, and of unquestionable integrity.  The solicitor and secretary
ought to be favourably disposed to the objects of the society.  The
offices for business ought in no case to be connected either with a
public-house or a Temperance coffee-house.  Eating and drinking are bad
adjuncts to business.  As every society must incur expenses, it is not
desirable to form societies in small towns or villages, but to connect
them with a large society.  The National, for instance, has agents to
receive subscriptions in every part of the country.  Indeed, many of the
local societies have become merged in it.  In consequence of its
excellent business arrangements, and of its immense capital it can do
what local societies cannot.  Already the Herts and Beds Society, the
Bristol Society and the Cardiff Society, have become incorporated with
it, and the arrangement has been found satisfactory to all parties
concerned, the National having the power to purchase an estate, when a
local society with its limited funds would be utterly unable to do so.
The same can be said of the Conservative and other larger societies.
Local societies have, however, this in their favour.  The managers are
well known men.  Confidence is felt in them; they appeal to local
sympathies, and they will have local support.



VIII.--A LIST OF EXISTING SOCIETIES.


It has been suggested that we give a list of the societies at present in
operation.  We do so here, though aware that the list is necessarily very
imperfect.  The _Freeholder_ aimed to give a list, but it never could
give a correct one.  We see Mr. Brooks in his Building Societies
Directory has also made a similar attempt, and in an equally unsuccessful
manner.  The societies are so numerous that it is impossible to do more
than chronicle the existence of the more active ones.  These are:--1. The
Arundel, 38, Arundel-street, Strand; Manager, Mr. J. Carpenter.  2. The
Birkbeck, Mechanics' Institution, Southampton-buildings, Chancery-lane;
Secretary, Mr. F. Ravenscroft.  3. The British, 3, Ivy-lane; Secretary,
Mr. H. Brooks.  4. The Britannia; Secretary, Mr. D. W. Ruffy, 1a, Great
George-street, New-road.  4. The Church of England, 22, John-street,
Adelphi; Secretary, Mr. Campbell.  5. The Conservative, 33,
Norfolk-street, Strand; Secretary, Mr. Gruneisen.  6. The Chelsea,
Cheyne-row.  7. The Finsbury, Featherstone-buildings; Secretary, Mr.
Scott.  8. The Home Counties, Chatham-place, Blackfriars-bridge;
Secretary, Mr. Knight.  9. The Lambeth, 90 Blackman-street, Borough;
Secretary, Mr. W. Banks.  10. London District, 10, Leadenhall-street;
Secretary, Mr. F. Redfern.  11. The London and Suburban; Secretary, Mr.
Weale.  12. The Metropolitan, 24, East-cheap; Secretary, Mr. D. R. White.
13. The Marylebone, Great Portland-street; Secretary, Mr. J. W. Knight.
14. The Middle Class, Peele's Coffee House, Fleet-street; Secretary, Mr.
W. Peacock.  15. The National, 14, Moorgate-street; Secretary, Mr.
Whittingham.  16. The North London, British School Room, Denmark-terrace,
Pentonville; Secretary, Mr. Bernard.  17. The St. Pancras; Secretary, Mr.
Spring.  18. The Union.  19. The Westminster, 4, Beaufort-buildings,
Strand; Secretary, Mr. G. Hugget.  Most of these societies are in full
operation, and have purchased valuable estates.  The probable number of
Freehold Land Societies in the country is 130.  In some parts societies
have not flourished, in consequence of their being confounded with
O'Connor's Land Scheme; in others, more especially in the North, there
has been an utter impossibility in the way of getting freehold property;
in others, the management has been languid, and the societies have
decayed.  But the number is, we believe, that which we have stated; or at
any rate is as near the truth as it is possible for us to be.



IX.--CONCLUSION.


We have thus gone through our self-appointed task.  We have considered
the Freehold Land Movement in its origin and effects.  We have shown them
to be good.  We have shown the movement itself to be well worthy the
support of every philanthropic man.  It has now grown, and become strong.
It is now doing what Parliament dare not, providing for the political
emancipation of the people.  It has put the franchise in the hands of
honest men.  It has given a new character to political agitation.  It has
shown how, without resorting to intimidation, or without the frantic
appeal of the demagogue, the working men of England may enfranchise
themselves.  Parliament may refuse to legislate on the matter--one Reform
Bill after another may be prepared, and then thrown by--one party
combination after another may be driven from the Treasury benches, but
the movement is gradually working its way, which is to reform Parliament,
to put down W. B. and his man Frail--to root out the demoralisation of
which St. Albans is a type, and to give to the people a perfect
representation in the peopled house.  It is time the present state of
things was altered.  For this purpose, the Freehold Land Movement exists.

We thus make our appeal to the friends of political progress.  We aim at
the advocacy of the movement which has for its end what you profess to
desire.  That movement we believe destined to be the salvation of our
country, and we ask you to rally round it.  It is true Free-trade is not
in danger, but Parliamentary Reform is.  A large party headed by Lord
Derby take their stand by the Bill of '31, and maintain that concession
has reached its limits--that class legislation is still to prevail--that
the people are still to be ignored--that inside the constitution are
still to be the privileged few, and outside of it the unprivileged many.
Against this mockery we ask England's manhood to protest--not by crowded
assemblies or inflammatory harangues, but in the constitutional manner
pointed out by Freehold Land Societies.  We want not voices but votes.
In the House of Commons, the thoughts that breathe and words that burn
avail not, but votes are omnipotent.  No member can disregard or despise
his constituents; their will to him must be law.

But we stop not here.  We seek a still wider support.  The Freehold Land
Movement has done wonders, it has removed the reproach cast upon the
working man, that he is reckless and improvident.  It has shown that he
can save when a proper object is offered.  In a speech a year or two
since, in the House of Commons, by Mr. Sotheron, M.P. for Wiltshire, it
was stated that the total number of friendly societies was not less than
33,232, and the aggregate of the members which they included amounted to
3,032,000.  The annual revenue of these societies was 4,980,000 pounds,
and the accumulated capital from the savings of these poor persons was no
less a sum than 11,360,000 pounds.  Faulty as most of these societies
were, so desirous of saving was the working man, that he had actually
entrusted them with the enormous sum we have just named.  If these things
were done by Friendly Societies, what will not be done when the
advantages of Freehold Land Societies are well and widely understood?  At
this time there is much maudlin sympathy expressed on behalf of the
working classes.  They need it not.  They are stout enough and strong
enough to take care of themselves.  The Freehold Land Movement has given
them an investment, and they have become saving men.  The money that
would formerly have been spent in the public-house has given many a man a
freehold and a stake in the country, such as even a revising barrister
must admit.  The present system of revision of votes by barristers is
bad.  Members of Freehold Land Societies have been much wronged in
consequence.  One worthy disfranchised several claimants last summer, on
the ground that the forty-shilling franchise, in all cases, should cost
50 pounds.  It ought to be in the power of no man to arrive at such a
decision.  The question should be left to a jury--not to a barrister,
eager of promotion, and for that purpose desirous to please the powers
that be.  But still a man may thus obtain wealth and a vote.  And the man
thus taught self-denial and providence will not be contented with
remaining merely a freeholder; he cannot make himself that without
becoming intellectually and morally a better man.  He will be a better
father of a family, a better citizen, better in his public and private
life.  Workmen of England, Ireland and Wales, we call upon you to rally
round the Freehold Land Societies.  They exist for your benefit alone.
They will give you all that you require--desirable investments for your
savings--habits of economy and political influence.  You have no need to
cringe and beg.  All that you want, you have it in your power to obtain.
Never was there a more favourable time for you to avail yourselves of the
Freehold Land Societies now springing up in your midst.  You have now
money you can put by.  When the Corn Laws cursed the land, it would have
been mockery to have asked you to do so then.  Now the case is altered,
and you must each one of you seek to elevate yourselves.  As Mr. Cobden
aptly remarked, half the money annually spent in gin would give the
people the entire county representation, and thus also provide desirable
investments for the money that you are morally bound to lay by against a
rainy day.  The man who refuses to make provision for the future cannot
expect to prosper.  Not to do so when a man can is a folly and a crime.
Now then is the time to support the Freehold Land Societies.  Thus when
sickness or old age or bad times come, you will have something you can
call your own.  Habits of economy will thus grow and strengthen, and the
reward will be sure.  Of all luxuries, that of independence is the
sweetest, and that these societies put within your reach.  Their failure
is impossible.  They are the societies for the age: they will parcel out
the English ground amongst English men: their triumph will be the
emancipation of the working man from the misery and wrongs and
degradation of the past.

We appeal also to men who aim at the moral reformation of our race--who
care little about politics--who believe that in a world of knaves it is
difficult to get a good government at all, and we claim their support.
The mission of the Freehold Land Movement is the same with theirs.  The
philanthropist labouring to remove the degradation, which compels to a
life little better than that of the beasts that perish, men made in the
image of their Maker--the advocate of Temperance aiming at the
destruction of a vice which has slain its thousands, and which, like a
destroying pestilence, still walks the land--the Christian seeking to
permeate our age with a living faith--all these we claim as co-workers.
The movement, besides its direct bearings, tends to bring about the
results they desire.  Not merely has political emancipation been the
result of the movement--moral emancipation has invariably followed in its
train.

We thus make our appeal for the support of the cause which is yet in its
infancy, and which has a thousand trophies yet in store.  Peacefully does
it conduct the people to power, and give practical utterance to the
spirit of the age.  The doom of whatever keeps man in subjection to
another has long been sealed.  The proud patrician of Imperial Rome--the
feudal baron of the Middle Ages, have passed away.  Even Oxford abandons
the faith at one time it armed to defend, and no longer acknowledges the

    "Right divine of kings to govern wrong."

Onward to victory is the people's march.  The decree has gone forth, they
must be free.  For this consummation we have ever hoped and striven.
From the contentions of party we have ever turned to advocate whatever
gives to the people moral dignity and political power; to others we leave
the cause of the privileged classes--the advocacy of existing wrongs--the
preservation of existing abuses.  We plead the cause of the
unenfranchised, but of the unenfranchised who have faith and energy and
self-denial enough to win the franchise for themselves.  We conjure them
to bestir themselves, to give their support to the Freehold Land
Movement, to quit themselves like men.  We need at the polling booths
independent voters, not men who can be bullied or bribed--to make such is
our aim, for such England needs, aye, and needs more than ever now.

                                * * * * *

                                 THE END.

                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

       Woodfall and Kinder, Printers, Angel-court, Skinner-street.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FREEHOLD LAND SOCIETIES***


******* This file should be named 32807.txt or 32807.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/2/8/0/32807



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

