The Project Gutenberg eBook, A Concise History and Directory of the City
of Norwich for 1811, by C. Berry


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: A Concise History and Directory of the City of Norwich for 1811


Author: C. Berry



Release Date: June 15, 2010  [eBook #32829]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A CONCISE HISTORY AND DIRECTORY OF
THE CITY OF NORWICH FOR 1811***


Transcribed from the 1810 C. Berry edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org.  Many thanks to Norfolk and Norwich Millennium Library,
UK, for kindly supplying the images from which this transcription was
made.





                                    A
                             CONCISE HISTORY
                                   AND
                                DIRECTORY
                                  OF THE
                            _CITY OF NORWICH_;
                                For 1811:


                      Containing besides the LISTS,

                               A VARIETY OF
                            LOCAL INFORMATION,
                         _USEFUL and INTERESTING_
                       To RESIDENTS and STRANGERS.

                      [Picture: Decorative divider]

_Embellished with an engraved Plan of the City_. {0}

                      [Picture: Decorative divider]

                                * * * * *

                                 Norwich:
               Printed by and for C. Berry, jun. Dove-Lane.
                                  1810.




THE
_Editor's Address to the Public_.


Nine years have expired since the publication of the last NORWICH
DIRECTORY (which was out of print almost as soon as in); during which
period, alterations have been constantly taking place in the residence of
the inhabitants, independent of those which have been entirely removed by
death or otherwise.  It will be found of those which were inserted in the
former, and are still to be found in this, not half of them remain in the
same residence.--He was not aware of the difficulty of obtaining the
address of so large a population, or he would have been deterred from the
undertaking: he has used his utmost endeavors to render it as correct as
possible, and hopes he has made no very flagrant errors or
omissions.--The DIRECTORY contains several hundred names more than that
before noticed--the historical part is entirely written and compiled for
the present purpose--many charitable and public institutions are noticed
which cannot be found elsewhere--and the lists are much augmented, and
corrected to the present time.--The alphabetical order of the DIRECTORY,
is corrected to the first vowel.

He cannot let this opportunity escape, without returning his thanks to
several gentlemen who have rendered him information he could not
otherwise have obtained.--He writes not for fame, but throws himself on
an indulgent public; and should his feeble efforts prove in any degree
useful, or meet the approbation of his fellow-citizens, his end is
gained.

_NORWICH_, _October_ 19, 1810.




TABLE
OF THE
_POPULATION of the City and County of NORWICH_,
In the Years 1801, 1786, 1752, & 1693.

   PARISHES.           Houses           Persons           Persons           Persons           Persons
                        1801              1801              1786              1752              1693
St. Peter                      123               378               507               425               470
Southgate
St. Etheldred                   68               252               254               247               243
St. Julian                     211               662               846               595               593
St. Peter                      316              1350              1362              1408              1376
Permountergate
St. John                       312              1144              1114              1004               781
Sepulchre
St. Michael at                 402              1198              1442              1127               865
Thorn
St. John                       231               888               975               890               668
Timberhill
All Saints                     176               701               825               578               425
St. Stephen                    541              2211              2360              2314              1769
St. Peter                      460              2120              2299              2288              1953
Mancroft
St. Giles                      239              1076              1117               961               910
St. Benedict                   227               830               900               715               652
St. Swithin                    120               503               643               751               496
St. Margaret                   173               662               859               856               664
St. Laurence                   269               899              1018               952               668
St. Gregory                    221              1057              1113              1202               772
St. John                       160              1698              1571              1107               657
Maddermarket
St. Andrew                     235              1858              1773              1334               935
St. Michael at                  77               446               502               482               479
Plea
St. Peter                       88               371               394               341               267
Hungate
St. George                     135               750               720               737               722
Tombland
St. Simon and                   83               333               443               420               362
Jude
St. Martin at                  253               936              1109              1083               819
Palace
St. Helen                       80               393               446               386               338
St. Michael                    255              1031              1185              1046              1026
Coslany
St. Mary                       306              1018              1202              1178               949
St. Martin at                  370              1747              2153              1698              1243
Oak
St. Augustine                  402              1232              1899              1226               850
St. George                     283              1132              1272              1295              1154
Colegate
St. Clement                    146               853               800               816               593
St. Edmund                      99               446               531               520               370
St. Saviour                    225               984               593               810               701
St. Paul                       378              1395              1681              1461               983
St. James                      251               520               608               696               416
Pockthorp                      241               979              1272              1116               732
Heigham                        227               854               923               653               544
    HAMLETS.
Lakenham                        89               428               486               165               221
Eaton                           38               278               260               226               153
Earlham                         12                95                66                68                50
Hellesdon                       17                81               108                70                65
Thorpe                          17                74                82                36                69
Trowse, Carrow,                 89               353               348               386               258
and Bracon
Precinct of the                118               616                                 700               650
Close
Norwich Goal                                      22
           Total              8763             36854             40051             36396             28911




A CONCISE
_HISTORY OF NORWICH_.


In attempting a brief History of Norwich, it shall be endeavoured, so far
as the limits of the design will admit, to consider its situation and
extent, foundation and present state, former and present population,
memorable events, antiquities, eminent or learned inhabitants, trade,
manufactures, &c.

Norwich is situate in 1. 25. E. of London, and in 52. 40. N. latitude; it
lies considerably eastward of the centre of the county of Norfolk, of
which it is the capital, and indeed it may be considered as the principal
city in the eastern district of the kingdom.  It occupies the top and
sides of a gentle hill, which runs parallel with the river Wensum on its
western side; the river suddenly takes an almost western course, and runs
through nearly the centre of the city.  It is distinguished in the annals
of Great Britain for its manufactures, the memorable events that have
occurred, its antiquities, and for various other objects which shall be
briefly touched upon.

Norwich, in its present state, is said to occupy more ground,
comparatively with its population, than any city in the kingdom, being
much interspersed with gardens, and it is frequently stiled, a city in an
orchard; its shape is irregular, and may not unaptly be compared to a
shoulder of mutton--it is full one mile and a half in length, and a mile
and quarter broad.  It contains thirty four churches and a number of
chapels and meeting houses, besides the cathedral; it has five bridges
over the river; it was formerly nearly surrounded with a wall, planted
with forty two towers and had twelve gates, the former is dilapidated the
latter, within a few years have been taken down.

The original foundation of Norwich is not easily asertained; however, it
is certain, that the Romans, presently after their establishment in
Britain, either erected fortresses near the British towns, or invited the
natives to assemble round the Roman military stations; and most of our
cities and chief towns occupy the site of such stations, or are in their
immediate vicinity, which makes it probable, that Norwich orginated in
the decay of (_Venta Icenorum_) Castor, and which the following old
distich commemorates.

    "Castor was a city when Norwich was none,
    "And Norwich was built of Castor stone.

Camden says, he had no where met with the name of Norwich previous to the
Danish invasion; on the origin of the name, various opinions have been
formed; however, there is very little doubt that it received its name
from the Saxons, their word _Northwic_, signifying a northern station,
castle, or town, and the word occurs on the Saxon coins of various
reigns.  Blomfield mentions several of these--one in the time of Alfred
the Great, about the year 872; another in the early part of the reign of
Athelstan about the year 925, and several others; besides three coins
minted here of Ethelred, called the _Unready_, of which it seems, some
are yet extant; and from which it appears, that Norwich was a place of
note before the Danes were in possession of Britain.

The Saxons immediately took advantage of the Romans leaving Britain, to
pour in their own troops, under pretence of protecting the natives; but
they soon threw off the mask, and erecting fortresses to defend what they
had seized, they shortly became possessed of the whole Island.  At this
period 'tis probable the former Castle of Norwich was first founded.
Vulgar chronology makes it as old as Julius Caesar; but its gothic
structure belied such conjecture--the elevated spot on which this castle
stood, commanding a prospect over a large space of country, pointed it
out as a proper place to fix an advanced post.

Uffa is considered the first Saxon monarch over this part of the kingdom,
in the year 575; but it appears, notwithstanding, from undoubted
authority, that Grecca, the father of Uffa, was the first sovereign of
East Anglia.

The monarchy, therefore, was probably established between the years 530
and 540, and the castle erected about the same period.  In the year 642
it is said to have been a fortified royal seat of Anna, the seventh king
of the East Anglian line.

From this time till the reign of Alfred, we find little or no mention of
the Castle: but during the incursions of the Danes, it was frequently
possessed by them and the Saxons alternately; and it appears, that king
Alfred in his time, finding the walls and ramparts of Norwich Castle
insufficient to repel the attack of the Danes, caused others to be
erected with the most durable materials.

Norwich Castle was evidently a military station in Alfred's time, as
appears also by the coin struck here, about the year 872, before noticed;
but in the reign of Etheldred the II. it is described to have been
utterly destroyed by an army under Sweyne, king of Denmark, about the
year 1004.  In 1010 the Danes again settled in and fortified Norwich, and
the Castle appears to have been rebuilt by Canute, about the year 1018;
to have been first used as a prison in the early part of the 14th
century, and from this period, its history merges into that of the city.

Mr. Wilkins says, Norwich castle is the best exterior of this kind of
architecture extant.  The area of the ancient castle, including its outer
works, contained about 23 acres, the whole of which was surrounded by a
wall; the principal entrance was by Bar, now Ber-street, through
Golden-Ball-lane, by the Barbican Gate, which was flanked by two towers,
and connected with the external vallum, by a wall; the extent of the
outermost ditch reached on the west part to the edge of the present
Market Pace, on the north to London-lane, which it included; and on the
east almost to King-street; the southern part reached to the
Golden-Ball-lane, where the grand gate stood.

According to Mr. Wilkins, the entrance into the Barbican was at the south
end of Golden-Ball-Lane, and not at the north, as Blomfield has it; over
each foss in this direction was a bridge, but only one of them remains;
this extends across the inner ditch, and according to Mr. Wilkins, is
formed of "the largest and most perfect arch of Saxon workmanship in the
kingdom."  This bridge is nearly 150 feet in extent, and the Castle
stands just across it on the south west part of the hill; the extent of
the Castle from east to west, including a small tower through which was
the principal entrance, is 110 feet 3 inches, and from north to south, 92
feet 10 inches; and the height to the top of the battlements, 69 feet 6
inches; the height of the basement story is about 24 feet, which is faced
with rough flint; the upper part is ornamented with small arches and
decorated so as to appear something like Mosaic work; the small tower
before-mentioned on the east side, was of a richer kind of architecture,
called, Bigod's Tower, which is now chiefly inclosed, defaced or pulled
down, as in the year 1793 the county thought it necessary to erect a new
goal, and it was resolved to attach it to the eastern side of the old
Castle.  Mr. Wilkins expresses himself justly indignant at the addition,
which he calls an heterogeneous and discordant mass.--This venerable pile
has been a castle of defence to British, Saxon, and Norman kings; it has
been the boast and pride of the province for ages past, yet by this
recent change it is bereaved of its ancient beauty; but, surely, whatever
alterations were necessary, they might have preserved the same character
and apparent date of architecture with the mutilated parts of this
stately pile.  The interior is also now an unroofed area, although
formerly covered and divided by floors.  The entrance to the top of the
Castle is on the west side, at the south corner by a flight of 99 steps.

The Castle precinct contains upwards of six acres, and the summit of the
hill is in circumference 360 yards, the whole of which is enclosed with
iron palisadoes, as is also the ditch around it; which, within the last
20 years, have been occupied for gardens, many of which are tastefully
laid out; and the summit of the hill on all sides commands a most
delightful view of the city and surrounding country.  The Castle with the
hill and ditch surrounding it, may be considered a _chef d'oeuvre_, and
the prospect therefrom superior to any thing of the kind in England.

A panoramic view of the city and surrounding country has been lately
published by Messrs. Stevenson, Matchett, and Stevenson, taken from
several stations on the hill.

The shirehouse which joins the Castle, has lately undergone complete
internal repair, and considerable alteration whereby the courts are
enlarged and rendered much more commodious than heretofore; and here all
county business is transacted, and the summer assizes held.

The town of _Nor_-_wic_ probably soon succeeded the building of the
Castle, and became occupied by the Anglo-Romans, from Castor, at which
time it appears to have been chiefly inhabited by fishermen and
merchants.  According to ancient manuscripts, a large arm of the sea
flowed up to Norwich, till about the time of William the Conqueror.
There exists positive evidence of Norwich being a fishing town in the
reign of Canute, about the year 1020.  In the time of Edward the
Confessor, about the year 1050, it appears to have had 25 churches, and
1320 Burgesses; during the peaceable reign of Edward, and his successor,
Harold, it continued to increase in wealth and population.  In the year
1075, it experienced a serious decrease by siege; in about the year 1085,
according to Doomsday book, a great number of houses were uninhabited,
yet the churches were increased to 54, and the houses to 738, which,
allowing six persons to each house, makes the population 4428.  In the
reign of William II. the bishop's see was removed from Thetford hither,
which together with a great influx of Jews at that time, made a
considerable increase to the population.  In the reign of Henry I. the
government of the city was separated from the castle jurisdiction and in
the following reign licence was granted for Norwich to have coroners and
bailiffs.  In the time of Richard I. 1193, the inhabitants were called
citizens.

The city wall was begun in 1294, and finished in 1320.

Previous to the plague in 1348, according to Blomfield, the population
amounted to 70,000; but, surely, this account as applied to the city,
must appear incredible from the extent of the walls, and from the
increase of population since 1085, a term of 263 years, the population
must have increased sixteen fold--a circumstance, I believe, unparalleled
in the annals of History.

In 1336, a great influx of Flemings in consequence of religious
persecution, settled in Norwich, and introduced the worsted manufactory.

Henry IV. in the year 1403, granted the city a charter, which made
Norwich a county of itself; and from this time it was governed by a mayor
instead of bailiffs; and in 1406, another charter was obtained for
regulating the mode of choosing the mayor, sheriffs, &c.

This city has suffered greatly at various times by the plague and
scarcity, and few places have sustained more damage by fire, which may be
attributed, in some measure, to the custom of covering the houses with
thatch.--Two desolating fires which happened in the latter part of Henry
VII's reign, induced the corporation to make a law, that no new building
should afterwards be covered with thatch.

Norwich was beginning to decline, but again revived in 1566, by the
settling here of about 300 Dutch and Walloons, who had fled from the
persecution of the Duke of Alva; and their number kept increasing very
rapidly for several years.  About this time, bombasines and some other
valuable articles were invented here, and contributed much to the
population of the city.  In 1574, Norwich exhibited on its muster roll
2120 able men, towards the general defence against the invincible Armada.
In 1578, queen Elizabeth took up her abode for several days in the city.
In 1688, the charter was confirmed to its full extent, by virtue of
which, the government is vested in a mayor, recorder, steward, two
sheriffs, twenty-four aldermen, of which the mayor is one, sixty common
councilmen, a town clerk, chamberlain, sword bearer and other officers.

In 1556, the extent of Norwich was ascertained, by which it appears to be
14 miles in circumference.  Norwich first sent members to parliament in
1264.  In 1403, four citizens were summoned to parliament, but as they
were paid by the citizens 3 pounds for their attendance, they petitioned
sending only two to save expence.  The city at present sends two who are
chosen by the freeholders and freemen, some of whom are so by
inheritance, some by servitude, and others by purchase--the sheriffs for
the time being, are the returning officers.

Till within a few years, the population of Norwich had been increasing,
_viz._ from the year 1693 to 1786, as will appear by the annexed
parochial list; but this is owing principally to strangers resorting to
Norwich as a manufacturing place, for by comparing, the births with the
deaths within that period, the latter have considerably exceeded the
former.  The decrease in the population observable in the table since
1786, is 3197; but 1786 was a year of peace; and in 1801, those serving
in the army, navy, and militia, were not included; out of the number of
houses in 1801, there were 747 unoccupied, and of the total number of
persons, 21,044 were females, and 15,810 males, being nearly in
proportion of 4 to 3.

At what period the art of manufacturing cloth from wool was first
introduced in this Island, is not certain; but it may be supposed it was
early practised in Norfolk, from the circumstance of spinning with the
distaff, being still retained here.  Before William the Conqueror woollen
cloths were made in Norwich; but what tended most to increase the Norwich
worsted manufactory, was the number of Flemish artizans who came over
here in 1336; and in the time of Richard the II. and succedings reigns,
various statutes were enacted for the encouragement and regulation of the
trade.  In 1445 the trade had arrived to such a degree of excellence, as
to rival all other nations in the foreign Markets.  In Henry VIII's time,
according to Blomfield, the sale of stuffs made in Norwich only amounted
annually to 200,000 pounds besides hose which were computed at 60,000
pounds more.  During the reigns of Edward VI. and Queen Mary, new
articles of Manufactory continued to be introduced, and new regulations
made.  In the time of Queen Elizabeth, encouragement was given to the
inhabitants of the low Countries, under the persecution of the Duke of
Alva, to settle here; and they introduced a variety of new fabrications,
by the intermixture of silk and mohair and several new articles were
manufactured as various in their qualities as their names.  In 1575
Bombasines were first introduced, for the manufactory of which elegant
article, Norwich has ever since been famed, but still the trade seemed
confined principally to home consumption; and the act of 1721, which
prohibited the general wearing of cottons, and the order for the Court
Mourning to consist of Norwich crapes, serve as proof that the trade did
not depend so much on foreign demand as home consumption.  From about,
1740 to 1760, the stuff trade gradually declined, and through the
prevalence of the India and Manchester cotton goods the destruction of
the home trade was almost completed.  The Manufacturers were obliged to
extend their continental connections, their travellers were seen in every
kingdom in Europe, and the great continental fairs were crouded with
purchasers for goods of Norwich manufactory.  They also sent their sons
to be educated on the continent that by learning the languages they might
strengthen their connections; the taste and habits of every country and
clime were consulted.  Hence Norwich and the Country for many miles
round, became crowded with looms, and though Norfolk and Suffolk, were
incessantly employed, yet the produce was unequal to the demand.  It
became necessary to import yarn, as well as wool, and the consumption of
bay yarn from Ireland was very great.  The neighbouring Counties and
Scotland also contributed something considerable.  At this meridian of
prosperity, the trade, from the capriciousness of fashion, began again to
decay, and the disastrous war breaking out, dissolved its continental
connections, depressed the spirit of enterprise, and paralized the hand
of industry.

The author of the Tour through the Island of Great Britain, in 1724,
gives a statement which was furnished by a manufacturer, whereby it
appears 120,000 persons were employed in the various branches of the
Norwich manufactory.  Arthur Young considers the interval from the year
1743, till the unfortunate dispute with the American colonies, to have
been a flourishing era; the number of looms were then found to be 12,000,
and it was calculated that each loom, with its attendant preparation,
produced work to the value of 100 pounds per annum; and that every loom
employed five hands besides the weaver, in the various processes before
and after the weaving, so that the whole number of persons employed, many
of which were old women and children, amounted to 72,000, and the money
earned by them to 1,200,000 pounds.

At present, the merchants being shut out of foreign markets by war, and
from our own by fashion, the number of hands employed must be
considerably reduced.  The principal articles of this manufactory, are
bombazines and broad camblets, for the latter, of which the East India
Company, have annually given large orders, and it is much to be lamented
that the benefits, which formerly accrued from this manufacture, should
within the last few years have been in a great measure dissipated by a
narrow jealousy and want of unanimity amongst the manufacturers.  This
discordance has created a baneful competition, for the favours of the
East India Company, which are consequently distributed, in the greatest
proportion, to that quarter, where the labours of the poor must
necessarily be the most depreciated.  A good understanding between them
would not only have preserved their consequence with the company, but
would certainly have rendered their connection with that body much more
advantageous, the Company finding their account in the goods; and not
being able to procure them at any other market.  However, during the
failure of a continental trade, it certainly is of considerable
consequence to the city.  The wools of Lincolnshire and Leicestershire
are chiefly used.

To articles before mentioned, have been of late years added, cottons,
shawls and some other fancy goods, both of silk and cotton; some of which
are calculated for furniture, and some for dress, and which for elegance,
surpass any thing of the kind made in the kingdom.  Cotton thread lace is
also made here, and no inconsiderable quantity of hempen cloth.

The staple manufactory of Norwich, furnishes about fifty distinct
occupations from the shearer of the sheep to the mariner who ships the
goods.  The earnings of the different artizens are various--men from 6s.
to 30s. per week; women from 5s. to 15s. and children, by spinning,
filling and tire drawing, from 1s. to 4s.

The combing of wool used to employ a great number of hands; but since the
invention of machines, their employ is in a great measure superseded.

In the time of Edward III. it is recorded there were not less than 76
places of Christian worship, besides a Jewish synagogue, in Norwich--we
shall now proceed to give a brief account of some of these now remaining.

The foundation stone of the cathedral is recorded to have been laid by
bishop Herbert, in 1096, and it was not until the year 1430, the
cloisters were completed.  In 1361, the upper part of the steeple was
partly blown down by a hurrican, after which, the present spire was
built.  About the year 1470, the stone roof of the nave was constructed,
and adorned with sculptures of scripture history; and shortly after, the
stone roof over the choir was erected, and adorned in a similar manner;
and about the same time, the whole vaulting was covered with lead.  In
1509, it was considerably injured by fire; in 1601, part of the spire was
struck down by lightning, but speedily repaired; it again suffered
considerably by the rebellion, in 1543; it was completely repaired and
beautified in 1763, and again in 1807.

The architecture is chiefly of the style, called Norman; the columns and
arches are exceedingly various in their size, mouldings, and ornaments;
the choir terminates with a semicircular east end, over which, are
curiously painted windows, by Dean Lloyd's lady.  The walls include
various chapels, and some courts belonging to the dean and chapter.  The
extreme length of the building is 411 feet from east to west; and the
width from north to south, 191 feet; the height of the spire and tower,
315 feet; the spire is ornamented with bold crockets, 5 feet asunder,
attached to and running up the ribs at each angle, and is the highest in
England, except Salisbury.  The cloisters are 174 feet square, with
arched openings or windows, looking inwards on all sides; the roof, which
is about 16 feet high, is ornamented with scripture sculptures, which
however, are much injured by accident and time.  The west front of the
cathedral displays a large central compartment, corresponding with the
width and heigth of the nave; also two lateral divisions corresponding
with the side aisles, the whole forming a very grand entrance.  The
interior must be allowed to have a grand and solemn general effect, and
that the whole appears of an unusual, bold and substantial stile.  It is
to be lamented that the fitting up of the choirs serve to destroy part of
the grandeur and solemnity, and shuts out the sight from a general and
comprehensive view of the building.  Within the church and cloisters,
still remain some curious memorials of the dead; but the greater part are
removed, like those to whom they belong, to make room for others, or have
fallen a sacrifice to the gradual inroads of time.

The Bishop's Palace stands on the north side of the cathedral, was
erected in the year 1318, and was enlarged and ornamented by several
successive Bishops; it suffered greatly in the rebellion, and it was with
some difficulty made habitable; it has been improving ever since, and is
now made a tolerable neat and convenient residence.

On the south side of the cathedral, formerly stood a priory, occuping
part of the space, now called the Lower Close, and which was built as a
residence for 60 monks, who officiated in the cathedral.

In the year 1804, on pulling down the workhouse, which stood at the
entrance of the deanery, some curious ruins were discovered, and the
shafts of three massive pillars are still left standing, as specimens of
the architecture of the age in which they were built.

At the west end stands the free school, formerly the charnel-house--was
built about the year 1316; the upper part was appropriated for the
residence of four officiating priests, the part beneath was a vault used
as a charnel house, which is now rendered into cellars, and part of the
building occupied by the master of the school.  The present portico is
much more modern than the other parts of the building.

Adjoining the free-school, stands Erpingham's gate, (it having been built
by Sir Thomas Erpingham as a penance) and is an elegant specimen of the
architecture of the time; it is much enriched with columns, mouldings,
and many small statutes in canopied niches, in one of which, over the
centre, is Sir Thomas Erpingham kneeling, and in the act of prayer.

The gate called St. Ethelbert's gate, from a church dedicated to that
saint, having formerly occupied its scite, and which appears to have been
built prior to the cathedral, was burnt down in the insurrection, in
1272; after which, the citizens were compelled to build the present
handsome gate with the chapel over it: the front facing tombland was
formerly richly ornamented, but by modern innovation and repair, it is
deprived of all its beauty.  The chapel was some years since used as the
bishop's registry, but has for the last ten years been occupied as a
weekly concert room, by a society of gentlemen amateurs.

There are few churches after the cathedral which deserves particular
mention as architectural objects, their names may be found in the list of
population; however, we shall notice St. Julian's church, being founded
anterior to the conquest and for its exhibiting some specimens of Saxon
architecture.

St. Peter's Mancroft church, a handsome regular building, and after the
cathedral, superior in size and architecture to any other; it stands on
an elevated spot at the south west corner of the market place.  Blomfield
states it was finished in the year 1455; it consists of a square tower,
about 100 feet high, though evidently intended to have been much higher,
as appears by the double buttresses extending to the top, and the
thickness of the walls; it contains an excellent peal of 12 bells, by
Messrs Pack and Chapman, in 1775; the tenor weighs 41cwt.  they are
acknowledged for general effect, to be the first peal in the world--and
the ringers are justly ranked with the first in the kingdom.

The church is wholly covered with lead, and supported by two rows of
pillars remarkably neat and slender; the body of the church, including
the chancel, is 212 feet in length, and is 70 feet wide; on the north and
south sides are entrance porches.  The altar is ornamented with a
painting, representing the deliverance of St. Peter out of prison, was
executed by Catton, and presented to the parish by Alderman Starling, in
the year 1768.  Within the church are some few sepulchral monuments
worthy notice, and a fine organ built in 1707.  The plate and furniture
of the altar is very valuable, one cup weighing upwards of 46 ozs. very
beautifully chased with the story of Abigal bringing presents to David,
which was given to the church, by Sir Peter Gleane.

In the vestry is a neat old painted carving, in alabaster.  A very
curious piece of tapastry, in high presevation; there is also an octavo
Bible, on vellum, written in 1340, and a folio manuscript much more
ancient.

St. Laurance church occupies the spot, which at a remote period, was the
quay for landing all fish brought to Norwich; the tythes of the fishery,
which must have been considerable, were granted to the abbey of St.
Edmund's Bury, on condition that the abbot would erect a church.  The
present church was erected in 1472, at the expence of the monastery of
St. Edmunds Bury, aided by private benefactions; the tower is a bold
square building, 112 feet in height; over the west door are several
figures sculptured in stone.  Previous to the civil war, the church was
highly decorated with various altars, tabernacles, &c. the window
ornamented with glass, and, according to Blomfield, in 1643, the
communion rails were broken down, the floor of the chancel taken up, and
the stained glass defaced.  In the parish registry is this entry, "laid
out to Goodman Perfett, for the putting out the superstitious
inscriptions in the church window, and the pulling down of crucifixes 1s.
8d."  In this church are several monuments.

Norwich is much indebted to monachism for many charitable institutions,
among which, are the free Grammar School, before mentioned, which was
originally kept in the fratry of a suppressed convent of friars; but
afterwards the charnel house was appropriated to that use, the houses of
the chaplains being fitted up for the Master, and the chaple for the
school-room.

The master has 50 pounds per annum, and the house; it is also endowed
with scholarships and fellowships belonging to Caius College, Cambridge.

Are here also five charity schools for boys, and one for girls, which
have been instituted more than a century, and are supported by
benefactions, annual subscriptions, annual collections made at fourteen
sermons, preached at different parishes, by rents of two estates left by
Alderman Riseborough, the one situate in Walpole, and the other in
Walton, in Norfolk, and by dividends arising from funded property.  The
boys are taught reading, writing and arithmetic, and the girls reading
and sewing, and both instructed in the religious duties according to the
Liturgy of the Church of England.

In the year 1784, labour was introduced and the boys and girls went
alternately to spinning and reading, &c. but so prejudiced were their
parents against this plan, that the number of children was reduced from
480 in 1784, to 188 in 1803.  At a special meeting held in 1803, the low
stale of the schools was taken into consideration; and the introduction
of labour being considered as the cause of it, the abandonment of the
spinning school was unanimously agreed; and the number from that time has
gradually increased.  From the last state of the charity, it appears that
46 boys are taught at each of the schools, making a total of 230.

Since the publication of the last state, the girls school has been
established on the improved system of teaching, according to the plan of
Dr. Bell, and Mr. Lancaster; and 104 girls are taught reading, writing,
arithmetic, and sewing, at very little more expence than formerly 40
were.--The Rev. C. J. Chapman, Treasurer.

Each of the masters have a liberal salary, including house rent and
firing, and the governess of the girl's school has similar advantages.
The boys, in addition to their learning, have a coat once a year, in
February, and such books as they want during their term, which is five
years--the girls are suitably allowed.

In addition to the above, are various parish Sunday schools, where
children of both sexes are instructed in the early rudiments of
education; also a school for 48 girls, where they are taught reading,
writing, sewing, and every other necessary accomplishment, in the
Bull-lane, St. Stephen's, which is under the patronage, direction, and at
the entire expence of Miss Gurney.  They attend church with the governess
every Sunday, and in addition to their learning, &c. have each a hat, and
those whose parents are unable, are furnished with other articles of
dress, to render their appearance suitable and decent.

There is also a school belonging to the Unitarians; the present master,
Mr. Harwin, lives in the Rose-lane, King-street, where 50 boys and girls
are educated.

The Independents and other dissenters from the church, contribute
something towards the education of the children of their respective
persuasions; besides, a school for the education of girls has been lately
established by the dissenters, which is supported by annual collections
at the different meetings.  The school-room is in St. Paul's and the
number educated is 120.

Of the hospitals, there were formerly one in St. Edmund's, for 30 boys,
who were clad in blue coats and red caps, and altogether educated and
maintained upon the foundation; and one for 24 girls, who where clothed
in blue gowns, and educated and maintained upon the foundation.  The
original plan of both these institutions is entirely altered, and they
are at present consolidated on the premises of the boy's hospital, in St.
Edmund's, were 40 boys, and 31 girls are educated, and their parents
allowed 10. pounds a year for their maintenance, out of which, they pay
for their education.--The present master for the boys', Mr. Gidney, and
the governess of the girls', Mrs. Gidney.

St. Giles' or the old Man's Hospital, in St. Helen's parish, was founded
1249; and was originally intended for men only; at present it maintains
53 men, and 53 women, including 6 nurses; any one before they can be
admitted must be 60 years of age; are elected by a court of mayoralty,
and must carry with them, a featherbed, blankets, and ten shillings for a
coffin.

Doughty's hospital, in St. Saviour's parish, was originally endowed for
24 poor men and 8 poor women, each being 60 years of age and upwards,
having a room in the hospital, partly furnished, with an allowance of two
shillings a week, and one chaldron of coals annually delivered them, at
several stated times, by the master, who must be a single man, has two
rooms, and double allowance; the men were also allowed a coat, and the
women a gown, every 2 years, of purple cloth; but the trustees have been
enabled to add sixpence per week, at several times, to the original
donation, in consequence of various benefactions left of late years to
the foundation; at present, the establishment is for 28 men and 10 women,
who have an allowance of three shillings and sixpence weekly; the coals
as heretofore, and the coats and gowns changed to a pair of shoes, and a
shirt or a shift each annually.

Cooke's hospital, in the Rose-lane, St. Peter's per Mountergate was
endowed by Robert and Thomas Cooke, Esqrs. for the habitation of 10 poor
women being 60 years of age or upwards, of good character, and who had
been inhabitants of the city at least 10 years.  Each of them in addition
to their room are allowed thirteen shillings per quarter, and some who
are exceedingly needy, assisted with clothing.

The Norfolk and Norwich hospital was first opened for the reception of
patients, in 1772; it stands about a quarter of a mile from the walls of
the city on the London road.  Its front aspect is nearly south east; it
is a neat brick building, in the form of an H; it was erected and is
still supported by voluntary contributions, and cost upwards of 13,000
pounds.  A new wing was added in 1802, which completed the original plan.
The governors meet every Saturday at eleven o'clock, to transact the
business of the hospital.  It appears from an abstract of the register to
the end of the year 1808, a period of 36 years--there have been on the
admission list, 27,051 in and out patients, out of which 17,727 have been
discharged as cured; 3786 relieved; 3400 for non-attendance, and other
irregularities; 640 incurable; 1292 died; and 206 remaining on the books,
the number of patients have been much increasing, as appears from the
yearly statements.

Bethelham Hospital, or Bedlam, was founded in the year 1713, for the
reception of lunatics; for its endowment, the founder settled by will,
all her estates on a body of trustees, who were to have the management of
the house forever.  As many poor lunatics are kept here gratis, as the
funds will allow--the inhabitants of the city having the first claim;
after which the trustees have the power of selecting proper objects from
any part of the county; they may also admit others, while there is room,
whose friends will agree to pay the moderate allowance of four shillings
and sixpence per week.  Additions were made to the building in 1807.  The
number of objects are considerably increased, by the good management of
the trustees, and some late benefactions, and the funds are in a thriving
state.  The master's salary is 40 pounds besides his dwelling, and two
chaldron of coals yearly.--There is also a private lunatic house, situate
near where brazen doors formerly stood.

The Norwich Dispensary, in Pottergate street, instituted in 1804, for the
purpose of giving advice and medicine gratis to such indigent poor of the
city, as are unable to procure assistance.  Mr. Powel, the apothecary,
has a liberal salary, including house rent and taxes.  The physicians
attend every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday Mornings, for the examination
and admission of patients.  The number of patients who have received the
benefit of this institution, have in the course of 12 months, amounted to
near 600, of which the greater part have been discharged cured.

The Infirmary in St. Augustine's parish, just outside the city walls, was
probably founded by a bishop of Norwich, as an hospital for lepers, but
is now occupied by ancient poor of both sexes, who are past labor, and
not fit to be put into common workhouses; they are in wards from 8 to 12
in each ward, and have every necessary, both of food and raiment; the
number entertained here is 103, and as soon as one dies, the vacancy is
filled up by election of the committee of the court of guardians for the
poor.  The master has a good house on the premises, and a liberal salary.

The hospital for indigent blind of Norfolk and Norwich, was instituted in
1805, and in the month of October, various pupils were admitted.  It is
principally indebted to Thomas Tawell Esq. who purchased a very handsome
house, with upwards of 3 acres of ground, in Magdalen-street, which he
contributed for the use of the establishment, and applied it as an asylum
for aged blind persons, and a school for the instruction of the young, in
manufacturing articles, by which they may obtain a livelihood; there are
now 5 aged persons and 16 pupils.  The annual subscriptions already
raised for its support, amount to about 400 pounds, and the benefactions
to nearly 1000 pounds.

The Humane Society for the recovery of persons apparently drowned, paid
from June 1807, to June 1809, 5. pounds 8s. 6d. for assistance given to
18 objects who were in danger of being drowned--The Mayor of Norwich, for
the time being, is Treasurer.

The Friars' Society, for the participation of useful knowledge,
instituted in 1785; their rooms for meeting are in Crown-Court, Elm Hill.
Their principal is an abbot, who has a prior and other officers under
him; they, during the winter season, distribute soup and bread to a great
number of the poor in Norwich.

The Friendly Society, for the benefit of poor women in sickness and old
age, was instituted in April, 1802, and consists of subscribing and
recommended members.  A subscribing member pays on admission 5s. 6d. and
7s. 6d. annually, which enables her to recommend one poor woman under 45
years of age.  A benefactor of five guineas has the same privilege.

A recommended member pays 2s. 9d. on admission, and 6.5d. on the first
Monday of every calendar month, which after one year entitles her to 5s.
per week during her confinement in child-bed, for one month, and 2s. 6d.
per week afterwards, if confined by consequent illness; and during any
other sickness or misfortune, 3s. 6d. per week for one month, and 2s. 6d.
per week afterwards; at the death of her husband 1 pound; and 5s. for
each of her children under 14 years of age.

At the age of 60 years, a recommended member ceases to pay her monthly
subscriptions, and is entitled to an annuity of 2. pounds 12s. for life,
or to such other annuity as the funds of the society are judged capable
of paying.

This society from its institution, to April, 1809, has paid 613. pounds
11s. 6d. to 760 women; to 308 during confinement in child-bed; 438 during
sickness; and to 14 losing their husbands.  Treasurer, the Rev. C. J.
Chapman Secretary, Mr. J. English.

Charity for Clergymen's widows, &c. in Norwich and Norfolk.  President,
the Lord Bishop of Norwich for the time being Treasurer, the Rev. Mr.
Parr.

The Norfolk Dissenters' Benevolent Association, for the relief of aged
dissenting Ministers, their widows and orphans, is supported by voluntary
subscriptions among the Calvinistic Unitarian, and Baptist Dissenters;
and an annual collection, in aid of the funds, is made at every meeting
of the above persuasions in the county.  The annual meeting of the
society is held the first week in May.  J. Barnard, Esq. of Knapton,
Treasurer.

The Benevolent Association, for the relief of decayed tradesmen's
windows, and orphans; was instituted in 1790.  From the statement of the
society, it appears that near 700 tradesmen's widows and orphans have
already received benefit from the funds of the association; and that the
accumulating fund of the society from benefactions, &c. amount to nearly
3000 pounds.  Mr. C. Bagg, Clerk.

The Norfolk Benevolent Medical Society, for raising and establishing a
fund for the relief and benefit of widows and children of surgeons and
apothecaries, and of indigent members of the profession, in Norfolk and
Norwich, instituted in 1786.  This society holds a general meeting
yearly, in May, at Norwich and Swaffham, alternately.

The Society of Universal Goodwill, in Norwich, for the relief of
foreigners who are not entitled to assistance from the parish laws of
this country.  The number of persons who have been relieved by this
society, amounts to near 3000.

The Amicable Society for Attornies, for raising and establishing a fund
for the relief and benefit of the widows and children of Attornies in
Norfolk and Norwich, instituted 1784.  Subscribers pay one guinea
annually, and they have accumulated a fund of upwards 2000 pounds.
Meetings of the society are held at the White Swan, St. Peter's, on the
first Monday in April and October.

Besides the preceding, here are some other public, and many private
charities and benefactions, which, together with those already
enumerated, serve to shew that the spirit of beneficence is not fled, nor
the hand of liberality closed.

Formerly, here were two workhouses for the poor, one the Duke of
Norfolk's Palace, hired by the Court of him for that purpose, and within
these few year, pulled down; the other in St. Andrew's, adjoining the
Hall, which is the only place occupied for that purpose at present.

The annual expence of maintaining the poor of Norwich, has amounted to
20,000 pounds on an average for the last 20 years, which has been raised
by an assessment on the half rental of occupations, at about 5s. on the
pound quarterly.

The workhouses falling to decay; inconvenient, unhealthy, and
unnecessarily expensive; an act was obtained, in 1802, for building a new
workhouse, without side the city walls, capable of containing 1300
persons.  Seven acres and a half of land was purchased for this purpose,
in a healthy situation, near Chapel-field; but, after many meetings, and
various plans and estimates offered, it was determined not to build a new
house, but to enlarge and completely repair the old one in St. Andrew's,
some adjoining buildings were accordingly purchased, the whole new
modelled, and made convenient and comfortable for 600 people, and if
necessary, room can be made for 200 more.

Bridewell is in the Mayor's jurisdiction for the confinment of such as
commit petty offences or outrages in the city, is situated in St.
Andrew's parish.  The north wall of which is about 79 feet in length, by
27 in height, and is considered one of the greatest curiosities of the
kind in the kingdom; it is incrusted with flints squared to about three
inches each, and cut to so great a nicety, that the edge of a knife can
scarcely be insinuated between the joints; it appears as regular and
smooth as brick-work; it was built about the year 1370, and seems to have
sustained little or no injury by time or accident, although the other
parts of the building have been twice nearly consumed by fire.  There are
some other pieces of flint-work in the city, equally well executed,
particularly on the south side of St. Michael's Coslany church.  The art
of squaring flints appears to have been lost in England, but some works
executed in that way within the last century in France, prove the art is
in some measure recovered there.

The City Gaol, till the year 1597, occupied the east end of Guild-hall,
at which time it was removed to its present situation, opposite the
Guild-hall in the market, and had, until that time been a public inn,
called the Lamb, which was purchased by St. George's company, to be
converted to its present use.

The Guild-hall was originally a small thatched building, and in Edward
the third's time, was called a toll-booth; about the same time, a small
room was added, from which it acquired the name of the Guild-hall, and
continued in this state till Henry the Fourth in 1406, granted the city,
a charter for electing a Mayor, &c., at which time, a committee was
formed, and a warrant granted them to raise money, and press all workmen
for the erecting of a new Guild-hall, which business was so vigorously
pursued, that in 1409, the roof was raised; in 1511 part of the roof at
the east end fell down, and in 1635 it was near being demolished by the
deputes' servants undermining its foundation in digging for saltpetre.
The windows of the Council chamber were formerly of painted and stained
glass, which have been miserably mutilated.--This room is ornamented with
portraits of various eminent persons, and also the arms of the great
Norfolk hero, the late Lord Nelson, with the sword of the Spanish
Admiral, taken by his Lordship in 1797, and presented by him to the
Corporation.

The Common-council-chamber underwent a complete repair in 1806, at which
time it was considerably enlarged: in this Hall the Assizes, and quarter
Sessions, for the city, are held.  It contains also the Mayor's office
for transacting daily business, the Town-clerk's and Chamberlain's
offices; and all elections for Majors and other officers, and all
questions of moment relative to the city, are here determined.

St. Andrew's hall, is a noble fabric, and was formerly a conventual
church of Benedictine friars, it was founded in 1415, consists of a nave
and two aisles, which remain nearly perfect; it had formerly a handsome
steeple, which fell down in 1712; the aisles are separated from the nave
by six elegant slender colomns which support the roof, they are half the
width of the nave, and the same length, the whole is 120 feet long, and
seventy wide; within the walls there are 45 windows, most of which were
formerly ornamented with painted glass, which is chiefly removed or
demolished.  In the time of Henry the Eighth, through the interest of the
Duke of Norfolk, the citizens obtained leave to make of the church, a
fair and large hall for the Mayor, &c. to repair unto at a common
assembly, &c.

The St. George's Company formerly held their feasts and meetings here.
This fraternity took its rise in 1385, and at one time amounted to 240
members; in 1416, they received a charter of incorporation: in 1731, the
company resigned their charter into the hands of the Corporation; their
plate and paraphernalia were sold, their debts paid, and their meetings
entirely ceased.  In 1544, the first Mayor's feast was held here, and in
1561, a sumptuous dinner, was given to the Duke of Norfolk, and a
numerous assembly of nobility and gentry, at which the Mayor's portion of
the expence, amounted to l. pound 12s. 9d.  The bill of fare exhibits a
striking difference between the price of provisions at that period and
the present, beef being 1s. 6d. per stone, flour 6d. per bushel, and
double strong beer 2s. 6d. per barrel.  King Charles the Second, and many
of the nobility, were entertained here in 1671.  In 1774, this building,
underwent alterations, and received some additions, among which were the
present porch, and the room over it, fitted up as the City Library, in
which the Court of Requests for the recovery of small debts, is held.  In
1796, the hall was opened as a Corn-Exchange for which purpose it is used
every Saturday.  It was new painted, and the pictures cleaned in 1806.
The walls are decorated with numerous portraits of those who from
official situations or otherwise, have contributed to the welfare of the
city, among which, at the upper end is an admirable portrait of the
immortal Nelson, being the last, and it is considered the best for which
he ever sat.  It was painted by Sir Wm. Beechey, in 1801.  Also, two fine
historical paintings by Wm. Martin, of Edward and Eleanora, and the death
of Lady Jane Gray, which he presented to his native city.  At the lower
end over the window is displayed, the ensign of the French ship, La
Genereux, captured by Sir Edward Berry, in 1800.  Every satisfactory
particular, relative to this place, the pictures, artists, &c. may be
learned from a late publication, "A Companion to St. Andrew's Hall,
Price, 1s."

There is also a Jew's synagogue in St. Peter's Mancroft; two Catholic
meetings, one in St. John's Maddermarket, erected within the last thirty
years, the other in St. Swithins lane, of longer standing, and much
smaller.  A French church in Queen-street, near Tombland, and the Dutch
church, so called, from having been formerly used by a Dutch congregation
adjoining St. Andrew's hall, but which is now used for the poor belonging
to the workhouse.  Two Quakers' meetings, one of which is in St.
Augustine's Parish, on the south side the Gildencraft, which is a strong
brick building with a large burying-ground; the other in the Goat-lane,
near the market-place, which is much smaller and more generally attended.
There are several other places of worship, used by the Protestant
Dissenters, of which, that belonging to the Unitarians is by far the most
elegant.  It is an octangular building supported within-side by eight
elegant Corinthian Pillars.  The pews are wainscot, the cieling is an
ornamented dome, and the effect of the whole, is remarkably striking.
The first stone of the Building was laid, by the celebrated Dr. Taylor,
on the 25th of February, 1754.  The expence of the building which was
near 5000. pounds was defrayed by the congregation, who can number among
their Ministers, several of great literay celebrity, in particular Dr.
John Taylor, Dr. Enfieid, Mr. Bourne, and Mr. George Morgan.

The Independents' meeting-house, stands a little to the east of the
foregoing, in the parish of St. Clement's: it is a large handsome square
building, and was finished about 1693.  The limits of this design will
not admit of a particular enumeration of all the places of worship,
belonging to the various congregations of Anabaptists, Methodists, &c. of
which there are many, chiefly in the northern part of the city.

The Excise-office, is at the Bull, in Magdalen-street.  The
Permit-office, in St. Peter's Hungate, opposite the Church.  The
Stamp-office, St. Giles's Broad street, I. H. Cole, Esq. Receiver.

The Post-office is in the Tuns' court, near the market-place, where the
Mails arrive from London, every forenoon, (Monday excepted), between and
12 o'clock, and are dispatched every afternoon, (Saturday excepted), at
four o'clock; the Mails from all the intermediate places branching upon
the London road, arrive and are dispatched at the same time every day.
The Mail to Yarmouth, is dispatched immediately after the arrival of the
Mails from London, and the Mail from Yarmouth, arrives here every day at
four o'clock.  The Mails from Cromer, Aylsham, North-Walsham, &c. arrive
here every day, early in the forenoon, and are dispatched from twelve to
one.  G. Litchfield, Esq. Post-master.

Post-horse duty office, Rampant-horse street, St. Stephen's, Mr. J. M.
Murry, Collector.

Surveyor of Assessed Taxes, Mr. C. Lay.  St. Giles's, broad street.

Norwich market has for a long series of years, been held in the highest
estimation, for the quantity and quality of provisions, with which it has
been supplied, particularly for poultry, which are sent from hence, in
considerable quantities to London, and various other parts of the
kingdom.  The market is under the regulation of a Committee from the
Court of Aldermen, and Commons.  Market-days, Wednesday and Saturday.
Collector of the market, Mr. R. Harmar.  The Fish-market, adjoining, is
generally well supplied (from Yarmouth) daily, as is the butchery, with
beef and mutton.

The Norwich cattle-market, held on the castle meadow, every Saturday, has
for many years been increasing, and is considered at this time, the first
cattle-market in the kingdom, out of the metropolis.  The Corporation, at
an Assembly held in September, 1809, ordered pens to be erected for pigs
and sheep, more convenient places to be assigned for beasts, horses,
stalls, waggons, carts, &c.; and tolls were ordered to be collected, viz.
for pigs and sheep, 8d. per score; beasts, when sold 2d. each, by the
purchaser; for horses, 6d. each; for waggons, brought for sale, 1s. each;
for stalls, 6d. each; for every auction, 1s.; for calves and mules, 1d.
each.  Here also is the weighbridge for Hay, &c., Mr. C. Hubbard,
hay-weigher, and collector of the cattle-market.

Norwich Public Library, was instituted in 1784, and was held in the City
Library-room adjoining St. Andrew's hall, till 1794, when it was removed
to the building formerly the catholic chapel, Wymer-street, where books
are delivered by the librarian to the subscribers, every day, between the
hours of eleven and two, Sundays and a few holidays excepted.  It
contains upwards of 7000 volumes.  Every subscriber pays two guineas and
a half, on his admission, and an additional half-guinea, annually.  There
are about 500 subscribers, under the regulation of a President,
Vice-president, and a Committee of 24, chosen from their body, half at
each of their annual meetings for two years.  A meeting of the Committee,
is held on the second Monday of every month, and the annual meeting, the
first week in September.

The Assembly-rooms, usually called Chapel-field-house, where assemblies,
&c. are held, built in 1754.  The rooms are spacious and brilliant.

The Theatre was built in 1757, and much enlarged, and improved by the
present Patentee, W. Wilkins, Esq. in 1800, at which time, distinct
entrances were made to each part of the house; it is convenient, and
tastefully fitted up.  It contains two circles of boxes, besides those
above which range with the gallery.  The box-lobbies are commodious, and
at the back of the upper-circle, is a bar-room, where refreshments of
every kind may be procured.  The stage is large, and the house has every
necessary convenience of green-room, dressings-rooms, scene-rooms,
painters-room, property-rooms, music-room, carpenter's shop, several
rooms occupied by the person who keeps the house, &c.  It will
conveniently hold 130. pounds and has been a nursery for many performers
of celebrity, who have afterwards become favorites in the metropolitan
theatres, among whom where Mr. Murray, Harley, C. Bannister, Powell,
Townshend, Waddy, Blanchard, &c.  The house when well filled, appears to
the best advantage, and then any person who has a taste for theatrical
amusements, neatness and elegance, cannot fail being agreeably
entertained with the appearance of the audience, the performers and the
house.

The principal place of Summer-amusement and resort, is Ranelagh garden,
just without side the City walls, on the London road.  Here is a large
octangular building, the Pantheon, which is 70 feet in diameter and is
fitted up with two tier of boxes, for the reception of company, and an
orchestra with rooms behind, for the accommodation of the musicians,
leaving a large area in the middle; it is capable of conveniently holding
1200 persons, and here on some public occasions, and annually in the
Assize week, which in the regular way commences on the Monday, eight
weeks after Trinity Sunday; the proprietor entertains the public with
some of the principal vocal performers from the London theatres, and a
suitable band.  In the garden is also a bowling-green and an orchestra
for the reception of a military band, and the garden and pantheon on this
occasion is elegantly lighted up with thirty thousand lamps, in a style
superior to any thing of the kind out of the metropolis; the pantheon is
at other times occasionally used for very large dinner parties, and for
the exhibition of performances, for which the theatre is not adapted.
The area is sometimes fitted up as a circus for equestrian exhibitions,
for which it is better calculated than any place in the kingdom, out of
London.

A garden and bowling-green, called Norwich Vauxhall, in Barrack-street,
Pockthorpe, very pleasantly situated against the navigable river from
Yarmouth; it is on a smaller scale than Ranelagh, is well furnished with
boxes for company, and was tolerably frequented for two or three seasons
after it was enlarged and fitted up in its present manner, but has been
gradually falling in public estimation since, notwithstanding the
proprietor has at several times brought forward a variety of amusements:
and indeed it is not probable his exertions can be productive, its
situation precluding it from a share of public favor.

The bowling-green near chapel-field, is much the largest in or near
Norwich, and is well frequented by the tradesmen in the neighbourhood,
and strangers, during the summer season.

The Adam and Eve garden, in St. Martin's palace, near the cathedral, is a
pleasant rural spot, on the opposite side of the river to Vauxhall, it
has a good prospect of the horse-barracks, and in the summer seasons is
very well frequented.

At Bracondale and Carrow, are some pleasant gardens, commanding a
beautiful general prospect, particularly towards Thorpe, over the river.

The village of Thorpe is delightfully situated on the navigable river to
Yarmouth, and commands a charming prospect; here are several places of
public resort which are well frequented during the summer season.

Chapel-field, which is on the south-west part of Norwich, was formerly a
place of much resort as a promenade, particularly on Sunday afternoons;
but within the last few years a reservoir has been made, and a large
tower built, which by a steam engine, at the New Mills, (which were first
erected in 1430, improved in 1695, and brought to perfection in 1802,)
and a subteraneous conveyance, is constantly suplied with water, some of
which is by machinery conveyed from the reservoir to the tower, for the
supply of such parts of the city as are above the level of the reservoir,
from whence it is distributed by cylinders and pipes of different
materials.  The reservoir and tower have however, in some degree, spoil'd
its appearance, and together with military parades being generally in the
Market, or on the Castle-hill, and Meadow, have occasioned those places
to become the principal promenades.

The horse-barracks, about a quarter of a mile north-east of the City,
were erected in 1792, and are well worth the observation of a stranger;
they are capable of holding about 230 horses and men; the foot barracks,
just on the northern side of Coslany-bridge, are calculated to contain
about 740 men.

There are five public bridges over the river Wensum, besides one at the
New Mills, generally used by sufferance, which is of wood; four of the
others, viz.--Blackfriars', Fye-bridge, Whitefriars, and Bishop-bridge,
of stone, and Coslany of iron.

Among the miscellaneous buildings, &c. worthy the attention of the
antiquarian or stranger, is Kett's castle, so called from the famous
Norfolk rebel of that name, who encamped there in 1549, at the head of
20,000 insurgents, whose numbers were continually increasing.  From this
place he attacked the city, where he committed every kind of outrage,
wantonly destroying many of the principal inhabitants, merely because
they were gentlemen, and burning and plundering most part of the city and
country adjacent.  Every possible means were used by government to
disperse them by lenient means in vain; after which, a sufficient
military force was sent to subdue them, which was not effected till many
battles and skirmishes had taken place, with great slaughter to the
insurgents, and some loss to the army.  After the main body were subdued,
pardon was again offered to a smaller party who remained in reserve, and
who presently complying with the offer, and with one voice cried out
"_God save King Edward_."

Kett and his brother were soon taken and committed to the Tower of
London, where they were tried and convicted of high treason, and shortly
after executed on gibbets, and hung in chains, one on the top of Norwich
castle, the other upon Wymondham steeple, Wymondham being the place of
their nativity, and nearly three hundred others of the ringleaders
suffered.  It is computed that Kett's rebellion cost the nation at that
time near 20,000 pounds.  This Castle was founded by Bishop Herbert,
about seven hundred years since, as a Chapel dedicated to St. Michael,
some small ruins of which are yet standing: it is situate on the brow of
Mousehold hill, just over Bishop bridge, near to which, close by the
river on the left hand, flows a spring of pleasant water, formerly much
resorted to, and over which was erected a handsome freestone conduit, by
Sir John Pettus, in 1611.  A little further to the left, on the other
side of the river, stands the tower in the Hospital meadow, called the
Dungeon, or Cow's tower; it is a circular building, about fifty two feet
in height, and twenty four in diameter, with a round spiral staircase
reaching to the top; is supposed to have been originally built as an
advanced post and watch tower to the castle; Blomfield thinks it was
built in order to levy the tolls then belonging to the prior and the
church, and says it was used as a prison for the jurisdiction of the
Cathedral.  The present tower is stated to have been built in 1390, at
the expence of the city.

In St. James's parish, opposite the church, is an old house, said to have
been built by the celebrated Sir John Fastolf, and termed in antient
records his palace, or city house.

Just within side of the walls near Ber-street, stands St. Catherine's
hill, on which is Mrs. Burroughes's house, the sight of which will well
repay the trouble of a walk.  The buildings in Surry-street, among which
is Surry-house, a curious specimen of domestic architecture, the windows
of which were emblazoned on glass, with many armorial bearings.  There
are also a number of good houses in St. Giles's-street, Messrs. Gurneys'
Bank, in St. Michael's Plea; the Flour mill, by steam, in St. Andrew's;
Mr. Patteson's brewery, in Pockthorpe, and many others, which will arrest
the attention of the stranger in his perambulation about the city.

Norwich, including the Hamlets, is divided into four great wards,
viz.--_Conisford ward_, _Mancroft ward_, _Wymer ward_, and _Great
Northern ward_; each of which is again subdivided into three small wards;
_Great Conisford_ containing _South Conisford ward_, in which is
comprized the parishes of St. Peter per Southgate, St. Etheldred and St.
Julian, and the hamlets of Trowse-milgate and Carrow; _North Conisford
ward_, in which is the parish of St. Peter per Mountergate.  _Ber-street
ward_, in which are the parishes of St. John at Sepulchre, St. Michael
thorn, St. John Timber-hill, All Saints, and the Hamlet of Lakenham.
_Great Mancroft ward_ contains the Parishes of St. Stephen, St. Peter per
Mancroft, and St. Giles, each parish being a small ward in itself,
including the hamlets of Eaton, and part of Earlham and Heigham.

_Great Wymer ward_, is subdivided into three small wards, viz.--_West
Wymer ward_, contains the parishes of St. Benedict, St. Swithin, St.
Margaret, St. Lawrence and St. Gregory, with part of the hamlets of
Earlham and Heigham.  _Middle Wymer ward_, contains the Parishes of St.
John at Madder-market, St. Andrew and St Michael at Plea.  _East Wymer
ward_, contains the parishes of St. Peter at Hungate, St. Simon and Jude,
St. George Tombland, St. Martin at the Palace, and St. Helen.

_Great Northern ward_, subdivided into three small wards, viz.--_Coslany
ward_ contains the parishes of St. Michael, St. Mary and St. Martin.
_Colegate ward_ contains the parishes of St. George's Colegate, and St.
Augustine.  _Fye Bridge ward_ includes the parishes of St. Edmund, St.
James, St. Paul, St. Saviour, and St. Clement.  Each of the small wards
have the right of electing two Aldermen, and one of the Nominees for the
Common Council; the rest of the Common Council being chosen by the
Nominees.  _Great Conisford ward_, including the Nominees, choosing
twelve,--_Great Mancroft ward_ sixteen,--_Great Wymer ward_ twenty,--and
the _Northern ward_ twelve.  In ward elections the resident freemen only
have at right to vote, and the election for Nominees takes place on the
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday, before passion-week.

The City is governed by a Mayor, Recorder, Steward, two Sheriffs,
twenty-four Aldermen, (of which the Mayor is one,) sixty Common
Council-men, a Town-clerk, Chamberlain and Sword-bearer, attended by
suitable officers.

The Mayor is elected by the freemen, on the first day of May, and sworn
into office on the guild-day, which is on the Tuesday before Midsummer,
except Midsummer-day fall on a Wednesday, in which case the guild is kept
the Tuesday se'nnight before the Mayor is chosen from among the Aldermen,
is a Justice of the quorum during his mayoralty, and afterwards Justice
of the peace.

On the death or resignation of an Alderman, the Mayor on receiving notice
thereof, must within five days, and not less than two; and giving not
less than twenty-four hours notice to the freemen in the great ward, in
which the small ward belongs, to elect another.

The Sheriffs are chosen--one by a letter from the court of Aldermen, in
the early part of July, and returnable if a full assembly can be made,
within fourteen days, upon paying a fine of 80 pounds to the corporation,
till the 10th of August; on which day, whoever holds it must serve the
office.  The other Sheriff is elected by the freemen on the last Tuesday
in August, and they are both sworn into office on Michaelmas-day.  The
Mayor with the Sheriffs, hold courts every Wednesday and Saturday, to
hear complaints, and to do every other act tending to the peaceable
government of the city.

The Recorder assists in the Mayor's court as chief Judge, as does the
Steward in the Sheriffs' court, they must both be barristers, and are
always Justices of the quorum, and Council for the city.

The quarterly assemblies are held on February the twenty-fourth, May the
third, the day before guild-day, and Sept. the twenty-first.

There are three Fairs in Norwich,--one on the Thursday before Easter, on
Tombland;--one on Easter-Monday and Tuesday;--and one on Whit-Monday and
Tuesday, by Bishop-bridge.

Here are several Insurance-offices, viz.--The Norwich Insurance
Fire-ffice, on Orford hill, opened in November 1792.

The Union office for insurance against loss by fire, corner of Briggs's
lane, near the market, established in March 1797;--and at the same place
The Union office, for the insurance of lives, and granting Annuities and
Endowments for children.

The General Equitable assurance office, for insuring property from fire,
in Bank street, established Michaelmas, 1807.  The Anchor fire office,
Back of the inns, established in June 1808; besides various agencies,
viz.--

Sun fire office agent, Mr. John Taylor, _St. Andrew's_;--Royal Exchange,
Mr. J. Woodrow, _St. George's Colegate_;--Phoenix, Mr. H. Francis, _Surry
street_;--Suffolk, Mr. Marsh, _Bank street_;--British, Mr. L. F. Boyce,
_St. John's Maddermarket_;--Imperial, Mr. Charles Norton, _King street_.

A gentleman desirous of spending a few days in Norwich, cannot help being
gratified by seeing the various employments of its extensive
manufactories in Stuffs, Cottons, Shawls &c.--the first and last of which
are here carried to a perfection no where else to be met with in England.

Norwich adds greatly to the trade of Yarmouth, by the importation of
about 40,000 chaldrons of coals yearly; wine, fish, oil, Irish yarn, and
all heavy goods which come from thence by the river Yare: and in Peace
the exportation of its manufactures to Russia, Germany, Holland, Denmark,
Norway, Spain, Portugal, Italy, &c.  The keels and wherries which
navigate between Norwich and Yarmouth are acknowledged to be superior to
any other small craft in England, for carrying a larger burthen, and
being worked at a smaller expence;--their burthen is from fifteen to
fifty tons; they have but one mast, which lets down, and carry only one
large square sail, are covered close by hatches, and have a cabin
superior to many coasting vessels, in which oftentimes the keelman and
his family live; they require only two persons to navigate them, and
sometimes perform their passage (thirty-two miles) in five hours.

Norwich has experienced of late years, a number of improvements; the
lighting is much more brilliant, and better regulated than formerly; the
paving also, which is in great forwardness, and the alterations
consequent thereon, have already much improved many parts, and will when
finished, add greatly to the beauty of the city, and to the convenience
and comfort of the inhabitants and occasional visitors.  The act for
paving the streets, &c. was obtained in June 1808, and empowers the
commissioners to levy on all houses laid to the poor-rate, four shillings
in the pound on the half-rental, and one shilling and four pence in the
pounds on such houses &c. as do not pay to the poor-rate, computed on
half their annual value; also by a frontage of two-pence per running
foot.  The commissioners under the paving act are one hundred and
thirty-six in number; sixty-three permanent, besides the Mayor, Aldermen,
Sheriffs, Recorder, Steward, the Speaker of the Commons, the Rev. the
Dean and Prebendary, in all thirty-one, and forty-two Parochial
Commissioners, chosen annually.  Clerk's office on Elm-hill, there are
also a surveyor and four collectors of the rates.

Among the modern institutions of the city is one which serves to shew
that the fine arts are encouraged even at this distance from the
metropolis; this is a "_Society of Artists_," the members of which have
made an annual public exhibition of their pictures, for the last few
years, during the Assize and following week, at their room in Sir
Benjamin Wrenche's court, St. John's Maddermarket, where they also hold a
meeting once a fortnight.  If societies of this kind were more
encouraged, instead of that deformity, which disgraces many modern
alterations, beauty, consistency, and propriety would be introduced.

Two mail coaches run daily between London and Norwich; a double bodied
coach, called the Expedition, by Newmarket daily, and a post coach by
Bury three times a week;--they all leave Norwich in the afternoon, and
arrive in London the following morning.  A Lynn and Norwich Expedition by
Dereham and Swaffham, leave Norwich on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday
morning at seven o'clock, and arrive at Lynn the same evening, returning
to Norwich on Wednesday, Friday and Monday, in winter time it runs only
twice a week, viz. on Tuesdays and Saturdays.

A Machine to Yarmouth twice every day, from the Black horse, Tombland, at
eight o'clock in the morning and four in the afternoon, in the summer,
and nine o'clock in the morning and three in the afternoon in winter,
Saturday mornings excepted; and in the worst part of the winter it
sometimes runs only once each day.

Two London waggons leave Norwich every Tuesday and Friday evening, and
return to Norwich every Wednesday and Saturday sen'-night following.  By
these waggons through Cambridge, there is a regular conveyance to
Manchester, Birmingham, Sheffield, York, and all the manufacturing towns
in Yorkshire:--here are also York, Manchester, Lynn, Bury waggons,
&c.--also a Barge to Yarmouth every Monday, Tuesday, Thursday and Friday.

The Diocese of Norwich consists of a Bishop, Chancellor, Archdeacon,
Commissaries, and other officers of the Ecclesiastical Court, a Dean,
Prebendaries, Minor-Canons, and other officers of the cathedral.  The
Bishop's office is in the upper close--the Consistory court is held in
the cathedral, about once in three weeks--the Dean and Chapter's office
is in the cloyster--Archdeacon's office at Mr. Steward's, Bank street.

                       [Picture: Decorative image]




_List of the Bishops and Deans of Norwich_,
_during the last century_.


BISHOPS.


1691 John Moore, translated to _Ely_, the forty-ninth Bishop.

1707 Charles Trimmel, to _Sarum_.

1721 Thomas Green, to _Ely_.

1723 John Lang.

1727 William Baker.

1732 Robert Butts, translated to _Ely_.

1738 Thomas Gooch, ditto.

1743 Samuel Lisle.

1749 Thomas Hayter, to _London_.

1761 Phillip Yonge.

1783 Lewis Bagot, to _St. Asaph_.

1790 George Horne.

1792 Charles Manners Sutton, to _Canterbury_.

1805 Henry Bathurst.



DEANS.


1689 Henry Fairfax, the fifteenth Dean.

1702 Humphry Prideaux.

1724 John Cole.

1730 Robert Butts, afterwards Bishop.

1733 John Baron.

1739 Thomas Bullock.

1761 Edward Townshend.

1765 Phillip Lloyd.

1790 Joseph Turner.



_Also eleven Lodges of Free and Accepted Masons_;--viz.--


No. 16 White Sawn, St. Peter's Mancroft, the first Wednesday in the
Month,--constituted May 11th, 1724.

No. 80 Bull, Magdalen-street, first Tuesday,--1749.

No. 99 Moon and Stars, St. Michael, at Coslany, third Tuesday,--Nov.
20th, 1753,--_Faithful Lodge_.

No. 105 Castle, Castle-ditches, second Thursday,--March 13th,
1757,--[Picture: Symbol of hand with finger pointing right] _Do not
meet_.

No. 120 Wounded Hart, St. Peter's Mancroft, fourth Tuesday,--Sept. 16th,
1766.

No. 153 Norwich Volunteer, St. Stephen's, second Wednesday.--_Lodge of
Friendship_.

No. 166 Wild Man, St. Andrew's Steps, first Monday.--_Ancient Masons_.

No. 192 Union Lodge, Gate House, Tombland, last Friday,--February 11th,
1766.

No. 294 Lodge of Union, city of Norwich, St. Stephen's, second Sunday and
fourth Monday.--_Ancient Masons_.

No. 563 Norwich Theatrical, at the different Theatres in the circuit,
second Friday,--June 26th, 1797.

Royal Arch Masons, Knight Templers, and Grand Chapter of Harodim, Gate
House Tombland.



_Also Three Lodges of ODD FELLOWS_, _instituted in_ 1804.


At the _Norwich Volunteer_, in St. Stephens, and since removed to the
_Duke of York_, on the Cattle Meadow, called the YORK LODGE--they have
near 400 names enrolled on their books.

The TRAFALGAR LODGE, instituted in 1808, at the _Three Tons_, near St.
Andrew's Steps

The PRINCE OF WALES LODGE, instituted in 1809, at the _Old Lobster_, in
Lobster-lane.

There is likewise a LODGE OF DRUIDS, at the _Rose_, in St. Augustines.

                                * * * * *

A sketch of the actions and characters of those persons born in this
city, who have distinguished themselves by their talents or application,
would furnish ample materials for an interesting volume; yet, to pass
over so important a topic entirely, might be censurable; brief
particulars of some few of the most eminent are here given:--

William Bateman, commonly known as William de Norwico, was born in the
beginning of the 14th century, (his father represented the City in
Parliament in 1326;) he received the rudiments of education at Norwich,
and afterwards at Cambridge studied the civil law, and was early noticed
for his literary acquirements, Bishop Ayremine recommended him to Rome,
where he soon acquired several offices of trust and honor; he was sent as
Nuncio, to mediate for peace between Edward III. and the King of France,
and was honorably received on his return to England in 1345: he is said
to have been tenacious of the perquisites and privileges of office; he
founded and endowed Trinity Hall, Cambridge, in 1347; in 1354, being sent
by Edward III. to acquaint the Pope with the nature of the King's claim
to the Crown of France, he died at Avignon, then the residence of the
Pope, and was buried in the Cathedral there in 1354.

Matthew Parker, was born in St. Saviour's parish, August 6th, 1504, he
received his education in Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, where he
made rapid progress in almost every kind of learning; he was appointed
Chaplain to Queen Ann Boleyn, and through her interest obtained several
preferments;--and on her being brought to the scaffold, the Princess
Elizabeth, with a solemn injunction, was put under his care.  He was
shortly after made Vice Chancellor of the Cambridge University; he was
appointed Chaplain to King Edward the VIth. and in 1552 preferred to the
Deanery of Lincoln; he withdrew from his native country in Queen Mary's
reign, but was recalled on her death, and appointed to the See of
Canterbury by her successor.  In his character he combined learning and
religion, in his household he was hospitable and courteous, of his
charity his liberal benefactions bear ample testimony; he collected many
valuable manuscripts, which he gave to the library of the College where
he received his education: he was a profound Antiquarian, and was the
author of _Antiquitates Britannicae_; he caused many valuable records
where copies were scarce to be printed; he published some other works,
and superintended a translation of the Scriptures from the original
tongue, known by the name of the Bishops Bible; he died at his palace in
Lambeth, May 17, 1575.

John Kaye or Cains, was born in Norwich, in 1510, and received his
education at Cambridge.  He finished his studies on the Continent, where
he wrote many books, and formed numerous valuable literary acquaintance;
on his return to England he practised as a Physician in Norwich with
great success, and in 1557 he was considered the most able practitioner
of medicine in the kingdom: he was physician to King Edward VI. and held
the same office to Queen Mary, with whom he was in high favor; in the
latter part of his life he retired to Cambridge, but being called to
London on some urgent business, he was taken ill, and died in July, 1573,
and was buried in Caius College Chapel, Cambridge; he exercised his pen
on almost every branch of learning, and left upwards of four-score
different treatises on various subjects.

William Cuningham, was born in Norwich, in 1531; he studied physic, and
graduated at Heidelburgh; he wrote several treatises on Astronomy,
Chronology and Medicine, particularly the Cosmographical Glass--printed
in 1559, at the close of which year he died.

Thomas Legge, born in 1535, was student at Cambridge, and succeeded his
friend Caius in the mastership of Caius College; he was a great and
distinguished Antiquarian; having attached himself to the Law, he was
appointed King's legal professor, and twice filled the vice Chancellor's
chair; he was also a dramatic writer, he died in 1607.

John Cosin, was born in Norwich, in 1594, he studied in Caius College,
Cambridge; he was promoted to several church preferments, which, at the
commencement of the civil wars, he was deprived of, being the first
clergyman who suffered that species of punishment for his loyalty.  On
the return of King Charles the II. he was appointed to the deanery of
Peterborough, and soon afterwards called to the Bishoprick of Durham, and
died in 1672; he wrote some pieces on polemical divinity.

Edward Brown, was born in this city about the year 1642, he was educated
at the grammar school, and in 1665 took the degree of Bachelor in Physic,
at Cambridge, and was soon after admitted at Oxford, where he in 1667
obtained a doctor's diploma; he then travelled over great part of the
Continent, and on his return, published an account of his travels, which
contain some valuable information of Natural History, particularly on
Minerology and Metallurgy; after settling in London, he was appointed
physician to King Charles the II. and in 1705, became president of the
College of physicians, which office he held till his death; he was well
versed in the living and the dead languages; he died in 1708, at his seat
at Northfleet, in Kent.

Doctor Samuel Clarke, the son of Edward Clarke, esq. an alderman of
Norwich, and for several years one of its representatives in Parliament;
he was born in 1675, and completed his studies at Cambridge, where he
soon distinguished himself, particularly in the Mathematics; the
Newtonian Philosophy attracted his notice, and by his illustration of
that theory, he obtained very considerable credit at the early age of 22;
he afterwards applied himself to divinity, and was appointed to some
church preferments, but from his attachment to Mathematical knowledge, he
was unwilling to admit any thing for truth which did not allow of that
kind of demonstration; this gave a bias to his judgment, which is
apparent in all his writings.  In 1706, he published a Latin edition of
Sir Isaac Newton's Optics, on the credit of which, he was noticed by
Queen Ann, and appointed to the valuable rectory of St. James's,
Westminster; in 1710, he published Caesar's Commentaries in royal folio,
(one of the most magnificent Books ever printed in England,) elucidated
with eighty-seven engravings.  On the death of Sir Isaac Newton, he was
offered the lucrative place of Master of the Mint, which he refused, as
being incompatible with his character as a clergyman; he died in 1729:
his writings were very voluminous, and will remain a lasting monument of
his uncommon abilities and profound learning.

Edward King, F. R. and A. S. S. was born at Norwich, in 1734; in 1748, he
was sent to Cambridge to finish his education; he soon distinguished
himself by his progress and regularity.  Having obtained academical
honors, he entered a student at Lincoln's-Inn, and from thence practised
at the Bar for some time, with great credit; but coming to a large
fortune by the death of his father, he quitted the profession, and
applied himself to scientific pursuits; he was particularly calculated
for profound research; he had long been an active and useful member of
both the Royal and Antiquarian Societies, and became vice president of
the latter in 1781, and president in 1783; he resigned the latter the
year following; his works were numerous and his observations on Ancient
Castles, is in great repute.  He died in London, April, 1807.  There are
some other eminent men, who (although not natives,) have spent the
principal part of their time in Norwich, of whom a slight notice may not
be unacceptable.

Herbert de Losinga, the first Bishop Norwich was born in Normandy, from
whence he was brought by William the II. towards the close of the 11th
Century: Henry I. appointed him his chancellor.  He is said to have been
very loose and wild in his young time, although afterwards he became
quite the reverse, he was an excellent scholar for the time in which he
lived, to atone for the extravagancies of his early years, he founded the
Cathedral, the Bishops Palace, &c.

Joseph Hall, was born in Leicestershire, in 1574; at the age of fifteen
was sent to Cambridge, to finish his education, and at the age of
twenty-three distinguished himself as a wit and a poet, he became
successively Bishop of Exeter and Norwich, but was soon bereaved of all
his preferments and properly by religious persecution; in 1647, he
retired to a little estate he rented at Heigham, where he died in
September, 1656, and was buried in the chancel of the parish church
there; he was by foreigners stiled the English Seneca; his works are
numerous, which are collected and printed in three volumes, folio.

Norwich is 108 miles from London by Newmarket, 110 by Colchester, 114 by
Bury St. Edmunds, and it is a remarkable fact, that Norwich, Bury and
Lynn, form an equilateral triangle, each side measuring 42 miles, it is
also 43 miles from Ipswich, and 24 from Yarmouth.  The soil of Norwich is
mixed the upper stratum is light of sufficient depth for the plough upon
chalk, gravel and sand; the air is remarkably salubrious, it is screened
from the easterly wind by Moushold Heath, and abound in springs of water
of the purest kind.

There are five Banks in Norwich, which draw upon London, viz.--

_Messrs. Gurney's_, St. Michael at Plea, upon BARCLAY'S, TRITTON and
BEVAN, No. 56, Lombard-street.

_Messrs. Harvey_ and _Hudson's_, King-street, upon HANKEY and Co. No. 7.
Fenchurch-street.

_Messrs. Ketts_ and _Back_, Orford-hill, upon HOARE, BARNETTS and Co. No.
62, Lombard-street.

_Starling_, _Day_ and _Son_, Pottergate-street, on FORSTER, LUBBOCK and
Co. No. 11, Mansion-House-street.

_Thomas Bignold_, _Son_ and_ Co._ Market-place, upon STEPHENSON'S,
REMINGTON'S, SMITH and Co. No. 69, Lombard-street.




_List of MAYORS during the last Century_.


1701, John Hall.  1702, John Atkinson.  1703, John Freeman.  1704,
William Blyth.  1705, William Thacker.  1706, William Cooke.  1707, Peter
Seaman.  1708, Thomas Havers.  1709, Mathew Nall.  1710, Robert Bene.
1711, William Cockman.  1712, John Goose.  1713, Nicholas Helwys.  1714,
John Norman.  1715, Peter Attelsey.  1716, Augustus Metcalf.  1717, R.
Lubbock, died--T. Bubbin, died, A. Parmenter succeeded.  1718, Richard
Mott.  1719, John Hall.  1720, Edward Coleburne.  1721, Benjamin Nuthall.
1722, Thomas Newton.  1723, Edmund Hunton.  1724, John Croshold.  1725,
Daniel Fromanteel.  1726, John Custance.  1727, John Harvey.  1728,
Thomas Harwood.  1729, John Black.  1730, John Pell.  1731, Robert Marsh.
1732, Francis Arnam.  1733, Jeremiah Ives.  1734, Phillip Meadows.  1735,
Thomas Vere.  1736, Timothy Balderstone.  1737, John Spurrell.  1738,
Robert Harvey.  1739, William Clark.  1740, John Nuthall.  1741, Edward
King.  1742, William Wiggett.  1743, James Nasmith.  1744, John Black.
1745, Simon Waller.  1746, John Wood.  1747, William Crowe.  1748, Thomas
Harvey.  1749, B. Nuthall, _second time_.  1750, J. Custance, _second
time_.  1751, T. Balderstone, _second time_.  1752, Thomas Hurnard.
1753, John Press.  1754, John Gay.  1755, Peter Columbine.  1756,
Jeremiah Ives.  1757, John Goodman.  1758, Nockhold Tompson.  1759,
Robert Rogers.  1760, Bartholomew Harwood.  1761, T. Churchman.  1762,
Jeremiah Harcourt.  1763, Benjamin Hancock.  1764, John Dersley.  1765,
James Poole.  1766, John Patteson.  1767, Thomas Starling.  1768, John
Day.  1769, Jeremiah Ives, jun.  1770, Robert Harvey, jun.  1771, Knipe
Gobbet.  1772, Charles Weston.  1773, J. Addey.  1774, J. L. Watts,
died.--James Crowe, succeeded.  1775, Richard Peete.  1776, Francis
Columbine.  1777, Nathaniel Roe.  1778, Roger Kerrison.  1779, John
Thurlow.  1780, Benjamin Day.  1781, John Morse.  1782, Starling Day.
1783, Jeremiah Ives Harvey.  1784, Robert Partridge.  1785, Elias
Norgate.  1786, Jeremiah Ives, junior.  1787, Robert Harvey, jun.  1788,
John Patteson.  1789, Charles Weston, jun.  1790, Thomas Watson.  1791,
John G. Baseley.  1792, John Harvey.  1793, John Buckle.  1794, James
Hudson.  1795, Jeremiah Ives, _second time_.  1796, William Herring.
1797, J. Crowe, _second time_.  1798, John Browne.  1799, John Herring.
1800, R. Harvey, _second time_.  1801, Jeremiah Ives, _second time_.
1802, Sir R. Kerrison.  1803, John Morse, _second time_.  1804, James
Marsh.  1805, Ed. Rigby.  1806, T. A. Kerrison.  1807, Rob. Herring.
1808, Starling Day, _second time_.  1809, Thomas Back.  1810, John
Steward.

                                * * * * *




_Members of Parliament for Norwich_, _from the Restoration_, 1660,


William Barnham, Thomas Rant.

1661 Francis Carey, Christopher Jay, who dying, were succeeded by William
Paston and Augustin Briggs.

1678 William Paston, Augustin Briggs.

1679 Hon. Wm. Lord Paston, Augustin Briggs.

1681 The same.

1685 Hon. Robert Paston, Sir Neville Catline, Knt.

1688 Sir Nevil Catline, Knt.  Thomas Blofeild.

1692 Thomas Blofeild, Hugh Borkenham, who dying in 1694, was succeeded by
John Ward.

1695 Francis Gardiner, Thomas Blofeild.

1698 Robert Davy, Thomas Blofeild.

1700 The same.

1701 Edward Clarke, Esq. R. Davy, Esq.

1702 Robert Davy, Esq.  Thomas Blofeild.

1703 Thomas Palgrave, in place of R. Davy, dec.

1705 Waller Bacon, Esq.  John Chambers, Esq.

1707 The same.

1710 Robert Berney, Esq.  R. Bene, Esq.

1714 The same.

1715 Waller Bacon, Esq.  Robert Britiffe, Esq.

1722 The same.

1727 The same.

1734 Horatio Walpole, Esq.  Waller Bacon, Esq.

1735 Thomas Vere, Esq.  Miles Branthwayt, Esq.

1741 Horatio Walpole, Esq.  Thomas Vere, Esq.

1747 Rt. Hon. Horatio Walpole.  Right Hon. John Lord Hobart.

1754 The same.

1756 Edward Bacon, Esq.  Harbord Harbord, Esq.

1761 The same.

1768 The same.

1774 The same.

1780 The same.

1784 Sir Harbord Harbord, Bart.  William Windham, Esq.

1786 Hon. Henry Hobart, Sir Thomas Beevor, Bart.

1790 Hon. Henry Hobart.  William Windham, Esq.

1796 The same.

1799 John Frere, Esq.  Robert Fellows, Esq.

1802 Robert Fellows, Esq.  William Smith, Esq.

1806 John Patteson, Esq.  Robert Fellows, Esq.  May the 4th




_Brief Particulars worthy Notice_.


PRINTING first introduced in Norwich, in 1570, and again, after it had
been discontinued many years, in 1701.

In 1701, An Act passed for lighting the Streets.

Crosgrove's Newspaper, called, _The Norwich Gazette_, first printed in
1707.

_Remarkably great Floods in Norwich_.

1373--1519--1570--1614--1646--1673--1691--1697--1706--1737--1739--1762--
1770--1794--1705.

The Court of Guardians incorporated 1711.

Bethel built in 1713, by Mrs. Mary Chapman, see page 23.

In 1738 the Castle Ditches were levelled, since such time the Cattle
Market has been kept here.

The first Bank established here in 1756, by Charles Weston, Esq.

1783 The Pagent of the Golden Fleece, or what is called Bishop Blaize,
was exhibited by the Woolcoombers, in a stile far surpassing all former
processions of the kind in this city.




ALPHABETICAL LIST
OF THE
_STREETS_, _LANES_, &c.


All Saints Green, by All Saints church.

Alms House Lane, from Gildengate-street to Muspole-street.

Andrew's, St.  Bridge-street, from the Hall to Blackfriers-bridge.

-- Chancel-streets.

-- Plain, by the Hall.

-- Steps, from St. Andrew's pump to London-lane.

Augustine's, St. Church-row, from St. Augustine's street to Gildencroft.

-- Street, from Botolph-street to City-walls.

Anne's St. lane, King-street, by Thorn-lane.

                                * * * * *

Back of the Inns, from Orford-hill to London-lane.

Bank-place, from London-lane to Bank-street.

Barrack-street, from Saint James's street to Horse-barracks, Pockthorpe.

Ber-street, from St. John's Timberhill church to opening, late Ber-street
Gates.

Bethel-street, from the Upper Market to Saint Giles's church.

Bishop-gate-street, from the Close-precincts to Bishop's-bridge.

Bracondale, from Ber-street to Carrow-road.

Bridewell-alley, from Pottergate-street to Saint Andrew's church.

Briggs's-lane, from the Market to Rampant-horse-street, St. Stephen's.

Buff-coat-lane, from Golden Ball-lane to Common Pump-street.

Bull-lane, from St. Stephen's-street within the walls to Upper
Surry-street.

Butcher's-market, by St. Peter's Church and Market-place.

Bank-street, from Bank-place to King-street.

Botolph-street, from Stump-cross to St. Augustine's church.

Bennet's St. Road.

Bull Close-street, from St. James's church to Magdalen-street.

                                * * * * *

Castle Dykes and Meadow, round the Castle-hill.

Chapel-field, by the Theatre.

Chapel-field-lane, from Gun-lane to Chaple-field.

Chapel-field-row, from St. Stephen's-street under the walls to
Chapel-field.

Chapel-street, from St. Martin's Palace Plain to Hospital-lane.

Charing Cross, Wymer-street between Middle and Lower Westwick.

Cherry-lane, from Pitt-street to Gildengate-street.

Clement's, St. Church-alley, from Fye Bridge-street to Colegate-street.

Close, Upper, in Precincts of the Cathedral.

Close, Lower, ditto.

Cockey-lane, from Market-place to London-lane.

Cockey-lane Little, from Cockey-lane to Pottergate-street.

Colegate-street, from Magdalen-street to Saint Michael's Coslany Corner.

Common Pump, St. Michael's Thorn.

Common Pump-street, from Common Pump to King-street.

Common-staithe, old, King-street.

-- new, King-street.

Cook's lane, King-street, near Rose-corner.

Coslany-street, from Coslany Bridge-street to St. Martina-lane.

Coslany Bridge-street, from Coslany Bridge to the church.

Cow-hill, from St. Giles's church to Pottergate-street.

Cow-gate-street, from Whitefriar's Bridge to St. James's Church.

Cross-lane, from Snail Gate-street to Gildengate street.

Catherine St. hill, near St. John's Sepulchre church.

                                * * * * *

Dove-lane, from Market-place to Madder-market church.

Duke's Palace.

                                * * * * *

Elm-hill, from St. Peter's Hungate church to St. Simon's church.

Elm-lane, from Elm-hill to Tombland.

                                * * * * *

Faith's, St. Lane, King-street.

Field-square, opposite the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital.

Finket-street, Ber-street by the church.

Fish-market, by Guildhall.

Fisher's-lane, from St. Giles's Broad-street to Pottergate-street.

Fishgate-street, from Fyebridge-street to Saint James's-street.

Fyebridge-street, from Fye-bridge to Magdalen-street.

Fyebridge-quay, from Fye-bridge to Privy-lane.

                                * * * * *

George's, St. Bridge-street, from Blackfriar's Bridge to St. George's
church.

-- Church-alley, from Gildengate street to Muspole-street.

Gildencroft, by St. Augustine's church.

Gildencroft-lane.

Gildengate-street, from Colegate to St. Augustine's.

Giles's, St. Street, from the church to the City Walls.

-- Hill.

-- Back-street, from St. Giles's-street inside the Walls to Pottergate.

-- Broad-street, from Guildhall to Saint Giles's church.

---- Road.

Goat-lane, Upper, from St. Giles's Broad-street to Pottergate-street.

-- Lower, do.

Golden Ball Lane, Castle-dykes.

Golden Dog Lane, from Snailgate-street to Magdalen-street.

Green's-lane, from Gildengate-street to Snailgate-street.

Gregory's, St. Church-alley, by St. Gregory's church.

Griffin-lane, from King-street to the Horse Fair.

Gun-lane, from Rampant-horse-street to Hay-hill.

                                * * * * *

Hall's End, near the Market.

Heigham-street, from Lower Westwick to the Causeway.

Heigham Upper.

Horns-lane, from Ber-street to King-street.

Hungate-street, from Elm-hill to Tombland.

Horse-fair, bottom St. Faith's Lane.

Hay-hill, from Gun-lane to Mancroft church.

Hospital-lane, from Chaple-street to Bishopgate street.

                                * * * * *

John's, St. Timberhill street, from Orford-hill to Timberhill church.

Jail-hill, near the Guildhall.

Jenkin's-lane, from St. Martin's-street to Gildencroft.

James's, St. Street, from St. James's church to Barrack-street.

                                * * * * *

King-street, from Tombland to City-walls.

                                * * * * *

Lady's-lane, from Bethel-street to Theatre-plain.

Lawrence, St.  Church-alley, from Middle to Lower Westwick.

-- Lane, from Pottergate street to Middle Westwick.

--Steps, from Middle to Lower Westwick.

Life's-green, in the Close Precincts.

Lobster-lane, Potter-street.

London-lane, from Cockey-lane to Bank-place.

                                * * * * *

Maddermarket-street, from Dove-lane to Duke's Palace.

Magdalen-street, from St. Clement's church to the City-walls.

Margaret's, St. Lane, from Pottergate street to Middle Westwick.

-- Church-alley.

Mariner's-lane, from Ber-street to King-street.

Market-lane, from Scole's-green to Thorn-lane.

Market-place, St. Peter's, Mancroft.

Martin St. Street, from St. Martin's-lane to City walls.

-- Lane, from Tooley-street to St. Martin's-street.

-- Palace-plain.

---- street, from Tombland to Palace-plain.

Mary's, St. Plain, Coslany-street.

-- Church-alley.

Michael's Coslany Church-alley.

-- St. Thorne-lane, from Ber-street to King-street.

Muspole-street, from St. George's Plain to Alms Lane.

Margarett's, St. Plain, Lower Westwick.

                                * * * * *

Nailer's-lane, by Duke's Palace.

New Mills Lane, St. Margarett's-plain.

Norman's-lane, from St. Saviour's Back-street to Cowgate-street.

                                * * * * *

Orford-street, from Hog-hill to Castle Ditches.

Orford-hill, formerly Hog-hill, near the Castle Ditches.

Orford-street, Little, from Rampant-horse Back street to Orford-hill.

                                * * * * *

Peacock-street, from St. Edmund's church to St. James's Church-lane.

Pig-lane, from St. Martin's Palace to Fyebridge Quay.

Pitt-street, from Tooley-street to St. Augustine street.

Pottergate-street, from St. Andrew's-steps to City-walls.

Privy-lane, from Palace-plain to Fyebridge Quay.

Pudding-lane, from Lower to Upper Market Place.

                                * * * * *

Queen-street, from Bank-place to Tombland.

Quay-side, from Fyebridge to Privy Lane.

                                * * * * *

Rampant Horse-street, from St. Stephen's-street to the church.

-- Back-street, from Brigg's-lane to Red Lion-street.

Red Lion-street, from St. Stephen's-street to Orford-hill.

Redwell-street, from Bank-place to Hungate street.

Rising Sun Lane, from Golden Ball Lane to Scoles Green.

Rose-lane, King-street.

Rosemary lane, from Coslany church Alley to St. Mary's church.

Rodney street, from All Saints Green to Surry street.

                                * * * * *

St. Saviour's Lane, from St. Saviour's church Lane.

-- Church Lane, from Magdalen-street to Peacock-street.

-- Church Alley.

Scole's Green, bottom Rising Sun Lane.

Shuttle Lane, from Rising Sun Lane to Common Pump.

Soutergate-street, from St. Mary's church to Alms Lane.

Stephen's St. street, from Red Lion-street to City-walls.

-- Back street, from St. Stephen's Church-alley to Chaplefield Row.

-- Church Alley.

-- Road, from City-walls to Norfolk and Norwich Hospital.

Stepping-lane, from Scoles green to King-street.

Surrey-street, from St. Stephen's-street to Upper Surrey-street.

-- Upper, from Surrey-street to City-walls.

-- Mewse, upper end of Bull-lane, St. Stephen's.

Swan-lane, from Cockey-lane to Pottergate-street.

Swithin's St. lane, from Pottergate-street to St. Swithin's church.

-- Church-lane, from Middle to Nether Westwick.

-- Church-alley.

Snailgate-street, from Colegate-street to Botolph street.

Simon, St. Street, from Tombland to Fyebridge.

                                * * * * *

Theatre square, near Chaple-field.

Tooley-street, from Pitt-street to Southergate street.

Timberhill-street, from Orford-street to Timberhill church.

Upper Market, by Mancroft church.

-- street, from Mancroft church to Guildhall.

                                * * * * *

Wastlegate-street, from St. Stephen's-street to All Saints church.

Water-lane, St. George's Bridge-street.

-- St. James's.

-- King-street.

-- St. Martin's.

Weaver's-lane, Old Hay Market.

Westwick Middle-street, from Charing-cross to City-walls.

-- Lower-street, from Charing-cross to Heigham-street.

Wherry-staithe, King-street.

Whitefriars Bridge-street, from St. Martin's Palace to the bridge.

White Lion-street, from Orford-hill to Market Place.

Willow-lane, from St. Giles's Broad-street to Pottergate-street.

World's End Lane, St. Martin's Palace.

Wymer-street, from St. Andrew's-hill to Charing cross.

Wounded Hart Lane, from Upper Market to Bethel street.




THE
_NORWICH DIRECTORY_.


                      [Picture: Decorative divider]

Abbs Zach.  Shoemaker, Coslany Bridge street

Abbs & Rudd, Plummers, Glaziers and Ornamental Painters, Rodney street

Abram John, Pattenmaker, Magdalen street

Adams and Bacon, Coachmakers, St. Stephens without side the walls

Adams John, China man, by Duke's Palace

Adlam John, Gardener, Coslany street

Aggs & Son, Linen and Sack Manufacturers, Pitt street

Aggs J. G. Iron Founders, King street, St. Faith's lane

Allman Sam. Gingerbread Baker, Coslany Bridge street

Algar Thomas, Publican, Pitt street, Pelican

Able John, Publican, New Mill Lane, Lord Nelson,

Able W. C. Carpenter, Middle Westwick, opposite St. Mary's Church

Able Wm. Publican, St. Lawrence, near Coslany Bridge, White Horse

Abel Daniel, Shopkeeper, Coslany Bridge street

Able Robert, Shopkeeper, St. Martin's lane

Addey Mrs. Lodging House, Chapel Field

Addey John, Linen Draper, London lane

Akers Carter, Baker, Bank street

Allen Rich. Tailor and Draper, London lane

Alefounder, Wm. Gardener, Middle Westwick, near Ten Bell Lane

Alderson Robert, Barrister, Bishopgate street

Alderson James, M. D. Colgate street

Allen C. Pork Seller, Magdalen street

Allen Wm. Gardener, Eaton

Allen Wm. Publican, St. Andrew's Bridge street.  Black Friars

Ames Joseph, Publican, Market Place.  Bear

Ames Robert, Shopkeeper, Lower Westwick, opposite Fair Flora

Ames Eliz. House Broker, Elm hill

Ames Daniel, Paper and Rag Warehouse, St. George's Bridge street

Angel John, Publican, Gildengate street

Angel & Son, Curriers, Golden Ball lane

Ansell John, Plumber and Glazier, Dove lane

Andrews Thomas, Shopkeeper, Common Pump street

Asker Sam. Hairdresser, Upper Market

Aldridge John, Whitesmith, Pottergate street, by Goat lane

Aldridge --, Dyer, Coslany Bridge street

Annis John, Bookseller and Binder, London lane

Allison Wm. Bricklayer, Wounded Hart lane

Artis John, Shoemaker, Rampant Horse street

Atkins Miss, Ladies Dress Maker, St. Giles's street

Atkins Barth. Tailor, Lower Westwick, near St. Lawrence steps

Atkinson J. T. G. Attorney, King street, by Cook's lane

Atkinson Leonard, Publican, Colegate street.  Sun and Anchor

Adcock John, Gent. St. Stephen's street, near the corner

Adcock W. Hairdresser, St. Giles street

Adcock Jn. Publican, Cowgate street.  White Friars

Adcock Henry, Publican, Hungate street.  Coopers

Adcock James, Publican, St. Augustine's street.  Royal Oak

Alborough Thomas, Publican, Ber street.  Prince of Wales.

Aldouse Mary, Shopkeeper, St. Martin's lane

Anthony Wm. Shoemaker, St. George's Bridge street

Athow John, Stone and Marble Mason, Back of the Inns

Arrup J. Carpenter, Barrack street

Ayers Mary, Publican, Magdalen street.  Red Lion

Amy Thomas, Cooper, Magdalen street

BACK Mary, Bowling Green House, near Chapel field

Back James, Wine Merchant, Orford hill

Back Thos. and Co. Grocers, Market place

Back W. Surgeon, Willow lane

Back Thomas, Esq. St. Giles's Broad street

Bacon Peter, Shopkeeper, King street, St. Julian's

Bacon Tho.  Gingerbread Baker, Wastlegate street

Bacon Daniel, Publican, Timberhill street.  Red House

Bacon James, Confectioner, St. Stephen's street near the corner

Bacon Othenial, Brazier, Market place

Bacon John, Publican, St. Martin's street.  Mad Bess

Bacon Richard, Appraiser, Botolph street

Bacon R. M. Printer and Bookseller, Cockey lane

Bacon John, Gardner, near St. James's church

Bacon Edmund, Gent. St. Martin's Palace street

Bailey Anthony, Cotton Manufacturer, and Bell-man, St. Martin's Palace
Plain

Baker Benjamin, Gardener, St. Faith's lane

Baker Henry, Haberdasher, Market place

Baker and Cross, Mantuamakers, Gun lane.

Baker Roger, Shawl manufacturer, Peacock street

Baker John, Book and Shoemaker, Hungate street

Baker H. Ladies' Dressmaker, Orford Hill

Baldy Edmund, Dyer, Coslany street

Balls, Robert, Publican, St. Mary's Church alley, White Horse

Balls, James, Tailor, Snailgate street

Balls James, Publican, Bishopsgate street.  Bull

Baldwin John, Basketmaker, Charing Cross

Baldwin John, Baker, by Charing Cross

Bamendge George, Publican, Coslany Bridge street Jolly Dyers

Banham James, Pumpmaker, King street, near the Green Man

Bantan William, Publican, Southergate street.  Recruiting Serjeant.

Barlow John, Lodging House, Timberhill street

Barlow John, Publican, St. Martin's street.  Oak.

Barlow John, Hairdresser, Fyebridge street

Barlow John, Shawl Manufacturer, Upper Westwick

Barlow John, Shawl Manufacturer, Middle Westwick, by the Lord Nelson

Barker, John Farmer, Eaton

Barker, Publican, St. James's street.  Castle.

Barker John, Publican, by Fyebridge.  Ribs of Beef

Barker John, Woollen Draper, London lane

Barker Wm. Salesman, opposite St. Lawrence steps

Barker Richard, Coal seller, Lower Westwick, near the Mills

Barker Jere, Pawnbroker, Lower Westwick, near St. Lawrence steps

Barker John, Publican, Upper Heigham.  Gibraltar

Barker Christ. Publican, Botolph street.  Woolpack

Barker and Co.  Liquor Shop, Market place

Barker Samuel, Liquor Shop, Market place

Barker Thos. Whitesmith, by Mancroft church

Barwell Mrs.  Wine and Liquor Merchant, St. Stephen's street

Barrow S. and A. Tea Dealers, Brigg's lane

Barrow and Co. Cotton Manufacturers, Colegate

Barber John, Publican, Bishopsgate street.  Fishmonger's Arms

Barnham Daniel, Publican, King-street.  Tompson's Cellar

Barnes and Son, Bricklayers, All Saints Green

Barnes Wm. Carpenter, Magdalen street

Barnes Robert, Farmer, Eaton

Bamer, Wm. Whitesmith, King-street, near Tombland

Barnard, Publican, Upper Market.  White Swan

Barnard, Abraham, Schoolmaster, Botolph street

Barnard and Scott, Manufacturers, Muspole street

Barnard John, Shopkeeper, Colegate street

Bare Wm. Wheelwright, King street, near Horns-lane

Baseley, Young and Roe, Beer Brewers, King-street

Bassham Charles, Appraiser and Auctioneer, St. Stephen's street

Basey Charles, Shawl Manufacturer, Southergate street

Basey Ann, Shopkeeper, St. Martin street

Basey John, Shopkeeper, Botolph street

Basey Robert, Cowkeeper, Cowgate street

Basey John, Carter, Barrack street, near the Barracks

Batley Richard, Publican, King street, without the city walls

Bayfield Mrs.  Baker, St. Martin's street

Bateley, Wm.  Eating House, Lower Goat lane

Bateman John, Woolfactor, Muspole street

Baxter Fred.  Grocer, Coslany Bridge street

Bayfield John, Ironmonger, Magdalen street

Blackburn John, Stonemason, King-street, near the Imperial Arms

Blake John, Attorney, Surrey street

Blake James, Shawl Manufacturer, Gildengate street

Blake Isaac, Hotpresser, Snailgate street

Blake Robert, Cotton Manufacturer, Heigham street

Blake and Stanuard, Hog butchers, Lower Westwick, near the Dove Tavern

Blake, Salesman, Lobster lane

Blake Mrs.  Milliner, Pottergate street, near Cockey lane

Blake Thos. Esq.  Barrister, Queen street

Blake Wm.  Publican, outside St. Giles's walls.  Grapes

Black Wm.  Confectioner, Market place

Blaxter James, Cookshop, Colegate street

Blakeley Elijah, Duffield Maker, Saint Mary's Church alley

Blazeby Paul, Publican, Saint Martin's street.  Fighting Cocks

Blanchflower Fr.  Publican, Lower Westwick.  Drum

Branch James, Baker, Magdalen street

Brady John, Innkeeper, Magdalen street

Bransby, Benj.  King street, at the Old Anglers

Bradfield James, Pattenmaker, Little Cockey lane

Bray John, Tailor, Draper and Salesman, Saint Andrew's bridge street

Bradley John, Boot and Shoemaker, St. Simon's street

Brazil Rob.  Publican, near St. Andrew's Steps.  Wild Man.

Beare, Wm.  Boot and Shoemaker, Upper Market

Beare Tho.  Leathercutter, St. George Bridge street

Beare John, Boot and Shoemaker, St. George's Bridge street

Bean Mark, Bricklayer, near Charing Cross

Bean Rob.  Pelican, Ber street.  Bull's Head

Beaumont, Rev. Mr. near Charing Cross

Beaumont John, Shopkeeper, Middle Westwick, by the Queen of Hungary

Beatniffe Richard, Bookseller, Cockey lane

Beckwith Mary, Boarding School, South Place, Griffin lane

Beckurth and Co. Attorneys, St. Martin's Palace street

Beckham Ed.  Cooper, Gildengate street

Bedford Charles, Brazier, Rampant Horse street

Bedford Charles, Brazier, Pottergate, Street, by Bridwell alley

Beevor James, St. Andrew's Steps

Beevor Ann, House Broker, by St. Andrew's Steps

Beevor John, M. D. St. Giles's Broad street

Beesley George, Shoemaker, Coslany Bridge street

Bell George, Shopkeeper, St. Lawrence, near Coslany Bridge

Bell Thomas, Publican and Carpenter, King street, White Swan

Bell, Wm.  Baker, near Rose Corner, King street

Beloe Arthur, Cordwainer, Orford hill

Beloe Wm.  Publican, White Friars Bridge street.  White Friars

Bensley John, Carpenter, Rodney street

Bensley Robert, Baker, St. Stephen's street, near the Crown

Bensley Edm.  Publican, Market place.  Half Moon

Bendy Chas.  Druggist, London lane.

Bennet James, Clock and Watch Maker, Briggs lane

Bennet Ann, Ladies boarding school, St. Stephen's street

Berry Christ.  Bookseller and Printer, Dove-lane

Berry John, Printer and Stationer, Upper Market

Besowth Ann, Mantuamaker, Ber street, opposite the Lamb

Bessy W. F.  Innkeeper, Upper Market.  Wounded Heart

Beswick John, Cotton-bleacher, Trowse Milgate

Betts Ann, Publican, Trowse Milgate.  Rose and Crown

Betts Wm.  Blacksmith, Trowse Milgate

Bexfield Richard, Cabinetmaker, Pottergate street

Brereton John, Shopkeeper, St. Margaret's plain

Brereton John, Collarmaker, Middle Westwick, near St. Bennet's church

Brewerton, Tho.  Merchant, St. Margaret's plain

Brewer Mark, Publican, St. Giles's street.  Queen's Head

Brewer James, Boarding and Day School, Colegate street

Brett John, Baker, Fishgate street

Brewster Stephen, Carter, Tooley street

Bidle John, Shopkeeper, St. Martin's street

Bidwell Richard, Sack Manufacturer, St. George's bridge street

Bilham John, Grocer, Fyebridge street

Bird Bailey, Land-surveyor, Red Lion street

Bird, widow, House-broker, Red Lion street

Bird Samuel, Jeweller, &c.  Briggs lane

Bignold and Son, Bankers, Market place

Birch Mrs.  Circulating Library, Little Cockey lane

Briggs James, Coal-dealer, White Fryers bridge

Brighton Rich.  Publican, Bethel street.  Theatre

Brittingham W. Esq. outside of St. Augustine's walls

Blofield Geo.  Woolcomber, St. Martin's street

Blogg Wm.  Silk Mercer, Swan lane

Blogg Samuel, Bricklayer, Wymer street

Blogg Wm.  Building Surveyor, Ber street, outside the city walls

Bloy Edward, Shopkeeper, Ber street, by Pump

Bloom Dan.  Merchant, Duke's Palace

Boardman Messrs.  Woollen Drapers, Market Place

Boardman John, Linen Draper & Hosier, Market Place

Boardman Ben.  Clerk to the Hull Trader, King street, opposite the Common
Pump

Boardman Ben.  Hatter and Hosier, London lane

Boast Robert, Sawyer, near All-saints green

Boast Jonathan, Publican, St. Stephen's road.--Trowel and Hammer

Body M.  Shopkeeper, Barrack street, opposite Barracks

Bolton John, Merchant, St. Faith's lane

Bolton Zeba, Coachmaster, Red Lion Street

Bolton John, Innkeeper, St. Giles's Broad street.  Wool Pack

Bolingbroke Nath.  Wholesale Haberdasher, Jail hill

Boltz John, Gardener, Barrack street

Boltz George, Gardener, Magdalen street

Bone Thomas, Baker, Middle Westwick

Bone Nicholas, Shoemaker, Lower Goat lane

Bone Wm.  Surgeon, Tombland

Bond Robert, Surveyor of Assessed Taxes, Hungate street

Borkham Tho.  Publican, Colegate street.  Crown and Sceptre

Botwright Wm.  Grocer, St. George's Bridge street

Bowen Widow, Merchant, Tombland

Bowen Ann, Music-seller and Stationer, Cockey lane

Booty William, Shopkeeper, Common Pump street

Booty Joshua, Shopkeeper, St. Augustine's street

Booty William, Bookseller and Printer, Market place

Boyce Sarah, School-mistress, St. Margaret's Church alley

Boyce & Beacon, Attorneys, Wymer street

Boulter Thomas, Baker, St. Giles's Broad street

Bougin John H.  Publican, Lower Westwick.  Three Turks

Brown Crisp, Merchant, King street, St. Peter's, Southgate

Brown Ed.  Carpenter, near Mountergate church

Brown Wm.  Butcher, Ber street, by Lock and Key

Brown John, Millwright and Founder, Timberhill street

Brown W.  Pipemaker, All Saints Green

Browne Charlotte, Ladies Boarding School, Rampant Horse street

Brown and Son, Ironmongers, Upper Market

Brown and Barker, Hatters and Hosiers, Cockey lane

Brown Eliz.  Milliner, Upper Market

Brown, Geo.  Pipemaker, Middle Westwick, near Lord Howe

Brown Mrs.  Glover, Dove lane

Brown and Chace, Merchants, Dukes Palace

Brown Rev.  St. Andrew's Wymer street

Browne Wm.  Taylor, Queen street

Brown Wm.  Baker, St. Martin's street

Browne John, Iron Foundery, Colegate street

Brown Rev.  Gildengate street

Browne Charles, Hair-dresser, Magdalen street

Browne Joseph, Pipemaker, Fishgate street

Brown  Surveyor, St. Giles's Broad street

Browne John, Cow-keeper, Magdalen street

Browne John, Publican, Bracondale.  Lord Nelson

Brooks Thomas, Inn-keeper, Timberhill street.  Castle and Lion

Brookes and Son, Curriers and Leather-cutters, Goat lane

Brooks Tho.  Brickmaker, outside Ber street walls

Brookes Cath.  Straw Hat Manufacturer, Little Cockey lane

Brookes I. and B.  Tanners, Heigham street

Brownson James, Gent.  Theatre square

Brownfield and Roe, Cotton Manufacturers, Magdalen street

Brunton Mary, Baker, Hungate street

Brundell Wm.  Grocer, Redwell street

Blunderfield Samuel, Carpenter, Tooley street

Bush John, Miller, Gildengate street

Bush Zachariah, Publican, Back of the Inns.  Horse and Groom.

Buck Mrs.  Ladies' Dress Maker, Surry street

Buck John, Miller, St. Stephen's street, near the King's Head

Buckenham John, Plumber and Glazier, Magdalen street

Buckle J. and W.  Ironmongers, Market place

Buddey Anthony, Grocer, St. Martin's Palace street

Bullen Joshua, Ironmonger, Jail hill

Bullen and Taylor, Ironmongers, Rampant Horse street

Bulwer Rev. near St. Cathrine's hill

Bunting James, Publican, Ber street, outside city walls.  Pheasant Cock

Burgoyne John, Publican, Lakenham.  Cock

Burton John, Gardener, St. Bennet's road

Burton John, Innkeeper, Magdalen street.  Cat and Fiddle

Burton John, Publican, Barrack street.  Red Cow

Burt and David, Upholsterers, Hay hill

Burgess Robert, Publican, Barrack street.  7 stars

Burgess, John, Shopkeeper, St Martin's street

Burrows John, Shopkeeper, Barrack street

Burrows John, Shopkeeper, Coslany street

Burrows Wm.  Grocer, Magdalen street

Burrows Stephen, Publican, Upper Heigham

Burrows Mrs.  St. Cathrine's hill

Burrell James, Toyshop, Magdalen street

Burrell Mrs.  Lodging House, Ladies' Lane

Burrage Robert, Publican, Ber street.  Windmill

Burks John, Silk Dyer, Allsaints green

Bush Henry, Miller, outside St. Augustine's walls

Bush W.  Shopkeeper, Timberhill street

Bush George, Publican and Tailor, King street.--Rose

Bushell --, Baker, corner of Timberhill street

Butcher James, Grocer, Middle Westwick, opposite Cardinal's Cap

Butcher and Decaux, Grocers, Queen street

Butler Joseph, Shopkeeper, Hungate street

Butler John, Duffell maker, Hungate street

Butler, Wm.  Gardener, Ber street by Church

Blyth Phillip, King street without the walls, at the Ship

Blyth Samuel, Plaisterer, Pottergate street

Blyth --, Machine maker, opposite Norfolk and Norwich Hospital

Bryant H.  Leather Cutter, St. Gregory's ch. alley

Bygrave Robt.  Attorney, St. Giles's Broad street

Byrne Peter, Leather and Fancy Breeches Maker, London lane

CALEY Sam.  Gardener, Thorn lane

Calthorpe Chris.  Cooper, London lane

Caldecott  Millener and Ladies' Dress Maker, St. Stephens street near the
Bull

Campin Robert, Linen Draper, Cockey lane

Campin John, Boot and Shoemaker, Cockey lane

Cann James, Cabinet Maker, Timberhill street

Candler Benj.  Grocer, Little Cockey lane

Cannell Thomas, Publican, Fyebridge quay Jolly Waterman

Cannell Aquilla, Collar and Harness maker, Coslany street

Capon Christ.  Painter, Bethel street

Carver Jas.  Publican, Castle Ditches.  Golden Ball

Carver Daniel, Worsted Manufacturer, Timberhill street

Carr Wm.  Shopkeeper, Coslany Bridge street

Carr Wm.  Shoemaker, Botolph street

Carman Rich.  Shopkeeper, Coslany Church alley

Carrington Rev.  Rampant Horse street

Caryl Thomas, Adjutant of Norwich Volunteers, St. Stephen's street, near
city walls

Cask Tho.  Shopkeeper, Trowse Milgate

Caston    Carpenter, Middle Westwick, opposite the Prince of Wales

Catchpole John, Publican, Jail hill.  Guild hall.

Catchpole James, Shopkeeper, Pottergate street, near Fisher's lane

Catten Wm.  Baker, Heigham street

Cattermone Charles, Publican, St. Andrew's steps

Chamberlain Henry, Tonage Collector, King street, in a yard near the
Rainbow

Chamberlain Frances, Shopkeeper, King street, opposite Cockey lane

Chamberlain Peter, Grocer, Upper Market

Chamberlain Charles, Grocer, White Lion street

Chamberlain Tho.  Inn-keeper, Upper Market.  White Swan

Chamberlain John, Publican, Eaton.  Lion

Chamberlain Geo.  Carpenter, Trowse Milgate

Chapman Tho.  Publican, King street.  Prince Ferdinand

Chapman Rev. C. J.  St. Giles's street

Chapman  Shopkeeper, St. George's Bridge street

Chalker Robert, Publican, St. Stephen's Road.  King of Prussia

Chambers Nethercoat, Gent.  Chaple Field

Chambers Henry, Publican, Lower Westwick.  New Brewery

Challis and Son, Boot & Shoemakers, London lane

Chaplin Wm.  Shopkeeper, St. Simon's street

Charlesworth Joseph, Duffield-maker, Magdalen street

Clabburn Tho.  Gent.  Rodney street

Clabburn Mrs.  Confectioner, St. Simon's street

Clabburn Rob.  Oatmeal-maker, Elm hill

Clary Wm.  Publican, St. Stephen's, outside the walls.  Coachmaker's Arms

Clarke, Son, and Co. Warehousemen, Chaplefield lane

Clarke James, Boot and Shoemaker, Colegate street, by the Moon and Stars

Clarke Wm.  Publican, St. Martin's street.  Crown

Clarke Mat.  Shopkeeper, Gildengate street

Clarke Rob.  Shoemaker, Gildengate street

Clack Richard, Straw Hat Manufacturer, London lane

Claxton John, Farmer, St. Martin's, outside the walls

Claxton Mrs.  Shopkeeper, St. Martin's street

Crakenthorpe Sam.  Gent.  St Stephen's street

Craske Peter, Shoemaker, Briggs's lane

Craske Christ.  Baker, St. Martin's street

Craske Benj.  Bricklayer, St. Augustine's street

Craske Christ.  Baker, Botolph street

Crane Job, House-broker, Maddermarket street

Chestney Rob.  Surveyor, Bracondale

Chesnut Mrs.  Collar and Harness Maker, Magdalen street

Chesnut John, Hair-dresser, St. Giles's Broad street

Chesnut Rob.  Hair-dresser, St. Giles's Broad street

Chettleborough William, Baker, Rampant Horse street

Chettleborough Harrison, Plumber and Glazier, Bank place

Chettleborough Daniel, Sadler, corner of Queen street, Tombland

Chettleborough Rob.  Haberdasher, Market place

Clements Rob.  Auctioneer, Rampant Horse street

Clements and Strange, Coachmakers, Back of the Inns

Creek Mary, Cloaths Warehouse, by St. Andrew's Hall

Chittock James, Baker, Rising Sun lane

Clift Lenold, Gent.  Rose lane, King street

Crips Geo.  Grocer, Market place

Critchfield James, Cutler, Market place

Clover Joseph, Gent.  Barrack Master, Snailgate street

Coates William, Publican, St. Lawrence lane.  Checquers

Coate H. N.  Shopkeeper, Hay hill

Cocks Dan.  Blacksmith, Tombland

Cocksedge J. P. Grocer, by Timberhill church

Cock John, House-broker, Upper Westwick

Codling John, Eating-house, Maddermarket street

Codman Steph.  Hairdresser, St. Martin's street

Coe Agatha, Ladies Boarding School, Griffin lane

Coe John, Shoemaker, Lobster lane

Coe John, Cabinetmaker, Middle Westwick, near St. Laurence's church

Coe Lionel, Trowsterer, Magdalen street

Cogman Benj.  Baker, Ber-street, opposite Thorne lane

Coleby James, Shoemaker, St. Laurence's steps

Coleby Sam.  Gardener, Cowgate street

Coleman Jere.  Miller, Pockthorpe.

Coleman, John, Carpenter, Coslany street

Coleman Geo.  Linen-draper, Cockey lane

Coleman Jeremiah, Miller, outside Magdalen walls

Coleman Geo.  Bricklayer, Snailgate street

Coleman James, Farmer, Hellesdon

Coleman, Jere, Bricklayer, Thorne lane

Colman Ed.  Surgeon, Tombland

Colman Joseph, Baker, Upper Market

Colket and Dybale, Cotton Manufacturers, St. Stephen's street

Colket Mary, Druggist, St. Stephen street

Coldham W. Publican, Jail hill.  Labour in vain

Cole J. H. Esq.  Stamp Office, St. Giles's Broad street

Collins David, Shoemaker, Lower Westwick, opposite St. Laurence's steps

Cone Sam.  Trowsterer, St. Saviour's Back street

Cooper Thomas, Publican, St. Andrew's steps.  Shoulder of Mutton

Cooper Samuel, Nurseryman, inside St. Martin's walls

Cooper Rob.  Shopkeeper, Gildengate street

Cooper, Lewis, and Co. Wholesale and Retail Linen-draper, Market place

Cooper Chas.  Barrister at Law, near Orford hill

Cooper Richard, Publican, Magdalen street.  New Two Brewers

Cooke and Neal, Dyers, near St. Simons' church

Cooke and Co. Shawl Manufacturers, Gildengate street

Cooke Wm.  Bone Merchant, Fishgate street

Cook Henry, Baker, Heigham street

Cook Rob.  Publican, St. Stephen's street.  Jolly Gardeners

Coppin and Courtnell, Plumbers, Glaziers and Painters, St. Stephen's
street

Coppin James, Plumber and Glazier, Hay hill

Copeman E. and R.  Woollen-drapers, Market place

Corbet --, Cook-shop, Magdalen street

Corfield William, Currier, King street, opposite St. Julian's church

Corfield, Eliz.  Leathercutter, Orford hill

Cordwell and Brewster, Machine-maker, Golden Ball lane

Cork Joseph, Publican, Cow hill.  Red Cow.

Cork Wm.  Plumber and Glazier, Middle Westwick, near the Crown

Corsbie Benjamin, Publican, St. Martins' street.  Arabian Horse.

Cosins James, Merchant, Middle Westwick

Cossey Wm.  Shopkeeper, by common pump

Cossey Thos.  Publican, Timberhill street.  Star and Crown

Cossey John, Publican, Cross lane.  Rifleman

Cotterell John, Bricklayer, Maddermarket church alley

Cotman    Artist, Whymer street

Cotman Edm.  Haberdasher, Cockey lane

Coulson John, Shopkeeper, St. Martin's street

Coulson Ralph, Factor, Muspole street

Cousins John, Leathercutter, Upper Market

Cousins & Waite, Tobacco Manufacturers, Jail hill

Coward Rob  Publican, Tombland.  Fleece

Coxton Henry, Publican, Market plain.  Two-necked Swan

Cozens and Copeman, Grocers, Market place

Crowland, Publican, Lobster lane.  Boy and Cup.

Crocket Mrs.  China-shop, Swan lane

Crockett Sarah, Bookseller and Stationer, near St. Simon's church

Crowfoot Mrs.  Publican, St. Martin's street.  Queen Caroline

Cross Cha.  Dentist, by Mountergate church

Cross Joseph, Pattenmaker, Rampant Horse street

Cross John, Farmer, Earlham

Crook and Co.  Brushmakers, Market place

Crook Tho.  Gardener, Heigham

Crowe Spicer, Plumber and Glazier, opposite St. Laurence's steps

Crome John, Drawing-master, Gildengate street

Cropley Rich.  Shoe-warehouse, Gildengate street

Crotch Mich.  Carpenter and Musical Instrument Maker, St. Clement's
church alley

Church Mrs.  Milliner, Pottergate street, by Little Cockey lane

Church James, Coal-dealer, Rose corner

Crusoe Miss, Ladies' Dress Maker, St. Andrew's steps

Crusoe Tho.  Liquor Shop, Market place

Cubit Mary, Ladies Boarding School, Pottergate street, by Goat's lane

Cuckow Tho.  Inn-keeper, Market place.  Star

Culling Tho.  Publican, Botolph street.  Shuttles

Cullyer Wm.  Collar-maker, Castle meadow, near the Griffin

Culyer Henry, Milk-seller, Ber street, near the Baker's Arms

Culyer Sam.  Shoemaker, Timberhill street

Culyer Wm.  Cooper, Rampant Horse street

Culyer Sam.  Publican, Market Place.  Church Stile

Culyer John, Whitesmith, Cow hill

Culyer W.  Coach-master, St. Giles's Broad street

Culley and Co. Lace Manufacturers, Duke's Palace

Cully John, Liquor Merchant, St. Andrew's steps

Culley and Co. Grocers, Upper Market

Cullington John, Publican, St. Stephen's, under city walls.  Lame Dog

Cunningham Tho.  Publican, Elm hill

Cupper Tho.  Duffield-maker, Heigham

Curson Tho.  Patten-maker, Fye Bridge

Curchin John, Bricklayer, Lobster lane

Curtis John, Publican, Castle ditches.  Half Moon

Curtis Mrs.  Boarding School, Burt's court Hay hill

Curtis John, Hog-butcher, Timberhill street

Cushing Samuel, Carver and Gilder, St. Giles's Broad street

Cushing Joshua, Stonemason, St. George's Bridge street

Cushing Ed.  Shopkeeper, Quay side

Cushing John, Bookbinder, Wymer street

Cutler Tho.  Upholsterer, Rampant Horse street

DADY, Charles, Eating House, Bridewell alley

Dade Miss, Ladies School, outside St. Augustine's walls

Daglass John, Baker, Maddermarket street

Dalrymple Wm.  Surgeon, Snailgate street

Dale Wm.  Woolcomber, Gildengate street

Damant Fr.  Sadler and Harness maker, Magdalen street

Dann John, Gardener, Barrack street

Dann Robert, Publican, St. Martin's Palace plain Buck

Dann Edward, Shopkeeper, World's End lane

Dann Robert, Taylor, St. George's Bridge street

Daplyn Wm.  Whitesmith, Bull lane

Darkin Robert, House-broker, Red Lion street

Darking George, House-broker, Lobster lane

Darkin    Publican, Pottergate street.  First and Last

Darley Wm.  Turner, Soutergate street

Davey Robert, Clock and Watch Maker, Back of the Inns

Davey Jonathan, Esq.  Back of the Inns

Davey Ann, Mantua Maker, St. Giles's street

Davey Wm.  Dyer, St. Clement's Church alley

Dawson Wm.  Shopkeeper, Timberhill street.

Day Eliz.  Hog Butcher, St. Stephen's street, near the Crown

Day Wm.  Dyer, St. Stephen's street

Day Francis, Publican, Bethel street.  Coach-maker's Arms

Day Wm.  Publican, Back of the Inns

Day Starling, junr. Esq.  St. Giles's street

Day    Dalton and Day, Bankers, Pottergate street

Day Rich.  Rev. Pottergate street

Day John, Woolcomber, Pottergate street, near Goat lane

Day James, Publican, Tooley street.  Whip and Egg

Drake Tho.  Glazier, King street, near the Rose corner

Drake John, Tailor, St. Giles's street

Drake Fr.  Cooper, St. Martin's Palace street

Drane Wm.  Publican, Timberhill street.  Woolpack

Death Seth, Cooper, Lower Westwick, near St. Lawrence's Steps

Deary Mrs.  Shopkeeper, Barrack street, by Barracks

Deacon John, Attorney, Gildengate street

Deacon Sam.  Surgeon, Magdalen street

Deacon Rev.  John, St. Martin, lane

Decker Rev.  St. Giles's street

Decarle Rob.  Stone and Marble Mason, Duke's Palace

De Day --, Manufacturer, Coslany street

De Hague and Stone, Attorneys, Elm hill

Delf Moses, Whitesmith, Rampant Horse back st.

Denmark Tho.  Shopkeeper, Magdalen street

Denmarke Mary, Shopkeeper, Tombland

Dent Sam.  Publican, Hay hill.  White Horse

Denny Mrs.  Toy-shop, St. Andrew's steps

Denton Joseph, Publican, London lane.  Red Lion

Dennet Jas.  Publican, Coslany street.  Queen Anne

Denham Sam.  Shoemaker, Coslany street

Devenny Mrs.  Lodging house, Castle Ditches

Devereaux    Whitesmith, St. James's street, by Wrestlers

Devereaux Edm.  Plumber and Glazier, Gildengate street

Davenport    Land Surveyor, Snailgate street

Drewell Rob.  Saddle and Harness Maker.  St. Martin's Palace street

Drewell    Innkeeper, Magdalen street.  King's Head

Dickerson Mrs.  Publican, Pottergate street.  Two Quarts

Dickerson T.  Shopkeeper, Botolph street

Dillenger and Graham, Confectioners, White Lion street

Dilly Mrs.  Publican, St. Augustine's.  Catherine Wheel

Dingle John, Thwisterer, Botolph street

Dingle John, Shopkeeper, Gildengate street

Dixon Dan.  Hairdresser, Hay hill

Dixon and Fairhead, Straw Hat Manufacturers, Bethel street

Dixon Mary, Publican, St. Stephen's street.--Should of Mutton

Dixon Robert, Drawing Master, St. Clement's Church alley

Dring John, Baker, St. Giles's street

Dring Geo.  Baker, Magdalen street

Dobson Jas.  Carpenter, Rodney street

Doe Tho.  Baker, Gildengate street

Doman John, Shoemaker, King street, opposite Horn's Lane

Doman Geo.  Stone Mason, Rose Lane

Dove Tho.  Timber Merchant, Scoles Green

Dove Wm.  Publican, Ber street, Flecked Bull

Dowson, Son and Norgate, Merchants, King street opposite Southgate church

Dowing John, Publican, Ber street, outside the walls.  Waggoners

Ducker Wm.  Shopkeeper, Bethel street

Duckett Jas.  Innkeeper, Magdalen street.  Bull

Ducket John, Hairdresser, Coslany street

Ducket Widow, Tripe-dresser, Ber street, near Lock and Key

Duckett Wm.  Publican, Bethel street.  Twelve Bells

Dunnington Wm.  Gentleman, St. Faith's lane

Dunn Mrs.  Publican, St. Simon's street.  Jolly Dyers

Dunning    Shopkeeper, Middle Westwick, by city walls

Dunham & Yallop, Goldsmiths, &c. Market Place

Durrant Tho.  Shopkeeper, Heigham street

Durrant Tho.  Publican, St. Martin's street.  Buck

Dyball Tho.  Baker, Magdalen street

Dye Sam.  Grocer, St. Stephen's street

Dye Susan, Fishmonger, Fishmarket

Dye Tho.  Publican, St. Martin's Palace Plain.--Jolly Farmers

Dye Sam.  Publican, Fishgate street.  Marlborough

EARL W. E.  Cabinet Maker, Red Lion street

Eaton Thomas, Silk Mercer, Market Place

Eaton M.  Hog Butcher, Cowgate street, by church

Easton Mrs.  Ladies' Dress Maker, St. Giles's st.

Eagleton John, Cowkeeper, Heigham street

Eagling Robert, Shoemaker, Pottergate street, by Goat lane

Eager James, Publican, Bridewell alley.  Fleece

Edwards Henry, Merchant, King street, by Story's wharf

Edwards W. G.  Tailor and Draper, Orford hill

Edwards Widow, Innkeeper, St. Stephens.  Crown

Edwards Fr.  Hog Butcher, St. Martin's street

Edwards John, Baker, St. Augustine's street

Edwards Edmund, Gardener, Botolph street

Edwards Wm.  Tailor and Salesman, Colegate street

Edwards John, Carpenter, St. Margaret's Church alley

Evans T. B.  Esq.  Tombland

Ebetts Dan.  Farmer & Corn Merchant, Hellesdon

Eke Wm.  Innkeeper, Rampant Horse street.--Rampant Horse

Elsegood Charles, Publican, Ber street.  Lamb

Emery Joseph, Wellsinker, outside St. Augustine's walls

Emery Publican, Magdalen street.  Lord Nelson

Emperor Mrs.  Publican, Norman's lane.  Sawyers

Emms R.  Publican, Heigham street.  Royal Oak

Ewen T. G.  Esq.  Pottergate street

Eglinton Rich.  Sadler and Harness Maker, St. Simon's street

Ellis John, Gentleman, Rose lane

Ellis Henry, shopkeeper, opposite Mountergate church

Ellis Rob.  Shopkeeper, St. Martin's street

Elvin Rev.  Colegate street

Elwin James, Baker, Pottergate street, opposite Fisher's lane

Elliott Charles, Haberdasher, Brigg's lane

Emms Robert, Publican, Heigham street.  Royal Oak

English John, Liquor-shop, Ber-street, by the Jolly Butchers

English John, Turner, St. Stephen's street

English Rob.  Inn-keeper, Surrey street.  Greyhound

English James, Schoolmaster, St. Lawrence steps

FAIR Mary, Ladies Boarding School, King street, by Rose corner

Fair Charles, Shoemaker, Gildengate street

Fairhead Cha.  Bricklayer, Hungate street

Farnell Keeling, Taylor and Draper, Lower Goat lane

Farnell Tho.  Schoolmaster, Maddermarket church alley

Fayerman Arnold, Schoolmaster, Little Cockey lane

Francis Henry, Attorney, Surry street

Francis Sam.  Yarn maker and Hosier, St. Martin's Palace street

Fearmley Jonathan, Shopkeeper, Middle Westwick, near Margaret's Church

Fell Jos.  Salesman, near Duke's Palace

Fenton Paul, Tailor, Middle Westwick, near the Pidgeons

Fenn Abraham, Boot and Shoemaker, Tombland

Fletcher Tho.  Cordspinner, Dove lane

Fletcher and Co. Sack Manufacturers, near Fye-bridge

Freemantle D.  Gentleman, Chapelfield lane

Freeman John, Cabinet Maker and Upholsterer, Upper Market

Freeman J.  Tavern-keeper, Lower Westwick, Dove

Freeman & Son, Carvers & Gilders, London lane

Freeman Jas.  Publican, Fyebridge quay.  Cock and Pye

Freeman Jas.  Publican, Fishgate street.  Jolly Dyers

Freeman Wm.  Shopkeeper, Cowgate street

Frewer J. H.  Sadler and Harness Maker, Market Place

Freshfield John, Porter Merchant, Elm hill

French John, Hairdresser, St. George's Bridge street

Fiddy James, Publican, King street.  Green Man

Fiddey Mrs.  Cloaths Warehouse, Orford hill

Field Eliz.  Shopkeeper, St. Giles's Broad street

Filby John, Wool and Yarn Factor, Lower Westwick, near Three Turks

Finaghty    Linen Draper, Magdalen street

Firmin Wm.  Baker, Ber street, by Church

Fish Wm.  Musician, London lane

Fish John, Cotton Manufacturer, Fishgate street

Fisk Hammond, Timber Merchant, Fishgate street

Fitt Cha.  Publican, St. Augustine's street.--Shoulder of Mutton

Fitt and Crotch, Pipe Makers, opposite Timberhill Church

Fitt Benj.  Publican, Charing Cross.  Pidgeons

Fitch and Taylor, Chemists and Druggists, Market Place

Fitch and Taylor, Chemists and Druggists, Bridewell Alley

Flint Rich.  Grocer, St. Giles's Broad street

Flowers Rob.  Butcher, Ber street, near Lock and Key

Flowers Thos.  Dealer in Small Seeds, Weaver's lane

Flowerdew, John, Shopkeeper, St. Martin's street

Folliot John, Shopkeeper, Pottergate street, by Fisher's lane

Forster Ann, Butcher, Ber street, near Prince of Wales

Forster John, Woollen Draper, Market Place

Forster and Unthank, Attorneys, Queen street

Forster Aug.  Publican, Muspole street.  Dove

Fountian Martin, Bricklayer, Tooley street

Foulger, Sam.  Gardener, Magdalen street

Fox Paul, Schoolmaster, Pitt street

Fox and Son, Plumbers and Glaziers, near Bridewell alley

Frost John, Shopkeeper, Magdalen street

Frostdike John, Publican, Upper Heigham.--Dragoon

Fuller Henry, Tailor, Golden Ball lane

Fuller Miss, Mantua Maker, St. Stephen's street, near the Peacock

Fullock John, Publican, St. Stephen's street.--Volunteer

Furness Jas.  Carpenter, Lower Westwick, opposite new Brewery

Furze Wm.  Publican, Botolph street.  Old Cat and Fiddle

GAGE Mrs.  Millener and Mantua Maker, London lane

Gapp James, Merchant, St. Laurence, near Coslany Bridge

Gapp James, Dyer, Coslany Bridge street

Gatty David, Shopkeeper, King street, opposite St. Faith's lane

Gay Robert, Basket Maker, Tombland

Gaze John, Tanner, near Charing Cross

Gaze Sam.  Publican, King street.  Compasses

Gaze James, Tailor, Ber street, near Jolly Butchers

Gaze Joseph, Currier, St. Bennet's road

Grand John, Attorney, St. Giles's Board street

Gray Wm.  House Broker, Charing Cross

Gray Rob.   do.   do.

Gray    House Broker, Middle Westwick, near St. Laurence's steps

Gray Edward, Gardener, Upper Heigham

Giant Chas.  Tailor and Draper, Tombland

Grant T. and J. Grocers, Cockey lane

Graver Spooner, Publican, Colegate street.  Black Boys

Graham W. G.  Haberdasher Cockey lane

Graham Widow, Breeches Maker, Upper Market

Gedge Lionel, Eating House, Pottergate street, by Bridewell alley

Gee Benj.  Publican, Gildengate street.  Crown and Anchor

Geldart and Son, Liquor Merchants, St Simon's street

George Wm.  Publican, King street.  Old Barge

George Rob.  Shopkeeper, Ber street, opposite Baker's Arms

Glegg John, Land Surveyor, All saints green

Greenfield George, Publican, King-street.  Half Moon

Greenfield Samuel.  Shopkeeper, King street, near the Half Moon

Greenfield Dennis, Baker, Golden Ball lane

Green Henry, Publican, King street.  New Barge

Green Dan.  Gentleman, Rose lane

Green James, Cordwainer, Red Lion street

Green Rose, Publican, Surry street.  Anchor

Green George, Gentleman. Timberhill street

Green Wm.  Stay Maker, Dove lane

Green Mrs.  Lodging House, Upper Market

Green Wortly, Basket Maker, Middle Westwick opposite St. Lawrence's
Church

Green Wm.  Lodging House, Hungate street

Green Gabriel, Boarding and Day School, Soutergate street

Green Wm.  Publican, Soutergate st.  Cock & House

Green John, Farmer, Eaton

Greaves John, Woollen Draper, Market Place

Greaves    Publican, Middle Westwick.  Adam and Eve

Greeves Tho.  House Steward, Chaple street

Greeves and Co. Hotpressers, Rosemary lane

Gibbs Henry, Linen Draper, Market Place

Gidney and Norton, Fancy Gig and Harness Makers, Wastlegate street

Gidney James, Fruiterer and Broker, Trafalgar House, Red Lion street

Gidney John, Fruiterer, Queen street

Giffer Chris.  Shopkeeper, Timberhill street

Gilman John, Foreign Warehouse, Bethel street

Gilman Edm.  Shopkeeper, outside St. Martin's walls

Gilman Cha.  Hatter, London lane

Gillham Rob.  Whitesmith, St. Martin's lane

Gill Cha.  Grocer, near Duke's Palace

Gill J.  Dealer in Earthenware, St. Giles's Broad st.

Gilmore David, Hairdresser, Maddermarket street

Gilmor Wm.  Boot and Shoemaker, Magdalen street

Girling William, Publican, St. Stephen's street.  Wheatsheaf

Gittens Fr.  Shopkeeper, outside St. Martin's walls

Grimmer Tho.  Carpenter, St. Martin's lane

Grimmer Wm.  Gardener, Ber street, by the Fox and Hounds

Grindley Henry, Woolcomber, by Rose corner, King street

Griffiths John, Plane-maker, Ber street

Greenwood Tho.  Gent.  Scoles green

Grimble --, Tailor, Bethel street

Griggs Mrs.  Shopkeeper, St. Margaret's plain

Grinling Widow, Woolen-draper, London lane

Glover Ed.  Rev.  Pottergate street

Godfrey Ann, Linen-draper, Market place

Godfery Sarah, Milliner, Market place

Goat Wm.  Shopkeeper, St. Martin's street

Godward Sam.  Cotton-spinner, Cowgate street

Goffin Eliz.  Shopkeeper, Middle Westwick, near St. Laurence's steps

Goodings Jonathan, Publican, St. Stephen's street.  Trumpet

Goodwin Widow, Liquor-shop, Pudding lane

Goodwin James, Attorney, Willow lane

Goodwin Benj.  Baker, Charing Cross

Goodings James, Gardener, Bank street

Gooch James, Publican, Castle ditches.  Weighing Machine

Goodrhum John, Shopkeeper, King-street opposite the Half-moon

Goose Robert, Horse-dealer, outside St. Stephen's walls

Goose John, Shopkeeper, Pitt street

Gostling. F.  Gent.  Faith's lane

Gotts Tho.  Publican, St. Mary's plain.  Hen and Chickens

Gotts Geo.  Blacksmith, St. Augustine's street

Goulding and Neal, Gardeners, outside St. Benedict's walls

Gowen Wm.  Linen-weaver, Fishgate street

Grout and Co. Gauze-manufacturers, Magdalen street

Gunns John, Carpenter, under St. Augustine's walls

Gunton James, Cabinet-maker, Timberhill street

Gurney Samuel, Publican, Red lion street.  Red Lion

Gurney Sam.  Fishmonger, Fishmarket

Gurney Messrs. R. J. H. and J.  Bankers, Bank place

HADMAN James, Tavern-keeper, Cockey lane.  Tunns

Hagon Jas.  Glover, Magdalen street

Hagg Edward, Cutler and Grinder, Little Cockey lane

Hague   Publican, Hungate street.  Princes Inn

Haines Wm.  Cowkeeper, King st. by city walls

Hall Geo.  Gardener, Ber street, opposite Mariner's lane

Hall Henry, Gentleman, Ber street

Hall Mary, Boarding School, Bethel street

Halton John, Publican, Back of the Inns.  Globe

Hales Jas.  Attorney, St. Giles's street

Hallows Tho.  Hairdresser, Coslany street

Hampp I. C.  Merchant, St. Giles's Broad street

Haymant Wm.  Coal Merchant, King street

Hanworth John, Pork Seller, King street, St. Ethelred

Hansworth John, Shoemaker, Bethel street

Hanworth L. B.  Publican, Redwell street.  Red Well

Hanshaw Ebenezer, Publican, Timberhill.  White Hart

Hankes Wm.  Merchant, Colegate street

Hansell John, Shopkeeper, Middle Westwick, near the Prince of Wales

Harbord John, Publican, Lower Westwick.  Three Turks

Hardy and Son, Grocers, corner of Rampant Horse street, St. Stephens

Hardiman John, Shoemaker, Brigg's lane

Hardiman Rob.  Shopkeeper, Magdalen street

Hardesty John, Grocer, St. George's Bridge st.

Hardingham Jo.  Musician, St. Martin's Palace st.

Harling Benj.  Baker, Bethel street

Harman Jas.  jun. Tailor and Salesman, Back of the Inns

Harman Sam.  Tailor and Salesman, Middle Westwick, near Charing Cross

Harman Rich.  Habersdasher, Cockey lane

Harman Geo.  Shopkeeper, White Lion street

Harmer John, Carter, King street, near Cockey lane, St. Julian

Harmer S. and H. Attorneys.  Chaplefield lane

Harmer W.  Coal Seller, St. Stephen's street, near the George

Harmer Henry, Attorney, Chaplefield lane

Harmer John, Haberdasher, White Lion street

Harman    Publican, Middle Westwick.  Cardinal's Cap

Harmer Dan.  Publican, St. James's.  Checquers

Harper John, Hosier, Cockey lane

Harper Geo.  Liquor Merchant, St. Stephen's st.

Harper Wm.  Hatter and Hosier, London lane

Harper Rich.  Shopkeeper, Bishopgate street

Harper John, Shopkeeper, Tooley street

Harper Robert, Ranelagh Gardens, outside St. Stephen's walls

Harris Jas.  Publican, Allsaints, outside city walls.  Brickmaker's Arms

Hart Wm.  House-broker, Orford hill

Hart Geo.  Ironmonger, Orford hill

Hart Phil.  Wheelwright & Carpenter, Botolph st.

Harvey and Hudson, Bankers, King street

Harvey Rob.  Esq.  Colegate street

Harvey and Gibson, Manufacturers, Colegate st.

Harwin Wm.  Schoolmaster, Rose lane

Hastings Benj.  Publican, by Common Pump.--Checquers

Hatch --, Leathercutter and Trunkmaker, Pottergate street, near Goat lane

Hatch Francis, Shopkeeper, Lobster lane

Hatch Widow, Baker, Upper Goat lane

Hawkes Rob.  Warehouseman, Bethel street

Hawkes Rob.  Felmonger, St. Martin's street

Hawkes John, Hog-butcher, Cross lane

Hawkins Tho.  Grocer, Tombland

Hayles Joseph, Baker, Middle Westwick, opposite St. Swithin's Church

Hays Rich.  Shopkeeper, Barrack street

Haywood Isaac, Tinman, St. George's Bridge st.

Haylett Mich.  Publican, St. Martin's lane.  Pine Apple

Hazlewood John, Publican, Middle Westwick.--Lord Howe

Heald Hen.  Gardener, Rose Lane

Heazlewood John, Shopkeeper, Ber street, opposite Horn Lane

Hearne W.  Publican, Market Place.  Black Prince

Heavers Nat.  Publican, Barrack st.  Robin Hood

Heasell Miss  Ladies' Boarding School, Redwell st.

Heasel Tho.  Baker, Colegate street

Herring J. & Sons, Manufacturers, Gildengate st.

Herring Wm. Esq.  Merchant, St. Faith's lane

Herring Robert, Esq.  Bracondale

Hedgman Rich.  Carpenter, Quay side

Hewett Coleby, Shoemaker, Red Lion street

Hewett    Lodging house, Chapelfield lane

Hewett    Shopkeeper, Botolph street

Hewett John, Hairdresser, Magdalen street

Hewett Jas.  Esq.  Gildengate street

High Peter, Baker, Fishgate street

Higgins and Clarke, Shawl Manufacturers, Pitt st.

Hill Jas.  Tailor, Coslany Bridge street

Hill Sam.  Carpenter, St. Martin's street

Hill Mrs.  Publican, St. Martin's street.  Fellmonger's arms

Hill    Cotton Manufacturer, Botolph street

Hilling Wm.  Confectioner, Lower Goat lane

Hilton Geo.  Publican, Middle Westwick.  Prince of Wales

Hinsby Wm.  Carpenter, All-saints Green

Hitchen Tho.  Dyer, adjoining Coslany Bridge

Hodgson Jas.  Young Ladies' Academy, Wymer st.

Hodgson Cha.  Young Gentlemans' Academy, Hungate street

Hogg Tabitha, Publican, St. Martin's street.--Two Neck'd Swan

Holmes John, Shoemaker, Lobster lane

Holmes J. Shopkeeper, Lower Westwick, near St. Laurence's steps

Holl Geo.  Shoemaker, Back of the Inns

Holl Sam.  Shoemaker, Pottergate st. by Goat lane

Holt Tho.  Lodging House, Wymer street, opposite St. Andrew's church

Holland John, Shopkeeper, Barrack street

Holmes Tho.  Publican, without St. Augustine's walls.  Magpye

Homer Wm.  Coach Maker, St. Giles's road

Hook Edm.  Esq.  St. Giles's street

Hood Wm.  Innkeeper, Colegate street.  Moon and stars

Horstead --, Publican, Wymerst.  Hole in the Wall

Horstead Tho.  Boot and Shoemaker, London lane

Horth John, Upholsterer, Swan lane

Horth Eliz.  Cook Shop, Colegate street

Horne Francis, Confectioner, Pottergate st.

Hotblack Harriot, Shopkeeper, St. Gregory's Church yard

Hovell Tho.  Publican, St. Swithin's church lane.--Hampshire Hog

Houghton Rob.  Butcher, Ber street, near Lock and Key

Houghton Wm.  Publican, Golden Bull lane.  Boot

Houghton Jas.  Publican Barrack street.  Marquis of Gransby

Howes Tho.  Hotpresser, Coslany street

Howes Wm.  Gardener, Eaton

Howes Rev. Tho.  Cow hill

Howlett John, Publican, Fishgate street.  Pidgeons

Hewlett Tho.  Publican, Goat lane.  Bell

Howlett Wm.  Shoemaker, St. George's Bridge st.

Howlett James, Wheelwright, St. Martin's street

Howard Wm.  Attorney, Magdalen street

Howard D.  Wheelwright, Hellesdon

Howard Simon, Carpenter, Soutergate street

Howard Cha.  Carpenter, Ber street, by Horn lane

Howard John, Baker, Cowgate street

Howell Wm.  Publican, Ber street.  Boar's head

Howell Henry, Hairdresser, Orford street

Howell Tho.  Publican, Upper Goat lane.  Old Goat

Howell Tho.  Hay and Straw Dealer, Duke's Palace

Howell William, Glazier, Colegate street

Hubbard Robert, Chinaman, White Lion street

Hubbard Wm.  Lodging house, St. Giles's Broad st.

Hubbard I.  Publican, Bethel street.  White Lion

Hubbard Wm.  Chair Maker, Fisher's lane

Hubbard    Cabinet Maker.  Wymer street

Huby Simon, Shopkeeper, Lower Westwick, near St. Lawrence's steps

Hudson George, Slea Maker, Fyebridge street

Hufflett Cha.  Publican, Elm hill.  Turkey Cock

Huggins Henry, Chair Maker, Middle Westwick, opposite the Duke of York

Hugman Benj.  Fellmonger, Heigham street

Hunt Jas.  Publican, St Martin's Palace Plain.--White Lion

Hunnock H.  Circulating Library, Bridewell alley

Hutchinson Mrs.  Publican, St. Augustine's street.  Prince of Wales

Hutchinson John, Bricklayer, King street, by Tombland

Hurne P.  Confectioner, Pitt street

ISAAC Joseph, Grocer, Chaple street

Isaac James, Butcher, Magdalen street

Ives Rev. Jeremiah, Town Close

Ives Wm.  Gardener, Eaton

Ivory John, Gentlemen, King street

Iungius, Mrs.  Music Seller, London lane

Jackson    Hatter and Hosier, London lane

Jackson John, Venetian Blind Maker, Maddermarket Church alley

Jackson Wm.  Shopkeeper, Timberhill by Church

Jackson Rob.  Publican, Norman's lane.  Hare & Cat

Jacobs Tho.  Publican, Eaton.  Lamb

Jacobs A.  Optician, Magdalen street

James Wm.  Throwsterer, Cowgate street

James John, Chinaman, Market Place

James Frederick, Tailor, St. Andrew's Bridge st.

James John, Whitesmith, Magdalen street

Jenkinson James, Publican, Botolph street.--Boatswain's Call

Jarvis Tho.  Upholder, Bridewell alley

Jarmy Edm.  Cow keeper, Ber st. opposite Church

Jarold J.  Shopkeeper, Ber st. opposite Thorn lane

Jay Tho.  Merchant, opposite St. Ethelred's Church

Jay John, Baker, St. Stephen's st. near the George

Jenner Henry, Linen Draper, Cockey lane

Johnson Frances, Publican, Swan lane.  White Swan

Johnson Rob.  Publican, Heigham street.  Crocodile

Johnson Benj.  Grocer, &c.  St. Lawrence's steps

Jones John, Hatter, Hosier and Stocking Manufacturer, Rampant Horse
street

Joslin Rob.  Sadler and Harness Maker, Maddermarket street

Joullain Miss, Ladies' French School, Griffin lane

Joy Matthew, Linen Draper, Cockey lane

Juby Tho.  Publican, King street, at the Vats

Judd James, Carpenter, Magdalen street

Just John, Innkeeper, Market Place.  Lamb

KEER John, Duffield Maker, St. Martin's street

Keith Chris, Linen Diaper, Cockey lane

Kent Henry, Boot and Shoemaker, White Lion st.

Kent Charles, Boot and Shoemaker, Orford hill

Kett John, Butcher, Thorpe Hamlet

Kett Henry, Publican, King street.  Whalebones

Kett and Back, Bankers, Orford hill

Kett Edward, Butcher, Fishmarket

Kett    Linen Draper, Old Haymarket

Kersey Sam.  Publican, outside St. Martin's walls.  Dun Cow

Kew John, Hairdresser, White Lion street

Keymer John, Liquor Shop, White Lion street

Keymer Mrs.  Shawl Manufacturer, St. Saviour's Back street

Keymer James, Surgeon, Rampant Horse street

Kittle James, Mahogany Merchant, King street, St. Anne's lane

Kittle J.  jun. Basket Maker, King st. St. Anne's lane

Kidd Wm.  Grocer, Elm hill

King Tho.  Carpenter, Cow hill

King Geo.  Publican, Lower Westwick.  No where

King James, Painter, St. George's Bridge street

King Richard, Tailor, Chaple street

King T.  Corn Factor, outside St. Augustine's walls

King William, Miller, Thorpe Hamlet

Kinghorne Rev.  Pottergate street

Kitton John, Grocer, Ber street

Kitton John, Harness and Collar Maker, St. Stephen's street, near Surry
street

Kitton Robert, Grocer, Coslany street

Kirton    British Lace Manufacturer, Bethel st.

Kitson Roger, Writing Master, and Accompant Wymer street

Kitson Cha.  Bishop's Register Office, Tombland

Kittle Rich.  Woollen Draper, London lane

Kittle T.  Tailor, Fishgate street

Knight's    Clock and Watchmaker, St. Andrew's Bridge street

Knights John, Tailor, Wastlegate street

Knights Tho.  Tailor, Middle Westwick, opposite St. Lawrence's steps

Knights Geo.  Cutler, Dove lane

Knights Jas. Esq.  Merchant, Colegate street

Knights Tho.  Hat Manufacturer, Elm Hill

Knights Nath.  Publican, Bishopgate street.  Marquis of Gransby

LACEY Benj.  Tailor, Wymer st. by Duke's Palace

Lack Mrs.  Baker, Elm hill

Ladbrooke    Drawing Master, old Post Office yard, Market Place

Ladbrook John, Farmer, Eaton

Ladley Francis, Manufacturer, Lower Westwick, near the Drum

Laite Cha.  Turner, St. Stephen's street, near the Crown

Lambert Mrs.  Register Office, Pottergate street, by Cockey lane

Lambert Robt.  Gardener, World's End lane

Lamb Wm.  Butcher, Ber street by Lock and Key

Lamb Cha.   do.   do.   by Pump

Lamb Jas.   do.   do.   opposite Pump

Lamb Wm.   do.   do.   do.

Lamb Eleanor, Shopkeeper, Castle Ditches

Lamb John, Butcher, Market Place

Lamb Tho.   do.   do.

Langton Rich.  Schoolmaster, Cowgate street

Lane Robert, House-broker, neat St. Lawrence's steps

Lane Rev.  St. Swithin's lane

Lane Rob.  Circulating Library, Wymer street, opposite St. Andrew's
Church

Lane John, Publican, St. Simon's.  Star and Garter

Larrance S.  House-broker, opposite St. Andrew's Hall

Larter Joan, Pawnbroker Timberhill, opposite Church

Lathom Henry, Esq.  Upper Surry street

Laws Cha.  Shopkeeper, Colegate street

Lawes Wm.  Shopkeeper, Cowgate street

Lawes T.  Publican, Barrack street.  Barracks

Lawes John, Hog Butcher, Middle Westwick, near Cardinal's Cap

Lawter Joshua, Under Chamberlain, Bethel street

Lawter Rob.  Law Stationer, Chaplefield

Lay Cha.  Attorney, St. Giles street

Leeds Tho.  Publican, Castle Ditches.  Lord Nelson

Leeds Cha.  Publican, Rampant Horse street.--Nag's Head

Leeds John, Brushmaker, Maddermarket street

Leeds Robt.  Brushmaker, Pottergate street

Leeds John, Coal Merchant, near Charing Cross

Leeds Gibbs, Sieve Maker, Hungate street

Leeds Wm.  Dealer in Coals, Pitt street

Leech Wm.  Innkeeper, Market Place.  King's Head

Le Fevre Wm.  Coal Merchant, St. James's, under the city walls

Lefrank F. T.  Baker, Magdalen street

Leman Wm.  Shopkeeper, King st. outside the walls

Leman Rob.  Shopkeeper, Heigham street

Lemon B. Esq.  Magdalen street

Le Strange John, Publican, Scoles' Green.--Weavers' Arms

Levi Isaac, Jew-broker, Ladies' lane

Lilly Hammond, Publican, near Maddermarket Church.  Prince of Wales

Ling Edm.  Farmer.  Eaton

Ling Nich.  Plumber and Glazier, Magdalen street

Ling G.  Linen Draper, Weaver's lane

Ling W.  Tailor, St. Michael's Plea Church yard

Linstead Henry, Butcher, Ber street, by Church

Linstead Sam.   do.   do.   do.

Lincoln John, House Steward, Snailgate street

Lindsey, Joseph, Publican, Magdalen st. Red Lion

Lock Nat.  Millwright, Wymer street

Lock Marg.  Tea Dealer, Redwell street

Lovick Tho.  Thatcher, Ber st. near Mariner's lane

Lovick John, Haberdasher, Cockey lane

Lovick Sam.  House-broker, St. Andrew's Bridge st.

Lovick W.  Publican, Elm hill.  Briton's Arms

Love Mrs.  Schoolmistress, Maddermarket Church alley

Love Rob.  Plumber and Glazier, Swan lane

Love Sam.  Plumber and Glazier, Magdalen street

Lovewell Isaac, Innkeeper, Lobster lane.  New Lobster

Lownd John, Butcher, Ber street, by Lock & Key

Lowe John, Publican, by Common Pump.  King's Head

Lowe Rob.  Hog Butcher, Gildengate street

Lowe Fred.  Baker, St. George's Bridge street

Lowne Geo.  Publican, Fishgate street.  Checquers

Lowden John, Farmer, Upper Heigham

Lowden John, Butcher, Market Place

Lowden Jas.   do.   do.

Lubbock Dan.  Cotton Manufacturer, Snailgate st.

Lubbock Mary, Baker, Surry street

Lubbock Tho.  Attorney, Bethel street

Lubbock Wm.  Boot & Shoemaker, St. Martin's st.

Luckett John, Tanner, Wymer street, opposite the Hole in the Wall

Lyng Arthur, Bricklayer, St. Stephen's Back st.

MAC BRIER, Thomas, Publican, Barrack st.  Light Horse Man

Mace Stephen, Grocer, White Lion street

Mack W. & Co.  Waggoners, St. Giles's Broad st.

Mackie W. A.  Nursery Man, St. Stephen's road

Magub Jas.  Wheelwright, outside of St. Augustine's walls

Mallet Nich.  Shopkeeper, Muspole street

Mallett John, Chinaman, Market Place

Mallett Geo.  Furrier, Middle Westwick, by St. Laurence's Church

Malster Stephen, Shopkeeper, White Friars Bridge

Maltby Sarah, Shopkeeper, Coslany street

Maltby Dav.  Shopkeeper, Cowgate street

Mann E. G.  Grocer, Dove lane

Mann and Brown, Manufacturers, Pottergate street by Fisher's lane

Mann E. S.  Grocer, near Charing Cross

Mann Jas.  Carpenter, Castle Meadow

Mann Robt.  Watchmaker, opposite St. Simon's Church

Mann Jas.   do.   near Fyebridge

Mann Sam.  Hairdresser, by Waggon and Horses, Tombland

Manning Sam.  Baker, Norman's lane

Manning Edward, Brazier, Cockey lane

Manning John, Baker, St. Lawrence, near Coslany Bridge

Manning Joseph, Gardener, King st. near Rainbow

Marker Rob.  Shopkeeper, St. Augustine's street

Marker Rob.  Shopkeeper, Magdalen street

Margerum Rob.  Castle Meadow, Lodging house

Martin Tho.  Publican, St. Martin's street.  White Lion

Martin Rob.  Publican, St. George's Bridge street.  Two Quarts

Martins    Coal Dealer, Fishgate street

Martin Sam.  Cabinet Maker, Surry street

Martin Wm.  Coachmaster, St. Stephen's street

Martin Edm.  Parasol and Umbrella Manufacturer, London lane

Martins Cha.  Upholsterer, Elm hill

Marshall Wm.  Shopkeeper, Colegate street

Martineau T.  Manufacturer, Magdalen street

Martineau P. M.  Surgeon, King street, St. Peter per Mountergate

Marston Robt.  Stone Mason, Bethel street

Martin Geo.  Linen Draper, Cockey lane

Marrison Wm.  Shopkeeper, Middle Westwick, by the White Lion

Marsh Jas. Esq.  Attorney, Bank place

Marsh and Sons, London Waggon Office, Tombland

Markland Fr.  Beer Brewer, Wymer street

Matthews John, Plumber and Glazier, St. Stephen's street, near Surry
street

Matland Cha.  Attorney, Redwell street

Mason, Robt.  Baker, St. James's street

Mason Henry, House-broker by Charing Cross

Mayes Wm.  Carpenter, Middle Westwick, opposite St. Margaret's Church

Mealing Jacob, Merchant, King street, near to the Whale Bones

Meares S.  Carpenter & Joiner, St. Steph. back st.

Mears Jere.  Wine Cooper, Tombland

Medler Edw.  Innkeeper, Lobster lane.  Crab

Meek Val.  Farmer, Carrow

Meek Wm.  Publican, Coslany Bridge street.  St. John's Head

Meek & Royal, Ladies' Dress Makers, Snailgate st.

Mendham John, Baker, Barrack street

Mendham John, do.   Hungate street

Mendham Tho.  Publican, Coslany street.  Lamb

Mendham Tho.  Gardener, St. Martin's street

Merry Robert, Cooper, Lobster lane

Metcalf Wm.  Shawl Manufacturer, St. Simon's st.

Middleton Cha.  Hotpresser, Middle Westwick, near St. Laurence's steps

Middleton    Hotpresser, near Duke's Palace

Middleton Mich.  House-broker, Bridewell alley

Middleton    Publican, St. James's.  King's Head

Middleton Mat.  Shawl Manufacturer, Colegate st.

Miller Widow, Public gardens, Chaple street.--Adam and Eve

Miller, Hannah, Publican, King street.  Cock.

Miller Sam. do.   do.   Raven

Miller Jas.  Shopkeeper, Magdalen street

Miller Edw.  Tailor, Common Pump street

Mileham Rich.  Publican, Hay hill.  Barley Mow

Millard Rev. Charles, Bracondale

Minner John, Publican, King st. at the Rainbow

Mingay M. B.  Woollen Draper, Market Place

Minns Rob.  Shoemaker, Back of the Inns

Mitchell, Harris, and Co. Merchants, St. Martin's Palace plain

Mitchell Henry, Baker, St. Martin's Palace street

Mitchell Sam.  Land Steward, Pottergate street

Mitchell Jas.  Collar Maker, Lower Westwick, opposite the steps

Mitchell S. & E. Liquor Merchants, opposite St. Andrew's Hall

Mitchell Sam.  Publican, Coslany Bridge street.--Red Lion

Mollett Francis, Publican, King street.  Keel

Mollet Rising, Furnishing Ironmonger, Tombland

Molton Fr.  Weather Glass Maker, Lower Westwick, opposite St. Laurence's
steps

Money John, Cowkeeper, outside St. Bennet's walls

Moneyment Edw.  Shopkeeper, Timberhill

Monday Mrs.  Shopkeeper, St. Stephen's street, by city walls

Moon Robert, Farmer, Eaton

Moon and Tayler, Carters, King street

Moore John, Tailor, Ber st. opposite Thorn lane

Moore John, Wheelwright, Ber street, opposite Thorn Church

Moore Jas.  Publican, Castle Ditches.  Jolly Farmers

Moore Wm.  Ironmonger, London lane

Moore and Thorne, Gardeners, St. Martin's street

Moore and Jay, Bakers, St. Augustine's street

Morgan John, Grocer, Ber street, by Flecked Bull

Morgan Wm.  Pawnbroker, Middle Westwick, by White Lion

Morley Mrs.  Throwsterer, Cowgate street

Morris John, Whitesmith, Fyebridge

Morse and Adams, Beer Brewers, St. Martin's st.

Morse and Hall, Dyers, Fishgate street

Mortlock Jas.  Publican, Rampant Horse street.

Moss Rich.  Gentleman, Allsaints Green

Mounsear Rob.  Upholder, Hungate street

Murrell Jas.  Publican, Thorn lane.  Toper

Murrell John, Breeches Maker, Allsaints green

Murry Mrs.  Shopkeeper, Middle Westwick, near the White Lion

Muskett John, Publican, Red Lion st.  Yarmouth Bridge

NASH John, Liquor Merchant, Wymer street

Nave Matthew, Carpenter, Bethel street

Neave John, Cotton Manufacturer, Castle Ditches

Neave Wm.  Bricklayer, Ber st. opposite Baker's Arms

Neal Wm.  Straw Hat Manufactory, Cockey lane

Neal Phil.  Publican, Magdalen st.  Old Two Brewers

Neal Phil.  Gardner, outside St. Giles's walls

Neep Edw.  Pastry Cook, London lane

Nelson Tho.  Shopkeeper, Barrack street

Nevell John, Publican, Heigham street.  Cow and Hare

Newman    Gardener, Lakenham

Newman    Gardener, near Bishop bridge

Newby Sam.  Shoemaker, Back of the Inns

Newton Fr.  Silversmith, &c. Cockey lane

Newstead Sam.  Shoemaker, Maddermarket Church alley

Newbegin Wm.  Hog Butcher, St. Mary's plain

Newson Wm.  Grocer, Magdalen street

Nichols Tho.  Throwsterer, Middle Westwick, near the steps

Nickels Tho.  Shopkeeper, St. Andrew's Bridge st.

Nichols Henry, Cowkeeper, outside St. Martin's walls

Nichols Tho.  Cordspinner, St. Augustine's street

Ninbam John, Painter, Chaple field

Nixon George, Publican, Coslany st.  Checquers

Nobbs Wm.  Shopkeeper, Charing Cross

Nockolds Henry, Gingerbread Baker, St. Gregory's Church alley

Nokes Wm.  Corn and Coal Merchant, Fyebridge street

Nolbrow M.  Publican, near Bishop bridge.--King's arms

Norton Cha.  agent to the Imperial Fire Office, opposite Cook's lane

Norton Cha.  Surveyor of Assessed Taxes, King street, near Tombland

Norton Tho. Cowkeeper, outside St. Giles's walls

Norman and Garrard, Linen Manufacturers, Castle Meadow

Norman & Moore, Hotpressers, Coslany Bridge st.

Norman Mrs.  Shopkeeper, Botolph street

Norman Jas.  Blacksmith, Berst. opposite Church

Norman Ben.  Straw Hat Warehouse, Bethel street

Norris Sam.  Carpenter, Fyebridge street

Norris John, Cabinet Maker, Allsaints green

Norgate John, Grocer, St. Stephen's street

Nosworthy J.  Toy Warehouse, Queen street

Noverre and Nicholson Dancing Masters, Theatre square

Nunn Mrs.  Baker, St. Andrew's steps

OAKLEY Ch.  Shopkeeper, Ber st. near Flecked Bull

Oakley Wm.  Blacksmith, St. Martin's Palace St.

Ollett Mrs.  Shopkeeper, Heigham street

Orsborn Sam.  Shoemaker, St. Martin's street

Osborn Isaac, Gentleman, King street, St. Julian

Osborne Wm.  Sack Manufacturer, Cowgate street

Outlaw N.  Shopkeeper, near the Rainbow

Ownsworth John, Bricklayer, St. Giles's street

Oxley and Co. Hatters and Hosiers, Market Place

Oxley John, Linen Draper, Cockey lane

Oxley Jos.  Manufacturer, Botolph street

Oxley John, Cotton Manufacturer, Gildengate st.

PAGE Tho.  Baker, King street, near the Anglers

Page S. D.  Basket maker, Market Place

Page John, Baker, Pottergate street, near Bridewell alley

Page Jos.  Draper & Clothier, St. Andrew's Bridge street

Page Wm.  Innkeeper, St. Augustine's street.  Rose

Palmer Wm.  Shoemaker, Middle Westwick, opposite St. Laurence's Church

Palmer Tho.  Silk and Cotton Dyer, St. Andrew's steps

Palmer Basket Maker, St. Stephen's street

Partridge Jere.  Gentleman, St. Stephen's, by Ch.

Parsley Charlotte, Innkeeper, White Lion street.  White Lion

Parsons Mrs.  Lodging House, Ladies' lane

Parsons J.  Bookseller & Stationer, Bridewell alley

Parkinson Wm.  Flour Merchant, Hellesdon

Parlor Sam.  Lock and Whitesmith, London lane

Parkinson J.  Haberdasher, London lane

Parkerson J.  Bell Founder and Blind Manufacturer, Hungate street

Parr Rev. Robert, St. Giles's street

Parr Tho.  Tailor and Draper, London lane

Paston Benj.  Publican, Ber st. Recruiting Serjeant

Pattle    Innkeeper, St. Giles's Broad street.--Currier's Arms

Patteson John, Esq.  Beer Brewer, Barrack street

Patteson John, Esq.  M. P. Surry street

Pentney John, Publican, near Golden Ball lane.  King Alfred

Paul Wm.  Auctioneer, Back of the Inns

Paul Tho.  Shawl Manufacturer, Gildengate street

Payne M. H.  Baker, St. Stephen's, outside city walls

Payne Jas.  Sadler and Chinaman, Fyebridge street

Payne Simon, Shopkeeper, Norman's lane

Playford Geo.  Publican, Ber street.  Lock & Key

Playford R.  Trunk and Patten Maker, Dove lane

Pratt Mrs.  Hat Maker, Charing Cross

Pratt Miss, Ladies' Boarding School, Colegate st.

Pratt Rob.  Surveyor, Snailgate street

Pead Wm.  Carpenter, St. Swithin's Church alley

Pearse Tuthil, Farmer, Eaton

Peck Edw.  Butcher, Ber street, near Lock and Key

Peck Mary, do   do   near the Pump

Peck Wm.  Tavern Keeper, Rampant Horse street.  Thatched House

Perry Paul, Turner, St. Gregory's church yard

Perry Rev.  Classical School, Pitt street

Pennyman Isaac, Publican, St. Giles's Broad st.  London Waggon

Petch Jas.  Publican, Trowse Milgate.  Angel

Pleasance Jas.  Shopkeeper, Norman's gate

Prentice Sam.  Innkeeper, Hay hill.  George

Prentice Cath.  Wine Merchant, Tombland

Press    Farmer, Lakenham

Phillips Edw.  Merchant, King street.  St. Julian's

Phillips Rob.  Publican, Ber st.  Fox and Hounds

Phillips Wm.  Publican, St. Stephen's st.  Peacock

Pickis Rob.  Oatmeal Maker, St. Martin's street.  Angel

Piggen John, Throwsterer, Pitt street

Pigg Wm.  Shopkeeper, Ber street, opposite Mariner's lane

Pigg Robert, Grocer, London lane

Pigg Robert, Baker, London lane

Pigg Tho.  Carpenter, St. Saviour's Back street

Pike Wm.  Coal Merchant, Barrack street

Pillar Barth.  Publican, Lower Westwick.  Fair Flora

Pillans Wm.  Esq.  Tombland

Pitchford John, Surgeon, Snailgate street

Pitchers    Coal Dealer, St. George's Bridge st.

Pitchers    Publican, Maddermarket st.  Golden Lion

Pitcher Isaiah, Pawnbroker, Lobster lane

Pritchard John, Baker, Barrack street

Primrose Wm.  Baker.  Pit street

Prior Sarah, Lodging House, Bethel street

Priest J. F.  Chemist and Druggist, St. Giles's Broad street

Priest Rich.  Grocer, Market Place

Pointer Widow, House-broker, Middle Westwick opposite St. Gregory's
Church

Pointer Wm.  Publican, Magdalen st.  Cross Keys

Pooley Tho.  Duffield Maker, Magdalen street

Popjoy John, Pavior, Quay side

Porter John, Tailor, Little Orford street

Porter R.  Gun Maker, Little Cockey lane

Porter John, Carpenter and Joiner, St. Martin's Palace plain

Potter Tho.  Publican, All saints green.  Rifleman

Potter and Ramsbottom, Dyers, Lower Westwick by New Mills

Potter Wm.  Currier, Lower Westwick, near the Drum

Powell John, Gardener, Scoles Green

Powell Robert, Gentleman, Rampant Horse street

Powley Rob.  Hog Butcher, St. Martin's Palace Plain

Powley    Publican, Fyebridge street.  Bishop Blaize

Perowne Jas.  Boulting Cloth Maker, Coslany st.

Plummer Dan.  Publican, Middle Westwick.--Fountain

Plummer and Massey, Ironmongers, Pottergate st.

Plumptre Robt. Esq.  Barrister, Pottergate street

Purland Rob.  Druggist and Grocer, St. Simon's st.

Pluxley    Publican, St. Martin's Palace street, Cupid and Bow

Pye and Riches, Haberdashers, London lane

Pye Sam.  Esq.  St. Martin's Palace Plain

Pye Mrs.  Ladies' Dress Makers, Pottergate street, near the Checquers

QAUNTRILL Wm.  Baker, Soutergate street

Quantrill John, Shopkeeper, King street, near Horn's Lane

Quinton Perry, Throwsterer, Cowgate street

RACKHAM Peter, Merchant, King street, St. Julian's Church alley

Rackham Matthew, Publican, St. Stephen's street.  Bull

Rackham Mrs.  Shopkeeper, St. Stephen's street, near the George

Rackham Wm.  Leather Cutter, Coslany Bridge st.

Rainsforth John, Publican, Magdalen street.  White Lion

Rampley George, Innkeeper, Orford hill.  Bell

Rampley    Baker, Middle Westwick, near Prince of Wales

Ramm Wm.  Pawnbroker, King st. near Rose lane

Rand W. F.  Surgeon, Tombland

Raven, Beare, and Hooker, Wholesale Warehouse, Market Place

Ray Fr.  Breeches Maker, & Glover, St. Stephen's street

Ray Fr.  Glover, Magdalen street

Reeve Rob.  Butcher, Ber street, near Pump

Reeve Henry, M. D. Rodney street

Reeve John, Musician, St. Stephen's back street

Reeve I. S.  Baker, Coslany street

Reeve Edw.  Grocer, Botolph street

Reeve Isaac, Duffield Maker, Snailgate street

Remmington Richard, Sadler, London lane

Reuben Wm.  Publican, Ber street.  Jolly Butcher

Reynolds Edw. Wheel Seller, Castle Ditches

Reynolds John, Bar Iron Warehouse, Goat lane

Reynolds J.  Cowkeeper, St. Jas. outside the walls

Riches Robt.  Publican, St. Giles's Broad street.--Black Horse

Riches Jas.  Publican, Heigham street.  Crooked Billet

Riches Tho.  Publican, Cockey lane.  Green Dragon

Riches Ed.  Hairdresser, Pottergate street

Riches and Thompson, Merchants, King street, opposite Whalebones

Riches    Publican, adjoining City Walls, at Cinder Ovens

Riches Wm.  Wheelwright, St. Benedict's without the city walls

Rice Jas. L.  Tailor, Rampant Horse street

Richer, Nich.  Bookbinder, St. Giles's Broad st.

Richardson Tho.  Druggist, by Duke's Palace

Ringer Ed.  Leather Cutter, Maddermarket street

Ringer Martin, Hairdresser, Middle Westwick, by St. Swithin's church

Rigby Ed. Esq.  Surgeon, St. Giles's street

Rippon James, Tailor, Rampant Horse street

Rising Tho.  Innkeeper, Castle Ditches.  Castle and Lion

Rivet Mrs.  Silk Dyer, Upper Market

Rivet Cha.  Musician, St. Giles's Broad street, by Woolpack

Rix and Co. Glass Warehouse, Bridewell alley

Roach Edw.  Tailor, Bank street

Roach Rich.  Plumber, Glazier, & Lead Merchant, Elm hill

Robinson Tho.  Schoolmaster, Elm hill

Robinson    Grocer, Gildengate street

Robinson John, Publican, Colegate street.  Guild

Robinson Mrs.  Throwsterer, Botolph street

Robinson John, Plumber and Glazier, Magdalen street

Roberts Wm.  Shawl Manufacturer, Pottergate st. by Day's Bank

Roberts John, Shopkeeper, Coslany street

Roberds and Son, Manufacturers, St. Saviour's Church lane

Roberds John, Heavel & Slea Maker, Snailgate st.

Robkin    Cook Shop, St. George's Bridge street

Rock Rich.  Throwsterer, St. James's street

Roe Benj.  Upholsterer, Colegate street

Roe Ed.  Shopkeeper, St. Martin's Palace Plain

Roe John, Tailor, Swan lane

Roe and Son, Grocers, Back of the Inns

Rogers Tho.  Shoemaker, St. Lawrence lane

Rogers Miss Ladies' Boarding School, Magdalen street

Rogers Hugh, Brushmaker, St. Simon's street

Rooks John, Carpenter and Joiner, Snailgate

Root Jas.  Whitesmith, St. Saviour's Church lane

Roope Tho.  Corn Grower, Lakenham

Roper John, Publican, King street, at the Ship

Roper James, Woollen Draper London lane

Rowe Adam, Publican, Allsaints, without the walls.  Golden-Lion

Rowe Jas.  Publican, St. Stephen's st.  Two Quarts

Rowe Edw.  Publican, Lower Goat lane.  Roebuck

Royal Edm.  Shopkeeper, by Rose lane

Royal Mrs.  Ladies' Dress Maker, Bank street

Royal Jas.  Miller, Magdalen street

Royall Peter, Publican, Coslany Bridge street.--Two Quarts

Robinson Wm.  Gardener, Heigham street

Robinson James, Surgeon, Goat lane

Rudd John, Innkeeper, Middle Westwick.  Crown

Rudram Wm. and Co. Wharfingers, King street, St. Julian

Rudram Rich.  Carter, near St. Anne's lane, King street

Rummer R. Gig and Post Horse Master, Castle Ditches

Russell Benj.  Watch Maker, Magdalen street

Rust Widow, Publican, St. James's.  Wrestlers

Rust Eliz.  Millener, Tombland

Rye Wm.  Linen Draper, Jail hill

SABBERTON and Co. Woolcombers, Pit street

Sadd John, Cotton Dyer, Coslany Bridge street

Sadler Tho.  Innkeeper.  Market Place.  Angel

Sadler Tho.  Publican, St. Giles's street.  Cock

Sadler Wm.  Grocer, St. Giles's street

Saint    Shawl Manufacturer, Pit street

Salmon Tho.  Baker, Ber street, near the Pump

Salmon Rich.  Tailor, St. Saviour's Church alley

Sampson Wm.  Shoemaker, Lower Westwick, by Pump

Sampson Aaron, Confectioner, Lower Goat lane

Saul Wm.  Carpenter, Cow hill

Saunders    Supervisor of Excise, St. Laurence's lane

Saunders    Stocking Manufacturer, St. Andrew's Bridge street

Sayer John, Liquor Shop, Pudding lane

Sayer John, Innkeeper, Upper Market.  White-Swan

Sayer and Bond, Post Chaise and Horse Masters, Swan yard.  St. Peter's
Mancroft

Say Hugh, Plumber and Glazier, St. Martin's Palace street

Say Tho.  Plumber & Glazier, St. Giles's Broad st.

Stcarnell John, Farmer, Earlham

Shalders John, Grocer, St. George's Bridge street

Shalders Wm.  Leather Cutter, Redwell street

Shalders and Son, Sadlers and Collar Makers, Orford hill

Sharpe Rich.  Publican, outside Magdalen walls.--Artichoke

Sharp John, Publican, Elm hill.  Crown

Shafto Geo.  Millwright, St. Martin's street

Slater John, Farrier, Hay hill

Spratt James, Pawnbroker, by Rising Sun lane

Spratt, Wm.  Coachmaker, Chaplefield

Spratt John, Pawnbroker, Middle Westwick, near Charing Cross

Spalls Geo.  Carpenter, Pottergate street, near city walls

Spanton Wm.  Coach and Post Horse Master

Sparks Briton, Post Horse and Gig Master, Tombland, Waggon and Horses
lane

Sparkes    Tailor, Colegate street

Sparkles Edw.  Publican, Barrack street.  Duke of York

Spalding Dan.  Liquor Merchant, Rampant Horse Back street

Sparshall Edm.  Liquor Merchant, Fyebridge street

Smith    Draper and Tailor, Brigg's lane

Stafford Wm.  Hairdresser, Brigg's lane

Stafford John, Shopkeeper, St. Stephen's street

Stannard Rev. Bethel street

Stannard John, Plumber and Glazier, Middle Westwick, Ten Bell lane

Stannard Joseph, Publican, Charing Cross. Lord Camden

Stannard John, Billiard Table.  Little Cockey lane

Stannard John, Coal Dealer, outside St. Martin's walls

Stannard Joseph, Carpenter & Joiner, Colegate st.

Stacey and Son, Chemists and Druggists Orford hill

Stagg Henry, Pawnbroker, Barrack street

Staff John, Grocer, St. Martin's Palace Plain

Stark and Son, Dyers, Colegate street by Moon and Stars

Stangroom John, Shopkeeper, Coslany street

Stangroom Robt.  Gardener, outside St. Martin's walls

Stackwood    Hog Butcher, Coslany street

Starr John, Hog Butcher, St. Martin's street

Starling Edm.  Shopkeeper, Fishgate street

Starling Tho.  Boot and Shoemaker, Botolph street

Stamford Tho.  Publican, near Bishop Bridge.  Duke of York

Swann John, Tinman, Bethel street

Swann Tho.  Straw Hat Warehouse, London lane

Swann Wm.  Tinplate Worker, Magdalen street

Seaman    Publican, Middle Westwick.  Beehive

Seggins Mrs.  Publican, St. Giles's st.  King's Head

Sewell Sarah, Publican, St. Stephen's st.  King's Head

Sewell James, Publican, Coslany street.  Sun

Sewell & Co. Callico Glaziers, St. Giles's Broad st.

Sewter John, Shopkeeper, Coslany street

Sexton Wm.  Ironmonger, Market Place

Sexton Joseph, Shawl Manufacturer, Snailgate st.

Shearman R.  Carter, Barrack street

Sheen Edw.  Well-sinker, King st. St. Ethelred

Sheldrake John, Tailor, St. Giles's Broad street

Sherrell Miss, Millener, Bethel street

Shearing Rob.  Whitesmith, Golden Ball lane

Shreeve Mrs.  Shopkeeper, St. Augustine's street

Shreeve Henry, Shopkeeper, Botolph street

Shephard Jas.  Gentleman, Rampant Horse street

Skelton Widow, Umbrella Manufacturer, Maddermarket street

Skelton Edward, Grocer, Swan lane

Skelton Geo.  Tailor, Bank Place

Skeele Henry, Coffee House, Market Place

Skedge Wm.  Baker, St. Martin's Palace Plain

Stevenson Wm.  Farrier, Castle Meadow

Stevenson, Matchet and Stevenson, Printers and Booksellers, Market Place

Steward John, Esq.  Attorney, Castle Meadow

Steward Wm.  Baker, Cowgate street

Steward Jane, Haberdasher, London lane

Stevens Charles, Coal Dealer, Colegate street

Stevens W.  House-broker, by Duke's Palace

Sevens    Pavior, Colegate street

Stewardson Nathaniel, Printer, Bookseller, and Auctioneer, Magdalen
street

Stebbing Rob.  Sadler, Rampant Horse street

Stebbing Geo.  Publican, Fisher's lane.  Bear and Staff

Spencer Chris.  Carman, King street, opposite Green Man

Shilling Sam.  Gardener, Cowgate street

Shildrake Tho.  Lodging House, Middle Westwick, opposite St. Margaret's
Church

Shrimpling Dan.  Throwsterer, Magdalen street

Shickle Jas.  Plaisterer, Hungate street

Sidney John, Publican, King street, near Tombland.  Griffin

Sidel John, Wholesale Warehouse, Pit street

Sillet Mrs.  Innkeeper, Tombland.  Black Horse

Simpson & Rackham, Attorneys, St. Giles's Broad st.

Sims and Pitchford, Wholesale Chemists, Elm hill

Simons John, Publican, Fishgate street.  Tiger

Simons Rob.  Hog Butcher, Ber street, opposite Flecked Bull

Simons John, Tripe Dresser, top of Thorn lane

Sillis Fr.  Tanner, Heigham street

Silvey Rob.  Baker, Ber street, by Baker's Arms

Silke Ann, Ladies' Boarding School, Chapelfield lane

Sizeland Tho.  Baker, Bethel street

Skipper Sam.  Grocer, Dove lane

Skipper Rob.  Carter, Barrack street

Skinner Mary, Shopkeeper, St. Swithin's Church alley

Skippon Jas.  Ladies' Boot and Shoemaker, Allsaints' green

Smith Thomas, Furrier, Jail hill

Smith John, Cloathes Seller, Little Orford street

Smith Sam.  Shopkeeper, St. Giles's street

Smith, Tho.  Cabinet Maker, St. Giles's Broad street

Smith Josiah, Publican, Cow hill.  Duke of York

Smith Edw.  Cabinet Maker, St. Laurence's steps

Smith Wm.  Tanner, St. Giles's Broad street

Smith John, Linen Weaver, by Duke's Palace

Smith    Blacksmith, Lobster lane

Smith W.  Innkeeper, Tombland.  Waggon & Horses

Smith Fr.  Publican, Coslany st.  Greenland Fishery

Smith John, Shopkeeper, St. Martin's street

Smith John,   do.   do.

Smith Moses, Pawnbroker, do.

Smith John, Druggist, Magdalen street

Smith Mat.  Tanner, Heigham street

Smith Hugh, Gardener, Lakenham

Smith Ann, Baker, by Common Pump

Smith J.  Schoolmaster, Ber st. near Baker's Arms

Smith Wm.  Shopkeeper, Timberhill opposite Ch.

Smith John, Publican, Ber street.  Baker's Arm

Smith Wm.  Lodging House, Allsaints Green

Smith Sarah, Publican, Wastlegate st.  Red Lion

Smith J.  Upholsterer, corner of Surry st. St. Stephens

Smith Francis, Cooper, Red Lion street

Smith Edw.  Professor of Botany, Surry street

Smith Fr.  Woollen Draper, Market Place

Smith Wm.  Plumber and Glazier, Upper Market

Smith Mrs.  Fishmonger, Fishmarket

Smith James, Shoemaker, Upper Market

Springall Tho.  Publican, Bethel st.  Wheat Sheaf

Springall Geo.  Publican, London lane.  Three Tunns

Springall Wm.  Carpenter, Cowgate street

Springfield and Sons, Pawnbrokers, St. George's Colegate Church alley

Springfield Tho.  Watchmaker, Colegate street

Spinks John, Publican, Muspole st.  Woolpack

Stiles Tho.  Publican, Bank Place.  King's Arms

Stiles Tho.  Staymaker, Bethel street

Stringer Jas.  Shopkeeper, Pottergate street, by Cow hill

Stimpson Rob.  Innkeeper, St. Giles's Broad st.-- Black Horse

Swift J.  Clerk to the Court of Guardians, Fisher's lane

Scott James, Baker, St. Stephen's street

Scott John, Upholsterer, White Lion street

Scott Tho.  Brushmaker, do.

Scott    Surgeon, St. Giles's street

Scott Rob.  Brazier, Lower Westwick, by steps

Scott    Publican, near Charing Cross.  Jolly Farmers

Scott Rob.  House-broker, near Charing Cross

Scott Martha, Shopkeeper, Colegate street

Scott and Spaw, Manufacturers, Colegate street

Scott John, Shopkeeper,   do.

Southgate John, Plumber and Glazier, Timberhill street

Southwell Sigismund, Esq.  Surry street

Southern Geo.  Chemist and Druggist, Market Place

Sowell J.  Publican, Cowgate st.  Wheel of Fortune

Sowter Mrs.  Collar Maker, Trowse Millgate

Spooner S.  Straw Hat Maker, Ladies' lane

Spooner Mary, Ladies' Dress Maker, St. Martin's Palace street

Storey John, B Wharfinger, King street

Story Charles, Coal-seller, Lower Westwick, the Drum

Story Mrs.  Publican, Magdalen st.  Elephant

Stone Wm.  Shoemaker, Bridewell alley

Stone Fr.  Carpenter, King street, near Tombland

Stone Sam.  Painter, Colegate street

Sword John, Post Horse Master, King street, near Tombland

Spurrell R.  Gardener, Ber street, near Finket st.

Squires, late Sims, Chemist and Druggist, London lane

Squires and Edwards, Merchants, King st. Common Staithe

Squire and Hills, Liquor Merchants, Queen street

Stubbs    Publican, Wymer street.  White Horse

Studwell Edw.  Chinaman, Market Place

Sutten Edw.  Shopkeeper, by Charing Cross

Sutliffe Rev.  Pottergate street, near Goat lane

Sunstead Dan.  Grocer, Soutergate street

Sudbury Tho.  Dyer, Fishgate street

Sudbury Sam.  Gentleman, Allsaints green

Sudbury and Son, Upholsterers, Cockey lane

Sly & Sons, Clock and Watch Makers, White Lion street

Sydall Geo.  Butcher, King street, Thorn lane

Symons Rob.  Tailor, Trowse Millgate

Symonds Eliz.  Publican, St. Andrews Bridge street.  Red Lion

Symonds W.  Cotton Manufacturer, do.

Syrett    Confectioner, Dove lane

TALLACK Mrs.  Pawnbroker, Coslany street

Tawell and Tomlinson, Iron Merchants, Back of the Inns

Taylor John, Publican, King street, by Horn's lane.  Jolly Watermen

Taylor Jas.  Goldbeater, Ber st. by Baker's Arms

Taylor Wm. Esq.  Surry street

Taylor Adam, Attorney, Orford hill

Taylor Wm.  Shopkeeper, Middle Westwick near White Lion

Taylor Rich.  Woolcomber, Middle Westwick, near St. Margaret's Church

Taylor Jas.  Musician, Pottergate street, opposite St. Laurence's lane

Taylor and Utting, Upholsterers, Bridewell alley

Taylor M.  Shopkeeper, St. James's, by Checquers

Taylor Rob.  Publican, Hungate st.  Jolly Dyers

Taylor John, Plumber and Glazier, St. Martin's Palace street

Taylor John, Wool and Yarn Factor, Muspole st.

Taylor Wm.  Publican, St. George's Bridge street.  Tunns

Taylor Wm.  Tailor, Gun lane

Taylor    Bookbinder, Market Place

Twaites Alex.  Linen Draper, London lane

Tenant Rob.  Gardener, Magdalen street

Thetford Widow, Pawnbroker, Norman's lane

Theobald Wm.  Breeches Maker, White Lion street

Theobald John,   do.   Cockey lane

Theobald Sarah, Millener, Cockey lane

Treasure Wm.  Cordspinner, Magdalen street

Tremlett & Deterville, Classical School, Wymer street

Thirtle John, Boot and Shoemaker, Magdalen st.

Tidd Mary, Druggist, Elm hill

Tillet Wm.  Publican, Hungate st.  White Lion

Tillett Tho.  Draper and Hosier, Lower Goat lane

Tilyard Rob.  Shopkeeper, Fyebridge street

Tilyard Rob.  Manufacturer, Fishgate street

Tinkler John, Tanner, Heigham street

Tipple Tho.  Tailor and Salesman, Dove lane

Titter B. P.  Cabinet Maker, St. Simon's street

Trigg Fr.  Tailor, Bethel street

Twiddy Jas.  House-broker, Timberhill by Church

Thorpe Tho.  Publican, Middle Westwick.  Queen of Hungary

Thorpe John, Publican, Dove lane.  Shoulder of Mutton

Thompson Jas.  Rev.  Bank Place

Thompson Mrs.  Publican, Snailgate street.  Fortune of War

Thompson John, Bricklayer, Colegate street

Thorne Wm.  Gardener, outside St. Giles's walls

Todd Honor, Publican, King street.  Black Horse

Todd Sam.  Patten Maker, Timberhill street

Toft Sam.  Tavern Keeper, Lobster lane.  Sun and Anchor

Toll George, Chinaman, Market Place

Toll Rob.  Warehouseman,   do.

Toll Henry, Woollen Draper,   do.

Tomlinson Rob.  Staymaker, St. Andrew's steps

Tomlinson Wm.  Hatter and Hosier, Back of the Inns

Tompson, Susan, Publican, King street.  Music House

Tompson Tim.  Beer Brewer, King street

Tompson Guy, Publican, Ber st.  King's Arms

Tompson Wm.  Shoemaker, Bethel street

Tompson John, Shawl Manufacturer, Snailgate st.

Tompson Joseph, Miller, Bishopgate street

Tompson Rob.  Shopkeeper, Bishopgate street

Tompson Ann, Publican, King street.  Imperial Arms

Tooke Mrs.  Shopkeeper, Peacock street

Tooke J. B.  Esq.  by Horse Fair

Tooley Rob.  Butcher, King street, near Cock

Tooley    Publican, Thorn lane.  Ship

Townshend Jas.  Shopkeeper, St. Martin's street

Towler    Shawl Maker, Gildengate street

Town and Harrison, Post Chaise & Horse Masters, Pottergate street

Town Dan.  Publican, Pottergate street.  Ordnance Arms

Troughton Tho.  Surgeon, Coslany street

Trombetta Cha.  Weather Glass Maker, Timberhill by Church

Thurston Sam.  House-broker, by Dukes's Palace

Thurston John,   do.   do.

Thurgar Chris.  Ladies' Academy, St. Giles's Broad street

Thurlow Henry, Cordspinner, St. Martin's street

Trueman Rich.  Shoemaker, Pottergate street, near Cockey lane

Tubby Sam.  House-broker, St. Stephen's street

Tuck Rob.  Publican, King street.  Trooper

Tuck John, Hog Butcher, Elm hill, near the Hand

Tunwell Wm.  Shopkeeper, St. Giles's street

Turner John, Publican, St. George's Bridge st.--Shakespeare

Turner Cha.  Schoolmaster, Cowgate street

Turner Nich.  Cotton Manufacturer, Ber street, near Church

Turner Wm.  Shopkeeper, Orford hill

Turner W. G.  Tailor and Draper, near Charing Cross

Turner Tho.  Shoemaker, St. Gregory's Ch. alley

Turner Tho.  Jeweller and Engraver, London lane

Turner John, Carpenter, Pottergate st. by Goat lane

Tuthill John and Co. Beer Brewers, Coslany st.

Tuthill James, Shopkeeper, Soutergate street

Tuttle John, Throwsterer, Botolph street

VARNISH Benj.  Butcher, Ber street, near the Pump

Varnish Edw.  Farmer, Thorpe Hamlet

Varnish Rich.  Hairdresser, Gildengate street

Vialas    Circulating library, Orford hill

Vincent Wm.  Earthenware-seller, St. Gregory's Church alley

Vincent James, Shawl Manufacturer, St. Clement's Church alley

Vince J.  Publican, Trowse Millgate.  Pine Apple

UNDERWOOD Jas.  Bricklayer, King street by Mountergate Church

Upcroft John, Publican, Charing Cross, at Charing Cross

Upcroft Wm.  Publican, Coslany st.  Woolpack

Upcroft Wm.  House-broker, Magdalen street

Utting Stephen, Shopkeeper, Trowse Milgate

WADE John, Butcher, Upper Market

Wade James,   do.   do.

Wagstaff    Baker, St. Mary's Plain

Waite John, Brazier, St. Giles's Broad street

Waite Wm.  Brazier, London lane

Waites Georg.  Toy Shop, Bank Place

Waites Tho.  Oatmeal Maker, Wastlegate street

Waites John, Publican, Coslany Bridge street.--White Hart

Waller John, Publican, Upper Market. Old Ch. Stile

Walpole Sarah, Shopkeeper, King street, bottom of Stepping lane

Walker Isaac, Gunsmith, St. Stephen's street, by Peacock

Walker John, Bricklayer and House-broker, Hungate street

Walker Tho.  Machine Maker, Hungate street

Walker Amos, Baker, Coslany street

Walkington Jas.  Livery and Lace Manufacturer, St. Giles's Broad street

Wall Mark, Cotton Manufacturer, Weaver's lane

Want Tho.  Norwich Courier Office, London lane

Warnet John, Bricklayer, King street, opposite Story's Wharf

Ward Henry, Butcher, Ber st. rear Jolly Butchers

Ward George,   do.   do.   near Pump

Ward Robt.   do.   do.   do.

Ward John, Innkeeper, St. Stephen's st.  George

Ward Wm.  Liquor Shop, Market Place.  Chop House

Ward Joseph, Shopkeeper, Barrack street

Warren James, Shopkeeper, Ber st. near Windmill

Warters Geo.  Innkeeper, Upper Market.  Pope's Head

Warnes John, Hairdresser, Queen street

Warne Geo.  Musician, King st. near Tombland

Warne Lydia, Clear Starcher, Colegate street

Warnes Robt.  Publican, Fishgate st.  Sawyers

Ward John, Baker, Red Lion street

Warner Jas.  Blacksmith, Eaton

Watts Tho.  Brass Founder, Rose lane

Watts, Aggs and Williams, Warehousemen, Little Cockey lane

Watson Edw.  Coal Merchant, St. Anne's lane

Watson John, Baker, Orford hill

Watson Rich.  Farrier, Pottergate st. near Goat lane

Watson Rev.  Gildengate street

Watling Jas.  Carpenter, Timberhill, by Church

Watling James, Tailor, Lower Westwick, near the Three Turks

Watling Simon, Publican, Coslany street.  Eight Ringers

Waterson Ed.  House-broker, Bridewell alley

Watcham Tho.  Gardener, Heigham street

Watcham and Son, Gardeners, Eaton

Whall Philip, Publican, Cowgate street.  Queen's Head

Whall John, Baker, Market Place, Bear yard

Webb and Son, Wool and Yarn Factors, Coslany Bridge street

Webster Rev. Stephen, Bracondale

Webster John, Publican, King street.  Wherry

Webster Wm.  Innkeeper, St. Simon's st.  Maid's Head

Webster James, Boot and Shoemaker, Magdalen street

Weeks Wm.  Plumber, and Glazier, Botolph street

Wells Wm.  Attorney, Theatre square

Wells Mary, Pawnbroker, St. Martin's street

Welton Wm. jun.  Baker, Middle Westwick, near Charing Cross

Welton Wm.  House-broker, St. Gregory's Church alley

Welch, John, Miller, Thorpe Hamlet

Wenn Jas.  Gingerbread Baker, St. Stephen's road

West John, Linen Draper, Cockey lane

Weston Cha.  Beer Brewer, St. George's Bridge street

Wetherick Jeremiah, Publican, Brigg's lane.--Fountain

White Wm.  Publican, St. Saviour's Back street.--Mischief

White Eliz.  Shopkeeper, St. Martin's street

White Tim.  King street, opposite Raven

White Jas.  Shoemaker, Upper Market

White J. E.  Ironmonger, Orford hill

Whitelock, Mrs.  Millener, Orford hill

Whitehead W.  Woolcomber, inside St. Augustine's walls

Whitley Jonathan, Bricklayer, Botolph street

Wicks Wm.  Innkeeper, Duke's Palace Inn

Wiffen Sam.  Baker, Trowse Milgate

Wiley Tho.  Woolcomber, Soutergate street

Wild Wm.  Liquor Shop, White Friars Bridge st.

Wilde Rob.  Coal Dealer, Rising Sun lane

Wilcockson and Co. Milleners, White Lion street

Williams Tho.  Liquor Shop, Middle Westwick, by Charing Cross

Wilkins Cha.  Publican, Upper Goat lane.  New Goat

Wilkins Jas.  Plasterer, St. Benedicts Church alley

Wilkinson Joseph, Sadler and Harness Maker, St. Giles's Broad street

Willement Mrs.  Hosier, Middle Westwick, near the steps

Willement Martin, Manufacturer, Snailgate street

Wilson W.  Shoemaker, Dove lane

Wilson Tho.  Confectioner, Queen street

Wilson Wm.  House-broker, St. Stephen's street

Wilson Joseph, Duffield Maker, St. Stephen's st. near the Crown

Wilson Tho.  Publican, Heigham street.  Flower in Hand

Wilson Widow, Duffield Maker, Middle Westwick, near St. Margaret's Church

Wilsea Sam.  House-broker, near Duke's Palace

Wilsea Ann, Shopkeeper, near Duke's Palace

Wilsea Peter, Plumber and Glazier, Coslany st.

Wilsea Robert, Cotton Manufacturer, Cowgate street

Wilch Jas.  Baker, King st. opposite St. Julian's Church

Wilkerson Rev.  Surry street

Wilmot Rob.  Hat Maker, Dove lane

Winter    Shoemaker, St. George's Bridge street

Wild Fr.  Shopkeeper, Magdalen street

Wilkes Mark, Farmer, Magdalen street

Wimperis Mrs.  Haberdasher, Bridewell alley

Winter A.  Baker, St. Simon's street

Winter Jas.  Shopkeeper, Lower Westwick, near New Mills

Winter James, Baker, St. Margaret's Plain

Wiseman Wm.  Duffield Maker, Soutergate street

Wright J. H.  Plaisterer, St. Lawrence's lane

Wright Warner, M. D. St. Giles's Broad street

Wright John, Linen Draper, London lane

Wright Robert, Shopkeeper, King street, near Griffin

Wright and Davey, Gun and Pistol Makers, Queen street

Wright Thomas, Shopkeeper, St. George's Bridge street

Wright    Throwsterer, Snailgate street

Wright Susan, Shopkeeper, by St. Anne's lane King street

Wright John, Hose Yarn Maker, Timberhill street

Wright Rob.  Linen Manufacturer, Chapelfield lane

Wright Christopher, Woolcomber, St Giles's st.

Wright John, Boat-builder, Carrow

Wright John, Coal Merchant, Magdalen street

Woolverton Miss, Ladies' Dress Maker, Elm hill

Wolverton Edw.  Cabinet Maker, Queen street

Woodcocke William, Haberdasher, White Lion street

Woodcock John, Hairdresser, Upper Market

Woods John, Publican, by Mancroft Church.--Farriers

Woods Tho.  Duffield Maker, Middle Westwick, near Prince of Wales

Woods Mrs.  Publican, Barrack st.  Black Boys

Woodward George, Porkseller, St. Stephen's street near the George

Woodward    Gunsmith, Hay hill

Woodhouse Wm. Shoemaker, Back of the Inns

Woodbine John, Manufacturer, Goat lane

Woodrow Tho.  Carpenter, Bank Place.

Woodrow John, Publican, Botolph st.  Globe

Woodrow Tho.  Surveyor, Snailgate street

Woodgate Phil.  Woolcomber, Magdalen street

Woolterton John, Publican, Tooley st.  Flower in Hand

Worth and Carter, Manufacturers, Gildengate st.

Wyatt Noah, Shoemaker, St. Stephen's street

Wyeth Nathaniel, Bricklayer, St. Margaret's Plain

Wymer John, Publican, Buff-coat lane.  Buff-coat

YARINGTON I. C.  Plumber and Glazier, King street opposite Compasses

Yeoman Jonathan, Publican, Barrack st.  Griffin

Youngs Peter, Publican, St. Stephen's street.  City of Norwich

Young J.  Innkeeper, Castle Ditches.  York Tavern

Youngman Wm.  Dyer, Cowgate street

Youngman and Green, Stocking Manufacturers, Fyebridge street

ZIPFEL  Wood Clock Maker, St. Andrew's Bridge street

Zipfel C.   do.   Magdalen street

          [Picture: Decorative symbol of the Castle at Norwich]




MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT.


JOHN PATTESON, Esq.  _Town Residence_, Miller's Hotel, Jermyn-street.

WILLIAM SMITH, Esq.  _Town Residence_, Park-street, Westminster.




A LIST
OF THE
CORPORATION OF NORWICH,
1810-1811.

                                      _Elected Alderman_        _Wards_      _Sheriff_
The R. W. J.           _Mayor_     January,       1807       N. Conisford   1808
STEWARD, Esq.
Charles Harvey,      _Recorder_
Esq.
Robert Alderson,      _Steward_
Esq.
Thomas Back, Esq.     _Deputy-     June,          1808       Mancroft       1809
                       Mayor_
Robert Harvey,       _Alderman_    January,       1768       Coslany        1766
Esq.
John Morse, Esq.         do.       July           1777       N. Conisford   1779
Starling Day,        _Alderman_    September      1777       W. Wymer       1775
Esq.
Robert Partridge,        do.       October        1778       Ber-street     1780
Esq.
Jere. I. Harvey,         do.       January        1779       Ber-street     1779
Esq.
Jeremiah Ives,           do.       September      1779       E. Wymer       1782
Esq.
R. Harvey, jun.          do.       January        1780       E. Wymer       1784
Esq.
J. Patteson, Esq.        do.       December       1781       St. Stephens   1785
J. Harvey, Esq.          do.       July           1787       Mid. Wymer     1784
J. Buckle, Esq.          do.       January        1788       St. Giles's    1787
W. Herring, Esq.         do.       May            1795       S. Conisford   1786
J. Browne, Esq.          do.       March          1798       St.            1794
                                                             Stephen's
James Marsh, Esq.        do.       July           1802       W. Wymer       1802
Edward Rigby,            do.       November       1802       Colegate       1803
Esq.
Robert Herring,          do.       February       1805       S. Conisford   1791
Esq.
Starling Day,            do.       April          1807       St. Giles's    1789
jun. Esq.
Mr. Alderman             do.       August         1797       Mid. Wymer     1804
Leman
-- Alderman                        May            1804       Colegate       1800
Jonathan Davey
-- Alderman J. W.                  December       1806       Fyebridge      1807
Robberds
-- Alderman J. H.                  February       1809       Mancroft       1799
Cole
-- Alderman J. H.                  June           1809       Fyebridge      1805
Yallop
-- Alderman W.                     September      1810       Coslany
Hankes

SHERIFFS.


                    F. MORSE, Esq.--T. TROUGHTON Esq.




COMMON COUNCIL.


                       Mr. HENRY HARMER, _Speaker_.

                          _Conisford Ward_, 12.

Mr. C. Browne        }                 Mr. I. P. Cocksedge
I. Kitton            } _Nominees_.     S. Sudbury
I. Angell, jun       }                 W. Rackham
D. Bloom                               I. Hutchinson
E. Browne                              F. G. Atkinson
H. Gridley                             G. Chapman

                           _Mancroft Ward_, 16.

Mr. P. Chamberlain      }                 Mr. H. Harmer
R. Beatniffe            } _Nominees_.     Jos. Fitch
H. Francis              }                 G. Le Bas Hardy
C. Chamberlain                            D. Copping
Jas. Bennet                               Jas. Brookes
T. Eaton                                  R. Dunham
J. Keymer                                 T. S. Day
Jas. Adams                                Rich. Wright

                         _Great Wymer Ward_, 20.

Mr. S. Mitchell       }                 Mr. Rob. De Carle
J. Reynolds           } _Nominees_.     J. P. Garrad
J. Gapp               }                 Cha. Gills
Alex. Thwaites                          J. H. Wright
Jas. Nosworthy                          W. Cork
R. Roach                                E. Ringer
F. Horne                                A. Brown
Jas. Roper                              A. A. H. Beckwith
B. Johnson                              J. Culley
J. S. Turner                            F. L. Boyce

                           _Northern Ward_ 12.

Mr. W. Hankes       }                 Mr. E. Devereaux
T. Troughton        } _Nominees_.     Jas. Smith
H. Fisk             }                 M. Fountain
J. Herring                            J. Deacon, jun.
J. Oxley                              W. Howard
J. Rooks                              T. Woodrow

COMMITTEES IN NORWICH.


                         _Chamberlain's Council_.

The Mayor, Starting Day, jun. T. Back, J. Browne, Esqrs.--Messrs. I.
Reynolds, R. Dunham, A. Thwaites, and W. Hankes.

                          _Hospital Committee_.

J. Harvey. W. Herring, J. Browne, E. Rigby, and T. Troughton,
Esqrs.--Messrs. H. Harmer, S. Mitchell, and D. Coppin.

                            _City Committee_.

R. Harder, R. Partridge, R. Harvey, jun. and J. Marsh, Esqs.--Messrs. C.
Chamberlain, I. P. Cocksedge, A. Brown, and J. Gapp.

                           _Market Committee_.

The Mayor, I. Browne, J. Marsh, Esqrs. and Mr. Alderman Leman--Messrs P.
Chamberlain, S. Sudbury, F. Horne, and R. Roach.

                                _Clavers_.

Mr. Alderman Cole, and Mr. Alderman Yallop, Messrs. E. Ringer, and J. S.
Turner.

                               _Auditors_.

J. Patteson, W. Herring, and I. Browne, Esqrs.  Messrs. R. Beatniffe, J.
Roper, J. Bennett, and J. P. Garrad.

                           _Tonnage Committee_.

R. Harvey, S. Day, R. Partridge, and I. Browne, Esqrs.--Messrs. D. Bloom,
C. Browne, G. L. Hardy, and J. F. G. Atkinson.

                      _River and Street Committee_.

R. Harvey, J. Morse, W. Herring, and J. Harvey, Esqrs.--Messrs. E.
Browne, J. Angel, junr. R. De Carle, and J. Kitton.

                _Committee to inspect the Assembly Bonds_

E. Rigby, R. Herring, and T. Back, Esqrs. and Mr. Alderman
Robberd--Messrs. J. Nosworthy, J. Deacon, J. Herring, and T. Eaton.

                            _Coal Committee_.

J. Morse, R. Herring, and S. Day, jun. Esqrs.--Messrs. H. Gridley, J.
Keymer, J. Hutchinson, and A. A. H. Beckwith.

          _Committee of Appeals to the River Water Assessments_.

(_By the Assembly_) R. Partridge, and Esqrs.--Messrs. C. Gills, and R.
Wright.

(_By the Lessees_) Messrs. J. Webb, T. Hawkins J. Cozens, J. Grand.

                      [Picture: Decorative divider]

                         _Officers of the Court_.

E. De Hague, Gent.  _Town Clerk_

J. Roach, Gent., Mr. F. L. Boyce, _Coroners_

W. Simpson, Gent.  _Chamberlain_

W. Foster, S. Stone, _Under Sheriffs_

Mr. T. Lubbock, _Sword Bearer_

Mr. W. Mack, _Chief Constable_

Mr. J. Lawter, _Under Chamberlain_

Mr. R. Harman, _Clerk of the Market_

Mr. C. Hubbard, _Clerk of the Cattle Market_, _and Hay Weigher_

Mr. J. Dunham, _Water Bailiff_

Mr. S. Cole, jun. _Inspector of Corn Returns_

                      [Picture: Decorative divider]

               _Treasurers of the several Hospitals_, _&c._

_Great Hospital_,           R. Harvey, jun. Esq.
_Court Bonds & Tonnage_     S. Day, jun. Esq.
_Doughty's Hospital_,       R. Harvey, jun. Esq.
_Assembly Bonds_,           J. Steward, Esq.
_Boy's Hospital_,           R. Harvey, jun. Esq.
_Girl's Hospital_,

Mr. W. DALRYMPLE, Surgeon to the four Hospitals.

Mr. B. BIRD, Steward to the Estates of the same.




The CORPORATION of GUARDIANS of the
POOR of NORWICH.


                      R. ALDERSON, Esq.  _Governor_:

                   W. HERRING, Esq.  _Deputy Governor_.

                     S. DAY, jun. Esq.  _Treasurer_.

The MAYOR, RECORDER, STEWARD, SHERIFFS and ALDERMEN for the time being.

     _MESSRS._             _MESSRS._
C. Browne            S. Mitchell
J. Kitton            J. Reynolds
J. Angel             J. Roper
E. Browne            R. Roach
S. Sudbury           A. Browne
W. Rackham           A. A. H. Beckwith
A. Squires           J. Pitchford
A. Mackie            J. Stannard, jun.
P. Chamberlain       W. Hankes
R. Beatniffe         T. Troughton
H. Harmer            H. Fisk
D. Coppin            J. Herring
R. Dunham            J. Rooks
W. Shanke            R. Ward
A. Taylor            J. Angier
W. Cutting           J. Webb

                       W. SIMPSON, Gent.  _Clerk_.

                         Mr. J. SWIFT, _Beadle_.

                     T. NICHOLS, _Assistant Beadle_.

           C. CHURCH, _Mayor's Constable and Removal Officer_.

                  T. WARREN, and J. SIMMONS, _Visitors_.

                             _City Surgeons_.

Mr. J. KEYMER, for Mancroft ward, part of Wymer ward, the Hamlets of
Eaton, Earlham, Heigham, and the Jail.

Mr. J. ROBINSON, for Conisford ward, part of Wymer ward, the Hamlets of
Trowse, Carrow, Bracondale, and Lakenham with the Workhouse, and
Bridewell.

Mr. S. S. DEACON, for the Northern ward, the Hamlets of Pockthorpe,
Hellesdon, Thorpe and the Infirmary.

                           _City Man-Midwife_,

                            Mr. W. DALRYMPLE.

                                * * * * *

                          _Governors of Bethel_.

                 JEREMIAH IVES, Esq.  Catton, President.

W. Herring, Esq.         Rev. R. Parr
J. Gurney, Esq.          R. Plumptre, Esq.
S. Southwell, Esq.       W. Foster

                  _Treasurer_, J. Gurney, Esq. Lakenham

                 _Physicians_, Dr. Wright, and Dr. Reeve

                 _Surgeon and Apothecary_, Mr. J. Keymer

                       _Steward_, Mr. W. S. Millard

                        _Clerk_, Mr. T. Stoughton

                       _Master_, Mr. James Bullard

                Committee the first Monday in every Month

                      _Norfolk & Norwich Hospital_.

                         OFFICERS OF THE CHARITY.

                      T. BLOFELD, Esq.  _Treasurer_.

               _Physicians_, Drs. Alderson, Wright, & Reeve

             _Surgeons_, Messrs. Rigby, Martineau, & Coleman

                      _Assistant-Surgeon_, Mr. Bond

                        _Secretary_, Mr. J. Deacon

                        _Apothecary_, Mr. G. Hardy

                      _Matron_, Mrs. Isabella Warcup

The Physicians and Surgeons attend in turn, (_gratis_) every Saturday, at
eleven o'clock, to take in Patients, and every Thursday, at the same
hour, to prescribe to the out Patients.

                _Commissioners for selling the Land Tax_.

          The MAYOR, and two Senior Justices for the time being.

               C. Harvey, T. Blake, and R. Plumptre, Esqrs.

        _Commissioners for executing the Property Act in Norwich_.

R. Plumptre, J. Patteson, M. P. J. Harvey, J. Marsh, J. Ives, R. Harvey,
jun. W. Herring, J. C. Hampp, T. Blake, E. De Hague, W. Foster, E. T.
Booth, E. Squires, and H. Gurney, Esqs.

              Mr. S. Stone, _Clerk_, his office on Elm-hill.

                       _Committee of Woolcombers_,

Appointed by Act of Parliament for "More effectually preventing abuses &
Frauds committed by persons employed in the Manufactories of Combing wool
and worsted yarn," in Norfolk and Norwich.

Messrs. J. Day, J. Sabberton, T. Troughton, H. Gridley, P. Woodgate, T.
Wiley, W. Dale, W. Scott, S. Lawes, R. Clabbourn.

                   [Picture: Decorative divider, finis]

            _C. Berry_, _jun. Printer_, _Dove-Lane_, _Norwich_




A Corrected List of Carriers to and from Norwich.


    [The first column of figures shews the distance of each place from
                                Norwich.]

_The Hours having this Mark_, [*] _before them_, _signify in the
Morning_.

  _M._          _Towns_.         _Where they    _Come in_.      _Go out_.
                                  set up_.
       11  ACLE                 Black Horse    W.             W. S.                    1
                                & Horse
                                Shoes,
                                Tombland,
                                and Jolly
                                Farmers, St.
                                Martin's at
                                Palace
       15  Aldborough           Black Horse    F.             S.                       2
                                Tombland &
                                St. Giles',
                                & Golden
                                Lion, St.
                                John's Mad.
        8  Alderford            By the         W. S.          W. S.                    1
                                Reepham
                                Carrier
       14  Antingham            Southreps &
                                N. Walsham
                                Carriers
        8  Ashwelthorpe         Red Lion,      W. S.          W. S.                   10
                                Orford-hill
       12  Aslacton.            George,        S.             S.                       2
                                Hay-market
       14  Attleborough         Lamb and       W. S.          W. S.                   12
                                George,
                                Hay-market
        8  Attlebridge          Fakenham,      W. S.          W. S.                   11
                                Foxley, &
                                Hindolv.
                                Car.
       11  Aylesham             Wod. Hart, &   W. S.          W. S.                   11
                                B. Swan, St.
                                Peter's
      165  Birmingham           Coaches and
                                Waggons
       17  Bacton               Bull,          F.             S.                      12
                                Magdalen-
                                street
        7  Barford              Hingham
                                Carrier
       24  Barney               Black Horse,   Tu.            W.                      11
                                St. Giles'
       15  Barningham           B. Horse,
                                St. Giles',
                                & Gresham
                                Car.
       40  Barton Mills         Star,          Tu.            Tu.                      3
                                Hay-market,
                                and Coaches
       14  Bawdeswell           Foxley and
                                Hindolveston
                                Carriers
       18  Beccles              White Hart,    M. F.          Tu. S.                  11
                                Star, and
                                White Lion
       33  Beechamwell          White Lion,    W.             Th.                     10
                                St.
                                Benedict's
       13  Blickling            Aylesham
                                Carrier
        6  Blofield             Coaches,       F.             S.                       2
                                Acle
                                Carrier, and
                                Waggon and
                                Horses,
                                Tombland
       11  Booton               Moon &         W. S.          W. S.                   11
                                Stars, Crown
                                & Scep. St.
                                Mic.
       26  Botesdale            Lamb,          F.             S.                      10
                                Hay-market,
                                & Bury Coach
        6  Bracon Ash           Ashwelthorpe
                                and Carleton
                                Carriers
       16  Bradfield            Southreps
                                Carrier
       73  Braintree            Star, in the
                                Market
       24  Blakeney             Holt
                                Carriers
       17  Briston              Greenland      F.             S.                      11
                                Fishery, St.
                                Mic. Cos.
        7  Brooke               Greyhound,     W. S.          W. S.                    3
                                St.
                                Stephen's
       21  Brockdish            Wool Pock.     T. F.          W. S.                   12
                                St. GiIes' &
                                Pope's Head
       15  Buckenham            White Hart     F.             W. S.                   12
       14  Bungay               Star and       M. T. F.       T. W. S.
                                Barley Mow,
                                Hay-market
       11  Bunwell              Buckingham
                                and
                                Kenninghall
                                Car.
       18  Burgh                Bull,          F.             S.                       2
                                Magdalen-
                                street
        9  Burlingham           Acle and       W. S.          W. S.                    3
                                Blofield
                                Carriers
       37  Burnham              Labour in      T.             W.                       2
                                vain
       42  Bury St. Edmund      Star and       Th. F.         F.                  11 & 3
                                Lamb,
                                Hay-market
        8  Buxton               Erpingham
                                and Skeyton
                                Carriers
       29  Castle Acre          Watton
                                Carrier
       63  Cambridge            London
                                Machines and
                                York Wag.
       10  Cantley              Hasingham
                                Carrier
       14  Carlton Rode         White Lion,    W. S.          W. S.                   12
                                St. Peter's
       22  Caston               Ellingham
                                and Watton
                                Carriers
       14  Catfield             Elephant,      W. F.          W. S.                   12
                                Magdalen-
                                street
       11  Cawston              Ringers, St.   W.             W. S.                   12
                                Michael's
                                Coslany, and
                                Jolly
                                Farmers, St.
                                John's Mad.
       25  Cley                 Holt
                                Carriers
        3  Colney               Hingham and
                                Shipdham
                                Carriers
        7  Coltishall           Duke's Pal.    M. W. S.       M. W. S.                 2
                                and Pope's
                                Head
       15  Corpusty             Edgefield      T.             W.                      10
                                Carrier
       22  Cromer               Wounded        T. F.          W. S.                   10
                                Heart and
                                Pope's Head
        5  Crostwick            Coltishall
                                Carrier
       16  Dereham              Labour in      M. T. F.       T. W. S.                11
                                Vain and
                                Pope's Head
       16  Dickleborough        Diss and
                                Hoxne
                                Carriers
       22  Diss                 Star and       T. S.          W. S.                   12
                                Lamb,
                                Hay-market
       42  Downham              White Lion,    W.             Th.                     10
                                St.
                                Benedict's
        4  Drayton              Lyng and
                                Walsingham
                                Carriers
       15  Earsham              Harleston
                                and Bungay
                                Carriers
        5  Easton               Mattishall
                                and Yaxham
                                Carriers
       14  Ellingham            Nag's Head,    F.             S.                      10
                                St.
                                Stephen's,
                                and George,
                                Hay-market
       18  Elmham               Duke's         W. F.          Th. S.               *5 11
                                Palace and
                                Wounded
                                Heart
       13  Elsing               Lyng Carrier
       50  Ely City             York Waggons   W.             Th.                     10
       24  Erpingham            Bull,          F.             S.                      11
                                Magdalen-
                                street
       24  Eye                  Wool-pocket,   F.             S.                      12
                                St. Giles'
       19  Edgefield            White Horse,   F.             S.                      11
                                St. Laurence
       25  Fakenham             W. Hart,       T. F.          W. F.                    2
                                Wool-pocket,
                                and Labour
                                in Vain,
                                Jail hill
       18  Felbrigge            Cromer and
                                Gresham
                                Carriers
       13  Felmingham           Skeyton
                                Carriers
       22  Fieldalling          Pope's Head,   T.             F.                       5
                                St. Peter's
       11  Forncet              Yarmouth       S.             S.                       2
                                Bridge, Red
                                Lion-lane,
                                and George,
                                Hay-market
       18  Foulsham             Labour in      F.             S.                      12
                                Vain
       15  Foxley               Wounded        F.             S.                      12
                                Heart
        4  Framlingham          Bungay
                                Carrier
       30  Fressingfield        Greyhound      F.             S.                      11
        6  Frettenham           Swanton
                                Carrier
       11  Freethorpe           White Lion,    S.             S.                       2
                                St. Martin's
                                Palace
       20  Garboldisham         Kenninghall
                                Carrier
       12  Garveston            White Lion,    S.             S.                       2
                                St.
                                Benedict's
       18  Gresham              Black Horse,   F.             S.                      11
                                Tombland, &
                                Wounded
                                Heart, St.
                                Peter's
       18  Guist                Wells and                     S.                      11
                                Walsingham
                                Carriers
       22  Gunthorpe            Pope's Head    F.             S.                       5
       16  Gunton               Black Horse,                  S.                      11
                                St. Giles'
       12  Hardwick             Nag's Head,                   S.                       2
                                St.
                                Stephen's
       20  Hampstead            Edgefield
                                Carrier
       24  Halesworth           White Hart     M. F.          Tu. S.                  11
                                and Star,
                                St. Peter's
      203  Hallifax             York Waggons   Tu.            Tu.
       61  Halstead             London         T.             W.                      12
                                Coaches and
                                Star
       13  Halvergate           Three          S.             S.                       2
                                Farmers, St.
                                Martin's
                                Palace
       19  Happisburgh          King's Head,   F.             S.                      11
                                Magdalen-
                                street
        9  Hapton               George,        S.             S.                      12
                                Hay-market
       20  Harleston            Wt. Hart, &    F.             S.                      11
                                Wool-pocket,
                                St. Giles'
       20  Harling              Crown, St.     F.             S.                      11
                                Step. &
                                Kenninghall
                                Car.
        9  Hasingham            White Lion,    S:             S.                      12
                                St. Martin's
        8  Hevingham            Shoulder of    S.             S.                       2
                                Mutton, St.
                                Augustine's
        9  Heveringland         Cawston
                                Carrier
       14  Heydon               Moon and       W. S.          W. S.                    1
                                Stars, St.
                                Mic.
                                Coslany,
                                Rec. Serj.
                                and Cawston
                                Carrier
       12  Heddenham            Bungay and
                                Harleston
                                Carriers
       10  Hempnall             Nag's Head,    W. S.          W. S.                    2
                                St.
                                Stephen's
        5  Hetherset            Wymondham
                                Carrier
       16  Hickling             Cat and        F.             S.                      12
                                Fiddle,
                                Magdalen-
                                street
       18  Hindolveston         Moon and       F.             S.                      12
                                Stars, and
                                Black Horse
       21  Hindringham          Wounded        T.             W.                       2
                                Heart
       14  Hingham              Cur. Arms,     M. T. F.       W. T. S.                11
                                Lobster, &
                                W. Pocket
       10  Hockering            Dereham
                                Carriers
       22  Holt                 Bull, Mag.     M. Tu. F.      Tu. Th. S.              8*
                                street, and
                                Pope's Head
       19  Hockham              Bull, St.      F.             S.                      11
                                Stephen's
       14  Honing               Dilham and
                                Bacton
                                Carriers
        9  Horning              Catfield and
                                Ludham
                                Carriers
        4  Horsford             Cawston and
                                Edgefield
                                Carriers
        4  Horsford St. Faith   Aylesham
                                Carrier
       33  Houghton             Pope's Head    M.             T.                      11
       23  Hoxne                Wool-pocket,   F.             S.                      11
                                St. Giles'
        7  Honingham            Dereham
                                Carriers
       15  Ingham               King's Head,   F.             S.                      11
                                Magdalen-
                                street
       13  Ingworth             Ditto          T. F.          W. S.                    2
       42  Ipswich              Ditto, and     T.             W.                      12
                                Diss Carrier
       14  Itteringham          Gresham
                                Carrier
       35  Ixworth              Bury
                                Carriers
       19  Kenninghall          Greyhound,     F.             S.                      11
                                St.
                                Stephen's
       16  Knapton              Cat &          F.             S.                       1
                                Fiddle, &
                                Elephant,
                                Mag. st.
       10  Lammas               Bull,                         W. S.                    2
                                Magdalen-
                                street
      193  Leeds                Halifax and
                                York
                                Carriers
       15  Lessingham           White Horse,   F.             S.                       1
                                Magdalen-
                                street
       24  Litcham              Blk. Horse,    T. F.          W. S.                    1
                                Cur. Arms,
                                and W. Poc.
      124  Lincoln              Coaches and
                                Waggons
      230  Liverpool            Ditto
       10  Loddon               Greyhound,     F.             S.                       1
                                St.
                                Stephen's
       10  Long Stratton        Cock, St.      W. S.          W. S.                    1
                                Stephen's
       13  Ludham               Crown and      W. S.          W. S.                    1
                                Anchor, St.
                                Augustine's
        8  Lingwood             Black Horse,   S.             S.                       2
                                Tombland.
       11  Lyng                 Duke's         W. S.          W.                       3
                                Palace, &
                                Bl. Boys,
                                St. Geo.
       42  Lynn Regis           B. Horse, C.   W. S.          W.                       2
                                Arms, W.
                                Pkt. & W.
                                Ht.
       42  Mildenhall           London
                                Waggons
        9  Marsham              Cherry-tree,   W. S.          W. S.                    3
                                St.
                                Augustine's
       29  Massingham           Pope's Head    M.             Tu.                     11
       12  Mattishall           P. of Wales,   W. S.          W. S.                    3
                                St. Bennet's
                                & W. Poc.
      202  Manchester           Coaches and
                                Waggons
       20  Mendham              Harleston
                                Carrier
       10  Morley               Nag's Head,    F.             S.                      10
                                St. Stephens
       13  Moulton              Shoulder of    S.             S.                       3
                                Mutton, St.
                                Stephen's,
                                and Bell,
                                Orford-hill.
        5  Mulbarton            Ashwelthorpe
                                and Forncet
                                Carriers
       17  Mundesley            Cat and        F.             S.                      12
                                Fiddle,
                                Magdalen-
                                street
       12  Neatishead           White Horse,   W. S.          W. S.                    2
                                Magdalen-
                                street
       24  Necton               Wool-pocket,   F.             S.                      11
                                St. Giles'
       35  Needham              Stowmarket     Th.            F.                       2
                                waggons
       49  Newmarket            London
                                Waggons and
                                Mails
        6  Newton               Long
                                Stratton
                                Carriers
       14  N. Walsham           Duke's         T. F.          W. S.                    2
                                Palace, and
                                Pope's Head
       13  Oulton               Greenland      F.             S.                      12
                                Fishery, St.
                                Mic. Cos.
       16  Pott. Heigham        Ludham
                                Carrier
       16  Pulham               Cock, St.      T. F.          W. S.                    3
                                Stephen's, &
                                Wool-pocket
        4  Rackheath            Ludham
                                Carrier
       25  Rainham              Fakenham
                                Carrier
       14  Reedham              Hasingham
                                Carrier
       20  Redenhall            Harleston
                                Carrier
       11  Reepham              Moon and       W. S.          W. S.                    1
                                Stars
       14  Rockland             Ellingham
                                Carrier
       12  Reymerstone          White Lion,    F.             S.                       1
                                St.
                                Benedicts
        7  Saxlingham           Star and       W. S.          W. S.                    2
                                Crown, St.
                                John's Timb.
       35  Saxmundham           Halesworth
                                Carrier
       15  Saxthorpe            Edgefield
                                Carrier
       20  Scole                Diss
                                Carriers and
                                Mails
        9  Seething             Wool-Pocket,   S.             S.                       2
                                St John's
                                Timberhill
       10  Scottow              K. Hd. Mag.    W. S.          W. S.                    2
                                st. Lobster,
                                & D. Palace
       20  Sherringham          Boy and Cup,   W. S.          W. S.                   11
                                and Wounded
                                Heart
       19  Shipdham             Black Horse,   M. F.          T. S.                   11
                                St. Giles'
        6  Shottisham           Star and       W. S.          W. S.                    2
                                Crown,
                                Orford-hill
       11  Skeyton              King's Head,   S.             S.                       2
                                Magdalen-
                                street
       10  Sloley               Bull, ditto    W. S.          W. S.                    3
       11  Smallburgh           Ditto          F.             S.                       2
       17  Southreps            Ditto          F.             S.                      12
       10  S. Walsham           Wh. Lion,      S.             S.                       2
                                St.
                                Martin's, &
                                Waggon and
                                Horses,
                                Tmbld.
       32  Southwold            Star,          T.             W.                       1
                                Hay-market
       12  Sparham              Fakenham and
                                Walsingham
                                Cars.
       14  Stalham              Bull,          F.             S.                       1
                                Magdalen-
                                street
       22  Stanfield            Lobster        W.             T.                       2
        5  Stoke Holy Cross     Hardwick
                                Carrier
       40  Stow                 Ipswich
                                Carrier and
                                Mails
       35  Stowmarket           White Hart     W.             Th.                      2
                                and ditto
        7  Stratton Strawless   Aylesham       W. S.          W. S.                    1
                                Carrier
        9  Strumshaw            Farmers, St.   S.             S.                      11
                                Martin's
                                Palace
       13  Swanton Morley       Black Horse,   F.             S.                       5
                                St. Giles'
       27  Swaffham             Curriers       Tu. F.         W. S.                   10
                                Arms, and
                                Lobster
        8  Swannington          Reepham
                                Carrier
        5  Swainthorpe          Tasburgh
                                Carrier
       11  Swanton Abbots       King's Head,   W. F. S.       W. S.                    2
                                Cross Keys,
                                and Bull
                                Mag-street
        4  Swardiston           Tacolneston
                                Carrier
       13  Suffield             Black Swan,                   S.                       1
                                back of the
                                Hall
        9  Tacolneston          Yarmouth       F.             S.                       2
                                Bridge, Red
                                Lion-lane
        8  Tasburgh             Ditto          W. S.          W. S.                    2
       28  Thetford             Mails and
                                Waggons
       14  Thymelthorp          Hindolveston
                                Carrier
       40  Thornham             Woolpocket,    Tu.            Tu.                      2
                                St. Giles'
       26  Thursford            Black Horse,   T.             W.                      11
                                St. Giles'
       16  Trunch               W. Horse,      F.             S.                      10
                                Mag str. &
                                N. Walsh.
                                Car.
       26  Tottington           Skeyton
                                Carrier
       27  Walsingham           Woolpocket,    T. Th.         W. F.                    2
                                and Wounded
                                Heart
       21  Watton               Cur. Arms,     M. T. F.       T. W. S.                11
                                Lobster, and
                                Wool-poc.
       31  Wells                Wounded        T. Th. F.      W. F. S.                 3
                                Heart, and
                                Wool-pocket
       55  Wisbeach             Woolpocket     W.             Th.                     12
       14  Wolterton            Erpingham
                                Carrier
       42  Woodbridge           Star and       M. T. Th.      T. W. F.                 1
                                White Hart
       42  Woolpit              Stowmarket
                                Carrier
       14  Worstead             White Horse,   S.             S.                       2
                                Magdalen-
                                street
        7  Wreningham           White Lion,    W. S.          W. S.                    2
                                White
                                Lion-lane,
                                and
                                Ashwelthorpe
                                Carrier
        6  Wroxham              W. Horse,      F.             S.                      11
                                Mag.-st. and
                                Ludham Car.
        9  Wymondham            Nag's Head,    W. S.          W. S.                    2
                                Cock,
                                Shoulder
                                Mutton,
                                Recruiting
                                Serjeant,
                                and
                                Coachmaker's
                                Arms, St.
                                Steph.
       22  Yarmouth             Machine and
                                Barge
       13  Yaxham               Woolpocket,    S.             S.
                                St. Giles'
      190  York                 Star,          Tu. F.         Tu. F.                   4
                                Hay-market
       30  Yoxford              Ditto          M.             T.                       2



                       _C. Berry_, _jun. Printer_, _Dove-lane_, _Norwich_.




FOOTNOTES


{0}  Unfortunately the Norwich Millennium Library copy lacks the map and
so it cannot be included.--DP.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A CONCISE HISTORY AND DIRECTORY OF
THE CITY OF NORWICH FOR 1811***


******* This file should be named 32829.txt or 32829.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/2/8/2/32829



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

