The Project Gutenberg EBook of Ballads of Peace in War, by Michael Earls

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Ballads of Peace in War

Author: Michael Earls

Release Date: July, 2002  [Etext #3305]
Posting Date: October 9, 2009 [EBook #3305]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BALLADS OF PEACE IN WAR ***




Produced by Alan Earls









BALLADS OF PEACE IN WAR

By Michael Earls




HIS LIGHT

    Gray mist on the sea,
    And the night coming down,
    She stays with sorrow
    In a far town.

    He goes the sea-ways
    By channel lights dim,
    Her love, a true light,
    Watches for him.

    They would be wedded
    On a fair yesterday,
    But the quick regiment
    Saw him away.

    Gray mist in her eyes
    And the night coming down:
    He feels a prayer
    From a far town.

    He goes the sea-ways,
    The land lights are dim;
    She and an altar light
    Keep watch for him.




THE COUNTERSIGN


    Along Virginia's wondering roads
    While armies hastened on,
    To Beauregard's great Southern host,
    Manassas fields upon,
    Came Colonel Smith's good regiment,
    Eager for Washington.

    But Colonel Smith must halt his men
    In a dangerous delay,
    Though well he knows the countryside
    To the distant host of grey.
    He cannot join with Beauregard
    For Bull Run's bloody fray.

    And does he halt for storm or ford,
    Or does he stay to dine?
    Say, No! but death will meet his men,
    Onward if moves the line:
    He dares not hurry to Beauregard,
    Not knowing the countersign.

    Flashed in the sun his waving sword;
    "Who rides for me?" he cried,
    "And ask of the Chief the countersign,
    Upon a daring ride;
    Though never the lad come back again
    With the good that will betide.

    "I will send a letter to Beauregard,"
    The Colonel slowly said;
    "The bearer dies at the pickets' line,
    But the letter shall be read
    When the pickets find it for the Chief,
    In the brave hand of the dead."




THE COUNTERSIGN


    "Ready I ride to the Chief for the sign,"
    Said little Dan O'Shea,
    "Though never I come from the picket's line,
    But a faded suit of grey:
    Yet over my death will the road be safe,
    And the regiment march away."

    "In a mother's name, I bless thee, lad,"
    The Colonel drew him near:
    "But first in the name of God," said Dan,
    "And then is my mother's dear--
    Her own good lips that taught me well,
    With the Cross of Christ no fear."

    Quickly he rode by valley and hill,
    On to the outpost line,
    Till the pickets arise by wall and mound,
    And the levelled muskets shine;
    "Halt!" they cried, "count three to death,
    Or give us the countersign."

    Lightly the lad leaped from his steed,
    No fear was in his sigh,
    But a mother's face and a home he loved
    Under an Irish sky:
    He made the Sign of the Cross and stood,
    Bravely he stood to die.

    Lips in a prayer at the blessed Sign,
    And calmly he looked around,
    And wonder seized his waiting soul
    To hear no musket sound,
    But only the pickets calling to him,
    Heartily up the mound.

    For this was the order of Beauregard
    Around his camp that day--
    The Sign of the Cross was countersign,
    (And a blessing to Dan O'Shea)
    And the word came quick to Colonel Smith
    For the muster of the grey.




A HILL O' LIGHTS


    Turn from Kerry crossroads and leave the wooded dells,
    Take the mountain path and find where Tip O'Leary dwells;
    Tip O'Leary is the name, I sing it all day long,
    And every bird whose heart is wise will have it for a song.

    Tip O'Leary keeps the lights of many lamps aglow,
    Little matters it to him the seasons come or go,
    Sure if spring is in the air his hedges are abloom,
    And fairy buds like candles shine across his garden room.

    Roses in the June days are light the miles around,
    Tapers of the fuchsias move along the August ground,
    Sumachs light the flaming torches by October's grave
    And like the campfires on the hills the oaks and maples wave.

    All the lights but only one die out when summer goes,
    One that Tip O'Leary keeps is brighter than the rose,
    Through the window comes the bloom on any winter night,
    And every sense goes wild to it, soft and sweet and bright.

    Lamps are fair that have the light from flowers all day long,
    When the birds are here and sing the Tip O'Leary song,
    But a winter window is the fairest rose of all,
    When Tip O'Leary's hearth is lit and lamps upon the wall.




OFF TO THE WAR

    (For Jack)


    In a little ship and down the bay,
    Out to the calling sea,
    A young brave lad sailed off today,
    To the one great war went he:
    The one long war all men must know
    Greater than land or gold,
    Soul is the prince and flesh the foe
    Of a kingdom Christ will hold.

    With arms of faith and hope well-wrought
    The brave lad went away,
    And the voice of Christ fills all his thought,
    Under two hands that pray:
    The tender love of a mother's hands
    That guarded all his years,
    Fitted the armor, plate and bands,
    And blessed them with her tears.


    Older than Rhodes and Ascalon
    And the farthest forts of sea,
    Is the Master voice that calls him on
    From the hills in Galilee:
    From hills where Christ in gentle guise
    Called, as He calls again,
    With His heart of love and His love-lit eyes
    Unto His warrior men.

    Christ with the brave young lad to-day
    Who goes to the sweet command,
    Strengthen his heart wherever the way,
    Whether he march or stand:
    And whether he die in a peaceful cell,
    Or alone in the lonely night,
    The Cross of Christ shall keep him well,
    And be his death's delight.




THE TOWERS OF HOLY CROSS

    (For W. M. Letts)


    The roads look up to Holy Cross,
    The sturdy towers look down,
    And show a kindly word to all
    Who pass by Worcester Town;
    And once you'd see the boys at play,
    Or marching cap and gown.

    The gallant towers at Holy Cross
    Are silent night and day,
    A few young lads are left behind
    Who still may take their play;
    The Cross and Flag look out afar
    For them that went away.

    And mine are gone, says Beaven Hall,
    To camps by hill and plain,
    And mine along by Newport Sea,
    Says the high tower of O'Kane;
    I follow mine, Alumni calls,
    Across the watery main.

    Their sires were in the old Brigade
    That won at Fontenoy,
    Stood true at Washington's right hand,
    that were his faith and joy:
    From Holy Cross to Fredericksburg
    Is many a gallant boy.

    Then God be with you, says the Cross,
    And the brave towers looking down;
    I'll be your cloth, sings out the Flag,
    For other cap and gown,
    And may we see you safe again,
    On the hills of Worcester Town.




ALWAYS MAYTIME

       (for  Gerry)


    When May has spent its little song,
    And richer comes the June,
    Through former eyes the heart will long
    For May again in tune;
    Though large with promise hope may be,
    By future visions cast,
    Our memoried thoughts will yearn to see
    The happy little past.

    And you, my loyal little friend,
    (From May to June you go),
    What years of loyalty attend
    Great comradeship we know;
    Yet joy have me in place of tears
    To see your road depart,
    For whether east or west your years,
    A friend stays home at heart.

    Then gladly let the Springtime pass
    And Summer in its wake;
    Ahead are fields of flower and grass
    All fragrant for your sake:
    With hearts of joy we say farewell,
    With laughter, wave and nod,
    It's always May for us who dwell
    In seasons close to God.




THE STORYTELLER


    Tim of the Tales they call me,
    With a welcome heart and hand;
    But little they hold my brother
    For all his cattle and land.

    If I be walking the high road
    From Clare that goes to the sea,
    A troop of the young run leaping
    To gather a story from me.

    Tim of the Tales, the folk say,
    Is known the world around,
    For children by taking his stories
    To their homes in foreign ground.

    I pity my brother his fortunes,
    And how he sits alone,
    With the money that keeps his body,
    But leaves his heart a stone.

    And sometimes do I be feeling
    A dream of death in my ear,
    And a heaven of children calling,
    "Tim of the Tales is here."




MY FATHER'S TUNES


    My father had the gay good tunes, the like you'd seldom hear,
    A whole day could he whistle them, an' thin he'd up an' sing,
    The merry tunes an' twists o'them that suited all the year,
    An' you wouldn't ask but listen if yourself stood there a king.
    Early of a mornin' would he give "The Barefoot Boy" to us,
    An' later on "The Rocky Road" or maybe "Mountain Lark,"
    "Trottin' to the Fair" was a liltin' heart of joy to us,
    An' whin we heard "The Coulin" sure the night was never dark.

    An' what's the good o' foolish tunes, the moilin' folks 'ud say,
    It's better teach the children work an' get the crock o' gold;
    Thin sorra take their wisdom whin it makes them sad an' gray,--
    A man is fitter have a song that never lets him old.
    A stave of "Gillan's Apples" or a snatch of "Come Along With Me"
    Will warm the cockles o' your heart, an' life will keep its prime.
    Yarra, gold is all the richer whin it's "Danny, sing a song for me"
    Or what's the good o' money if you're dead afore your time.

    It's sense to do your turn o' work, it's healthy to be wise,
    An' have the little crock o' gold agin the day o' rain;
    But whin the ground is heaviest, your heart will feel the skies,
    If you know a little Irish song to lift the road o' pain.
    The learnin' an' the wealth we have are never sad an' gray with us,
    The dullest times in all the year are merry as the June:
    For we've the heart to up an' sing "Arise, an' come away with us,"
    The way my father gave it, an' we laughin' in the tune.




A SONG

    (For John McCormack)


    June of the trees in glory,
    June of the meadows gay!
    O, and it works a story
    To tell an October day.

    Blooms of the apple and cherry
    Toil for the far-off hours;
    Never is idleness merry,
    In song of the garden bowers.

    Brooks to the sea from mountains,
    Yea, and from field and vine:
    Rain and the sun are fountains
    That gather for wheat and wine.

    Cellar and loft shall glory,
    Table and hearth shall praise,
    Hearing October's story
    Of June and the merry days.




A BALLAD OF FRANCE


    Ye who heed a nation's call
    And speed to arms therefor,
    Ye who fear your children's march
    To perils of the war,--
    Soldiers of the deck and camp
    And mothers of our men,
    Hearken to a tale of France
    And tell it oft again.

          *     *     *

    In the east of France by the roads of war,
    (God save us evermore from Mars and Thor!)
    Up and down the fair land iron armies came,
    (Pity, Jesu, all who fell, calling Thy name).

    Pleasant all the fields were round every town,
    Garden airs went sweetly up, heaven smiled down;
    Till under leaden hail with flaming breath,
    Graves and ashen harvest were the keep of death.

    One little town stood, white on a hill,
    Chapel and hostel gates, farms and windmill,
    Chapel and countryside met the gunner's path,
    Till no blade of kindly grass hid from his wrath.

    Lo! When the terrain cleared out of murky air,
    When mid the ruins stalked death and despair,
    One figure stood erect, bright with day,--
    Christ the Crucified, though His Cross was shot away.

    Flame and shot tore away all the tender wood,
    Yet with arms uplifted Christ His Figure stood;
    Out reached the blessing hands, meek bowed the head,
    Christ! The saving solace o'er the waste of dead.

    France tells the story, make our hearts know well,
    Christ His Figure stands against the gates of hell:
    Flame and shot may rive the fortress walls apart,
    Christ the Crucified will heal the breaking heart.

    Wear Him day and night, wherever be the war,
    (God save us evermore from Mars and Thor!)
    Flag and heart that keep Him fear not shot and flame,
    (Strengthen, Jesu, all who stand, calling Thy name).

         *     *     *

    Ye who guard a nation's call
    And speed to arms therefor,
    Ye who pray for brave lads gone
    To perils of the war;
    Soldiers of the fleet and fort
    And mothers of our men,
    In the shadow of the Cross
    Shall we find peace again.




TO ONE IN SUCCESS


    A world's new faces greet you,
    Ten thousand quick with praise,
    But truer stay to meet you
    Old friends and other days:
    Let fickle changes hurt you,
    (The new go quick apart)
    One fame shall ne'er desert you
    In true hearts like this heart.




THE LIFELONG WAR


    Still goes the strife; the anguish does not die.
    Stronger the flesh is grown from earthy years,
    In siege about my soul that upward peers
    To see and hold its Good.  The spirit's eye
    Approves the better things; but senses spy
    The passing sweets, spurning the present fears,
    And take their moment's prize.  Ah, then hot tears
    Deluge my soul, and contrite moans my cry!

    Courage, my heart: bright patience to the end!
    Few years remain; then goes the warring wall
    Of sensely flesh, that men will throw to earth.
    So be it; so the contrite soul shall wend
    A homeward way unto the Captain's call,
    Eternally to know contrition's worth.




LINDEN LANE

     HOLY CROSS: MAY, 1917

    (For Major Joseph W. O'Connor, '03)


    Birds are merry and the buds
    Come along with May:
    Lonely is the linden land
    For lads that went today.

    What calls the May of song
    But the fair young spring?
    Heard our boys another tune
    Sterner voices sing.

    Bugles blew by land and sea,
    And the tocsin drum;
    See, brave hearts go down the hill,
    Shouting, "Hail, we come."

    From the towers that show the Cross,
    Staunch the Flag waved out,
    And the royal Purple shook
    Joyous with the shout.

    Heigh-ho! And a lusty cheer,
    Down the linden lane:
    The pine grove looked but cannot tell
    If they'll come home again.

    Few may take the homeward road
    When the war is done:
    Where they fall or when they come,
    Hail, to the cause they won.

    Till the buds and the merry birds
    Come another May,
    Cross and Flag aloft shall bless
    Brave lads who went today.




THE BOUNDARIES OF A HOUSE


    Along the north a mountain crest,
    A row of trees runs towards the west;
    The south is all a field for play,
    For work the east has marked a way;
    The night shows all the stars above,
    And the long, long day, a mother's love.




ATTAINMENT


    Let me go back again.  There is the road,
    O memory! The humble garden lane
    So young with me.  Let me rebuild again
    The start of faith and hope by that abode;
    Amend with morning freshness all the code
    Of youth's desire; remap my chart's demesne
    With tuneful joy, and plan a far campaign
    For better marches in ambition's mode.

    Ah, no, my heart! More certain now the skies
    For joy abide: the cage of tree and sod,
    Horizons firm that faith and hope attain,
    Far realms of innocence in children's eyes,
    And hearts harmonious with the will of God:--
    These might I miss if I were back again.




THE PHILOSOPHERS


    The best of true philosophers
    Are the children, after all,--
    The children with laughing hearts
    And the serious field and ball:
    They have a bowl and bubbles,
    And hours where rainbows are;
    They find, if ever the sun is hid,
    In every dark a star.

    But, O, the sorry men that make
    The wise books of our day!
    They cannot smile athwart a cloud,
    When black thoughts lead astray;
    They cannot add a simple sum,
    But talk like drunken men,
    And shut their eyes to keep out God
    When spring comes in again.

    Far simpler than the Rule of Three
    Are the laws of earth and sky;
    Yet fools will muddle all true thought,
    And pride will have its cry;
    The banners with their deadly words
    Go reeling on unfurled,
    And sin and sadness march along
    To the heartbreak of the world.




THE PHILOSOPHERS


    But the children are the wise men,
    With the clearest heart and mind;
    If two and one are three, they say,
    Then truth is near to find;
    If this be now that once was not,
    If things must have a cause,
    Then very simple is the sum
    That God is in His laws.

    The world's men that are fools enough,
    They will not speak that way,
    But with a cloud of muddled thought
    They hide the light of day;
    Yet laughing words and candid truth
    Abide by field and hall,
    Where the best of true philosophers
    Are the children, after all.





PREPAREDNESS




I. THE DRUMMER BOY

    You never know when war may come,
    And that is why I keep a drum:
          For if all sudden in the night
          From east or west came battle fright,
          And you were sound asleep in bed,
          And very soon to join the dead,
          You then would gladly wish my drum
          Would warn you that the war had come.

    So that is why on afternoons
    I tell the neighborhood my tunes:
          Sometimes behind a fortress bench,
          Or where the hedges make a trench,
          I beat the drum with all my might,
          While people look with awful fright,
          Just as they would if war had come,
          And heard the warning of my drum.

          They must be thankful, I am sure,
          Because they now may feel secure,
          And rest so safe and sound in bed,
          Without wild dreams of fearful dread;
          For now they hear me all the day,
          As round the yard I march and play,
          To let them know if war should come
          They'll get the warning of my drum.




II. THE SAILOR

    A sailor that rides the ocean wave,
    And I in my room at home:
          Where are the seas I fear to brave,
          Or the lands I may not roam?
          At the attic window I take my stand,
          And tighten the curtain sail,
          Then, ahoy!  I ride the leagues of land,
          Whether in calm or gale.

    Tree at anchor along the road
    Bow as I speed along;
          At sunny brooks in the valley I load
          Cargoes of blossom and song;
          Stories I take on the passing wind
          From the plains and forest seas,
          And the Golden Fleece I yet will find,
          And the fruit of Hesperides.

          Steady I keep my watchful eyes,
          As I range the thousand miles,
          Till evening tides in western skies
          Turn gold the cloudland isles;
          Then fast is the hatch and dark the screen,
          And I bring my cabin light;
          With a wink I change to a submarine
          And drop in the sea of Night.




WAR IN THE NORTH


    Not from Mars and not from Thor
    Comes the war, the welcome war,
    Many months we waited for
    To free us from the bondage
    Of Winter's gloomy reign:
    Valor to our hope is bound,
    Songs of courage loud resound,
    Vowed is Spring to win her ground
    Through all our northern country,
    From Oregon to Maine.

    All our loyal brave allies
    In the Southlands mobilize,
    Faith is sworn to our emprise,
    The scouting breezes whisper
    That help is sure today:
    Vanguards of the springtime rains
    Cannonade the hills and plains,
    Freeing them from Winter's chains,
    So birds and buds may flourish
    Around the throne of May.

    Hark! and hear the clarion call
    Bluebirds give by fence and wall!
    Look!  The darts of sunlight fall,
    And red shields of the robins
    Ride boldly down the leas;
    Hail!  The cherry banners shine,
    Onward comes the battle line,--
    On!  White dogwood waves the sign,
    And exile troops of blossoms
    Are sailing meadow seas.

    Winter's tyrant king retires;
    Spring leads on her legion choirs
    Where the hedges sound their lyres;
    The victor hills and valleys
    Ring merrily the tune:
    April cohorts guard the way
    For the great enthroning day,
    When the Princess of May
    Shall wed within our northlands
    The charming Prince of June.




THE HAPPY TIME


    Two gloomy scenes may be,
    Or count you three:
          A building hope all crushed at morn,
          A bridal day in clouds of rain,
          And night that keeps a mother's pain
          For tidings of a child forlorn.

    Of happy times count more,
    Admit these four:
          A flower of promise rich with day,
          A son with victories that wear
          A halo on his mother's way:
          And friends whose hearts ring like a chime
          Across the world at Christmas time.




THE TIME OF TRUCE


    Two young lads from childhood up
    Drank together friendship's cup:
    Joe was glad with Bill at play,
    Bill was home to Joe alway.

    On their friendship came the blight
    Of a little thoughtless fight;
    Then, alas! each passing day
    Farther bore these friends away.

    There was grief in either heart,
    Bleeding deep from sorrow's dart,
    When in thoughtfulness again
    Each beheld the other's pain.

    But the shades of night are furled
    When the morning takes the world,
    And the Christmas days of peace
    Make our little quarrels cease.

    Bill and Joe on Christmas Day
    Met as in the olden way;
    Bill put out his hand to Joe,--
    It was Christmas Day, you know.

    Bill and Joe are friends again,
    And to them long years remain;
    Time may take them far away,
    They keep Christmas every day.




BETHLEHEM


    O ye who sail Potomac's even tide
    To Vernon's shades, our Chieftain's hallowed mound;
    Or who at distant shrines high paeans sound
    In Alfred's cult, old England's morning pride;
    Or seek Versailles, conceited as a bride,
    With garish memories of kins strewn round;
    Or lay your spirit's cheek on Forum ground,
    For here a mighty Caesar lived and died:
    To these and other stones, O ye who speed,
    Since there, forsooth, a prince was passing great,
    More zealous let your heart's adoring heed
    The Child most Royal in a crib's estate.
    No poor so poor, no king more king than He:
    Come, better pilgrims, to this mystery.




A VOW-DAY FLOWER

    (POVERTY, CHASTITY, OBEDIENCE)


    Three little leaves like shamrock,
    And the trefoil's love-lit eyes,
    Whether it takes the sunshine
    Or the shadows from the skies.

    And richer than rose or lily
    Is the flower he wears today,
    With triune bloom and fragrance
    From earth to heaven alway.

    Poverty is the low leaf,
    And one is chastely white,
    And the red love of obedience
    Goes up to God a light.

    Grow, good flower, and keep him
    Who wears your bloom today,
    Shadow and sunshine bless him,
    And the trefoil's heavenward way.




THE TREE IN THE TENEMENT YARD

    (For T. A. Daly)


    America, Ireland and Italy,
    All have known this poor old tree.

         *     *     *

    A rickety fence goes round the yard
    And the noisy streets stand high:
    The grassless ground is brown and hard,
    And the cinder pathways, lined with shard,
    Sees but a bit of sky.

    Once the yard was fertile and fair,
    And lilac bushes near:
    And a Yankee counted with fretful care,
    Under the solacing shadows there,
    The gain of every year.

    The crowded walls of trade arose
    And gloomed the avenue:
    But a Munster man at each day's close
    Built in the tree his hope's rainbows,
    And saw his dreams come true.

    The years have thickened the darkened air,
    But the tree is still on guard:
    It comforts the young Italian there,
    Who sees the future blossoming fair
    From the tree in the tenement yard.

         *     *     *

    America, Ireland and Italy
    All have loved this poor old tree.




OLD HUDSON ROVERS

    (For Joyce Kilmer)


    When the dreamy night is on, up the Hudson river,
    And the sheen of modern taste is dim and far away,
    Ghostly men on phantom rafts make the waters shiver,
    Laughing in the sibilance of the silver spray.
    Yea, and up the woodlands, staunch in moonlit weather,
    Go the ghostly horsemen, adventuresome to ride,
    White as mist the doublet-braize, bandolier and feather,
    Fleet as gallant Robin Hood in an eventide.

    Times are gone that knew the craft in the role of rovers,
    Fellows of the open, care could never load:
    Unalarmed for bed or board, they were leisure's lovers,
    Summer bloomed in story on the Hyde Park Road.
    Summer was a blossom, but the fruit was autumn,
    Fragrant haylofts for a bed, cider-cakes in store,
    Warmer was a cup they know, when the north wind caught 'em
    Down at Benny Havens' by the West Point shore.

    Idlers now-and loafers pass, joy is out of fashion,
    Honest fun that fooled a dog or knew a friendly gate,
    Now the craft are vagabonds, sick with modern passion,
    Riding up and down the shore, on an aching freight;
    Sullen are the battered looks, cheerless talk or tipsy,
    Sickly in the smoky air, starving in the day,
    Pining for a city's noise at Kingston or Po'keepsie,
    Eager more for Gotham and a great White Way.

    Rich is all the countryside, but glory has departed,
    What if yachts and mansions be, by the river's marge!
    Dim though was a hillside, lamps were happy-hearted,
    Near the cove of Rondout in a hut or barge.
    Silken styles are tyrants, fashion kills the playtime,
    Robs the heart of largess that is kindly to the poor,
    Richer were the freemen, welcome as the Maytime,
    Glad was boy or maiden, seeing Brennan of the moor.

    Send us back the olden knights, tell no law to track 'em,
    Give to boy and maid the storytellers as of yore,
    Millionaires in legend-wealth, though no bank would back 'em,
    But old Benny Havens by the West Point Shore.
    Off with lazy vagabonds, social ghosts that shiver,
    Give to worthy road-men the great green way,
    And we'll hear a song again up the Hudson river,
    Ringing from a drifting raft, set in silver spray.




A WINTER MINSTER

    (For Fr. C. L. O'Donnell)


    The interlacing trees
    Arise in Gothic traceries,
    As if a vast cathedral deep and dim;
    And through the solemn atmosphere
    The low winds hymn
    Such thoughts as solitude will hear.
    To lead your way across
    Gray carpet aisles of moss
    Unto the chantry stalls,
    The sumach candelabra are alight;
    Along the cloister walls,
    Like chorister and acolyte,
    The shrubs are vested white;
    The dutiful monastic oak
    In his gray-friar cloak
    Keeps penitential ways
    And solemn orisons of praise;
    For beads upon the cincture-vine
    Red berries warm with color shine,
    And to their constant rosary
    The bedesmen firs incline;
    And fair as frescoes be
    Among the shrines of Italy,
    These lights and shadows are,
    Impalpable in gray and green
    Upon the hills afar
    And the gold westering sun between.
    The music!  Hark!
    Oh, an it be no rapturous lark,
    Yet has the lesser chant
    The blessedness of song.
    The snowbird mendicant
    Intones the antiphon--
    Et laboremus nos;

    And all the grottoed aisles along,
    Where servitors rejoice,
    The chorused echoes run--

    Oremus nos.

    The inspiration of the breeze
    Gives every reed a voice
    From tenebrae and silences;
    Over the valleys borne,
    Come organ harmonies;
    And when the low winds call,
    The pines with miserere mourn
    A requiem musical,
    Softer than moonbeams fall
    Across the starry oriels of night,
    Flooding the azure round
    With hushed delight
    And sanctity of sound.




THE DARK LITTLE ROSE

    IRELAND


    When shall we find the spring come in,
    And the fragrant air it blows?
    And when shall the bounty of summer win
    Fairer than fields of Camolin
    For the dark little Rose?

    Long was the winter, the storms how long!
    What flower may live i' the snows!
    No bloom shall last under heels of wrong,
    If the heart-blood be not deathless strong,
    As the dark little Rose.

    Sing hers the culture sweeter than rain
    That healed old Europe's woes;
    Older than bowers of Lille and Louvain
    Grew by the Rhine and the towns of Spain
    From the dark little Rose.

    Leagues in the sunlight never shall fail
    While the broad, round ocean flows;
    Though never a fleet goes up Kinsale,
    See, all the world is within the pale
    Of the dark little Rose.




THE MONK MAELANFAID


    Maelanfaid saw a tiny bird
    A-grieving on the ground,
    And O, the sad lament he heard,
    That sorrow's self might sound:
    He could not read a note or word
    The song of grief inwound.

    Maelanfaid went within his cell
    To keep a fast and pray,
    To listen to a voice would tell
    The mystery away:
    What was the red long pain befell
    The bird of grief all day?

    "Maelanfaid," airy voices call,
    "MacOcha Molv is dead,
    Who killed no creature great or small,
    Who helped all life instead:
    Now griefs of bird and blossom fall
    Around his funeral bed."




THE YOUNG ADVENTURERS


    We will go adventuring, will you come adventuring,
    Hail, to all who sail with us the seven pleasant seas:
    All the shores with lily bells, all the flutes of woodland dells
    Are calling like a legend upon a fragrant breeze.

    Throw away the haughty cares, children here are millionaires,
    Laughter take for baggage and give your laugh a song;
    We must sail the seas of grass, round the isles of clover pass,
    And delve in leagues of shadowland, when clouds come along.

    Caves are walled with treasure trove, rich as any south-sea cove,
    Bullion of the meadow where the gold sun flows;

    Round the reefs of mignonette, up the waves of violet,
    Fragrant go our sails and spars with attar of the rose.

    On, gay adventurers, bravely ride the billowy furze,
    Golden foil and dewy pearls are swaying to a tune:
    Quaff the brew of red raspberry through the vine veils gossamery.
    Till we turn when night comes down alleys of the moon.

    Yea, with laughter in our sails and our hearts a book of tales,
    Down the silver roadways, a homeward hymn we say:--
    Praise the Lord ye great and small, flower and weed majestical,
    For pleasant seas that God gave adventurers today.




THE FOUNTAIN OF YOUTH

    (For Osceola and Pocahontas)


    Was it a hundred years ago,
    Or was it but yesterday,
    When we found the roads that grow
    Blossom and song of May?
    Maybe it was but yesterday,
    Or a hundred years ago.

    The roads from Bersabee to Dan
    Are old and quickly tire,
    But to the heart of child or man
    Youth is a fairy fire:
    Our youthful roads, they never tire
    From Bersabee to Dan.

    Ponce de Leon found no spring,
    But legend's long, long ruth;
    But the grace of God is a magic thing
    Abides with chivalrous youth:
    The grace of God that brings no ruth
    For them who find the spring.

    There is a land, there is a May
    Beyond the graveyard tree;
    Ten thousand years are like a day
    Of a youth that we shall see:
    Our young hearts pass the graveyard tree
    To a land forever in May.




THE BONNIE PRINCE O' SPRING


    The little green soldiers are here at last,
    With their waving blades and spears;
    And across the hills they are marching fast
    With the drill of a thousand years:
    And I wave afar, and I shout, Hurrah!
    Till I hear their echoing cheers.

    A bonnie prince is at their head,
    And his love the legions know:
    For he gives them rest where the twigs are red
    At the hedges cool in a row:
    And afoot are they soon to a birdlike tune
    On the northward march to go.

    Oh, I am leal to the marching men,
    To my bonnie Prince I'm true;
    For he tells me the way to his tented glen,
    And the secret password too:
    And he sets in my hair a blossom to wear,
    Like his own good horsemen do.

    Then I will follow on all the day
    Where the bonnie Prince has led,
    Till we drive the Winter foeman away
    And throne my Prince instead:
    And sing willaloo! With the birds, willaloo!
    For the Winter King is dead.




ON A TRAIN

    (For Christine and Tom)


    Oases are charming 'mid the Afric sands,
    Beautiful is summer after rain;
    But the sweetest blossoms may be eyes and hands,
    And two playful children on a train.

    Aileen and her brother, home from holiday,
    Left behind them Narragansett town;
    Innocence like music followed all the way,
    Summer glowed upon the cheeks of brown.

    She that was their escort read a magazine:
    They were young, and trains are dull at night;
    All the passing signals, red and blue and green,
    Counted up the miles for young delight.

    I was there behind them, earnest in a book:
    Lo, the journey turned to fairyland,
    When, like magic mirrors, dusty windows took
    Aileen's dancing eyes and waving hand!

    That is how it happened on a creeping train,
    How a play began without a word,--
    Peekaboo reflections in a window-pane,
    Such a story-hour was never heard.

    Aileen and her brother, strangers were to me;
    They were friendly for the cloth I wore;
    And through leagues of window, youthful play could see
    We were friends to be for evermore.

    So we passed the hamlets, passed the miles of night
    In a fairyland of silent games,
    Till the travel ended in the Worcester light,--
    Yet we parted, strangers in our names.

    But   a fortnight later, by an autumn tree,
    Aileen and her brother came my way,
    And another, glad to tell the names of them and me,
    And to hear how travellers can play.

    Life is but a journey, say we evermore,
    Passing lights the years have, like a train;
    Three good friends will travel up to heaven's door,
    With the world a merry window-pane.




THE COLUMBINE


    Gray lonely rocks about thee stand,
    Ignored of sun and dew,
    Yet is thy breath upon the land,
    To thy vocation true.

    So come they character to me
    That works in sunless ways,
    And I shall learn to give with thee
    Dark hills a constant praise.




TWO SEANICHIES

    (For Aedh)


    'Tis the queerest trade we have, the two of us that go about,
    I that do the talkin', and the little lad that sings,
    We to tell the story of a Land you ought to know about,--
    The wonder land of Erin and the memories it brings.

    Sure it is a wonder land, richer than the books it is,
    Full of magic stories and a hopeful heart of song;
    Faith, and near the mountains and the sunny lakes and brooks it is,
    Like the olden seanichies, the pair of us belong.

    Far and broad our journeyin', up and down the land we go,
    Today among the mountains and tomorrow by the sea;
    Pleasant are the roads with us, and to a welcome grand we go,
    Erin wins the heart of you, whoever you may be.

    Erin's heart will capture you, if you will but listen now,
    Great she was afore the Danes and all her Saxon foes,
    After that the sorrows came, sure your eyes will glisten now,
    Up, my lad, and sing for them "The Dark Little Rose."

    Rest awhile and I will tell the fame of Tara's Hall to them,
    All the deeds of valor and a thousand scenes of joy,
    Wicklow hills and Derry fields where Killarney calls to them.
    Come, my lad, it's Ninety-Eight and sing "The Croppy Boy."

    Long ago the stranger came and learned to love the ways of her,
    Irish more than Irish the Norman foe became;
    Sure and here across the sea you give your hearts to praise of her,
    The tear and smile within her eyes that ever are the same.

    Not for gold or little fame the two of us to go about,
    I that do the talkin', and the little lad that sings,
    We to win your love for her, the Land you're glad to know about,
    The wonder land of Erin and the memories it brings.




THE GREEN BRIGADE

    ON THE FIELD OF CORN


    Where is the war ye march unto,
    From the early tents of morn?
    And what are the deeds ye hope to do,
    Brave Grenadiers of Corn?
    Pearls of the dew are on your hair,
    And the jewels of morning light,
    Pennants of green ye fling to the air,
    And the tall plumes waving bright.

    Gaily away and steady ye go,
    Never a faltering line:
    Forward!  I follow and try to know
    Word of your countersign:
    Hist!  The spies of the tyrant sun
    Eagerly watch your plan,
    Lavish with bribes of gold, they run
    Down to your outmost man.

    Steady, good lads, go bravely on
    By the parching hills of pain,
    An armor of shade ye soon may don
    And meet the allies of rain:
    And night in the bivouac hours will sing
    Praise of the march ye made,
    And into your pockets good gold will bring,
    Men of the Green Brigade.

    Yea, and upon September's field,
    When the long campaign is done,
    With arms up-stacked, your hearts will yield
    Conquest of rain and sun:
    The pennants and plumes will then be sere,
    Your pearls delight no morn,
    But tents of plenty will bless the year,
    Brave Grenadiers of Corn.




ALLELUIA HEIGHT


    Obedience to the seasons' marshall-rod,
    That is a law of God,
    Here beauty passes with her gorgeous train,
    On paths that range from bud to grain.
    O, here the searching eyes
    In traffic for the soul's good gain
    Earn wealth of rare delight.
    Far pathways of surprise,
    In color's frumenty bedight,
    Lead off from avenues of day
    Through miles of pageantries:
    And from the starry chancels of the night
    And the inscrutable farther skies,
    Beyond where trackless comets stray,
    Outspreads a world in thought's array.
    And lo!  the heart's true voices sing
    From the exulting reverent breast,
    And lips proclaim, with adoration blessed,
    Glad Alleluias to the King.

    Prompt is our praise unto a jewelled queen
    In all her courtly splendor set,
    (Fair as those fairylands are seen
    By childhood's other sight):
    But if in pauper mien,
    Too poor for stray regret
    Where crowded streets affright
    She stood in beggary,
    Unknown, though faithful to her high degree,--
    O, then her praise  'twere easy to forget.
    Yet ever here,
    For all of time's prompt fickleness--
    From plenteous June and wide largess
    Of full midsummer days,
    To dwarf December pitiless
    Amid the earth's uncomplimented ways--
    Yea, constant through the changeful year,
    This queenly Height commands our praise.
    To stand in meek unflinching hardihood
    When fortune blows its storm of fright,
    And work to full effect that good
    Resolved in open days of clearer sight--
    O, this is worth!
    That daily sees the soul
    To braver liberties give birth,
    That heeds not time's annoy,
    And hears surrounding voices roll
    Perennial circumstance of joy.
    Then come not only when the springtime blows
    The old familiar strangeness of its breath
    Across the long-lain snows,
    And chants her resurrected songs
    About the tombs of death;
    Nor yet when summer glows
    In roseate throngs
    And works her plenitude of deeds
    By tangled dells and waving meads,
    Come here in beauty's pilgrimage:
    Nor when the autumn reads
    Illuminate her page
    With tints of magicry besprent
    Of iridescent wonderment--
    (As scrolls in old monastic towers,
    Done in an earnest far-off age).
    But choose to come in winter hours
    To see how character can live,
    How noble character will give
    Through desolate distress
    And cold neglect's duress,
    The fulness of its powers
    And win the soul its victor sign.
    Yea, come when in a peasant gown,
    Amid the ample banners of the pine,
    And the resounding harpers of the vine,
    Lone winter holds upon the Height
    Her court in full renown.
    Obedient her courtiers go,
    Their gonfalons aloft and bright,
    And scatter pearls of snow;
    Her sturdy knighthood wear for crown
    Prismatic sheen in young delight,
    And wave the cedar oriflamme on high;
    While windward heralds cry,
    Across the battlements of earth
    To parapets along the sky,
    The lauds of character's full worth.

    The winter passes and the days come in
    Vibrant with spring.
    And men find welcome at the Easter tomb,
    Reward they win,
    Who make their hearts with courage sing
    Through Lenten opportunity of gloom:
    (Not as the Pharisees,
    With faces lacrimose,
    Who wear pretence of ashen woes,
    And murmur like the tuneless bees,
    Whose honies are hypocrisies),
    But men of character's delight,
    Who like this valiant Height
    Still serving through the bleakest day,
    With humble offerings of sound and sight,
    Do steadfast stand and pray:
    O, count those souls of noble worth,
    And God's good pleasure on His earth,
    Who still, if joy or pain
    Brings sun or rain,
    Heroic sing
    The law of Alleluia to the King.








End of Project Gutenberg's Ballads of Peace in War, by Michael Earls

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BALLADS OF PEACE IN WAR ***

***** This file should be named 3305.txt or 3305.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/0/3305/

Produced by Alan Earls

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
