The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Forward Pass in Football, by Elmer Berry

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Forward Pass in Football

Author: Elmer Berry

Release Date: July 9, 2010 [EBook #33120]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FORWARD PASS IN FOOTBALL ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)









  THE FORWARD PASS
  IN FOOTBALL.


  BY
  ELMER BERRY, B.S., M.P.E.

  _Head Coach Football and Baseball, Associate Director
  Physical Department, Professor Physiology and Physiology
  of Exercise, International Young Men's Christian
  Association College, Springfield, Mass._


  NEW YORK
  A. S. BARNES AND COMPANY
  1921



  COPYRIGHT, 1921, BY
  A. S. BARNES AND COMPANY




  THIS WORK IS AFFECTIONATELY DEDICATED
  TO
  Dr. J. H. McCurdy
  FORMER COACH
  SPRINGFIELD Y. M. C. A. COLLEGE FOOTBALL TEAMS,
  THE MAN WHO EARLIEST DEVELOPED THE FORWARD PASS,
  FOR TWENTY-FIVE YEARS A SUCCESSFUL COACH
  AND
  A STANDARD-BEARER OF CLEAN SPORT





CONTENTS


                                                          PAGE

  CHAPTER I
      THE COMING OF THE FORWARD PASS                         1

  CHAPTER II
      LEGAL RESTRICTIONS RELATIVE TO THE FORWARD PASS        4

  CHAPTER III
      THE SPIRAL PASS FROM CENTER                            6

  CHAPTER IV
      THE TECHNIQUE OF FORWARD PASSING                       8

  CHAPTER V
      FUNDAMENTALS OF THE SUCCESSFUL FORWARD PASSING GAME   11

  CHAPTER VI
      SUGGESTIVE FORWARD PASS FORMATIONS AND PLAYS          19

  CHAPTER VII
      DEFENSE FOR THE FORWARD PASS                          23




ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                          PAGE

  FIG. 1. PUNT FORMATION PASS                               19

  FIG. 2. UNDESIRABLE PASS                                  20

  FIG. 3. SPRINGFIELD-CARLISLE INDIAN PASS                  21

  FIG. 4. SPREAD FORMATION PASS                             21

  FIG. 5. OPEN DEFENSE                                      24




THE FORWARD PASS IN FOOTBALL




CHAPTER I.

THE COMING OF THE FORWARD PASS.


INTRODUCTION.

The history of football has been a story of limiting the power of the
offense. The defense has never been restricted, never curtailed, never
hampered, always free to line up as it chose, to go when it pleased
(barring offside), where it pleased and do practically as it pleased.
Always the offense has been too strong, too powerful, and there has been
the necessity of legal restrictions directed toward equalizing the
attack and defense. This was true in general up to the "revolution" when
ten yards and the forward pass came and the "new" game was created.

With the forward pass a great, new, unknown offensive weapon was
provided. The history of the game since the granting of this new method
of attack has again been chiefly a story of limiting the power and
effectiveness of this new offense. To be sure minor changes in the rules
have had other motives and objectives, but taking it by and large the
statement is true to fact.

A brief review of the conditions of the "old" game will recall to
players and spectators of that period the situation, and perhaps help
all of us to better appreciate and understand the changes that brought
the "new" game.

Mass plays predominated. Possession of the ball was vastly important.
Five yards were to be made in three downs. If a man six feet tall could
fall forward his full length three times he would make six yards and
first down. Consequently "fall forward," "get your distance," were
slogans of the old game. End runs, though they might occasionally
succeed brilliantly, were apt to lose precious distance that could not
be regained. If a team won the toss and took the ball there was
practically nothing but a fumble between them and a touchdown, and games
between evenly matched teams were often really decided by the luck of
the toss at the beginning of the game. For with even weight and
particularly with a slight advantage of weight in the line, a safe,
conservative game, straight ahead, slow but sure, tackle to tackle,
hammer the weak spot, was sure to bring the ultimate touchdown. All
sorts of ingenious formations were devised for massing power on the weak
spot. The famous "guards back" of Pennsylvania, the "flying wedge" of
Deland of Harvard, the "turtle back" wedge of others, the rolling mass
on tackle and others of this type will bring a smile of reminiscence to
"old-timers." Men were pushed, dragged and hauled along by their team
mates. Often special straps were attached to the uniform to facilitate
this work, and even to make possible throwing a man bodily, feet first,
over the prostrate lines.

Doubtless many men were severely injured by the splendid co-operative
efforts of their own team mates in such activity. Such a game meant
pounding--pure, unadulterated, gruelling pounding--until the selected
spot, groggy and exhausted, gave way and the opponents swept through to
victory or a substitute leaped in to fill the breach. Men came out of
such games in those days bruised and exhausted, no definite injury but
"dead," "all in." They were worse the next day and still worse the next,
dragging back ready for another gruelling pummelling by the following
Saturday. Internal injuries often developed and an unwarranted large
number of deaths occurred. The game was too rough; dangerously rough;
unnecessarily rough.

Closely linked with this aspect of the "old" game was the moral problem.
Everything was hidden in the mass play. Spectators could see little of
the real game, nothing of the "dirty work." Much of it could not be seen
even by the officials. Publicity is a great deferrent to unfairness. No
man wants the spectators in the stands to see him "pull" any "raw
stuff." Close lines, petty irritations and difficulty of detection
tempted many a man to foul play. We would like to think that the
cleanness and high standard of sportsmanship of the new game is an
indication of rising character and realization of ethical values of
sport. Doubtless it is, but at the same time no small part of it is due
to the openness of the new game; the fact that not only officials but
spectators can see most of what happens. The brutality of the old game,
the deaths and injuries from it, its moral effect, and finally even its
lack of interest to spectators, led to a general outcry against
football. There was a wide demand that it be abolished as an
intercollegiate sport. In 1906 a conference was called in New York for
this purpose. Representatives from approximately seventy colleges
attended.

Fortunately for American youth there were in the conference men of
vision who saw the real need of the hour. These men urged that the
difficulty was not with football but with the _way_ in which it was
allowed to be played; that the college faculties were themselves
responsible for the condition in that they had given no adequate
supervision to athletics; that the game should not be abolished but
revised. They contended that a new game should and could be produced
that would be more open, less dangerous and more interesting than the
old game. Their counsels ultimately prevailed and the conference that
had met to _abolish_ football formed what has become the National
Collegiate Athletic Association, an organization that has done a
wonderful work in raising the standards of sport in our American
colleges. The conference appointed a football rules committee, which,
amalgamating if possible with the old football rules committee, was to
adopt rules that would revise the game of football--that would make it a
_new game_.

What should be done to produce a more open, less dangerous, more
interesting game of football? Remember that the old mass game had
resulted from five yards in three downs. The first fundamental
suggestion was the requirement of _ten_ yards to gain. This could never
be made by mass attack. Consequently the forward pass was given to the
offense--practically the one great occasion of legislation favoring the
offense. In 1912 a fourth down was added. With ten yards in four downs
and the forward pass as the fundamentals the modern game of football has
been developed. Other changes, often important and far-reaching in
influence, followed, but they followed naturally, logically, almost
unavoidably, once the fundamentals, ten yards and the forward pass, had
been accepted.




CHAPTER II.

LEGAL RESTRICTIONS RELATING TO THE FORWARD PASS.


The first suggestion of a recognition by the football rules committee of
any need of a more open game came in 1903. Between the twenty-five yard
lines seven players of the offense were required on the line of
scrimmage and the first man receiving the ball from the snapper-back
might run with it provided he crossed the scrimmage line five yards out
from center (Football Guide for 1903, pp. 127 and 142). Between the
twenty-five-yard line and the goal, however, only five men were required
on the line of scrimmage. In that case, however, restrictions were
adopted requiring the men to be back five yards or outside the end men.
In 1904 came the "checker board" field.

With 1906 came the great revolution and the adoption of the new game;
two lines of scrimmage, six men regularly on the line of scrimmage,
center trio back five yards if not on the line of scrimmage, ten yards
in three downs and the Forward Pass. It is with the last that we are
concerned. (Football Guide for 1906, pp. 95 and 121.)

At first one forward pass could be made by any player anywhere behind
his line of scrimmage to any player on the end of the line or one yard
back of it provided the pass crossed the line five yards out from
center. It was completed if _touched_ by any eligible player before it
touched the ground. Any illegal pass went to the opponents at the spot
from which the pass was made. A forward pass over the goal line became a
touch back.

Naturally a period of intensive experimentation followed. In 1907 the
loss of the ball on first and second down was changed to a loss of
fifteen yards. (Football Guide for 1907, pp. 137 and 168.) In 1908 the
recovery of the touched ball was restricted to the eligible man who had
first touched it on penalty of going to the opponents at the spot. Also
the penalty for ineligible men touching the ball was increased to loss
of the ball at spot where the pass was made (Football Guide for 1908,
pp. 181 and 214).

Nineteen ten and twelve brought the legal changes that largely completed
the new game. In 1910 the four periods were adopted, the longitudinal
lines were omitted, and a pass and kick were both required to be made
from five yards behind the line of scrimmage. A twenty-yard zone beyond
which the pass could not go was instituted. This was dropped again in
1912, the end zone was added so that a team could score on a pass, the
field shortened to three hundred yards and the fourth down added. By
many this was regarded as a direct blow to the forward pass as it was
supposed that it would mean an attempt at and a possibility of making
the distance by the old line bucking methods. This was regarded as in
line with the restrictive action of 1911, by which a pass touching the
ground either before or after being legally touched was ruled as
incompleted. Whatever the intention of the originators may have been the
fourth down has worked quite as advantageously to the new game as the
old, in that it has given quarterbacks an additional down with which to
experiment and to take chances.

The changes relating to the forward pass since 1912 have been mostly of
minor significance. The restriction requiring the kicker to be back five
yards was removed in 1913, the forward passer was protected from being
roughed up in 1914 and a ten-yard penalty for intentional grounding of a
forward pass was imposed. The forward pass out of bounds was ruled
incompleted in 1915. Relatively little change occurred during the war
period and there has been a feeling since that experimentation has gone
far enough; that the game is very good as it is, and that coaches,
players and the public generally should have a chance to thoroughly
acquaint themselves with the present possibilities. The open game has
come to stay, and attempts to further restrict it have met with strong
opposition.




CHAPTER III.

THE SPIRAL PASS FROM CENTER.


Possibly many would not recognize the necessity for a discussion of the
spiral pass from the snapper-back in a presentation of the forward pass.
Without this spiral pass, however, a successful forward passing game is
greatly handicapped if not rendered absolutely ineffective. The reasons
for this will be presented in a later chapter. Suffice it here to say
that the writer regards a good fast, accurate, true spiral pass from the
snapper-back, that can be shot back speedily and accurately to a
distance of at least fifteen yards, as absolutely indispensable to a
successful forward passing game. Ability to get such a pass is not
possessed by every center, nor by every team even among the better
colleges. This failure is due first to a lack of appreciation of its
importance, and second to an inability to teach centers how to acquire
this art.

The following method of teaching this pass has been found effective:

First: Have the candidate make an ordinary underhand spiral pass
forward. This is so simple and common that almost every player does it
automatically. Have him notice what he does. Notice how the ball is held
as it swings forward past the hip. The hand is bent inward almost at
right angles to the forearm. Now as the ball is shot forward from the
hand a peculiar _pulling_, _lifting_ motion is made. This motion imparts
the rotation to the ball and produces the spiral. This is the
fundamental part of the action. Essentially the same action must now be
secured with a backward pass.

Second: Have the candidate make an ordinary underhand spiral pass
_backward_. To many players this will at first seem awkward and they may
be unable to control either the direction or the rotation of the pass.
It is not necessary to continue with this until it is mastered, but some
practice on it is helpful. Proceed soon to the third step.

Third: Take position as a center, right leg back for a right hander,
swing the ball freely between the legs with the right hand, and make a
backward spiral pass between the legs. Work on this until a regular
spiral is secured.

Fourth: Still swing the ball freely from the ground but place the left
hand against the ball, pressing it more firmly against the forearm and
guiding the direction of the ball. The right hand may now be a little
farther forward on the ball.

Fifth: When the above has been mastered take position as in the fourth
step, then bending a little more in the hips and knees place the ball,
without changing position of the hands, so that it touches the ground
well out in front. When ready pull the ball powerfully with the right
hand, guiding with the left, and shoot it back at the chest of the
catcher, at first about seven yards back. Follow through with the right
hand and as the ball leaves the hand give the pulling, lifting snap
described above in number one which produces the real spiral. Great care
must be taken to see that the right hand is kept far enough _under_ and
_around_ the ball. As soon as the player begins to lay it on the ground
he almost invariably forgets to pass the hand far enough around it.
Consequently he loses his rotation and the pass becomes "wobbly" and
inaccurate.

Taught in this way many men acquired the idea of the spiral pass from
center with great ease. Extended and constant practice, however, is
necessary to insure a consistent and accurate performance that can be
depended upon under fire--the accomplishment fundamental to the forward
pass.

Some men master a very successful backward spiral pass from center with
one hand. The principle of this pass is essentially the same as that of
the closed grip overhand pass described later in the chapter on
technique of passing. It requires a large hand and perhaps a certain
amount of natural "knack." It is dangerous and less effective with a wet
ball, but with a dry ball ability to pass in this way with one hand
often adds greatly to the offensive strength of the center.




CHAPTER IV.

TECHNIQUE OF THE FORWARD PASS.


The execution of a good spiral forward pass is a thing of real beauty
and art. It holds the eye of spectators and players alike. It is to
football what the home run is to baseball. The soaring flight of a
sixty-yard spiral is like the rushing swoop of the daring aviator in its
charm and interest. To produce it the player must have a good arm,
master the knack of it and give long and earnest practice.

Practically all passes of more than five yards are executed as spirals.
These are of three types, the underhand, the overhand with closed grip
and the overhand with open grip.


THE UNDERHAND SPIRAL.

This is valuable for short distances where a quick pass is desired. Its
execution is so easy and common that no further comment is needed beyond
what has already been said in connection with the first part of teaching
the spiral pass from center, (page 6).


THE OVERHAND CLOSED GRIP SPIRAL.

This pass is theoretically the correct and logical manner of executing a
distance (over ten yards) pass. The ball is laid over into the palm of
the right hand (for a right-hander) with the fingers along and somewhat
behind the lacing of the ball, the thumb on the opposite side. The
position of the hand depends largely on its size. The smaller the hand
the nearer the end of the ball it must go and the more difficult it is
to retain the ball in the grasp. This type of pass is therefore
difficult for men with small hands and with a wet and muddy ball. In
making the throw the arm should be drawn backward _over_ the shoulder,
not down around as in a baseball throw. The nose, _i.e._, the forward
point of the ball, should be well elevated and the ball is then shot
forward past the ear at its objective. The motion is somewhat like that
of a pitcher, when pitching from the shoulder without the "wind-up,"
with a runner on first. As the ball leaves the hand the rotation is
given by a sharp pull _downward_ and _inward_. The most common fault and
cause of failure with this pass is that the nose of the ball is not kept
up during the forward motion of the arm. To do this the elbow must be
kept fairly close to the body and the little finger side of the hand
kept _up_. This gives a rather constricted position for throwing and
most men at first feel unable to get the desired distance. This comes,
however, as one acquires the knack of the snap and the follow through
with the body. When developed and mastered this pass gives wonderful
accuracy, great speed and can be shot directly to the receiver without
much elevation. It is therefore less likely to be intercepted and is an
ideal pass particularly for shorter distances up to thirty yards and for
dry days.


THE OVERHAND OPEN SPIRAL.

This pass is made in general in the same way as the closed grip spiral,
but the thumb lies alongside or near the fingers and the hand is open,
the ball lying in the palm of the hand. It is held in position as the
throw is made by the centrifugal force of the swing. In making this pass
a bigger swing may be used, more comparable to a "wind-up" delivery, and
consequently greater distance and greater height may be secured. The
ball can be literally "heaved" out and passes of fifty to sixty yards
are easily possible. The greatest difficulty in the execution of this as
in the closed grip pass is to keep the nose of the ball up. This can be
accomplished, however, without bringing the hand in so closely as in the
other, thus allowing opportunity for more individual peculiarities.
Players therefore usually learn this pass easier than the other, and
because of its greater usefulness with a wet and slippery ball is the
pass now most commonly used. Its chief disadvantage is the greater
height which it usually requires. This tends to increase the danger of
interception.


RECEIVING THE FORWARD PASS.

Although a great deal of practice is usually given to receiving forward
passes, often very little actual coaching is given on the correct form.

Every receiver should be notified by some method just _before_ a pass is
made to him. At this signal the receiver should turn toward the point to
which the pass is supposed to be made. This should be known on all
forward pass plays. The receiver and ball should then meet at this
point, the receiver on the dead run and somewhat sideward to the ball.
It will occasionally happen, but should rarely be necessary, for the
receiver to take a pass from directly behind or even very much over one
shoulder. He should, however, be able to do it when necessary.

The actual catching of the pass is not essentially different from
catching a punt or any ordinary pass. One hand should be used to guide
the ball into the body, one hand should be kept well under the ball, the
elbows should be kept close and the ball always be brought in _against
the body_ and held securely against any possible attack.




CHAPTER V.

FUNDAMENTALS OF A SUCCESSFUL FORWARD PASSING GAME.


The forward pass has now been a part of offensive football for fifteen
years. In spite of that fact few teams have developed anything like a
consistently successful ground gaining forward pass attack. Apparently
many regard the forward pass simply as a valuable threat, something for
occasional use, something to take a chance with, something the
possibility of which makes the _real_ game still workable. To a large
degree this has been the attitude of the larger colleges. In general
they have frowned on the forward pass; opposed it, sneered at it, called
it basketball and done what they could to retard its adoption. It has
taken away from them the advantage of numbers, weight and power, made
the game one of brains, speed and strategy--even if you please like
baseball, luck,--rendered the outcome of their _practice_ games with
smaller colleges uncertain. Why should they have hastened its
development? Rather it has been the smaller colleges that have found in
the forward pass their opportunity, which have developed its
possibilities until now the larger ones as well are turning to it as the
final means of winning their big game.

It is doubtless fair to say that the early development of the forward
pass was largely due to two teams, Springfield College of the Y. M. C. A.
and the Carlisle Indians. Their game in 1912 at Springfield is said by
competent experts to have been probably the greatest exhibition of open
football ever staged. It is doubtful if two such finished exponents of
the open game have ever met before or since. To Coach J. H. McCurdy of
the Springfield team goes the honor, in the writer's judgment, of the
early recognition and development of the strategy of the forward pass,
for in this respect at least, Springfield excelled even the wonderful
Indian teams produced by Glen Warner. No one team can longer claim a
leadership in this or any other department of the game, but it is fair
to say that the Springfield team has continuously demonstrated an
unusual aptitude for the forward pass and a high degree of leadership at
least among the Eastern teams.

It is not strange, in view of the fact that the great leaders of
football have not taken more kindly to the forward pass, that its
underlying principles have not been more thoroughly worked out and
organized. It is the chief purpose of this work to state if possible
some of these principles and fundamentals to the end that the open game
of football, always in the past and still to some extent opposed by
certain groups, may be better understood, more successfully coached and
more firmly and thoroughly established.


REGULAR GROUND GAINING PLAY.

The first fundamental of a successful forward passing game is that the
forward pass should be used as a _regular ground gaining_ play and not
simply, as so many teams seem still to do, as a sort of last desperate
chance. With many teams the attack may be summarized practically in this
manner: first and second down, runs; third down, forward pass; fourth
down, kick. And then they wonder that the forward pass doesn't succeed
and stigmatize it as a dangerous, treacherous and unsuccessful play!
Rather a team must have the confidence to use it often on first and
second downs, and even on special, occasions on a fourth down. Not only
that, but it must be used frequently, persistently and continuously.
Nothing more disturbs the morale of defense than a series of forward
passes, some of which succeed even though a considerable proportion of
them are incompleted. There is always the danger that one may succeed
and get away! What proportion of the running plays are successful in the
modern game? No statistics exist. If the forward pass were tried
anything like as persistently as the running game, unquestionably its
percentage of success would greatly increase.

On this basis the pass should be used for short as well as long gains. A
running play that gains two and a half to three yards is regarded as
successful. Why should not the pass be used in the same way? Passes that
give little or no gain in themselves, but put the receiver in position
for open field running, and at least a few yards gain, disorganize the
defense, eventually make the long passes successful, spread the defense
so bucking becomes possible, and contribute generally to making the
forward pass a regular ground gaining play--a part of the regular
attack.


PASSER WELL BACK.

The early successes of the forward pass were secured almost solely upon
the principle of putting the passer a distance of fifteen yards back,
then letting the opposing line come charging through absolutely without
resistance. Practically the whole offensive team was sent down to
receive (apparently) the pass, thus confusing the defense as to who was
eligible and furnishing interference as soon as the pass was completed.
By actual experiment it was found that a distance of thirteen to fifteen
yards was necessary. Although lines are more wary and experienced today
than formerly, this single piece of strategy is still very valuable.
Many teams are failing with their passes simply because their passer is
not more than seven to ten yards back. The greater distance gives a
short but _vital_ length of time for receivers to get free and for the
passer to pick out the open man. It also gives a longer time for running
sideward and forward, helping to confuse the defense as to whether a run
or pass is really intended. Add to this the fact that with the greater
distance back little or no protection need be given the passer, it
becomes clear that though many plays can and will be built with the
passer up close and running back only the necessary legal distance, a
big distance back is an important fundamental.

This at once brings out the importance of the spiral pass back from
center, and the ability to make, when desired, a long forward pass of
from fifty to sixty yards. Unless the snapper-back can make a
consistent, accurate, speedy pass to a distance of fifteen or more yards
and can accurately _lead_ his passer, no advantage is gained by this
distance back. Many teams have failed to put their passer the necessary
distance back because, though they did not recognize the real
difficulty, their center was not adequately getting the ball back to
him. Consequently the passer was instinctively creeping up closer and
closer, being hurried in his passes and often failing. The spiral pass
back from center is an absolutely fundamental requisite for a successful
forward passing game.

The ability also to make long passes is fundamental. With the secondary
defense playing ten yards back and possibly covering twenty yards more,
with the passer fifteen yards behind his own offensive line, the pass
going outward at an angle must often travel fifty-five yards to clear
the secondary defense. Although such long passes need not often be used,
the knowledge that the offense possesses the ability to make them is
necessary to keep the secondary defense back so that short, sharp passes
may succeed for the disconcerting gains of the regular ground gaining
attack.


KICK, RUN OR PASS POSSIBLE.

The ideal forward pass formation is one from which a kick, pass or run
is possible. As the play starts it should be difficult to diagnose
whether a run or pass is intended. In fact, as a team becomes finished
in its performance it may often switch in its intention, running out a
play on the call of the passer that was intended for a pass, because the
defense laid back and waited; and conversely, though not so often, a
pass may be made to an open man on the call of the passer, though the
signal called for a run. This represents high art in team work but it
can be developed. Much depends upon the alertness and head work of the
passer in this connection. Such changing of plan should not be allowed
in the early season, but it may be encouraged later as the team becomes
unified and comes to know itself. Such a combination, operating with
basketball intuition, becomes exceedingly difficult to stop.

If in addition to this a kick is occasionally worked on something
besides the fourth down, the game becomes a real test of wits.

Naturally not every forward pass will be "pulled" from an ideal
formation. Many splendid forward pass plays can be built up from
ordinary close running, bucking formations.


ALL ELIGIBLE MEN OPEN--"CHOICE" VS. "MECHANICAL" METHOD.

An occasional forward pass play is developed where only a single
eligible man is open to receive the pass. Such a play depends for
success upon its speed of execution, its unexpectedness and its
similarity to other regularly used running plays. A few such plays
should of course be included in the team's attack, but they are the
exception and when successful are so because of that fact. They the more
strongly emphasize the fact that as a general principle a regular
forward pass play should aim to get as many eligible men as possible
open to receive the pass. These men should be so spread that they cannot
all be covered by the defense. The passer then selects an open man or
the _best_ open man to whom to pass.

This method puts great responsibility upon the passer. It fits in with
the idea of putting him well back and giving him as much time as
possible to make his choice. It requires a passer of special mental
type, and one of considerable basketball ability who can dodge and get
his pass off accurately even when apparently covered. The ease of choice
can be much facilitated by having an order for each play in which the
passer is to look for possibilities. The first choice should always be
the signal called. That play should always be made if it is at all
possible; in early season and during practice it should be executed
whether possible or not. But as the passer develops ability he should be
allowed when the pass signalled is covered to select second, third and
even fourth choices, and the order of looking for the choices should be
so arranged that a quick sweep of the field in front of him will give
the passer his open men.

Not all coaches agree to the principle outlined above. Many have had
difficulty in finding passers who could make the choice required. They
have felt, therefore, that plays had to be designed to special men,
calling these men to special zones, one time one place, next time
another place, and then the play made as quickly as possible to this
special man. If the defense was confused and the man got loose, the play
succeeded (barring mechanical failure); if he did not it failed. This
represents a purely mechanical method. It harks back to the "old" game
where everything was as mechanical as possible and there was little need
of brain power and little occasion to make quick decisions. The quarter
made the decisions; the player did _what he was told to do_. The new
open game is not played that way; it opens up a world of choice and
possibility to the player. Therein lies its greatly increased mental
value.

The big reason that many coaches have failed with the "choice" method
of passing is that their plays have not been so designed as to give
their passer the necessary time for making a choice. They have allowed
the defense to "hurry" the passer. Some of the methods of preventing
this have already been indicated. Occasionally it may happen that a team
possesses a passer of great ability who cannot work the "choice" method.
For such a player "mechanical" plays must be built. But the
probabilities are that many men would develop this ability if they were
given practice and the opportunity.


CALL THE RECEIVER BEFORE PASSING.

It seems a very simple matter to say that the receiver should be called
_before_ the pass is made to him. It seems so simple that time is rarely
spent in practicing it. It is assumed that it will be done, but in
reality it is _not_ done. The usual thing is for the passer to hurl the
ball into the air and yell "ball." Let any coach actually insist once on
his passer calling his man _before_ he passes to him and see what
happens. And yet this is exactly the thing that will change the forward
pass game from a happy-go-lucky chance into a mathematical probability.
When the passer calls his man _before_ he passes he knows what he is
trying to do, the team knows, the receiver is given more time to get
into position, he is then given a better chance to catch the pass and
the rest of the team are given a chance to form interference. It is a
small thing to count as heavily as it does, but it is one of the small
things that make success.


KNOW WHERE THE RECEIVER IS TO GO.

Have it clearly worked out on every pass play where each eligible man is
to go. This is equally true in fact for every man on the team, for
_every man on the team has something to do on a forward pass_. It is
just as important on a forward pass play that each eligible man know
where, when and how he is to go as it is on running plays for the
interference to know whom they are to take. This is where the mechanical
part of the "choice" method of passing comes in. To a surprising degree
this can be almost the same on all plays. It will of course vary
somewhat with the style of defense met, but again surprisingly little.

The eligible man should seldom go directly to the spot where he will
receive the pass if it comes to him. At the proper instant, which should
be pretty definitely timed for everybody on each play, and always at the
call of the passer, the receiver should turn and race to the spot where
he knows the ball will be thrown. This spot should have been previously
worked out so that the passer "leads" the receiver, the latter being in
better position to catch the ball and on the dead run. This should also
be so worked out and the preliminary run of the eligible man such, that
the receiver will get the ball with his body between the ball and his
covering opponent. Receiver and opponent should never be crashing
_together_ when struggling for a ball. It is not only dangerous but poor
strategy.

In working out the above possibilities some eligible men may often be
used simply as decoys going perhaps almost straight toward the defensive
halves and forcing them to cover them, making other eligible men more
surely available for the pass. In case the defensive halves, however,
refuse to cover these decoys, they should immediately be given the pass.
Between combinations of this sort and the problem of determining whether
a pass or run is in process, the position of defensive half in modern
football is one compared with which the "dizzy corner" in baseball is a
bed of roses. The fact is that a team with anything like a mechanical
perfection in the passing game, and any ability to select its men as
above indicated, simply cannot be stopped in mid-field. The greatest
single fault and the one thing that stops most teams, outside of
mechanical failure, is the failure of eligible men to spread widely
enough. Too often two or three eligible men go to the same zone or area
and a pass to any one of the three can be covered by a single defensive
player. Instinctively every man on the offense tries to be where he
expects the ball to go. It must be drilled into the players that their
"business" may be decidedly elsewhere.


INTERFERENCE.

Finally, plan definitely for interference after the pass is completed.
This is particularly true for the shorter passes. Insist that every man
is in every pass play. There is great temptation for linemen to "take a
day off" when a long pass is called in which they are not likely to
figure. But they should either be protecting the passer, making it
possible for him to better choose his open man, or down with the
eligible men in the shorter zones ready for immediate interference in
case that pass should be elected. This should be definitely mapped out
with each formation and the receiver should know where to find
interference behind which he can dodge the instant he has received the
pass.


INTERCEPTION.

The danger of interception, though much over-rated by many, should be
carefully guarded. The interception of a long pass often means nothing
worse than punting to the other team would have meant. Possession of the
ball does not count for as much as in the old game. It should never mean
worse if the danger of interception is properly guarded. Too often,
however, it means a touchdown for the defense.

In the first place when the receiver has been called every other man on
the offense should instantly become alive as a possible interferer or
possible protector in case of interception. It is a preparedness, mental
and physical, that is desired that in itself would probably prevent half
of the touchdowns now made by interception. A pass doesn't _finish_ a
play, it simply starts it--and it may _start it either way_.

In the second place all line men and eligible men in the shorter zones,
who perhaps can be of no assistance on the longer pass, should the
instant they find the long pass in process act as if they expected it to
be intercepted.

Finally the passer himself and his immediate protectors should, the
instant the pass is off, cover for possible interception. They are the
last and possibly by far the most important "safety" in case of
interception.




CHAPTER VI.

SUGGESTIVE FORWARD PASS FORMATIONS AND PLAYS.


The previous chapter attempted a general statement of the fundamental
principles upon which a successful forward passing game may be built. It
is the purpose here to illustrate these by definite formations and plays
that have been successfully used. The kick formation has lent itself in
many ways very admirably to forward passing. A slightly modified punt
(Fig. 1) formation, in which the left end is one yard back, one half on
the line, full fifteen yards back, halves about three yards back, has
proven effective for line bucking, end running right or left, punting
and forward passing. The greatest difficulty lies in getting the left
half to go out straight to the side and be content with a short gain.
When this happens a few times someone from the defense is bound to try
to cover him. When that is attempted the way is open for runs or passes
to left end or tackle. This sideward threat, almost a pure lateral pass,
is an important part of the strategy of the successful forward pass
attack. Note in the play the direction and turning of other eligible
players, the position of line men for interference in case of a short
pass over center or outward to the wide man and the general protection
for possible interception.

[Illustration: FIG 1.--Punt Formation Pass.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--Undesirable Pass.]

A quick shift of left end to the line and right half one yard back (or
even played as it is) gives an equally good formation for run or pass to
the right, the corresponding players going to the corresponding
positions and everybody swinging and turning toward the right.

Against this type of play contrast the above (Fig. 2) which, though it
has often proven surprisingly successful, seems to the writer to violate
most of the principles above outlined. The ends coming in are at no
advantage over the defense. The halves going outward have no
interference and there is almost no defense for possible interception.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--Springfield-Carlisle Indian Pass.]

[Illustration: FIG. 4.--Spread Formation Pass.]

One of the earliest successful forward pass formations was a widespread
one devised and used by Dr. J. H. McCurdy of the Springfield team in
the Springfield-Carlisle Indian game of 1912 (Fig. 3). In this the line
was spread out practically across the whole field. It was used for
kicking as well, and the whole line was sent down to stop the wonderful
Thorpe. The play was good enough to produce twenty-four points against
the wonderful Indian team of that year, although the game was won by the
Indians 30-24.

The play is given here partly because of its historical value, but also
because the principle is still good.

Spread formations somewhat modified from the above are still proving
very successful, the following serving to again illustrate the
principles of the preceding chapter (Fig. 4).

In this formation tackles are out seven to ten yards, halves about three
yards back and full is back thirteen to fifteen yards. From this
formation line bucks, end runs, double pass end runs, kicks and forward
passes may be used. Quick variations may also be made to make tackles
eligible if desired.

The formations outlined will doubtless sufficiently illustrate the
principles discussed. There is no limit to the possibilities. The kick
and spread formations here given alone possess sufficient possibilities
for a team's entire season's repertoire of open plays. A common mistake
is to attempt too large and varied an assortment of these plays.




CHAPTER VII.

DEFENSE FOR THE FORWARD PASS.


There is no defense for the forward pass. In reality the pass cannot be
prevented, particularly in the center of the field. Yet from the
unwillingness of some of the great football leaders to adopt this style
of game one would infer that it is a worthless game, difficult to
succeed with and easy of defense. This is the point of view of a number
of teams. Yet it is interesting to note that these are the very teams
that have had no adequate forward pass defense.

Thus far most teams have trusted to luck against the forward passing
game. The inefficiency and mechanical errors of its offense, aided by
the restrictive legal measures adopted, have conspired to make this
possible. Signs are not lacking, however, to indicate a greatly
increased use of the passing game, an improved understanding and
appreciation of its fundamental principles and a much greater degree of
success for it. The defense for the forward pass will need to be studied
with great care in the immediate future.

The writer does not pretend to have solved this problem. His interest
has been rather on the other side. The following suggestions are offered
simply as a beginning:

First, "hurry the pass." Some man or men, not the entire line, should go
through and force the pass at the earliest possible moment, downing the
passer, blocking the pass or forcing it to be made before the eligible
men are ready or the passer has been able to locate them. This greatly
increases the chance of mechanical failure. Generally this should be
done by the ends. Some teams send the tackles in also. Some send tackles
in and have the ends wait. This frequently helps against the pass but
makes end running very easy.

Second, block eligible men. This of course can only be done before the
pass is made. But there is often an appreciable time before the pass is
made when eligible men could be blocked on the line of scrimmage. This
is the best work of the center trio rather than charging through.

Third, play a zone defense having each defensive back cover an area and
play the ball coming into that area rather than attempt to follow
individually eligible men.

Fourth, use the open defense (Fig. 5); that is, play the center out of
the line and with the full back about three yards behind tackle. This
defense is supposed to make center bucking easy, but it does not if the
defensive line is properly coached. This first line of secondary defense
is in position to intercept short passes or to help stop eligible men on
the scrimmage line. They are also in the best possible position to
assist on outside tackle and end runs while still in position to block
center bucks. In the judgment of the writer this is the best all-round
defense yet devised for the modern open game of football.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.--Open Defense.]

The open defense should be played as follows: Guards play to the center,
low, hard and stalling, not knifing through. Tackles fight their way
into the play through opposing end. Ends play as close as possible,
often not over two yards outside their own tackle and tear into every
play smashing the interference and hurrying passes. Center and full play
about three yards behind tackle, usually a trifle inside and wait until
they diagnose the play, then meet it. These men must be the best
tacklers on the team and fast, for if the tackles and ends accomplish
their work these men have their opportunity. Backs play from seven to
ten yards back and nearly straight behind end. Quarter or safety man
should play as close as he dares to, considering the possibility of
quick punts. This may be generally closer than most quarters play.

The defense with spread formations and for special plays is still too
much a matter of individual opinion to be discussed here.




  BASEBALL NOTES FOR
  COACHES and PLAYERS

  BY ELMER BERRY

  FOOTBALL AND BASEBALL COACH
  INTERNATIONAL Y. M. C. A. COLLEGE
  SPRINGFIELD, MASS.


  _REVISED EDITION_


  A practical handbook on the game of baseball, arranged
  in outline note form so that the book may become truly
  a useful repository of baseball knowledge and practice.


  CONTENTS

    BATTING
    BUNTING
    BASE RUNNING AND STEALING
    POSITION PLAY
    OFFENSIVE TEAM PLAY
    DEFENSIVE TEAM PLAY
    BATTERY STRATEGY
    TRAINING A COLLEGE TEAM
    ORGANIZED BASEBALL

  8vo cloth, illustrated with cuts and diagrams of actual play.
  Interleaved with blank pages for notes, etc. Price $2.00

  A. S. BARNES & CO., _Publishers_
  NEW YORK




Transcriber's Notes:

Passages in italics are indicated by _italics_.

The following misprints have been corrected:
  "STANDAND" corrected to "STANDARD" (dedication)
  "it" corrected to "is" (page 9)
  "Springfifield" corrected to "Springfield" (page 12)
  "diconcerting" corrected to "disconcerting" (page 14)
  "addidtion" corrected to "addition" (page 14)






End of Project Gutenberg's The Forward Pass in Football, by Elmer Berry

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FORWARD PASS IN FOOTBALL ***

***** This file should be named 33120.txt or 33120.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/1/2/33120/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
