Project Gutenberg's Harper's Round Table, September 3, 1895, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Harper's Round Table, September 3, 1895

Author: Various

Release Date: July 9, 2010 [EBook #33126]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S ROUND TABLE, SEPTEMBER 3, 1895 ***




Produced by Annie McGuire








[Illustration: HARPER'S ROUND TABLE]

Copyright, 1895, by HARPER & BROTHERS. All Rights Reserved.

       *       *       *       *       *

PUBLISHED WEEKLY. NEW YORK, TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 3, 1895. FIVE CENTS A
COPY.

VOL. XVI.--NO. 827. TWO DOLLARS A YEAR.


       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration]

A FIGHT IN THE FOG.

BY YATES STIRLING, JUN., ENSIGN U.S.N.


"All hands to muster!" rang out from the harsh throats of the
boatswain's mates of the U.S.S. _Kearsarge_, and the crew came tumbling
aft to the quarter-deck. They were as fine-looking a set of bluejackets
as one would care to see, the cream of the navy and the naval reserve.

The new _Kearsarge_ was cruising off the coast of Great Britain for the
purpose of intercepting one of the enemy's finest cruisers, which was
known to have recently left England, and was on the way to join her
sister ships in her own country.

Every one aboard the American ship was wild to meet the enemy, and the
_Kearsarge_'s crew had not a fear that the fight would result
differently from the one fought by her namesake forty-five years before.

The lookout had just reported smoke to the eastward, from which
direction the enemy was expected. When all hands were "up and aft," the
Captain addressed his men upon the impending conflict.

"Men," he said, "we are here to fight the most formidable of our enemy's
cruisers. She is equal in every respect to the mighty ship upon which we
stand. There are no chances in our favor. The battle will depend upon
your coolness and courage.

"Men of the main battery, upon you depends the result of the action.
Your target is the armored sides and turrets.

"Men of the secondary battery, your nerve and endurance are to be put to
the crucial test. Your guns must be directed at the unarmored gun parts
and torpedo tubes.

"Remember, all of you, a lucky shot may turn the tide of battle.

"Officers and men, upon you depends whether the new _Kearsarge_ shall
win a name as lasting and illustrious as did the noble ship from which
that name was inherited.

"The eyes of the world are upon you."

A few minutes later the Captain and the executive officers are upon the
forward bridge, discussing the minor details of the plan of action, and
casting apprehensive glances at the low line of black smoke on the
eastern horizon.

The former is a fine-looking young officer, who has been rapidly
advanced to commanding rank through his zeal and untiring labors to
perfect the navy of his country.

Many an article from his pen on how a ship should be fought has been
published in the scientific papers of America; but now he must put his
theories to the test--to learn by experience, bitter or sweet, whether
he merited the commendation which his numerous articles on naval science
have won for him.

The _Kearsarge_, which was launched in 1900, is an armored cruiser of
9000 tons displacement, 420 feet in length, and 64 feet in breadth. The
main battery consists of four 10-inch breech-loading rifles, firing
projectiles weighing 500 pounds; two mounted in a 10-inch armored turret
forward on midship line, and two in a similarly placed turret aft, and
four 8-inch breech-loading rifles, firing projectiles weighing 250
pounds, mounted two each in a 6-inch armored turret on either beam.

The secondary battery consists of twelve 5-inch rapid-fire guns and
eight 6-pounders mounted in armored sponsons on a covered gun-deck. On
her superstructure rail, about 15 feet above the spar-deck, she carries
twelve 37-millimeter revolver cannon and four long 1-pounders. With this
tremendous battery she can hurl two tons of steel from one broadside of
her main battery every minute, and 362 pounds of steel from her
secondary broadside every five seconds. The velocity of this metal on
striking within battle-range would be about twenty-five miles a minute.
The heavy shells, if striking within the biting angle, can penetrate the
armor of any war-vessel afloat.

On her berth-deck she carries five torpedo-tubes with two automobile
Whitehead torpedoes for each tube. The charge used is sufficient to sink
any cruiser afloat if exploded within ten yards of her bottom plating.
The armor on her sides is 5 inches of steel, and her protective-deck is
3 inches in thickness.

Among the inventions which her Captain has given to his navy is a
sound-detector, by means of which a sound can be magnified to a very
great degree, and its direction accurately ascertained.

The _Kearsarge_ had been fitted with one of these detectors before
leaving the United States, for the Captain knew that many dense fogs
would be met with off the English coast.

She has been cruising about in wait for her prey for over a week. The
crew have been given incessant drill and sub-calibre target practice.
The plan of attack has been discussed so often that it is known by all
the officers.

The ship is "cleared for action." Every stanchion and boat-davit has
been lashed to the deck. Every movable object on the deck below has been
sent to the protective-deck to avoid, as far as possible, the danger
from flying splinters.

The smoke on the horizon has approached, until now it is seen from the
top to come from two smoke-pipes framed by something that looks
suspiciously like two military fighting-masts.

The crew are gathered on the forecastle. The enemy is now in sight, and
the Captain's glass is upon her. A careful scrutiny shows her to be a
war-vessel similar in appearance to his own. At a sign from him the
drummer beats to "quarters." This sound calls every man to some station.
The Captain goes to the conning-tower, a small heavily armored turret
beneath the bridge. An aid enters with him to steer the ship by his
direction from the wheel within. A small opening near the top gives the
occupants a view around the horizon, and numerous speaking-tubes and
telephones put them in communication with all the vital parts of the
ship. Crews of twelve men each enter the turrets in charge of an
officer. Steam is turned on the turret-engines. The guns on the deck
below are divided between two divisions of men, each division in charge
of a lieutenant, who has an ensign and midshipman as assistants.

The men are stripped to the waist, and their guns are ready for battle;
division tubs are filled with water, and the decks are covered with
sand. On the berth-deck hatches and scuttles are opened, tackles are
hooked, and the cooks are hoisting powder and shell for the battery.

The torpedo clews are charging their deadly weapons with compressed air.
Below the protective-deck are half-naked men in the magazines and shell
rooms, handling the missiles that are soon to speed towards the
approaching enemy.

Down in the depths of the steel hull the firemen feed the mighty
furnaces to a white heat. It is all the same to them now as when the
monsters are engaged in a death-struggle. The sounds of the discharges,
of the explosion of shells, and the cries of the wounded will be too
distant and muffled to give them an idea of what is going on in the
world above them. The first news will come when the terrible torpedo
explodes against their ship's side, dooming them to a watery grave, or
the merciless ram sinks into its very bowels, or when a heavy shell
penetrates one of the huge boilers, dooming all hands in the terrific
explosion that will follow.

The stranger has altered her course and is steaming in the direction of
the _Kearsarge_. There are her two military masts, but no flag as yet to
show her nationality. Suddenly something flutters from her mast-head. It
is the flag of England! There is no time now to consider what must be
done. The ships are but five miles apart, steaming for each other at
twenty-knots speed. One minute more and the cruisers will be within
battle-range.

The Captain is a man of quick judgment, and his mind is made up in an
instant.

From his point of vantage on the bridge he takes a careful look at the
stranger and then at the drawing he has of her, furnished by the Navy
Department. It is the same vessel; yet why would she be cleared for
action if a British cruiser?

Starboard!

The mighty ship swings around in answer to her helm, and is heading
perpendicularly to the course of the stranger.

Two midshipmen stationed at the range-finders in the tops are pointing
the delicate instruments towards the approaching ship. Dials at each gun
automatically show that the distance is rapidly diminishing. The marines
have taken their rifles to the superstructure-deck, and are crouching
behind a breastwork constructed of closely lashed hammocks. The doctors
have removed their medicines and instruments to the ward-room, and the
long mess-tables are in readiness to receive the dead and wounded. The
chief quartermaster stands ready aft with a spare ensign to hoist over
the ship should his country's flag be shot away.

When the range-finder registers three and a half miles the Captain
orders the forward turret to fire at the stranger. The air is rent
immediately by the blast of the discharge.

The crew wait breathlessly while the shells reach the height of their
trajectories. One strikes the sea short, while the other strikes the
stranger and explodes.

The irrevocable step is taken. England's flag has been fired upon.

All hands wait to see what the stranger will do. Three miles told the
range-finder.

A brown mist shoots from the stranger's forward turret; at the same time
the British flag is hauled down, and the flag of the enemy floats
defiance in its stead. Two 10-inch shells fall but a few yards short of
the _Kearsarge_, and a moment later the sound of the discharge reaches
the ears of her crew.

Two miles and a half registers the range-finder, and all the officers
are directed to open fire. Shot after shot belches forth from the
_Kearsarge_'s broadside and speeds towards the enemy, exploding against
her armor and topsides.

As yet the _Kearsarge_ has not been hit, but now the vapor from the
enemy's smokeless powder shoots from the muzzles of a score of guns not
two thousand yards away, and two tons of steel are launched on their
deadly flight.

The havoc aboard the _Kearsarge_ will never be forgotten. The armor is
pierced, the topsides are riddled. The carnage among the unprotected men
on the gun-deck and superstructure is awful. But worst of all, many men
not wounded by shot and shell are laid insensible by some unseen power.

Skulonite is the word that passes from lip to lip. The poisonous gas is
the aftermath of the explosion of shells loaded with this deadly
compound.

The men are carried from the compartments filled with the vapor, and the
air-tight doors are closed to prevent the spreading of the noxious fumes
to the magazines and engine-rooms.

The cruisers are now but fifteen hundred yards apart, steaming in
opposite directions. As they circle about one another like mighty birds
of prey they are fast approaching within range at which a new weapon
will be launched against the other's steel hull, the silent but
relentless torpedo. Then the ram will soon crash through one of the
cruisers. Which will it be?

The _Kearsarge_'s fire is becoming more desultory as the crew of one gun
after another succumbs to the terrible influence of the skulonite.

Suddenly a steel fishlike weapon is seen shooting from the enemy's side.
The Captain of the _Kearsarge_ watches with breathless anxiety the line
of bubbles on the water's surface, as the torpedo approaches his ship at
a terrific speed. It suddenly swerves, and goes but a few yards clear of
her stern.

The _Kearsarge_'s breast torpedo is launched at the enemy. With a splash
it leaps from her side and speeds on its errand of destruction. The
bubbles in its wake show the aim is good. It must strike. But no, it has
gone under the enemy's ram.

What is that hazy line to windward, but half a mile distant? It is a
most welcome sight to the brave man in the conning-tower, and he heads
his crippled ship for the oncoming mist. Soon she is swallowed up in the
dense fog-bank, and shut out from her enemy's view.

The enemy gives chase, as the American commander had expected. He turns
the trumpet of his sound-detector in the direction of the pursuing
vessel, and from its dial ascertains her course.

The enemy is still firing, but the guns of the _Kearsarge_ have ceased
to roar, and "silence fore and aft" is commanded of the crew. The
fleeing ship goes on until her Captain is sure that his foe has entered
the fog, then the helm is put hard over, and the ship swings around
until the instrument indicates that the other is dead ahead.

Again the Captain is hopeful of success, as he realizes that the
enshrouding mist and the instrument before him place the advantage in
his favor. His eye is fixed on the pointer of the dial, ever responsive
to the electric current set up by the sound waves beating upon the
sensitive diaphragm in the trumpet. The ship leaps forward until he
hears through the ear-piece the throb of the enemy's engines. His heart
beats fast, but he knows that he must be self-controlled.

The ships are coming together bows on. The American commander causes his
ship to swing to starboard a little so as to point her bow away from the
approaching enemy.

The instant for action has come. He starboards his helm in order to lay
his ship across the course of the enemy. "Prepare to ram" is telephoned
by the aid at his side. The ship swings around. The pointer swerves from
the direction of her starboard bow to dead ahead. Has he been too late?
Will he pass across her wake, or will he cross her path in time to
receive her ram prow in his own broadside? The needle points ahead when
the huge side of the enemy looms up through the fog.

In a moment, with a terrific shock, the ram bow of the victorious
_Kearsarge_ enters the side of the enemy, cleaving armor and
deck-plating as though it were wood.

Slowly the victor backs off from her sinking enemy.

The rammed ship commences to deliver death-dealing shots; but she is
fast sinking.

She can no longer elevate her guns enough to strike the _Kearsarge_. She
has heeled too far. The firing eases.

All the _Kearsarge_'s boats that are not disabled are manned and ready
to render assistance to the vanquished.

Not a moment too soon. The ill-fated ship heels to starboard, her stern
rising high in the air, her screws thrashing the fog in their upward
flight, the flag under which her brave defenders had so well fought
still waving at her trucks, and slowly sinks beneath the waves, sending
up columns of water from her hatchways, and engulfing her crew in the
mighty suction.

But few survivors were saved of the few hundred that had had victory so
nearly in their grasp.




THE SAD STORY OF THE MOUSE.

BY KATHARINE PYLE.


  One winter, when mamma was ill,
    And scarce could move at all,
  There used to come a little mouse
    From out the bedroom wall.

  Mamma would scatter crumbs for it;
    'Twas company, she said;
  She liked to see it run about
    While she was there in bed.

  And when mamma was well again,
    The mouse would still come out,
  And nose around in search of food,
    And scamper all about.

  At last one day--oh dear! oh dear!--
    A naughty boy was I;
  I set a trap to catch that mouse;
    I'm sure I don't know why.

  I'd hardly closed the cupboard door
    Before the thing went, Snap!
  I was afraid to go and look
    At what was in the trap.

  At last I looked; the mouse was there!
    I carried it away;
  I never told a soul of it;
    I could not play all day.

  And after that mamma would say,
    "Why, where's our little mouse?
  It must have found some other place
    I think, about the house."

  But, oh, I'd give my bat and ball,
    My kite and jackknife too,
  To see that mouse run round again
    The way it used to do.




SHOOTING THE CHUTE.

BY WALTER CLARK NICHOLS.


More swiftly than the lightest-feathered swallow wings her flight
southward in the fall, more rapidly than any railroad train in the world
sweeps along its iron road, you speed down a long slide at an angle of
about thirty-seven degrees. Your heart leaps into your throat as the
boat you are in strikes the water and skims unevenly over the surface of
a small pond, and then your heart comes back to its right place as you
find you are unhurt. Then you give a gasp of pleasure, and are ready to
try it all over again. For you have "shot the chute."

"Shooting the chute" is the invention of that intrepid swimmer and bold
paddler Captain Paul Boyton. Captain Boyton, who is as brave as he is
modest, is the man who has paddled over twenty five thousand miles on
the principal rivers of the world in a peculiarly constructed rubber
suit, over great falls, and through dark canyons, in Europe, Africa, and
America; who has fought sharks and seals, and has had all sorts of
strange adventures. The idea of the "chute" first came to him, he says,
while shooting down the raging Tagus in Spain. In his book he says:

"The thought struck me as I was going into some subterranean passage,
the perpendicular walls seeming to close in and swallow up the entire
river. I was swept down by the mighty current, and was beginning to feel
sure that I was being carried into some underground rapids, when I was
suddenly dumped into a deep pool, where the course of the river was
running smooth and placidly along."

The first chute in America was built in Chicago, and opened for business
on July 4, 1894. It is nothing more nor less than an inclined roadway of
wood or iron, starting at a height of from 60 to 75 feet, which, with a
run of about 250 feet, descends to the surface of the water. On this
roadway there are tracks upon which boats, each holding eight
passengers, glide rapidly down. When the boat strikes the water, the
impetus acquired in the descent causes it to "skim" over the water in a
series of bounds, like a stone thrown by a boy in "ducks and drakes,"
some 300 feet to a landing-stage, where the passengers are disembarked.

But such a brief description doesn't even suggest the fun and the
excitement of "shooting the chute." It is a sport where old and young
can meet on common ground. In fact one poet has recently told how

  "Little Jimmy was a scholar,
    And his aptitude was such
  That his parents and his teacher
    Were afraid he'd know too much.
  So his grandmamma said, 'Bless him,
    I will take him into town,
  And we'll go to Captain Boyton's,
    Where they'll water-shoot us down.'"

[Illustration: YOU SEE THE BOAT LEAP FORTY FEET AT A JUMP.]

Suppose you were to go down to the chute--for there are four chutes in
different parts of the country now, in Chicago, Atlanta, Baltimore, and
at Coney Island--you would see something like this: There is a big
enclosure, with a high board fence around it, from which a huge incline
stretches up. It looks like a toboggan slide, only far bigger than most.
The man at the stile-gate says, "Tickets, please." So you pay twenty
cents for each ticket, admitting you to the grounds and one ride each on
the chute. Just as you go in you hear a roaring, rattling sound, and a
boat comes rushing down the slide into the lake in front of you. You see
the boat leap forty feet at a jump over the surface of the water, like
some ocean demon, until it finally quiets down and allows itself to be
paddled easily up to the bank. As the people in the boat are helped out
by several of the fifty attendants dressed in sailor suits, you expect
them to cry out some expression of disapproval, for you certainly heard
them shouting out in a frightened manner as they rode down the chute.
But no.

"Wasn't it perfectly splendid?" says one woman.

"It beats tobogganing!" exclaims another.

"Let's do it again!" says a small boy.

A little reassured, you move around with the crowd towards the entrance
to the slide, and, after giving your tickets to the gateman, you all get
into little cars--similar to those in use at Niagara Falls running down
to the whirlpool rapids--attached to endless chains, which drag you up
to the top of the chute as slowly as the boats in the other part go
rapidly. As you get a little more than half-way up, a boatload of people
rattles by within ten feet of you, and you wonder again whether you will
have the courage to make the first trial.

Once up, you follow the others around to the other side of the chute,
where boats are sent down every fifteen seconds. You glance down the
slide. It looks very long, and the water, which the steersman says is
only three feet deep, seems very far away and very deep. At last, with a
sudden gulp of courage, you jump in, holding tight to the railings as
the guard bids you. You see little streams of water bubbling up and
trickling down every few inches or so along the slide, and 'way below
the big pool of water looks yawningly upward. The boat-despatcher has
his hand on the lever which holds the boat back. And now that is
turned.

"Hold fast, ladies and gentlemen. Hats under the seat! Now, then, you're
off!"

[Illustration: THE "CHUTE."]

[Illustration: THE FIRST JUMP.]

Quickly the boat rattles into the incline. A fraction of a second, and
you are rushing along so fast that you almost scream. A second or two
more, and you are going at the rate of seventy-four miles an hour. You
have lost your breath, but the fresh air that rushes into your lungs
gives you a delicious sensation. You feel as if you were flying through
the air.

[Illustration: THE SECOND JUMP.]

[Illustration: "TRYING IT AGAIN."]

Boom! Splash! The boat strikes the water, almost jolting you off your
seat, and whirling the spray high into the air. The people on the banks
of the little pond whiz by, for the speed is still terrific, and the
boat jumps forward in crazy leaps. After two or three of these spasmodic
efforts the boat glides to the landing, thanks to the assistance of the
man in the stern. Your breath comes back. You find you weren't hurt a
bit, or even wet. You feel as if you jumped from the top of the barn
into the lowest but softest hay-mow. You give an ecstatic gasp, this
time of extreme delight, and plead with papa or Uncle Tom to "try it
again."

You "try it again," and this time you are not scared a bit, just simply
delighted. As you are being paddled over to the shore after the last
violent plunge of the ride, you take a look at the boat, and notice that
it is very strongly built--of hickory and oak, the boatman says, and
costing over a hundred dollars. It has a long slope upward in the prow,
less sharp than a yacht's bow, and thus the danger of getting wet is
almost entirely done away with. Each boat has four seats, seating eight
people altogether, besides the man who steers.

Perhaps you go down the chute a few times more. If you do, you will have
acquired the "chute craze," and then it is only a question of how much
money you can have spent for you. Abroad, several of the royal families
acquired the "chute craze," and some of them have had amusing times on
it. When the present Emperor of Russia, then the Czarovitch, was
visiting England in July, 1893, he, the Prince of Wales, and the King of
Denmark, went to Captain Boyton's water-show to "shoot the chute." An
eye-witness, who wrote about it to a Chicago paper, said:

"They climbed to the top of the high incline, and the Czarovitch, with a
twinkle in his eye, invited the King of Denmark to take the front seat
in the boat in which they were to make the swift descent. His Majesty
took the place, and his nephew quietly stepped in behind and put his
silk hat under the seat. The Indian guide pushed off, and in a moment
the boat was flying like mad down the steep incline. The King, who
thought the boat would certainly plunge under the waters of the lake
when it struck, crouched down and held on like grim death. The
Czarovitch stood up and yelled with excited glee. The flat-bottomed boat
dashed into the water with a tremendous splash, leaped four or five feet
into the air, and a drenching shower of spray covered his Majesty on the
front seat. As the boat approached the opposite shore the Czarovitch
turned to the Indian who was steering, grinned, and put out his hand;
the Indian grinned wickedly, and something slipped into his fingers.
There had been a similar bit of pantomime before the boat started, and
as skilful guides can take their boats through the exciting trips
without wetting their passengers, it is supposed that the young
Czarovitch played a little joke on his royal uncle. The Prince of Wales
came down in another boat, and they all liked it so much that they all
went back and tried it again."

So popular has the pastime been at the chute near New York that over
30,000 persons have frequently "shot the chute" in a day.




OAKLEIGH.[1]

BY ELLEN DOUGLAS DELAND.


CHAPTER XI.

Christmas morning dawned cloudy and very cold, but it had stopped
snowing, and after a while the sun came out and turned the country into
a radiant, dazzling spectacle.

The Franklins were to have a party during the holidays, and it had been
planned for the following Tuesday--New-Year's eve.

"If we had only arranged to have it earlier we might have escaped that
horrid Branson," said Cynthia, regretfully, the day after Christmas.
"Now, of course, he will come with the Morgans, and, worse still, we
shall have to be polite to him in our own house."

"I should hope so," said Edith. "You were rude enough to him at the
picnic, and I do think good manners are so attractive. I am going to
cultivate them as much as possible. No one will ever like you unless you
are polite, Cynthia."

"I seem to have plenty of friends," returned her sister, composedly,
"and I don't really care to have Bronson like me. In fact, I would
rather prefer that he shouldn't. I wouldn't consider it much of a
compliment to be liked by a--a--_creature_ like that!"

It would be impossible to convey an idea of the contempt in Cynthia's
voice as she said this.

"And if you are going to have such lovely manners, I should think it
would be just as well to begin at home," she added.

"What do you mean?"

"Well, I don't suppose you will like it, but really, Edith, sometimes it
does seem as if you just tried to hurt mamma's feelings. I know I ought
not to say this, perhaps, for you think I am only a younger sister, I
suppose, and haven't any right to lecture you; but when I remember how
nice you really are, I can't bear to have you act so. If you only would
try to like her, instead of trying not to like her! There, don't cry,
dear; I didn't mean to hurt your feelings."

And Cynthia threw her arms around her sister and kissed her.

"You have hurt them," said Edith, with a sob, "but I deserve it. I don't
know what has gotten into me since the Gordons came. I _can't_ like her
being here. Oh, Cynthia, you don't know how I feel sometimes! I wish I
didn't have such bad, wicked thoughts."

"Do you really try to get over it, Edith?"

"No-o, not very hard," she faltered. "I can't forgive her for coming and
taking my place, and--and--I don't want to forgive her. There, I know
you will think I am bad and horrible and everything else, but I can't
help it."

And, rising abruptly, she left the room.

"Poor old Edith!" sighed Cynthia, compassionately. "She will come round
some time; she can't help it."

       *       *       *       *       *

On New-Year's eve was to be the Franklins' party.

"Edith, we must have it very original and unique, something quite
different from anything we have ever had in our lives," said Cynthia, a
few days before.

"How can we? There's nothing new."

"Yes, there is, right in my head. I have an idea."

"What in the world is it?"

"Well, I'll tell you," and she proceeded to unfold it.

It proved to be a good one, and with Mrs. Franklin's help it was carried
into effect. The suggestion was to have a "character" party, but to
enact the parts without dressing especially for them. A list was made of
persons well known in history or fiction, and from this list Mrs.
Franklin chose those she considered the best, and wrote against each
name that of some girl or boy in Brenton. This she did without telling
her daughters how she had apportioned the parts, that they might be as
ignorant as their guests about one another's characters.

"It is a truly Bostonese party," said Mrs. Franklin, laughing, when they
talked it over. "There is an intellectual flavor to it that you wouldn't
find far away from 'the Hub,' but it is a capital idea, nevertheless,
Cynthia."

When the list was duly made Mrs. Franklin drove about Brenton to the
various girls and boys who were expected, and invited them for Tuesday
evening, explaining to them at the same time what they were to do.

[Illustration: THE GIRLS CAME TRIPPING DOWN IN THEIR DAINTY EVENING
DRESSES.]

It was an old-fashioned tea-party, and the guests began to arrive at six
o'clock. There were twenty in all, and they came hurrying in out of the
cold, and up-stairs to remove their heavy wraps, the girls tripping down
again in their dainty evening dresses, while the boys stood about the
doorways in rather an aimless fashion, wondering what they were expected
to do at such a very peculiar tea-party as this seemed to be.

It added to the mystery that each was given a card with his or her name
prettily printed upon it, and a little pencil attached.

"I never heard of anything like it, don't you know," drawled Bronson.
"I'll be hanged if I know what to talk about."

After supper, which was very jolly and effectually broke the ice, Mr.
Franklin made a little speech.

"You are all supposed to be somebody, and no one but my wife knows which
is which," he said. "The object is for each one to guess as many
characters as possible from their conversation, and when you have made
up your mind who some one is, you will write the name on your card, with
the name of the person you are guessing about. When your card is filled
with twenty-four names, which means that you have given a guess about
every one here, you will hand it in. Then the prizes will be bestowed."

"Prizes!" was murmured by the girls; "how lovely!" while the boys looked
relieved as the matter became clearer.

Cynthia turned to her neighbor and began to talk.

"Good-evening!" she said; "did you see anything of my broom? I forgot to
bring it along. Dear me, there's a lot to be done up there," gazing
towards the ceiling; "why didn't I bring it along?"

The neighbor chanced to be Dennis Morgan.

"I haven't seen your broom," he replied, "but I'm going to find out why
you want it. The trouble is, I've come too soon, I think, and I can't
find my way; but I can't tell you where I want to go, or you would guess
me on the spot."

"Ho!" laughed Cynthia; "I know where you want to go. I think you would
like a glass of water, wouldn't you? For I am sure you have burned your
mouth," she added.

Then she wrote on her card: "Dennis Morgan--Man in the Moon."

"Pshaw! How did you guess me so soon? And I haven't the ghost of an idea
who you are. Let me see, you want your broom. I can't imagine why you
need a broom."

"Cobwebs, cobwebs everywhere," murmured Cynthia, as she turned away and
listened to the conversation that was being carried on between Neal and
Gertrude Morgan.

"I'm a wonderful man," said Neal. "In fact I don't know but what I'm
about as great a person as you ever heard of. You can't mention my name
without alluding to it."

"I don't believe you are half as great as I am," retorted Gertrude,
"only I don't talk as much about it. Why, I am a queen."

"And I am a king. What kind of a queen are you?"

"I rule over a very important kingdom, and not only do I reign but I can
cook, too. I am one of those very convenient people to have about that
can turn their hand to almost anything, but I am chiefly celebrated for
my cookery. I made something nice one hot summer day--"

"Take care, Gertrude!" cried Cynthia; "I know you." And she wrote on her
card: "Gertrude Morgan--Queen of Hearts."

"Oh, come, Cynth, that's too bad!" exclaimed Neal. "I can't guess her at
all, but it's because I am so taken up reading a wonderful book when I
am very young, and making colored candles, and all that sort of thing."

"I thought you said you were a king!" said Gertrude.

"So I am; a terribly good sort, too."

At last Gertrude guessed him, and wrote "Alfred the Great" with his name
on her card.

Neal, however, could not discover who she was, not being as well posted
in "Mother Goose" as was Cynthia.

The one who was most mysterious was Edith. For a long time no one could
imagine who she was.

"I have had a great many adventures," she said, as they gathered about
her. "I have travelled to places that the rest of you have never been
to. I have played games with a duchess, and I have taken care of a
duchess's baby. A great many of my friends talk poetry. I have long
light hair, and sometimes I'm tall and sometimes I'm short."

"Never short, Edith, I'm sure," said Neal. Everyone laughed, for they
teased Edith about her stately height.

"I know you! I know you!" cried Cynthia, dancing with glee. "You told
too much that time," and she hastily scribbled "Alice in Wonderland" on
her card.

She herself, as the "Old woman who swept the cobwebs from the sky," was
easily guessed, much to her own chagrin.

At last each one had written twenty-four names on his or her card, and
they were given to Mrs. Franklin for inspection. Some funny mistakes
were made, and as they were read out they created much merriment.

Somebody thought Yankee Doodle must be Paul Revere, because he had been
spoken of as a rider; Julius Caesar and Columbus were hopelessly mixed,
both having mentioned themselves as crossing the water, and it being
impossible, from the description given, to distinguish between the
Rubicon and the Atlantic Ocean; the Lady of the Lake and Pocahontas were
confused, as they each saved a life; and every one mistook the Old Woman
that lived in a Shoe for Puss in Boots, because of her persistent talk
about foot-wear.

Cynthia had made a greater number of correct guesses than any one, but
as she was one of the hostesses she could not, of course, claim a prize,
so it fell to Tony Bronson, who was next on the list. Cynthia turned
away to hide the grimace which she could not repress when the dear
little clock in a red-leather case was given to him as first prize.

Kitty Morgan, Gertrude's cousin, was awarded the "booby" prize, for
having made the poorest guesses--a dainty little pin, which, she said,
quite repaid her for her stupidity; while one of the Brenton girls,
whose list was next best to Bronson's, received a pretty silver-framed
calendar as "Consolation."

It made a merry evening, and after the game was over they danced and
played other games until it was time to go home. It was eleven o'clock
when the last sleigh drove away.

"Only an hour to midnight," said Cynthia; "can't we sit up and see the
old year out? Do, papa, let us! We never have, and it must be such fun.
We couldn't go to sleep, anyhow, after such an exciting evening."

Mr. Franklin consented, and they sat about the fire discussing the
success of the game and the girls and boys who had been there, one or
two of whom remained for the night at Oakleigh.

Neal and Cynthia were alone for a few moments. They had gone out into
the hall to see the hour by the tall clock, and they found the hands
pointing to ten minutes of twelve.

"Let us wait here for it to strike," said Cynthia, going to the window.

The lamp had gone out in the hall, and it was but dimly lighted from the
room where the family were sitting. Outside, the moon was shining on the
white fields and frozen river. The old year was dying in a flood of
glory.

"I always feel so full of good resolutions on New-Year's Eve," said
Cynthia, in a low voice; "I wish I could keep them all."

"So do I," returned Neal. "I am always turning over a new leaf. I must
have turned over three volumes of new leaves by this time. But they
don't amount to much."

"It is discouraging, isn't it? I have never said anything about it to
any one before. It seems to me I am always breaking my good
resolutions."

"I don't see how. First of all, it doesn't seem as if you did anything
that is wrong--a girl doesn't have much chance to."

"Oh yes, she does. You don't know. And I have so many faults. There are
my bureau drawers--I can't keep them neat, and my clothes would be all
in tatters if it were not for Edith and mamma. And, worst of all, there
is my tongue."

"Your tongue?"

"Yes. It is such fun to make fun of people and say sharp things when I
don't like them--the kind of thing I am always saying to that Bronson."

Neal laughed, and then he sighed.

"You are putting me into a bad corner. If you think your faults are so
tremendous, what must you think of mine? I'm a thief and a coward."

"Neal!"

"Yes, I am. I am a thief because I don't pay that money. I had no
business to borrow it in the first place, and I could save it out of my
allowance if I would take the trouble, but I am too lazy: and I am such
a coward I won't ask Hessie for it, because I am ashamed to have your
father know it. It's all a nasty business, anyway."

He looked moodily out on the snow, drumming his fingers on the
window-pane.

"Neal," said Cynthia, softly touching his arm with her hand as she
spoke, "let's turn over one more new leaf. I will look out for my tongue
and my bureau drawers, and you will tell mamma everything and start
fresh. Will you, Neal? Promise!"

Before he answered the clock began to strike.

"Happy New-Year! Happy New-Year!" was heard from the parlor. "Neal and
Cynthia, where are you? Come in here, that we may all be together when
the clock stops striking."

So the old year died, and Neal had not given the required promise.

One day, shortly before he returned to St. Asaph's, he said to his
sister,

"Hessie, if I had been of age I think I would have tried to break the
will of grandmother's."

"Oh, Neal dear, don't say that! What do you mean?"

"Well, it isn't that I mind your having the money; you have always been
a brick about keeping me supplied; but the trouble is, I need more than
you give me."

"Neal, I am afraid you are spending too much," said Mrs. Franklin,
looking at him anxiously. "Are you in debt again? You know I would love
to give you all I have, but your guardians and the trustees of the
estate and John all think that you have a very large allowance for a
school-boy, and it would not be a good plan to let you have any more."

"Bother them all!" exclaimed Neal, seizing the poker and giving the fire
an angry thrust. A shower of sparks flew out, but he let one burn a hole
in the rug without noticing. "I'm tired of being tied to your
apron-string. I've a good mind to cut loose altogether."

"Don't say that!" cried Mrs. Franklin, in distress, going to him and
putting her arm through his. He was taller than she, and she had to look
up at him.

"If it were only you, it would be different," continued her brother;
"but you see you're married now, and everything is changed."

"But John is fond of you, Neal; I know he is. But he knows all about
boys, and his advice is good. Would--would five dollars help you?"

"You're a good little soul, Hessie," said Neal, looking down at her
affectionately, his momentary ill-humor passing, "and I suppose it is
not your fault if you can't give me any more. No, thank you; I won't
take the fiver. Don't worry about me. Here comes Jack in the cutter;
we're going to the village." And in a moment he was off.

The next day he went back to St. Asaph's.

The winter passed quickly after Christmas had come and gone, and all had
settled down again to the regular routine of work. Mrs. Franklin could
not help feeling anxious about Neal. She confided her fears to her
husband, but he made light of them.

"The boy only wanted more spending-money, Hester. He is very
extravagant, and you will be doing very wrongly if you supply him with
more money. His allowance is too large, at any rate, for a boy of his
age. Jack gets along perfectly well with just one-fifth the amount."

"But Jack is different."

"Very different, and Neal ought to be different, too. You paid his debts
in the fall, which were enormous for a school-boy, and then he was free
to start afresh. You will never cure him of extravagance if you keep him
supplied with all the money he wants."

Mrs. Franklin was forced to acknowledge the truth of her husband's
remarks. She said no more, though she was none the less worried.

Cynthia noticed that her step-mother was not as light-hearted as
formerly. They were going in to Boston one Saturday morning to do some
shopping together. Cynthia had decided to buy a watch with Aunt Betsey's
money, and she had brought the gold pieces with her.

"I am so afraid of losing them I don't know what to do," she said.
"Fifty dollars is so enormous, isn't it? Please take it in your bag,
mamma; I know I shall lose it."

Mrs. Franklin smiled absently, and when she had put away the money she
looked out of the window again.

"Mamma," said Cynthia, leaning towards her, "you are worried about
something, aren't you? Tell me, is it Neal?"

Mrs. Franklin looked startled.

"I did not know I had such a tell-tale face," she said. "Yes, you have
guessed it, Cynthia. I cannot help feeling worried about him. I have not
heard from him for some time, and that makes me uneasy. But it is just
fancy, and will pass off. Probably there will be a letter from him
to-night."

Cynthia also had remarked on Neal's silence, and this confirmed her
fears. She did not say anything more to Mrs. Franklin, however, for Neal
had again made her promise to repeat nothing he had told her.

"I'll never confide in you again if you tell," he had said; so, of
course, Cynthia had promised.

Her mind was busy during the remainder of the trip to Boston, and when
the train glided into the station she had determined to put her thoughts
into action.

"We will go to Shreve's and then to Bigelow's to look at watches," said
Mrs. Franklin, as they walked across the Common. "We had better look at
both places before you decide."

"I have changed my mind, mamma. I don't think I will buy a watch."

"Why, Cynthia!" exclaimed Mrs. Franklin, almost stopping short in her
surprise; "you want one so much!"

"No, I don't think I do--at least not just now. Let us just go buy the
clothes, and I'll keep Aunt Betsey's money a little longer."

She would give no further explanation, and her mother could not induce
her even to glance at the watches in Shreve's window. No; she had
decided that she did not need one.

When they reached home she took the money and went to her own room. She
was standing by the window, carefully packing the coins in a little box
with cotton, and about to do it up for the mail--for she knew no better
way of sending the money--when she heard the sound of wheels on the
drive.

Looking out, she saw one of the depot carriages approaching, and in the
vehicle was Neal himself.

Full of apprehension, dreading she knew not what, Cynthia dropped the
box of money and flew down stairs.

It was not vacation, it was the middle of the school-term.

Why had Neal come home?

[TO BE CONTINUED.]

FOOTNOTES:

[1] Begun in HARPER'S ROUND TABLE No. 817.




CORPORAL FRED.

A Story of the Riots.

BY CAPTAIN CHARLES KING, U.S.A.


CHAPTER VII.

Even that drive of a dozen blocks was full of excitement. As the buggy
whirled away from the post of the outermost sentry, after a brief
impatient interview, the sergeant of the guard sang out to the only
occupant whom he knew or in whom he felt personal interest, "Look out
for 'toughs' down the street, Fred. A gang of 'em's just been scattered
over at the Amity Works."

"That's where we're bound," was the answer shouted back over the lowered
buggy top, and then our corporal turned to his whilom "boss," but now
silent and embarrassed convoy. "Now, Mr. Manners, whether they recognize
you or not they'll see my uniform, and while they're meek enough in
front of a company, they're bold as a lion against a single militiaman.
Hoist the buggy top. That'll fend off rocks from the back and sides,
anyhow, and if anybody tries to stop us before we get to the works, whip
up and drive for all you're worth."

It was good counsel. Turning out of the avenue with its electric lamps,
the buggy was spinning through a dimly lighted, unpaved cross street.
Knots of people were still hovering about the corners--even women and
children. Loud, harsh voices were wrangling in a saloon, but for three
or four blocks northward the buggy whirled unmolested, then ahead could
be seen groups of uncouth-looking men arguing under the lamp-posts or
skulking about the street corners, and presently, as Manners's swift
roadster came springing up the street, the gas-light fell one instant on
the buttons and white chevrons of the corporal's blouse. A burst of
yells and taunts was the result as they drove by the first group. This
drew the attention of the others, and redoubled yells and a crash of
stones followed from the next, and presently the street ahead was alive
with straggling rioters running out to head off this lone vehicle,
freighted with they knew not what, but quickly divined to be of the
hated "capitalistic class." Manners reached for his whip and lashed his
spirited mare over the haunches. She seemed to leap into air, amazed and
indignant, and two rough fellows who sprang at her head were banged
aside as easily as an ironclad would burst through a shad net. But up
the street the crowd was thicker. Only five blocks away now, around the
second turn to the right, were the Amity Works and Fred's comrades of
Company L, but between them lurked some hundreds of the foiled and
furious mob, balked in their scheme of wrecking and burning the laden
cars and the magnificently inflammable plant of the wealthy corporation,
and eager to revenge themselves either on the owners or on those who had
become its guardians and protectors. Some one recognized the buggy and
Manners as they flashed by a lamp-post, and shouted his name. "Head 'em
off!" "Stop 'em!" "Shoot 'em!" "Kill the bloody hounds!" were the only
intelligible yells, and the gangs of "toughs" and tramps along the
street and among the lumber piles yelled mad echo to the cry. Stones and
other missiles came whirling through the night, some striking the mare
and redoubling her wild speed, some clattering upon the buggy top, some
few, better aimed, and from the front, whizzing into the buggy itself.
One of these stung Manners on the cheek, just as Fred, bending low to
dodge another, shouted to his companion, "Turn her to the right--next
street--it's our only chance."

Not a second too soon. Galloping now, the game little mare was hard to
guide, but Manners stood up and fairly dragged her around the corner,
the dust whirling in clouds from the flashing wheels, the buggy nearly
capsizing by the sudden turn. Here they came face to face and easily
burst through a little knot of rioters running to join the crowd on the
street they had just left, a yell of battled rage following them as they
went dashing away up the dim, dusty lane. "Courage! Only three blocks
more and we're safe," said Fred, as the manager, his grim mouth set,
gripped hard at the reins and strove to regain control. But the mare was
mad with fear and excitement now, and at the very next cross street
swerved to the left, the shortest line to her stable. The buggy
careened, whirled against the wooden curb, and in another instant,
shooting its occupants across the sidewalk, went bounding and dashing up
the street, shedding spokes, tires, cushions, and springs with every
jump, and landing, a moment later, only a dangling wreck at the heels of
the reeking mare in the hands of Company L, still ranked in front of the
shops.

"It's Manners's buggy," cried Sercombe, "and he's spilled out somewhere
up the street. The mob have got him. Save him if it's a possible thing."

So, too, said the Captain, and forty men of the "Backwoods Boys," as L
was facetiously termed by the city companies, went doubling down the
dusty street, peering eagerly ahead through the darkness.

[Illustration: "STAND BACK!" HE SHOUTED, "OR I'LL FIRE!"]

Not a moment too soon, either. Stunned, bruised, and blinded, Mr.
Manners lay like a log upon the wooden walk; but Fred, light and
athletic, had bounded to his feet, despite the shock, and in an instant
had picked up his rifle and run to the succour of his companion. With a
yell of triumph the nearest rioters came rushing down upon them around
the corner. Two blocks further away the gas-light showed other parties
of excited, wolflike men hastening in pursuit. The nearest were some
sixty yards away, but at least a dozen of them, with exultant howls and
renewed cries of "Kill 'em!" "Slash 'em!" "Lynch' em!" bore down on the
luckless manager and his sole defender. Instantly Fred slipped one of
the long copper cartridges in the breech and slammed the block. "Stand
back!" he shouted, "or I'll fire!" Then as they still rushed on he
quickly raised the long brown Springfield to his shoulder and sighted
square at the foremost man. "Halt, or I'll drop you in your tracks!" and
the coward knew he meant it, and crouched and dodged, waiting for others
to reach him. Then again, encouraged by the yells of those behind, on
they came, but slower, skulking close to the fence, bending low,
clucking and dancing to disconcert his aim. And then the words of his
Colonel at the armory came ringing in his ears. "Not a shot, men--not a
finger on the trigger except at the order fire!"--and there was none to
order here. Yet dauntless and determined there he stood, and that one
gallant Yankee boy, in whose veins the fighting blood of the Highland
clans was boiling, in the simple service dress of the National Guard,
was just enough to hold ten city "toughs" at bay one vital and
all-important moment, for when, re-enforced by the coming of their
fellows from the rear, they finally rushed on to work their cowardly
hate on the one prostrate man with his sole defender, they were met face
to face by the charge of Company L, and got the hammering they so richly
deserved.

And so morning dawned at last on smoking yards, on half-burned shops, on
slowly but surely moving mail and passenger trains, on the glistening
walls and windows of the unharmed Amity Works, all stoutly guarded by
businesslike detachments of the city's crack regiment, and the great
mobs of the previous day and night were scattered far and wide. All
night police and patrol wagons had been busily at work, and drunken or
still riotous characters were being gathered in and trundled to the
station-houses, or pitched neck and crop into some freight-car
temporarily turned guard-house. The Steinmans, Frenzels, and other
instigators had disappeared. Just as they had kept well behind the
fighting line when the struggle was hottest, so now were they nowhere to
be found when by their deluded followers as well as by the police they
most were wanted. Stoltz, too, had been spirited away, and was in hiding
somewhere among the outlying wards, but with a crack in his skull, said
the doctor who gave first aid to the wounded, that would neutralize "the
wheels in his head" for months to come. This at least was comfort to
many, and the Wallaces were in sore need of comfort, for up to eight
o'clock on this second morning of the strike not one word had been heard
of the loved husband and father. At six the Colonel himself had ridden
over to the Amity Works with a little escort, finding the neighborhood
deserted, and only a few scowling, skulking rioters left. Taking Fred
with him, he had patrolled the streets, and then given his anxious guide
a chance to visit his home. "Stay as long as necessary, corporal; but--
I've heard about last night, and shall want you later to-day after
you've found your father."

But when and how were they to find father was the question. Jim, under
the influence of opiates, still slept heavily. The policemen told off to
search came back crestfallen to say they could hear nothing of the old
man. No one had seen him since he left the shops the previous day.
Anxiety deepened with every minute, and at nine o'clock poor Mrs.
Wallace had practically abandoned hope. "They've murdered him," she
sobbed; "I know they have. They hated him for standing by his duty."

And even as she spoke there was a stir and excitement on the street
without. "Police patrol coming!" said some one, and come it did at rapid
trot, but without clang of bell or warning cry. It reined up abruptly in
front of the little cottage, and then there went up a shout of delight,
and Mrs. Wallace, rushing from the house, sobbing anew in relief from
dread and sorrow, seized and clasped her husband in her arms as with
calm dignity he stepped from the wagon. The police seemed desirous of
creating a pleasant impression. They were assiduous in their care of Mr.
Wallace. They begged Mrs. Wallace to understand that he had had the best
breakfast money could buy. There was evident cause of embarrassment and
something to be explained and extenuated, yet everybody crowded around
Wallace, and nobody seemed to care to listen to them. They hung about as
though they wanted to shake hands with him, but the old foreman only
very formally touched his hat as he said good-by.

"Where have I been? How did I escape?" he finally said in answer to
appeals of friends and neighbors. "I've been spending the night in
jail--with other desperate characters. I escaped by being arrested--in
Jim's coat--as a leader of the riot. Where's Jim?"

This was actually the case. Too few in number to effect anything in face
of such a mob, some police officers, scouting about their heels, had
caught sudden sight of old Wallace issuing with defiant air from the
side door of the threatened shops. These officers were new to that
section and had never seen him before, but his demeanor, his dress, his
badge all stamped him as a man prominent in the outbreak, and despite
his protestations they bundled him with a load of other prisoners into a
patrol wagon, and sent him to the main station two miles away. Not until
this morning could he secure recognition and a hearing. The old man was
exceeding wroth, but his wife was thankful. "He'd have been killed,"
said she, "if he hadn't been jailed."

But despite his indignation, old Wallace was on hand a few hours later
when a pleasing little ceremony was enacted at the Amity Works. There
the "backwoods boys" were drawn up in line to listen to some remarks of
their Colonel. A man of few words was that veteran when on duty, but
everybody seemed to know what was coming as he halted in front of them,
and Corporal Fred brought his rifle to the carry, stepped a few paces
forward, and stood there a little white, a little tremulous with
emotion.

"Men of Company L," the Colonel said, "you've done soldierly
service--valuable service, one and all, and some day I hope you'll get
the recognition you deserve; but there's one of your number who even
more than the rest deserves a word. Within twelve hours of the call for
duty Corporal Fred Wallace has had the conspicuous honors of being
discharged from his clerkship for obeying the summons, being knocked
senseless while doing it, being the guide of his regiment into the thick
of the riot, and finally of saving the life, at the risk of his own, of
the very man who discharged him.

"It has been your province during the night to convert some few rioters,
but it has been his to convert what is termed 'a soulless corporation,'
and I know you'll all be glad to hear him promoted sergeant on the spot.
So much for our side. Now we'll hear Mr. Manager Manners."

And amidst shouts of laughter and applause Mr. Manners limped forward
from a group of stockholders, while the Colonel heartily shook his young
guide by the hand. And behind Manners there loomed up in the doorway of
the shops a goodly stack of luscious fruit and boxes of cigars, and it
was evident the company meant to royally entertain its defenders.

And Mr. Manners was understood to express himself substantially as
follows:

"Gentleman of Company L. If these works had been destroyed last night
half a million dollars would have gone up in smoke. We couldn't get
insurance for more than quarter of its value. You saved it. Never until
last night did I know, or my associates, these gentlemen, what it meant
to have a National Guard. We thought it was the same thing as the
militia we used to join and have fun with forty years ago when we were
young, and so had determined to have no more of it in our business.
We've learned we didn't know the first thing about it. We're clean
converted. We find that young men nowadays are doing better by
themselves, their State, and their country than we did. Now I've got a
boy at home--a good boy, if I do say it--who wanted to join you three
months ago, and I wouldn't let him, and I'm going home this day to beg
his pardon, as I beg yours, and tell him I'll be a proud father if he
can wear the uniform in the same company with you and Wallace and
Sercombe. You've made Wallace a sergeant. Well, the Amity Works will
stand by what they've done, too. They discharged Mr. Wallace from what
we'll call a second-class clerkship yesterday afternoon, and they now
fill the vacancy by the promotion thereto of his friend Sercombe from
the shops. They have established another first-class clerkship, and to
fill that original vacancy they name Sergeant Fred Wallace, of Company
L, and we'll drink his health in the best and coolest lemonade to be had
in the whole State."

"Well," said old Wallace, as he sat later in the day with the mother's
hand in his, "I didn't take much stock in that soldier business either.
But where would we all have been this day but for Fred--Fred and his
regiment?"

THE END.




HINTS OF A RACING CAT-BOAT AND ITS CARE.


The popular idea that a racing cat-boat is an expensive luxury has
doubtless arisen from the cost entailed upon those who keep a racing
boat, and either cannot or will not themselves attend to the labor
connected with keeping such a craft in the best of condition. Many
boat-owners after entering for a race put their boats in the hands of
boat-builders to be gotten into condition so abundant around rivers and
bays where boat-racing is popular. To these men are usually intrusted,
besides getting the boat into condition, the procuring and training of
the crew, and if the race is important, the command of that too. Most
likely the crew will be composed of rivermen, amply compensated for
their services, and an amateur or two, one of which perhaps is the
owner. Of course all this costs, the builder having to be paid for his
labor of getting the boat ready and if he wins the race he naturally
expects something extra.

There are some owners, however, who attend to all these matters
personally, and their expenses are reduced to a very low figure.

If a boy has become the happy possessor of a boat, and is desirous of
becoming a good sailor, there is no reason why he shouldn't have the
pleasure of racing his boat, even if his supply of pocket money is
limited, provided he personally attends to all the work connected with
his boat. Besides saving much expense, it will serve to thoroughly
acquaint him with every part of his craft, a perfect idea of her
construction and rigging. If he makes a point of rigging her in the
spring and dismantling her in the fall, he will know what to do if some
part of his rigging gives way when he is sailing: and not be obliged to
do as the owner of a line boat on the Shrewsbury River did last year
when the lashings of a throat-halyard block gave way, lower sail and
wait for a friend to tow him in.

[Illustration: IN WINTER QUARTERS.]

We will suppose it to be spring and the boat to be in winter quarters on
shore. Naturally it is to be supposed that after being out of water for
some months her seams will have opened considerably. Do not attempt to
calk her in this condition, for if you should, you would run a good risk
upon the boards swelling of badly warping the planking. First of all,
put the boat in the water and allow her to fill, letting her remain in
this condition until the planking has swollen to the utmost: then pull
the boat up on land and let her dry for a day or so, so that the paint
will take. If the bottom is dirty, take a scrubbing-brush and water and
thoroughly clean it. After the boat is dry, examine all the seams
carefully, and where the openings appear too large to be stopped with
paint fill them with calking cotton soaked in white lead. Go over all
the other seams with white lead, and allow the whole to dry. Give the
bottom a good coat of either copper or arsenic paint, and paint the
above water body. After these coats have dried, go over the hull
carefully with sandpaper, and remove all inequalities. Give the bottom
and upper body another coat, laying it smoothly so as to give that fine
gloss so pleasing to the eye and so essential to the racing boat. Take
up the flooring and give the inside of your boat a couple of good coats
of paint, devoting particular attention to the centreboard trunk where
it joins the keelson. Examine the deck, particularly the joint with the
coaming. Where there are any knee openings, if the deck is painted, calk
them with cotton, if varnished, fill them with putty.

[Illustration: STEPPING MAST WITH SHEARS.]

If the deck is a varnished one, remove all the remains of last year's
varnish with sandpaper, and give the deck several coats of marine
varnish. The deck should be varnished at least once a month during the
season to keep it in good condition. At this time it would be well to
bring your sail out and lay it on the ground in the sun so as to allow
it to bleach, and give the centreboard a good scraping and varnishing or
painting, as the case may be. The boat is now ready to be put in the
water. Bring out the mast and spars, scrape with glass and sandpaper,
and varnish them. Now step the mast. If the boat is a small one it may
be lifted in by hand, but if it is a large one a pair of shears must be
rigged. (See sketch.) The shears consist of two poles, about half the
length of the mast (better if longer), two extremities of which are
lashed together, and the others planted firmly in the ground, the whole
being supported at an angle of about 45 deg. by a guy-rope. At the junction
of the two poles lash one of the blocks of the throat-halyards, allowing
the other to swing free. Attaching the mast or any other very heavy
weight to this block it may be lifted in with ease. Put the gaff and
boom in place, and lace the sail on. It will be quite a time before the
sail will stretch to its fullest extent, and it will be necessary to
stretch it along the gaff and boom after every outing for some time to
come or it will not set properly.

A few words here about the care of the sail may not be out of place.
Never roll a sail up when wet. Nothing will rot and mildew it more
quickly. If you are compelled to put the boat up for the night when the
sail is damp, tie a few stops around it at intervals, and allow it to
hang loosely between them, just using a sufficient number to prevent the
sail from thrashing about in case of a strong wind during the night. As
soon as possible after a rain hoist the sail and let it dry. The
quickest way to dry a sail is to hoist it to the full extent along the
mast and drop the peak, and raise the boom quite high with the toppen
lift. This will cause the sail to bag greatly, and the wind shaking it
will soon dry the moisture out.

[Illustration: METHOD OF SCRAPING BOTTOM.]

Your boat has been in the water for some time, and you have entered it
for a race. The first thing to do in this case is to examine its bottom.
This may be effected by selecting a shelving beach, and running your
boat as far up as possible at high water, having previously removed all
extra weights. Secure two guy-ropes to the mast-head, and drive stakes
on each side of the boat about twenty feet off. Fasten the ropes to
these stakes, so when the tide goes out they will hold the boat on an
even keel, and on the receding of the tide it will be an easy matter to
examine the under body of the boat.

If the bottom is so foul as to require repainting, construct ways and
haul out, scraping and painting as in the beginning of the season. If
the bottom should need only a slight cleaning and polishing slacken one
of the guy-ropes so that the boat will rest on its side, and scrub clean
with water and a stiff brush, polishing with cloths. After this side is
finished pull the boat up to an even keel and slack away the other rope
so it will rest on the other side, thus permitting you to get at the
rest of the under-water body. If you are so fortunate as to possess a
racing-sail and spars, unship the old ones and ship the racing-spars and
sail. If you have not, your boat is about ready. Remove all extra
weights (excepting ballast), and if movable ballast is permitted take it
aboard. Examine all your rigging carefully, and do not omit to go over
it again just before starting in the race. All this should be finished
the day before the race.

Ranking almost equal in importance to the condition of the boat is the
training of the crew. The length of time required before the race to get
the crew in condition will, of course, depend upon the knowledge of the
individuals. If the members have a fair idea of their business a few
hours before the race will be sufficient, but if they do not, the sooner
the training commences the better. For a racing crew to be handy, every
man in it must know his especial part in all the manoeuvres, and when
a manoeuvre is ordered must do it quickly and with the least confusion
possible, and not try in an excess of zeal to attempt to do more than
his part, unless so ordered. Above all, every man must obey implicitly
and without question any order of the Captain, for no boat can be
handled properly by its crew when anybody but the Captain is permitted
to give orders. As to the number of the crew, the average cat-boat of,
let us say, eighteen or twenty feet will require a helmsman, usually
Captain, sheet-tender, centreboard-tender, and a man to look after the
halyards. If your boat is so small as not to have so many men allotted
to it, the centreboard and halyards may be tended by one man. If, on the
contrary, more men than the requisite number are allowed, take the extra
men, if the day is windy, as ballast only, or if movable ballast is
permitted, as shifters.

Do not divide the work up into small parcels and give each one a little
to do, it creates too much moving about when under way, a thing not in
the least desirable. You might, however, have an understanding with them
as to what they are to do in an emergency, such as taking in or shaking
out a reef. Here a slight digression on taking in a reef when under way
may be pardoned. When under way drop the sail so that the desired
reef-points are about in a line with the boom, and when they are in the
right position let the boat come up into the wind so that the boom will
be inboard. Then order the crew to spread along the boom, and when the
bow-man has fastened the desired cringle at the jaws of the boom, have
them catch hold of the sail, stretch it along the boom, the sheet-tender
making fast the cringle on the leach (outer edge) to the boom. As soon
as this is accomplished tie the reef in. When all the reef-points are
tied, let the boat's head fall off and continue on course, as the peak
and throat may be properly hoisted, especially when you are strongly
manned, nearly as well under way as when in the wind. This operation, so
long on paper, may, with a well-trained crew, be accomplished almost in
the time it takes to read this. Shaking out a reef is a very easy
matter, and will need no mention. The whole aim in the training of a
racing crew may be summed up as follows: Every man to know his part and
do it when required. The first thing after explaining clearly to each
man his particular station is to get the crew accustomed to the boat. A
good way to do this is to take a spin at every opportunity with them
over the course, making a careful note yourself of the bearings of the
different marks by objects on shore, so that you will not lose valuable
time in the race in finding them. Do not allow any lagging in these
spins, for it is liable to lead to a blunder in the race, but maintain
the same discipline as you would at that time.

[Illustration: A FLYING START.]

The hour of the race is at hand. Your crew is aboard, and after a
careful examination of the running rigging, blocks, mast-hoops, sail and
its lacings, you set out for the starting-point. Arriving there, procure
your racing number, and after fastening it upon the sail, take your boat
out and cruise around in the vicinity of the starting-line, using this
opportunity to practise your crew in tacking, gybing, and other
evolutions likely to be encountered during a race. Upon hearing the
preparatory gun, it is best to get near the line. If you feel confident
that you have your boat well in hand, you might manoeuvre for a flying
start, but if you are a little uncertain, it is best to secure a good
position, and let your sail flap in the wind close as the boat lies
stationary close to the line.

If the first leg is close hauled or a thrash to windward, it is
advantageous to get away as near the front as possible, as the boats
slower in starting usually get off in a bunch and cut up each other's
wind. If the start is off the wind this is not so important. A flying
start is very desirable, but it requires careful calculation and
handling to bring your boat to the line at the right moment; and if by
some mistake you should cross a few seconds before the gun, you would
lose lots of valuable time in recrossing again. In a one-gun start the
importance of getting off quickly is greater than in a two-gun. Bang!
goes the starting gun. You are over the line, close-hauled most likely,
on the starboard tack (on account of having right of way). Do not make
the common mistake of hauling your boom in nearly amidships and jamming
your boat up into the wind; it will not pay. It increases the drift, and
your boat will not "foot" it as fast as one that is allowed a little
more leeway. Again, do not let your boat sag off too far or a heavy gust
may cause a "knockdown," with the consequent loss of much ground. Always
be ready to luff and take advantage of any little gust of wind, and it
is astonishing the amount of windward gain a clever sailor makes in this
way. This does not mean to luff so much at every putt as to dump the
wind out of your sail, or attempt to sail so close to the wind as not to
get its full power.

The amount of sail carried should be proportionate to the wind; it is a
great mistake to oversail a boat so that it wallows through the seas,
necessitating luffing or dumping out the wind in the squalls and
lowering of the peak when running before the wind. The angle of keel at
which your boat sails best can only be determined by experiment, and it
is a great blunder to carry sail so as to heel her to a greater one.
When sailing close hauled or to windward, all obstructions that may
catch the wind should be placed below deck if possible, or if it should
be necessary to have the crew up to windward, let them lay close to the
deck. (See sketch of start.)

As to the distribution of weight, aim to have your boat sail on the
proper water-line at all times: do not allow your crew, when beating to
windward, to pile aft, so as to escape spray, and so lift the bow out,
at the same time do not get your bow too deeply in. When ready to go
about (go on another tack), give the order "hard a lee," and let go the
tiller, the unbalanced action of the wind on the sail will bring the
boat up into the wind with a sweeping curve, and then use the rudder to
put her on the other tack.

In this way you will go about easily, and will not lose headway, as is
the case when the tiller is jammed over at the beginning. Immediately on
hearing the order "hard a lee," the crew should stand ready to shift the
ballast, and as the boat rounds up should change it rapidly, so as to
have it to windward when the sail fills on the other tack. A manoeuvre
of the same character should be executed when luffing around a mark.

Always be sure before going about that you have plenty of board down. We
will suppose that you have luffed around the first mark, and the next
leg is a run with the wind aft of abeam. This will not be particularly
exacting, the only points to keep in mind being to have your water-line
on proper trim, a full sail, and a straight course.

The second mark will have to be gybed around. This is a manoeuvre your
crew cannot be too well drilled in. Give yourself plenty of room, and do
not attempt to shave too closely. I witnessed last summer the capsizing
of a boat resulting from this desire.

The mark was a buoy placed near a heavy stake, and the helmsman of the
boat wishing to make a close shave steered too near it, and in passing
fouled his sheet-rope on the stake before gybing; the result was the
boat became unmanageable, and its momentum carrying it around gybed the
sail over, causing an upset. As you near the mark have the man forward
stand by the peak-halyard, ready to let go if anything happens wrong. As
you are about to turn, have the board raised and come around with an
easy sweep; but not so rapidly that the sheet-tender cannot haul all the
sheet-rope in. The sheet should be brought in with a steady pull, and
allowed to run out evenly. If any amount of slack is given as the sail
goes over, the wind on catching on the other side, if it does not
capsize the boat or carry away something, will bring her head up into
the wind with such force that it will be some seconds before you can
overcome it with the rudder.

[Illustration: FINISHING BEFORE THE WIND.]

[Illustration: PEAK LOWERED TO AVOID "GOOSE-WING"]

The remaining leg of our course we will suppose to be nearly free. When
running this way the board should be kept up, and all the weight in the
boat aft, as a boat under the great pressure exerted by the wind when
running this way has a tendency to dig its nose under. It is not
necessary for your crew to lay down now, and you may allow them to stand
and stretch themselves, as whatever wind they will catch will help the
boat instead of retarding, as in the other cases. (See sketch of
finish.) The only thing to be looked out for when running free, or
nearly so, is a "goose-wing." This happens when the wind is so strong as
to cause the boom to jump up parallel to the mast, and the sail wrap
around it. If when running before the wind you find your boom is jumping
too much, lowering the peak a little will lessen the pressure on the
sail, and stop it.

It is impossible to prophesy the result of the race, but I can say that
it depends equally on your boat and your management, with the training
of the crew a close second.

[Illustration: RIGHTING A CAPSIZED BOAT.]

A few hints on how to right a capsized boat may not be out of place
here. If you should happen to be near some boat that has capsized you
will, doubtless, feel it your duty to assist the unfortunate. It is not
a difficult matter to right a boat when you go about it in the proper
way. Run your boat alongside of the capsized one's mast and strip its
sail off, unfastening the throat and peak blocks, unreeving the
sheet-rope, and cutting the lashings of the sail to the mast-hoops. (Be
careful that the sail does not sink.) Put your boat in a position
alongside the bottom of the upturned boat, and unfasten your
throat-halyard block from the gaff, fasten this to the mast of the
capsized boat, as shown in sketch. It will then be an easy matter to
pull the boat up to an even keel, when she may be pumped out.

We will suppose the autumn to have arrived, and you are ready to put
your boat in winter quarters. After removing ballast, mast, sail, spars,
etc., construct ways as shown in the sketch of winter quarters. They
consist principally of two skids, on which the boat is run and hauled
out, but if you care for the condition of the boat's bottom, a cradle
had better be made following the idea shown in sketch. Pull the boat out
to the end of the skids, and if it is desirable to get it farther away
from the water, lay beams in front of the skids and pull the boat on
them. When free of the skids take them up and lay them in front of the
beams, repeating this operation until the boat is at the distance
desired. After removing everything, cover the deck and cockpit with
canvas. The sail should be sprinkled with salt and a little lime, not
too much or it will cause rotting, the lime being used to bleach the
sail only. This should be rolled up and packed away in a dry place, and
the mast and spars should also be under shelter, but not where there is
too great heat.

We have followed the fortunes of our boat from the beginning of the
season until the end. Unfortunately the limited space of this article
compels the mere mention of some points on which whole volumes could be
written. It is only the purpose of this paper to treat this subject in
the broadest fashion, and to give only general hints for the use of the
beginner in one of the most manly of sports.

  DUDLEY D. F. PARKER.




[Illustration: THE PUDDING STICK]

     This Department is conducted in the interest of Girls and Young
     Women, and the Editor will be pleased to answer any question on
     the subject so far as possible. Correspondents should address
     Editor.


I heard a girl spoken of the other day by one of her friends as a
perfect candy fiend. It made me laugh, because I knew the girl in
question, and I had never observed anything fiendish or malevolent about
her. However, it is so much the fashion for girls to use sweeping
expressions, that I am never a bit surprised when I hear "awful,"
"dreadful," "horrible," "terrible," and other strong words of that kind
used without much reference to their exact meaning. I suppose the young
girl described so alarmingly is very fond of candy, for which nobody can
blame her; not I, certainly, especially if it be home-made. But I will
imagine that each of my girls has an allowance, so much given her a week
to spend as she pleases. What proportion of this should she devote
merely to gratifying her taste for sweet things? Do you not think it
rather foolish to spend so much on bonbons, caramels, and creams, that a
girl has nothing left when she wishes to help clothe a poor family whose
house has been burned over their heads, to buy a pretty framed
photograph for her room, or to make a Christmas present for her mother
or dear friend?

It is quite time, by-the-way, for us to begin the consideration of our
Christmas presents in these bright days of late summer. By giving a
little thought and time to the matter, paying attention to small wishes
and wants which are spoken of in the family, we can often give our
friends and ourselves much more pleasure than can be done when
everything is left to the hurry of the last few weeks of the year. I
heard a lady say the other evening, "I have at least six girl friends
who knit beautifully, and I do wish one of them would make me a
fascinator." "And pray what may a fascinator be?" said I. And I learned
that it was simply a beautiful fleecy thing to wear upon the head in the
evening. It used to be called a "cloud" when I was a girl; and in my
girlish days I always kept one on hand to use up odd moments. It is
pretty, dainty work. Bedroom slippers, crocheted and made up over
lamb's-wool soles, are welcome gifts to receive, and not hard to make.
May I add that a present is much more likely to give satisfaction to the
recipient if it is beautifully wrapped up in tissue-paper and tied with
dainty ribbon? I never derived more pleasure in my life than from a book
which came to me one white cold Christmas eve. The book was daintily
wrapped in white tissue-paper and tied with a white ribbon, which
fastened on the cover of it one dewy, long-stemmed rose. A candle and
candle-stick is a graceful and useful present. You know that one should
always have a bedroom candle at night. It is a comfort to have it
standing on a little table near the bed with a supply of matches. One
never need then be in the dark a moment if a light happen to be
necessary. I saw a very quaint and charming candle-stick the other day.
It was in the shape of a monk with a cowl and robe, and he was patiently
holding up a long crimson candle. Candles may be had in many colors,
some of them very ornamental, and candle-sticks come in china, silver,
and bronze, and sometimes very pretty ones in tin, though I do not
recommend you to give a tin candle-stick as a present if you can afford
one in another material.

Presents of one's own work are always very much appreciated, and there
are many beautiful things in linen, such as doilies, centre-pieces, and
the like, which are welcome additions to your mother's table, so that
you cannot go wrong in choosing something in linen to embroider for her.
A set of towels with a monogram in the corner makes a very tasteful
gift, and I can imagine nothing lovelier than for a family of girls, or
a class, to embroider a bed-spread for a mother or teacher. This, of
course, would be a large undertaking, and should be begun many months
before the time it is wanted, and you would have great fun in keeping
the affair a secret. I saw a very beautiful bed-spread some weeks ago at
a house where I was a guest. The lady who is making it has been engaged
on it for years, and it is very elaborate--cream-colored linen of the
finest texture, covered all over with beautiful vines and flowers. She
has worked always from the flowers themselves, copying them faithfully
in shape and tint.

When you are writing to me it would be very pleasant to have you tell me
of beautiful Christmas gifts you intend to make. A girl in Maine might
have a suggestion which would be acted upon by a girl in Nebraska. I
will be extremely pleased to be the medium through which girls both
North and South may give each other happy thoughts and charming
suggestions about presents which are to be made for the next Christmas
holidays. May I quote a bit from your letter, dear Tillie T.? It may
give some of the girls an idea on which they may like to act. Tillie
says: "With the help of two of my friends I am making a hospital box.
Can you tell me some children's hospital to send it to? And is it a very
childish thing to do? For we really enjoy making the things, as well as
thinking of the pleasure they will give the children later. We have made
cambric scrap-leaves, paper dolls with dresses of tissue-paper, a
menagerie and circus of paper animals, and over sixty colored paper
dolls--the sort which have dresses to come off."

Perhaps somebody can suggest an addition to Tillie's already generous
list. St. Mary's Free Hospital for Children, West Thirty-fourth Street,
New York city, will be very glad to receive any gifts which our readers
would like to send to it.

[Illustration: Signature]

       *       *       *       *       *

The poor patient mules that drag the train-cars far down in the mines
rarely enjoy the light of day. Sometimes intervals of years pass before
they are brought to the surface, and far below in the dense darkness of
the mines they toil from month to month, seeing no light other than that
of the miners' flickering lamps.

Recently some mules that had for a number of years hauled the trains in
the lower tunnel of a coal-mine were brought to the surface. The strong
light of the sun dazzled them, and every one kept his eyes closed
tightly, and when they were released in a pasture a little distance away
they halted trembling and astonished, even fearing some harm. For a long
time they remained so, occasionally opening their eyes half-way, and
finally, towards sundown, they broke into joyous brays. Afterward they
ran around, jumped, kicked, and rolled on the grass as if mad. The
delight of freedom, the sun, and the pure air were more to them than the
food they refused to eat when it was put before them.




ON BOARD THE ARK.

BY ALBERT LEE.


CHAPTER V.

Tommy and the ex-Pirate and the Gopher remained quietly perched on the
rafter for some minutes after the big Ark had begun to move; but when
they found that none of the animals noticed them, since all seemed so
busy attending to their own affairs, they slid along the beam until they
could look out into the main room and see what was going on. That is,
Tommy and the ex-Pirate slid along, but the Gopher remained where he
was, apparently sound asleep.

"What do you suppose they will do next?" asked the little boy.

"Fight or eat, I guess," answered the ex-Pirate. "All animals fight or
eat."

"I don't think I should like to see them fight," continued Tommy. And
then he added. "Don't you think it is getting dark in here?"

"Very much so," said the ex-Pirate, looking about. "I suppose they will
light up pretty soon. It's always dark on a rainy day, you know."

"What kind of lights do you suppose they will have?"

"Ark-lights, of course," said the ex-Pirate. "What other kind would you
expect on a boat of this kind? Did you suppose the two Tapirs would be
bright enough? If you had ever had any dealings with a Tapir you would
know what a stupid beast he is. Don't you remember my classic about him:

  "Said the Monkey to the Tapir,
    One Sunday afternoon,
  'Won't you let me have some paper, etc., etc, ...

"The Tapir sold writing-paper, you see. But he was too stupid to get
along in the business. That's why it is called a stationary business."

Tommy was about to answer--he hardly knew what--when a bump and a squeal
interrupted the conversation. The sleeping Gopher had fallen off the
rafter. This accident might have caused a good deal of trouble if a
great hubbub had not started at the other end of the room at the same
moment. There were squeals and howls and yelps, as if one was being
killed. In the rush and confusion the Gopher mixed with the crowd, and
Tommy could only occasionally catch a glimpse of his pink sun-bonnet
bobbing up now and then in the swarm that was struggling in the
distance.

"I wonder what has happened?" said the little boy, leaning as far
forward as he dared.

"First fight, I guess," muttered the ex-Pirate, "But I think we had
better stay up here and wait till it's all over."

"I guess we had," assented Tommy. But they did not have to wait very
long, for the Gopher soon came scurrying back and climbed quickly up
beside them.

"Goodness! Goodness me!" he cried.

"What's the matter?" asked the ex-Pirate, eagerly.

"The Dachshund was playing tag with a Chinese Pug, and he fell through
the trap-door."

"Oh, my!" exclaimed Tommy.

"You ought to see him," pursued the Gopher. "He fell all the way down to
the hold, and his legs are jammed away up into his body and twisted all
out of shape. They're only about three inches long now, and even the
Elephant could not pull them out straight. He is disfigured for all
time."

"Can't any one help him?" asked the ex-Pirate.

"He won't let any one. The Duck, who was educated in divers practices,
offered his services as doctor, but the Dachshund would not have him.
Said he was a quack." There was a brief silence; then the Gopher added:
"They are trying to find out who opened the trap-door, and so I ran
away. I came in that way; but I'm sure I shut the trap after me."

"We came in that way too," said the ex-Pirate.

"Yes, and I came up first," put in Tommy. "You were last up. Did you
shut the door?"

"I guess I did not," admitted the ex-Pirate. "But it was the Sheep's
fault; he put it out of my mind."

By this time the excitement had abated, and the animals were scattered
in groups again. The Dachshund went waddling about the floor on his
short crooked legs, to the great amusement of the Storks and Cranes, who
still had long straight legs, and Tommy said,

"Well, I never knew before how it happened that those dogs had such
funny legs." But the Gopher said nothing, and still trembled for fear
some one would find out he had come in through the trap.

The wind was blowing fiercely outside, and as it howled around the
corners and under the eaves of the Ark it sounded notes like those of an
AEolian harp.

"Music, isn't it?" remarked Tommy. "It sounds like a fiddle."

The ex-Pirate almost jumped off the rafter.

"Fiddle!" he exclaimed. "Who said fiddle? Is there a fiddle on board? If
there is, I'm going to jump!"

"I did not say there was a fiddle on board," remonstrated Tommy. "I said
it _sounded_ like a fiddle."

"Oh!"

"What are you so afraid of a fiddler for?"

"If I tell you you will easily understand," answered the ex-Pirate, with
a deep sigh.

"Well, tell us. Is it interesting?"

"Yes, and I can give it to you in rhyme. Will you have it in four verses
or in six?"

"I guess four will do," answered the little boy, and he leaned over and
pulled the Gopher up closer. "Come and hear the poetry," he said.

The ex-Pirate turned toward his audience on the rafter, and recited:

  "There once was a fiddler whose name was McPhee,
  And he fiddled, he fiddled, did he.
  He fiddled so loud and he fiddled so long
  That the neighbors all thought there must be something wrong
  With this fearful old fellow, this fiddler McPhee,
  For he fiddled, he fiddled, did he.

  "So one day the neighbors all went up to see
  What the cause of this unceasing fiddling could be.
  They appointed committees to go in and speak
  In behalf of them all to this fiddling freak,
  Who had fiddled all day and all night for a week;
  But their efforts all failed with this frightful McPhee,
  Who fiddled for fun, he fiddled, did he.

  "The first man to face the fiddler McPhee
  Was a fat little fellow, who said, 'Sir,' said he,
  'You fiddle all night and you fiddle all day,
  You fiddle and fiddle your whole time away;
  Won't you tell us the reason why all this should be?'
  But the fiddler still fiddled, he fiddled, did he.

  "But finally, while fiddling, he said, 'Sir,' said he,
  'You will greatly oblige me by letting me be;
  All your fussing and fretting and fuming,' said he,
  'Is nothing at all--it's fiddledidee!'
  So he kept on a fiddling, this fellow McPhee,
  And he fiddled, and fiddled, and fiddled, did he.

"And I was one of the neighbors," added the ex-Pirate.

"And did not Mr. McPhee stop?" asked Tommy.

"No. We all had to move. He had a ninety-nine years' lease."

"I don't blame you," said the Gopher.

[Illustration: "LET'S ORGANIZE!... WHAT IS LIFE WITHOUT ORGANIZATION?"]

The ex-Pirate was about to propose reciting four more verses when there
occurred another commotion, and the Hippopotamus stood up on his awkward
hind legs and shouted:

"Let's organize! We ought to organize! What is life without
organization? I move we elect a president--"

But before he could express his views any further the Lion walked up to
him and buffeted him with his paw, and growled:

"Sit down! If there is any organizing to be done, _I_ will do it. I want
you to understand that I am the King of Beasts, and we won't have any
presidents this trip."

Whereupon the poor old Hippopotamus rubbed his sore jowls, and waddled
slowly off to another part of the room. Then the Lion got up on a big
chair, with the Lioness at his side, and made a speech. Tommy and the
ex-Pirate could not hear what he said, because they were so far away;
but the animals all seemed very attentive and much pleased, for they
continually nodded their heads, and at the close of the oration the
Gopher, who in some manner had managed to catch every word, waved his
sun-bonnet in the air and cried:

"Hooray! We're going to eat!"

"I told you so," whispered the ex-Pirate; and then he suggested to Tommy
that they go down to the floor and mingle with the animals, and try to
find the Sheep, so as to have a chance at the meal, if that were
possible.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




[Illustration: INTERSCHOLASTIC SPORT]


The lawn-tennis tournament for the Interscholastic championship of the
United States was finished at Newport last week, first honors being
carried off by Leonard E. Ware, of the Roxbury Latin School, Boston,
Mass. Ware is, beyond doubt, the best man of the four players who came
to represent the schools, and he proved, both by his play in the two
interscholastic matches and by the work he has done on various courts
this summer, that he has unquestionably the strongest claim to the title
of interscholastic champion. He defeated both Beaman and Sheldon without
any trouble, the latter being the stronger rival, and standing for the
full five sets. In the first match Beaman took the first set from Ware,
but after that the latter warmed up and had everything his own way.
Sheldon's contest with Waltz was a walk-over for the Hotchkiss School
player, as the score will show. The summaries follow:

L. E. Ware           }
M. G. Beaman         } Ware, 3-6, 6-2, 6-4, 6-3. }
                                                 } Ware, 6-4, 2-6, 7-5,
J. P. Sheldon, Jun.  } Sheldon, 6-1, 6-2, 6-1.   }        6-8, 6-1.
C. F. Waltz          }

The best playing Ware did during the entire period of the tournament at
Newport was in his match with Foote of Yale, whom he met in the third
round. Foote won--4-6, 6-4, 6-0, 8-10, 8-6--but it was a hard-earned
victory, and gave the spectators some of the best tennis to watch that
the tournament afforded. Ware will undoubtedly rank as one of the
leading players of the country next year, and I count on him to hold the
national championship before he gets out of college. His strongest
quality seems to be steadiness, and in addition to this he possesses
determination and sand.

[Illustration: THE NEWPORT TENNIS COURTS.]

Ware won his first set against Foote by good lobbing and clever
side-line strokes. His back-hand strokes along the side-lines were
especially fine. In the first game of the second set deuce was called
three times before Foote got the score, and several times afterwards
there were equally exciting moments. The third set was a love one for
the Yale man. He defeated Ware by playing a lobbing game whenever he
could. The latter was especially weak in placing his smashes, most of
them being returned within Foote's easy reach. This is, no doubt, Ware's
weak point, for it was mainly by this that he lost the set.

The fourth set was the most sensational of the five, and it was here
that the scholastic player showed the pluck that was in him. In the
first game he placed prettily, winning at fifteen, and he scored again
in the second by the same tactics, and in the third by wonderful
side-line work. Exciting rallies were the features of the next two
games, in the latter Ware bringing the score from love forty up to
deuce; but after deuce was called four times Foote scored, mainly
through his persistent lobbing. Perhaps the best tennis of all was shown
in the tenth game, when applause by the spectators was almost
continuous. Ware won it, although Foote had him 40-15, and was within
one point of the match. Losing that point gave him another set to play.
Eighteen games were required to decide this set, which was the longest
and, beyond a doubt, one of the most exciting of the tournament.

The fifth set consumed one solid hour of play, and went to Foote--8-6.
As in the former sets, Ware gave a great exhibition of pluck, and with
the score 2-4 against him, tied the figures. It was then nip and tuck
until each man had secured five games. At a critical point, however, and
one which probably would have altered the result considerably, Ware was
unfortunate in getting an obviously poor decision from one of the
linesmen. The whole set was largely a question of endurance rather than
of proficiency, and in this the older and stronger player naturally
excelled.

This Department has been questioned a number of times as to how the
racing length of a yacht is determined. As the International Cup races
are interesting every sportsman just now, and as the ROUND TABLE this
week gives on another page an article descriptive of cat-boat-racing,
this seems a particularly apt time to devote a few paragraphs to this
very complicated feature of yachting. We all know, of course, that upon
the difference between the racing lengths of two yachts depends the time
allowance which one boat must allow the other in a contest of speed.
This length is obtained by adding the square root of the sail area to
the length of the load water-line, and dividing the result by two. The
quotient is the racing length.

The load water-line, which is the distance between the points of the bow
and stern, exclusive of the rudder-post, is ascertained as follows:
Strip the yacht of everything except what she will carry in the race,
and assemble amidships the crew which is to man her. Then drop a
plumb-line from her bow to the water, and measure accurately the
distance between the point where the line strikes the water and the
intersection of the forefoot with the water. Repeat the same operation
at the stern. Then mark off these distances on the deck, the first being
measured back from the bow, and the second forward from the stern. The
distance between these two points is the length of the load water-line
of the yacht. It is measured on the deck, because the rounding of the
hull, of course, makes it impossible to get a straight line from bow to
stern on the water.

To get the correct sail area requires more labor. It is determined by
the dimensions of the spars and those of the jib-topsail stay. If it
were not for the length of the gaff a triangle would be formed by the
base-line, the stay and the leach of the topsail and mainsail. Then the
area could be easily calculated. But the projection of the gaff spoils
the triangle, and so the first thing to do is to measure the distance
from the end of the boom to the forward side of the mast. From that
point measure to a point on the bowsprit half-way between the jib-stay
and the jib-topsail stay. These, added together, give the actual
base-line. Then take the height of the mast and the height of the
topmast. The length of the gaff is next ascertained, and from this is
subtracted eight-tenths of the height of the topmast. The difference
between these is added to the actual base-line, the result giving the
corrected base-line.

Experience shows that this addition offsets very accurately the number
of square feet of sail lying between a straight line drawn from the end
of the boom to the sheave of the topsail halyards, and--considering that
line as a base--the two legs of the triangle extending from the end of
the boom to the peak of the gaff, and from the peak of the gaff to the
topmast. Then the length of the corrected base-line is multiplied by the
height of the mast, taken from the deck to the sheave on the topmast,
and the result is divided by two. After obtaining these measurements,
proceed as stated above--that is, add the square root of the sail area
to the length of the load water-line, and divide by two. Then you have
the yacht's racing length. There is no doubt that it is a complicated
problem.

But this method is for sloop measurement. To get the area of a cat-boat
sail there is a simpler way, although it is not so absolutely exact.
Draw a line from the throat to the leach parallel to the foot of the
sail, and let fall from the point of intersection of this line with the
leach another line parallel to the luff. The sail is then divided into a
rectangle formed by these two lines, the luff, and part of the foot, and
two triangles, one of which is bounded by the head of the sail, a part
of the leach, and your first line; the second, by a part of the leach, a
part of the foot, and your second line. To compute the areas of these
two triangles and the rectangle, and to add them, is a matter of simple
mathematics. And then you have the area of your sail.

Between now and the time of the opening of the football season I want to
say something each week about the game, more especially about the early
training for it, and the elementary principles of play which so many
enthusiasts overlook at first, and consequently go in and fail. Nobody
was ever born a football player. To become proficient in the game you
must devote many months to practice, and several years to actual study
of the game. Football is a science, just as chess is a science--and
there are very few great chess-players. There are very few great
football players. My advice to the young man who wants to excel on the
gridiron is first to find out, if he can, what position he is best
suited for (not what position he likes best), and then to study and play
that position steadily and for all he is worth. Go to as many big games
as possible, and watch the men who play your chosen position. See
wherein they excel, and note your own short-comings. In addition, read
everything you can get hold of about the science and strategy of the
game. There are a number of books on the subject. And after you have
read pretty thoroughly, think. No man can be a good football player
unless he can think out football problems for himself.

But more of that later. The important question now is that of
preliminary training, and by far the most important thing about
preliminary training is to do not too much at first. It is not only
unwise to work hard at first, but it is dangerous. Most of the men have
been away on long vacations, and very few, if any, of them have been
taking any regular or systematic exercise. Consequently their muscles
are not prepared to endure the sudden strains and wrenches to which they
are being subjected. It is a matter of record that more sprains and
bruises occur during the first few weeks of practice than at any other
time of the season.

For the first week or so the careful Captain will see that his men
perform only very light work. He will put them through easy exercises,
he will have them pass and kick the ball and practise falling on it.
Then he will have his men take short runs across country, and do such
general light work for wind and muscle as will enable them to take up
hard practice without danger. Every man should have a heavy sweater or
an overcoat at hand to put on as soon as play is stopped, for every
precaution should be taken to avoid catching cold. Every football team
should, if possible, have hot and cold water shower-baths convenient to
their dressing-rooms--for cleanliness is as important a matter to the
welfare of the players as fresh air. Long hot baths are weakening and
should be avoided, except when a cold has settled in the muscles, and
then hot water is of value.

Football players should be regular in their daily habits. They should
rise, take their meals, and retire to bed at the same hours every day;
and it is likewise a good thing to have the practice at the same hour
each afternoon, and, if possible, at that hour of the day when matches
will most probably be played later in the season. The men should have
plenty of sleep, say from ten at night until seven in the morning, and
on rising they should, if possible, take a short walk before breakfast.
And now that the word breakfast has fallen into the discussion let us
look at the commissariat side of the football question.

There was a time when a football player was supposed to make a martyr of
himself, as far as the good things of the kitchen were concerned. His
bill of fare was made up chiefly of raw beef, and he was permitted to
drink only so many glasses of water a day. This barbarous custom,
however, has now been done away with, and from personal experience I can
vouch for the delicious fare of the training-table of the present day. A
football player's diet must be restricted, of course, but there is an
ample list left that he may choose from. Roast beef, beefsteak, lamb
chops, roast lamb, broiled chicken, oatmeal, rice, mush, and all kinds
of cereal food, potatoes cooked in any style except fried, vegetables,
eggs, apple sauce, baked apples (never any raw apples), prunes, oranges,
grapes, figs, dates, and all fruit in season; rice and bread pudding,
stale bread, and dry toast--all these can go on the bill of fare. The
forbidden dishes are pie, cake, salad, pork, veal, rich dressings,
anything fried, ice-cream, candy, soda-water, and any kinds of drinks,
alcoholic, malt, or soft. No tea, no coffee, no chocolate, and--but this
should go without saying--no tobacco.

Another important thing for the Captain of a football team to give his
closest attention to is the condition of his men. He should watch them
continually, and note the slightest tendency toward overtraining, for
overtraining is much easier to prevent than to remedy. As soon as a
player gets into this condition he should take absolute rest for several
days, and thereafter he should only play for a short time each day. A
change of diet is a good thing, too. Remove all restrictions from the
diet of the overtrained man, and let him eat what he chooses for a few
days. Overtraining shows itself in various ways, but the most common is
for a player to feel worn and tired and disinclined to work hard on the
field. This is simply an evidence that his muscles have been worked too
hard, and have become so fatigued that they cannot recuperate their full
vitality between one day's practice and the next.

While speaking of diet I omitted saying that ice-water should be shunned
almost as if it were an alcoholic beverage. Never have ice water on the
training-table. Drink cold water, but do not have it iced. It is a bad
thing, too, to allow players to drink anything during practice or until
an hour after practice has been stopped. This will prove a hardship at
first, as the mouth gets dry and parched. Have a pail of water near the
field and a tin cup, and let the men rinse their mouths, but do not
permit them to drink. After a week or so they will become accustomed to
the abstinence, and their saliva glands will act more freely.
Gum-chewing is a bad practice, too. Constant mastication stimulates the
glands; but it is injurious in the end, just as all artificial methods
are in whatever sphere they may be practised.

The football team should work on the field every day, rain or shine.
Practice on a wet and muddy ground is necessary, because it frequently
happens that the most important game of the year (usually played at the
end of the season) has to be contested on a rainy day. Thus practising
in the rain will accustom the players to running and dodging in the mud,
and to holding a wet and slippery ball. If the storm is such, however,
that work in the open air is out of the question, the team should
practise in-doors. Rehearsing signals is good occupation for such
occasions, and practice in passing the ball and in tackling can also be
had. But unless in-door work is unavoidable it should never be indulged
in during the active season. The work on the field demands all the
energy of the players.

  THE GRADUATE.




[Illustration: STAMPS]

     This Department is conducted in the interest of stamp and coin
     collectors, and the Editor will be pleased to answer any question
     on these subjects so far as possible. Correspondents should
     address Editor Stamp Department.


The American Philatelic Association has just been holding its annual
convention at Clayton, New York. Two sessions were held each day August
13th, 14th, 15th, and 16th. This should be a very powerful society, but
is not on account of poor management. For 1895-96 the following officers
were elected: J. K. Tiffany, president; Alvah Davison, vice-president;
N. W. Chandler, treasurer; C. W. Kissinger, secretary. The next annual
meeting will probably be held in Wisconsin or Minnesota.

The year 1888 the Belgium government withdrew the 5-franc stamp from
use. During its life about 45,000 were used, most of which were probably
saved by collectors. A short time ago 2400 of these stamps, unused, were
found in the Brussels post-office, and these have just been sold by
auction to one man, who paid 36,000 francs for the lot, more than three
times their face value.

The making of new issues of postage-stamps primarily to sell to
collectors has not been stopped. Peru intends to issue one commemorative
stamp on September 10, 1895. Uruguay will issue three stamps in
commemoration of Joaquin Suarez on October 8, 1895. The pious Belgium
postmaster proposes to make two series of local stamps for use in Liege
and Brussels in commemoration of St. Lambert, the first bishop of
Belgium. France has surcharged her own 15, 25, 30, 50 centimes, and 1
franc stamps D. S. for use in the colony of Diego Suarez. I advise
collectors to leave all the above out of their collections. Any money
spent for them is simply thrown away.

The new 3, 5, 30, and 50 cent postage-due stamps have been reported as
issued; but no copies have yet reached the New York post-office.

It is rumored in stamp circles that the U. S. government is going to use
paper water-marked with an eagle for use in printing stamps. I hope the
postal authorities will see that the water-mark will be made
sufficiently clear to be seen distinctly on every stamp. The present
system is simply laughable. In 99 instances out of every 100 the present
water-mark can be seen only on the margins of the sheets, and one stamp
may contain the water-mark of a portion of one letter only, while others
have parts of two letters. Other governments seem to have no difficulty
in making clear and artistic designs for use as water-marks. See, for
instance, the numerous Great Britain water-marks illustrated in HARPER'S
ROUND TABLE No. 821.

Still there's more to follow. Another batch of the St. Louis stamps has
turned up, and philatelists are wondering how many there were in that
Louisville find (not Kansas City as stated in last week's issue).
Perhaps some one has the plate. About a year ago a New York dealer was
approached by a man who claimed to have the plate in his possession and
offered to print a lot, but the dealer was shy, and declined to make any
bargain until after a sample sheet had been shown to him for
examination. As this was not done, negotiations ceased.

     R. T. K.--The token inscribed on the reverse, "Not one cent for
     tribute, millions for defence," issued 1841, is very interesting.
     It is one of the "hard-money tokens" issued between 1837 and 1842,
     and are very common. They have no money value. The 1871 U. S.
     dollar is worth face only.

     E. PATTISON.--The coins mentioned are quite common, and are worth
     face only.

     W. GOFF.--There is no way of cleaning cancelled postage-stamps,
     hence the high value of most unused compared with used specimens.
     For instance, the U. S. 3c. 1857, with outer line, used sells for
     25c., but unused commands $15.

     K. F. KURTZ.--The K die U. S. envelope 1853 issue on buff can be
     bought for $3 and less, whether the stamp shows cancellation mark
     or not. If the entire envelope is unused and clean it is worth $10
     and upward. On white paper the prices are much higher.

     C. C. B.--The dealers pay $1.15 each for the U. S. gold dollars
     dated 1850 to 1855, and sell them for about $1.50. These are the
     common dates. The valuable gold dollars are those of which a few
     copies only were coined within the past twenty years.

     B. MAGELSEN.--There are not two varieties of any Columbian stamp,
     but almost every denomination can be found in two or more distinct
     shades. Purple is a very difficult ink to compound, so are certain
     reds. For instance, there are over 100 different shades of the
     current 2c.-stamp, all printed within the past year, and all
     nominally the same color.

     J. SMYTHE.--There are not many collectors of U. S. envelopes
     bearing express names, such as Wells, Fargo, & Co., etc. Hence the
     envelopes are rarely worth more than the regular issues.

     SAN ANTONIO.--The San Antonio of Padua jubilee issue now current
     in Portugal and the Azores, although good for postage in those
     countries, is frowned upon by collectors, as their postal use is a
     mere side issue, the chief reason why they were made being for
     sale to collectors. There are fifteen varieties, viz., 2-1/2, 5,
     10, 15, 20, 25, 50, 75, 80, 100, 150, 200, 300, 500, and 1000
     reis, also one 10-reis postal-card. The same stamps are surcharged
     Acores for use in that colony.

     A. LEWKAWSKY.--There are no reprints of U. S. stamps issued after
     1870. If you can buy the $1 and $2 Columbian issue do so by all
     means. They are going up in value rapidly. The present $1 stamp it
     is said will be printed in some other color. If so, the chances
     are that the black ones will advance in price materially.

  PHILATUS.




ADVERTISEMENTS.




Highest of all in Leavening Strength.--Latest U. S. Gov't Report.

[Illustration: Royal Baking Powder]




[Illustration: If afflicted with SORE EYES USE Dr. ISAAC THOMPSON'S EYE
WATER]




HARPER'S NEW CATALOGUE,

Thoroughly revised, classified, and indexed, will be sent by mail to any
address on receipt of ten cents.




[Illustration: BICYCLING]

     This Department is conducted in the interest of Bicyclers, and the
     Editor will be pleased to answer any question on the subject. Our
     maps and tours contain much valuable data kindly supplied from the
     official maps and road-books of the League of American Wheelmen.
     Recognizing the value of the work being done by the L. A. W., The
     Editor will be pleased to furnish subscribers with membership
     blanks and information so far as possible.


[Illustration: Copyright, 1895, by Harper & Brothers.]

Another pleasant ride out of Philadelphia into New Jersey is to the town
of Vineland by way of Salem. The entire distance is sixty-two miles, and
the run can, of course, be made in one day, with a stop at Salem for
dinner. It is pleasanter, however, to make a two-days trip out of it. If
the weather is good and you still want to ride, a run can be made from
Vineland to Philadelphia direct on the third day, though the roads are
not in either good condition or well made originally over the direct
route. The first stage will carry us to Salem, thirty-two miles from
Philadelphia. Leaving the city at Market Street, cross to Camden and run
down to Gloucester, or cross at the South Street Ferry, if you choose,
direct to Gloucester. Thence turning to the right at the end of the
Ferry Street, follow a direct road to Westville, which you enter just
after crossing the track. The road is macadamized, is very level, and in
pretty fair condition. From this point to Woodbury is direct by the same
macadamized road, the track being again crossed a little over half-way
to the latter place. The distance from Gloucester to Woodbury is about
four miles.

On leaving Woodbury, take the right fork at the break in the roads just
outside of the village and run direct to Berkley, which is to the
westward of you, passing through Clarksboro, where the end of the
macadam is readied and a gravel road begins. The road is not uncertain
anywhere along the route, but from Clarksboro to Swedesboro it is as
nearly straight as a road could well be. The railroad runs along on the
western side half a mile or more away, passing through Mickletown and
Wolferts. Just after crossing the road which runs into Wolferts station
you will come to a hill which is somewhat difficult, owing partly to the
condition of the roadbed and partly to the steepness of the hill itself.
It is best to keep on the main road, even if you dismount and walk over
the hill itself.

At Swedesboro a stop can be made for dinner or lunch at Ford's Hotel.
You have now ridden fifteen miles and covered about half the distance.
Leaving Ford's after a rest, keep to the left instead of crossing the
track, and run along close by the rails seven miles to Woodstown. A
number of roads come together as you enter, and to reach the centre of
the village itself you should keep to the left fork and run along into
the central square. If you do not mean to stop, keep to the right fork
after crossing the railroad, and run direct to Salem, ten miles away. A
rider can keep always to the left forks if he chooses on leaving
Woodstown until he has gone about two miles out, when he should turn to
the right at a fork and meet the main bicycle road five or six miles
from Woodstown. On the whole, it is better to keep to the straight
turnpike. The whole route to Salem is remarkably level as country roads
go, and while the bed is gravel beyond Clarksboro, it is nevertheless in
reasonably good condition all the way. At Salem the Nelson House is a
good place to stop for the night.

     NOTE.--Map of New York city asphalted streets in No. 809. Map of
     route from New York to Tarrytown in No. 810. New York to Stamford,
     Connecticut, in No. 811. New York to Staten Island in No. 812. New
     Jersey from Hoboken to Pine Brook in No. 813. Brooklyn in No. 814.
     Brooklyn to Babylon in No. 815. Brooklyn to Northport in No. 816.
     Tarrytown to Poughkeepsie in No. 817. Poughkeepsie to Hudson in
     No. 818. Hudson to Albany in No. 819. Tottenville to Trenton in
     820. Trenton to Philadelphia in 821. Philadelphia in No. 822.
     Philadelphia-Wissahickon Route in No. 823. Philadelphia to West
     Chester in No. 824. Philadelphia to Atlantic City--First Stage in
     No. 825; Second Stage in No. 826.




[Illustration: THE CAMERA CLUB]

     Any questions in regard to photograph matters will be willingly
     answered by the Editor of this column, and we should be glad to
     hear from any of our club who can make helpful suggestions.


WATERSCAPES.

The amateur who lives inland, and has made a success of landscapes, is
usually quite disappointed with his pictures of waterscapes when he
takes his summer outing at the sea or lake shore. The photographs are
for the most part thin and flat, and, while detail is not lacking, there
is no contrast between light and shadow.

The reason is that one is not prepared for the intense light with which
the whole scene is flooded, and consequently the plate is exposed too
long. The reflection from the water almost doubles the intensity of the
light. This may be noticed when focussing the image. Every part of the
scene reflected on the ground-glass is so well illuminated that there
are none of those dark masses of shadows which appear on inland
pictures. This the amateur at first thinks is an advantage. In one
respect it is, for it enables one to get a sharp focus much more easily.
This seeming advantage is really a great disadvantage. The strong light
on every object renders the developed negative flat and without
contrast.

One way to bring out the contrast is to use a small diaphragm. Focus
with a larger diaphragm and then put in a small one. The change in the
image on the ground-glass will be at once noticed. Instead of being
evenly lighted, the shadows are softened, and if a quick exposure is
made, and the negative carefully developed, a picture will be obtained
with as artistic gradations between the lights and shadows as in those
of a landscape.

In developing instantaneous pictures taken at the sea-shore a great deal
of judgment must be exercised. In the first place, as the light to which
the plate has been exposed is very strong, the picture must be put in
the developer in a very dim light, not allowing any of the direct rays
from the red light to strike the plate. As soon as the plate is covered
with the developer put a cover over the tray, and do not expose to the
light till time for the picture to begin to appear. If it comes up too
quickly, take it at once from the tray and put it in a dish of clear
water. Mix a fresh weak developer, or dilute the same developer and add
a few drops of bromide of potassium.

A weak solution of developer should be used to start the development.
Let the picture come up rather slowly, and after detail is well out take
the plate from the developer, rinse in clear water, and put it in a
stronger solution of developer till it has attained the right density.
Examine by holding to the light, and do not depend on the image on the
back of the plate as a guide to density. If the picture lacks in detail,
add a few drops of bicarbonate of soda to the developer; if lacking in
density, a few drops of solution of bromide of potassium should be used.

Fog, which one would naturally suppose would obscure or deaden the
light, has instead great illuminating power. Instantaneous pictures
taken on a foggy day are often the most beautiful of waterscapes.

A good rule when taking pictures at the sea-shore is to use a small
stop, and the quickest exposure of the shutter provided with the hand
camera.

Remember that the light is more than double the strength on the sea than
on the land, and that the water reflects the light instead of absorbing
it.

     SIR KNIGHT RAYMOND J. SPOONER would like to know how to mount
     prints on paper so that they will lie smooth. He intends to use
     drawing-paper 8 x 10 for 4 x 5 prints and then have them bound.
     Make a rather thin paste of laundry starch. Soak the prints in
     water for a few minutes, and then lay them one by one face down on
     some hard smooth surface, like a pane of glass or the bottom of a
     porcelain toning-tray. Blot each one as it is taken out of the
     water, removing all the superfluous moisture. Have the sheet of
     drawing-paper ready, and moisten the place where the print is to be
     placed very slightly with a damp sponge. Paste the back of the
     print, using only enough paste to cover it, lift the corner with
     the point of a knife, and lay it pasted side down on the mount. Lay
     a piece of tissue-paper over the face of the mount and roll the
     print smooth with a squeegee. A smooth glass bottle can be used if
     one has no squeegee, or a new wooden rolling-pin answers every
     purpose. Lay the print when mounted between two pieces of clean
     blotting-paper and put a weight on it; as the prints are mounted
     they can be laid one on top of the other with blotting-paper
     between. Be very careful that no paste is on the face of the print.
     The object in moistening the mount is that the print may not make
     it shrink; drawing-paper, being lighter weight than a card-mount,
     is apt to do this unless it is first moistened as directed.

     ANSWERS TO QUERIES.--SIR KNIGHT A. SMITH wishes to know what will
     keep films from curling when in the developer The films should be
     soaked in water till they become limp before they are placed in
     the developer. To keep them from curling after development they
     should be placed before drying in a solution of glycerine and
     water, composed of glycerine 1/4 oz., water 8 oz.

       *       *       *       *       *

FALSE ECONOMY

is practised by people who buy inferior articles of food. The Gail
Borden Eagle Brand Condensed Milk is the best infant food. _Infant
Health_ is the title of a valuable pamphlet for mothers. Sent free by
New York Condensed Milk Co., New York.--[_Adv._]




ADVERTISEMENTS.




Arnold

Constable & Co.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Autumn Styles"

Ladies' Golf Capes

In Great Variety.

Foreign and Domestic Makes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Broadway & 19th st.

NEW YORK.




[Illustration]

You See Them Everywhere

Satisfaction and Speed in

Columbia Bicycles

The famous Hartford Single-Tube Tires with which Columbia Bicycles are
equipped add much to the pleasure Columbia riders have in bicycling.
Even the dreaded puncture loses its terrors with Hartford Single-Tubes.
Repaired in a minute. Anyone can do it. Dunlop tires, best of double
tubes, if you prefer.

POPE MFG. Co.

HARTFORD, CONN.




Postage Stamps, &c.




=1000= Mixed Foreign Postage Stamps, including Fiji Islands, Samoa,
Hawaii, Hong Kong, for 34c. in stamps; 10 varieties U. S. Columbian
stamps, 25c.; entire unused 5c. and 10c. Columbian Envelopes, 25c. the
pair. Only a limited number were issued by U. S. Government. E. F.
GAMBS, Box 2631, San Francisco, Cal. Established, 1872.




[Illustration]

100 all dif. Venezuela, Costa Rica, etc., only 10c.; 200 all dif. Hayti,
Hawaii, etc., only 50c. Ag'ts wanted at 50 per ct. com. List FREE!

=C. A. Stegmann=, 2722 Eads Av., St. Louis, Mo.




=100= all different, China, etc., 10c.; 5 Saxony, 10c.; 40 Spain, 40c.;
6 Tunis, 14c.; 10 U. S. Revenues, 10c. Agts. wtd., 50% com.; '95 list
free.

CRITTENDEN & BORGMAN CO., Detroit, Mich.




[Illustration: If afflicted with SORE EYES USE Dr. ISAAC THOMPSON'S EYE
WATER]




Good Music

Franklin Square Song Collection.

GOOD MUSIC arouses a spirit of good-will, creates a harmonious
atmosphere, and where harmony and good-will prevail, the disobedient,
turbulent, unruly spirit finds no resting-place. Herbert Spencer puts
his final test of any plan of culture in the form of a question. "Does
it create a pleasurable excitement in the pupils?" Judged by this
criterion, Music deserves the first rank, for no work done in the school
room is so surely creative of pleasure as singing. Do we not all agree,
then, that Vocal Music has power to benefit every side of the child
nature? And in these days, when we seek to make our schools the arenas
where children may grow into symmetrical, substantial, noble characters,
can we afford to neglect so powerful an aid as Music? Let us as rather
encourage it in every way possible.

_Nowhere can you find for Home or School a better Selection of Songs and
Hymns than in the Franklin Square Song Collection._

Sold Everywhere. Price, 50 cents; Cloth, $1.00. Full contents of the
Several Numbers, with Specimen Pages of favorite Songs and Hymns, sent
by Harper & Brothers, New York, to any address.




Mangoes and Bilberries in Jamaica.


     All the mangoes are ripe now, and we get plenty of them. There are
     about six kinds: the Number Eleven, the Black, the Yam, the
     Kidney, and the East Indian. I like the Black best, though the
     Number Eleven is considered the choicest. The Black mangoes are
     gray with black spots on them; the Number Eleven are a bright
     orange color; and the Yam mangoes are yellow and red, and might be
     taken by strangers for huge peaches as they lie on the ground. The
     East Indian variety is big and green, with black spots.

     We also have bilberries. They are about the color, shape, and size
     of our huckleberries, and they taste about the same. We have them
     in the morning for breakfast. We also have cocoanuts on our place.
     When they are young the milk is good to drink, and is very
     refreshing. Our cook often makes soup of them, which is very rich
     in flavor. At one time I saw our cook with her dinner on her head.
     It consisted of baked plantain and yam, and was smoking hot. She
     was walking around the yard, taking off a bit of her dinner now
     and then to eat it.

     Coffee does not seem to grow well in this place, judging from that
     which is here. It grows better in higher regions. There is to be a
     "Sky Meeting" at Up-Park-Camp on the 20th of July, given by the
     English officers. It includes horse-racing, etc. This place in
     which we are now living is called "Garden House." The first
     mangoes in the island were planted here, and all the others came
     from them. There are sixteen acres of coffee. The people prune
     their coffee after it has begun bearing. I would like a few
     correspondents.

  FRED HAWTHORNE.
  GARDEN HOUSE, KINGSTON, JAMAICA.




Gold and Silver from Ores.


     I visited a huge smeltery not long ago, and saw how gold and
     silver were separated from their ores. The lead ore, or galena,
     which contains also gold, silver, and copper, is brought from
     Utah. The average yield of silver of the ore used here is about
     one hundred ounces to the ton. The amount of gold and silver in
     the ore is determined in the assaying room in this manner:

     A piece of the silver-bearing lead is carefully weighed in a very
     delicate balance, and is then placed in a little cup of bone ash,
     called a cupel. Then the cupel is put into a very hot furnace so
     arranged that a current of air passes over it. The air oxidizes
     the melted base metals, but the gold and silver are not affected.
     The cupel has the remarkable power of absorbing the oxides of
     metal, and so in an hour or so there is nothing left in it save a
     little bead of silver and gold. This bead is then weighed, and in
     this way it is known what proportion of gold and silver there is
     in the ore.

     To extract the metals, the ore is mixed with limestone and coal,
     and is thrown into a blast-furnace, which resembles an inverted
     cone. A fire is started in the bottom and a blast of air is forced
     through the pipes into the furnace. When the metal has been melted
     from the ore the furnace is tapped at the bottom, and the metal,
     consisting of gold, silver, copper, and lead, runs out into large
     pots. It is then run into moulds. This metal is called "bullion."

     The next process is to separate the lead from the other metals.
     The bullion is melted in a large deep basin and molten zinc is
     added. The zinc forms an alloy with the gold, silver, and copper,
     which is lighter than the lead, and therefore floats on the
     surface. Then this alloy is skimmed off and taken to another part
     of the works, where it is placed in furnaces and the zinc burned
     out. After all the zinc has been gotten rid of the metal is taken
     to a large room which contains a row of small furnaces. Inside of
     these furnaces are shallow cupels over which a current of air
     passes. After the metal has been melted in these cupels it is run
     out into moulds, which shape the metal into plates about twenty
     inches long and ten in width.

     The metal of these plates consists of gold and silver, which still
     have to be separated. The plates are hung in gauze bags and put in
     strong nitric acid. This acid dissolves the silver, but does not
     affect the gold, which drops down into the bags and is caught
     there. About three inches distant from the sack containing the
     gold and silver plate is a very thin plate of silver. This plate
     and the one in the sack are connected to a dynamo. The current of
     electricity causes the dissolved silver to deposit itself on the
     plate. After all the silver has been collected it is cast into
     blocks weighing one thousand ounces each. The gold is likewise
     cast into blocks.

     I saw about $100,000 worth of silver in the vaults and in the
     works. There are other methods of separating these metals, but I
     think this is the most common way. Some ores are more easily
     worked than others.

  HOMER L. STEWART, R.T.F.
  PITTSBURG, PA.




The Lyre-Bird.


     The lyre-bird is a very beautiful bird, and is to be found in the
     eastern part of Australia. The form and structure of the tail
     resemble an ancient Grecian lyre, hence its name. The size of this
     bird is about that of the common hen, the eyes are dark hazel,
     large, mild in expression, and very beautiful. The wings are short
     and hollow, rendering great assistance when running, but of little
     use in flying.

     The bird's running powers are extraordinary, and it is not easily
     overtaken. The legs are rather long, the color of the body is
     reddish-brown, and its general appearance is very graceful. It is
     of a gentle disposition and altogether harmless. The lyre-bird
     will soon be lost to us forever. The tail feathers were formerly
     sold in Sydney at a low price, but now that the beautiful
     creatures are nearly exterminated the price has risen exceedingly.

  CARRIE WELLENBROCK, R.T.L.




Prizes for Poems.


Three prizes of $5, $4, $3 each are offered by HARPER'S ROUND TABLE for
the best short poems. Any subject allowed. Limited to five stanzas; the
best to be printed in the ROUND TABLE. Competition open to all members
of the Order. Forward not later than December 1, 1895.




A Special Offer.


Teachers, students, superintendents of Sunday-schools, ladies, members
of the Round Table, and others willing to distribute ten to seventy-five
Prospectuses and personally commend HARPER'S ROUND TABLE, will receive,
according to number of Prospectuses distributed, bound volumes of
HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE for 1893, gold badges of the Round Table Order,
packet of fifty engraved visiting-cards, bearing their name, with copper
plate for future use, rubber stamp bearing their name and address,
nickel pencil resembling a common nail, or silver badge of the Round
Table Order. This offer is restricted to one person in a town or
neighborhood. In applying, state how many circulars you can place in the
hands of those sure to be interested in them, what are your facilities
for distributing them, and what prize you seek.




In Aid of the Fund.


At "Pine Top," on the afternoon and evening of September 21st, there is
to be a lawn festival and sale in aid of the Good Will School Fund. Pine
Top is at 162d Street and Edgecombe Road, in the upper part of New York
city, and the festival is under the auspices of the Misses Schrenkeisen,
Dey, and Hubert. The admission is ten and five cents, and all are
invited.




Saving on Age.


Thrift is an admirable trait. The way to acquire it is to cultivate it.
The way to cultivate it is to deny yourself, and faithfully lay by the
money you were tempted to spend. Of course you do not lay the money by
for the sake of having it to spend later on. People save money for the
money, it is true. This is right because it is provident. One might fall
ill, and if he had no money saved up he might become a burden upon those
illy able to support him.

But the best thing about the habit of saving is the habit itself.
Having the habit well fixed in one's character renders one
self-controllable--in other words, thrifty. Thrift applies to more
things than money-saving, for the man who saves money begins to save
other things. Waste is wrong--a sin.

Did you ever know one to save on his age--that is, to lay by as many
dimes or dollars each year as he is years old? Suppose you are fourteen.
During that year you save $14, and with it buy a certificate of deposit,
a share of stock, or something that is complete in itself--a bond that
represents your age that year. Next year you are fifteen, and you buy a
$15 bond. Or, if you cannot save as many dollars as you are years old,
try saving as many half-dollars or dimes. Keep your money in your own
name, not in the name of somebody else who happens to have a bank-book
when you do not, and draw it out only when you are very sure you need
it. Get your age bond first, and your luxury afterward.

If you begin at fourteen, a dollar for each year, you will have at
twenty-one seven bonds, representing $119. You will also have some
interest money. But you will have much more, namely, the _habit_ of
saving--systematic economy, which is an education of itself, and one
which, if necessary to gain, you could well afford to throw away the
$119 that you saved.




The Helping Hand.


Some kind friends in St Louis put a lemonade stand on Delaware Boulevard
the other day, and as a result sent $1.50 to us for the School Fund. Two
readers living in West Groton, Mass., took up a ten-cent collection
among their acquaintances, and remitted $1. The William D. Moffat
Chapter, of Oakland, Md., exhibited some rare manuscripts which a friend
loaned them, and sent us $10.

The letter of Mr. Munroe was cordially received by the Order, and
everybody praised the idea that _each member_ be represented, so that
the building would stand as a monument to the chivalry of the _whole
Order_. Since the last report the following sums have reached us:
Roderick and William J. Beebe, $2. William D. Moffat Chapter, Oakland,
Md., $10. Lucy L. Verrill, $1. H. E. Banning, 40 cents. Rosaline and
Edith Cline, 20 cents. E. J. and F. G., 20 cents. Carrie Wellenbrock,
$1. Otto Prussack, 5 cents. Dorothy and Pineo, 5 cents. M. C. Haldeman,
25 cents. Myra F. Chapin, 10 cents. Carroll D. Murphy, 10 cents. Harold
W. Bynner, 10 cents. Gerard Stafford King, 10 cents. Two devoted
readers, $1. Anna E. Sibley, 26 cents. Carolyn G. Thorne, 50 cents.
Ernestine Pattison, $2.50. Amy, D. A., and W. H. Bowman, Maud Ringen,
Marie and Morris Sadler, Jun., $1.50. Katherine A. Waller, 25 cents.

These sums come from every part of the country, showing a wide interest.
The Little Women Chapter, of Upper Nyack, N. Y., Sophie Moeller,
president, is to hold a fair, and wants contributions; the members of
the Order residing in Washington, D. C., and in Cincinnati. O.,
respectively are to have entertainments; and Mr. Kirk Munroe is to give
in New York city, in November, a reading from his own books. Washington
members may send word to Elizabeth W. Hyde, 1418 Euclid Place, N. W.,
and Cincinnati members to the Robert Louis Stevenson Chapter, J. H.
Bates, Jun., 502 East Third Street.

  GOOD WILL MITE

       *       *       *       *       *

  HARPER'S ROUND TABLE

  INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL FUND

  _Amount_, $........................

  ...............................
  _Contributor._

_This money is contributed, not because it is asked for, but because I
want to give it._

       *       *       *       *       *

If you use this Good Will Mite, simply pin it to your letter, in order
that it may be detached for filing. If the amount is given by more than
one contributor, add blanks for their names, but attach the added sheet
firmly to the Mite, that it may not become detached and lost. Include a
given name in each case, and write plainly, to avoid errors on the Honor
Roll.




Kinks.


No. 98.--ENIGMA.

  38, 21, 44, 20, 7, 35, 12.--To justify.
  29, 41, 5, 14, 33.--To err.
  27, 31, 43, 15, 36.--A judgment.
  42, 19, 47, 26, 24, 40, 11, 30.--A mechanical hold.
  32, 6, 46, 26, 34.--A kind of flax.
  36, 18, 28, 45, 23.--Suspense.
  17, 1, 22, 24, 10, 8.--A near relative.
  9, 39, 35, 2, 25, 36.--Accustomed.
  3, 46, 37, 24, 13, 4, 33.--Course of life.
  The whole a verse of Scripture in the Old Testament.

  ALBERT.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 99.--RIDDLES.

  Animal, nor vegetable,
    Nor mineral am I;
  A natural product, I exist
    From two to six feet high.
  I am not she, I am not he,
    But just between the two;
  You'll often see me take my place,
    And sometimes hear me too.
  I have no breadth, I have no length,
    I'm neither thin nor thick,
  I'm used to show a faithful love,
    And mark a traitor's trick.
  I'm mentioned oft in Holy Writ,
    Both in the Old and New,
  And strongly recommended there
    By holy men and true.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 100

  Born in the fields as free as air,
    Then early torn from home,
  And in the mansions of the great,
    A slave I'm forced to roam.
  From room to room I wander there,
    But never go alone,
  I'm always taken by the hand,
    Until my task is done.
  Although the badge of royal race,
    I'm found with mean and poor.
  And oft, with them, I hide my face
    Behind the kitchen door.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 101.

  I'm insignificant and small,
    But still my power is great;
  Before a barrier stout and strong
  Both force and strength may tarry long,
    Until I come at call.
  When with a gentle touch I do
  What all their might could not get through.




Answers to Kinks.


No. 95.

1. Mourning-bride. 2. Weeds. 3. Bleeding-heart. 4. Sweet-William. 5.
Rose. 6. Four-o'clock. 7. Phlox. 8. Stock. 9. Corn. 10. Box. 11.
Lady's-slippers. 12. Hop. 13. Fox-gloves. 14. Monks-hoods. 15. Balm. 16
Hearts-ease. 17. Thyme. 18. Old-man. 19 Sage. 20. Sweet-pease. 21
Eye-bright. 22 Pink. 23 Tulips. 24. None-so-pretty. 25. Matrimony.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 96.

  1.--1. L. 2. Dab. 3. Dared. 4. Lannier. 5. Being. 6. Deg. 7. R.
  2.--1. T. 2. Tub. 3. Tames. 4. Rumbles. 5. Below. 6. Sew. 7. S.
  3.--1. R. 2. Tab. 3. Toned. 4. Ranters. 5. Beery. 6. Dry. 7. S.
  4.--1. S. 2. Raw. 3. Roted. 4. Satanic. 5. Wends. 6. Dis. 7. C.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 97.

Longfellow--1. Melba. 2. Hanover. 3. Trenton. 4. Niagara. 5. Buffalo. 6.
Cleveland. 7. Holland. 8. Willard. 9. Scott. 10. Lewis.




[Illustration]

One can be genteel and neat, and still indulge a love of out-door
sports.

A fall with nothing worse than mud stains is not serious; Ivory Soap
will remove troublesome spots and restore the original freshness to a
good piece of cloth.

Copyright 1895, The Procter & Gamble Co.




[Illustration]

EARN A TRICYCLE!

We wish to introduce our Teas, Spices, and Baking Powder. Sell 30 lbs.
and we will give you a Fairy Tricycle: sell 25 lbs. for a Solid Silver
Watch and Chain; 50 lbs. for a Gold Watch and Chain; 75 lbs. for a
Bicycle; 10 lbs. for a Beautiful Gold Ring. Express prepaid if cash is
sent for goods. Write for catalog and order sheet.

W. G. BAKER,

SPRINGFIELD, MASS.




[Illustration]

THE

BALTIMOREAN PRINTING-PRESS

has earned more money for boys than all other presses in the market.
Boys, don't idle away your time when you can buy a self-inking
printing-press, type, and complete outfit for $5.00. Write for
particulars, there is money in it for you.

THE J. F. W. DORMAN CO.,

Baltimore, Md., U.S.A.




$100 PRIZE

For best 500-Word Essay. Open to girls under 17. Second prize, $25.
Subject "Silk," but essays must contain some reference to Cutter's
Little Spool Sewing Silk, and statement of points of superiority.
Circular of full particulars upon application to =JOHN D. CUTTER & CO.=,
makers of Cutter's "Little Spool" Sewing Silk, Union Square, New York
City.




[Illustration]

WONDER CABINET =FREE=. Missing Link Puzzle, Devil's Bottle, Pocket
Camera, Latest Wire Puzzle, Spook Photos, Book of Sleight of Hand, Total
Value 60c. Sent free with immense catalogue of 1000 Bargains for 10c.
for postage.

INGERSOLL & BRO., 65 Cortlandt Street, N. Y.




=DEAFNESS & HEAD NOISES CURED= by my =INVISIBLE= Tubular Cushions. Have
helped more to good =HEAR=ing than all other devices combined. Whispers
=HEAR=d. Help ears as glasses do eyes. =F. Hiscox=, 853 B'dway, N.Y.
Book of proofs =FREE=




HARPER'S NEW CATALOGUE,

Thoroughly revised, classified, and indexed, will be sent by mail to any
address on receipt of ten cents.




[Illustration: If afflicted with SORE EYES USE Dr. ISAAC THOMPSON'S EYE
WATER]




Harper's Young People Series

_Illustrated. Post 8vo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1.25 each:_

     =The Mystery of Abel Forefinger.= By WILLIAM DRYSDALE.

     =Raftmates.--Canoemates.--Campmates.= By KIRK MUNROE.

     =Young Lucretia, and Other Stories.= By MARY E. WILKINS.

     =A Boy's Town.= By W. D. HOWELLS.

     =Diego Pinzon.= By J. R. CORYELL.

     =The Moon Prince, and Other Nabobs.= By R. K. MUNKITTRICK.

     =The Midnight Warning, and Other Stories.= By E. H. HOUSE.

     Phil and the Baby, and False Witness. By Lucy C. Lillie.

     =Flying Hill Farm.--The Mate of the "Mary Anne."= By SOPHIE SWETT.

_Illustrated. Square 16mo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1.00 each:_

     =Wakulla.--The Flamingo Feather.--Derrick Sterling.--Chrystal, Jack
     & Co., and Delta Bixby.--Dorymates.= By KIRK MUNROE.

     =The Talking Leaves.--Two Arrows--The Red Mustang.= By W. O.
     STODDARD.

     =Prince Lazybones, and Other Stories.= By Mrs. W. J. HAYS.

     =The Ice Queen.= By ERNEST INGERSOLL.

     =Uncle Peter's Trust.= By GEORGE B. PERRY.

     =The Adventures of Jimmy Brown.--The Cruise of the Canoe Club.--The
     Cruise of the "Ghost."--The Moral Pirates.--The New Robinson
     Crusoe.= By W. L. ALDEN.

     =Toby Tyler.--Mr. Stubbs's Brother.--Tim and Tip.--Left
     Behind.--Raising the "Pearl."--Silent Pete.= By JAMES OTIS.

     =The Four Macnicols.= By WILLIAM BLACK.

     =The Lost City.--Into Unknown Seas.= By DAVID KER.

     =The Story of Music and Musicians.--Jo's Opportunity.--Rolf
     House.--Mildred's Bargain, and Other Stories.--Nan.--The Colonel's
     Money.--The Household of Glen Holly.= By LUCY C. LILLIE.

     =Who Was Paul Grayson?= By JOHN HABBERTON.

     =Captain Polly.= By SOPHIE SWETT.

     =Strange Stories from History.= By GEORGE CARY EGGLESTON.

       *       *       *       *       *

Published by HARPER & BROTHERS, New York

_The above works are for sale by all booksellers, or will be mailed by
the publishers, postage prepaid, on receipt of the price._




[Illustration: IT WAS A BEAUTIFUL SCHEME, BUT THE OLD LADY WAS ONTO
THEIR GAME.]




Poor Jimmie lisped, and his teacher entirely misunderstood his meaning
when he said, in answer to her command to conjugate the verb sink,
"think, thank, thinking, thunk."




BOBBY. "I don't like a bicycle built for two."

JACK. "You don't! why?"

BOBBY. "Because it encourages back talk."




[Illustration]

THE OBLIGING BEAR.


  A Honey-loving grizzly-bear,
  In a great bee-tree made his lair;
        "There is a law," he told the bees,
        "That honey sha'n't be kept in trees.

  "I'll take it out for you," said he.
  "Nay, nay, sir," cries the old queen bee,
        "Take yourself off!" and then and there
        The stinging bees fell on the bear.




HE WANTS TO KNOW.


TOMMY TRADDLES. "Papa, you call that little bit of a tiny wee engine a
donkey-engine, don't you?"

MR. TRADDLES. "Yes, my boy."

TOMMY. "Well, papa, won't that donkey-engine have to grow a great deal
bigger before it can have any horse-power?"




"Papa, I've got some mending for you to do. My roller-skates are
broken."

"Well, put them away till morning. It's too late to mend anything now."

"Why! you said this morning that it was never too late to mend."




BECKY WOOD.


  Barefoot, pit-a-pat, pious, poor, and good,
  Walking to the Meeting-House was little Becky Wood.
  Up rode great William Penn--"Little girl," quoth he,
  "Jump upon my palfrey here and ride along with me."
  Trot, trot, canter, canter, all along the street,
  William Penn took Becky Wood with her bare brown feet,
  Trot, trot, canter, canter, to the very door.
  Never was a barefoot girl quite so proud before.




A BLUNDER AND NO MISTAKE.


JABEZ (_slapping Ichabod on the back_). "Hello Tony!"

ICHABOD (_wincing_). "But I'm not Tony."

JABEZ (_discovering his error_). "Oh, I beg pardon. I thought you were
another fellow."

ICHABOD. "And so I am."




IT SEEMS SO.


"Papa," said Harry, "when a boy keeps on doing something wrong of his
own accord he's wilful, isn't he?"

"Yes," said Mr. Rigid.

"Then if he doesn't do nothing of nobody else's accord, he's wontful,
isn't he?"




The following extracts are from examination papers recently handed in at
a public school in Connecticut:

1. From what animals do we get milk? From the camel and the milkman.

2. The hen is covered with feathers. With what is the cat covered? The
cat is covered with fleas.

3. Name an animal that has four legs and a long tail. A mosquito.

4. Name two kinds of nuts. Peanuts and for-get-me-nuts.






End of Project Gutenberg's Harper's Round Table, September 3, 1895, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S ROUND TABLE, SEPTEMBER 3, 1895 ***

***** This file should be named 33126.txt or 33126.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/1/2/33126/

Produced by Annie McGuire

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
