The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Shadow of a Man, by E. W. Hornung

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Shadow of a Man

Author: E. W. Hornung

Release Date: September 6, 2010 [EBook #33651]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SHADOW OF A MAN ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Tim Madden and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









           The Shadow of a Man




                   The
             Shadow of a Man

            By E. W. Hornung

        Charles Scribner's Sons
             New York 1901




          Copyright, 1900, by
          J. B. Lippincott Co.

          Copyright, 1901, by
        Charles Scribner's Sons

             TROW DIRECTORY
    PRINTING AND BOOKBINDING COMPANY
                NEW YORK

       *       *       *       *       *




_CONTENTS_


                                      _Page_

     _I. The Belle of Toorak              1_

    _II. Injury                          14_

   _III. Insult                          28_

    _IV. Bethune of the Hall             39_

     _V. A Red Herring                   58_

    _VI. Below Zero                      67_

   _VII. A Cavalier                      84_

  _VIII. The Kind of Life                97_

    _IX. Pax in Bello                   120_

     _X. The Truth by Inches            134_

    _XI. Bethune v. Bethune             147_

   _XII. An Escapade                    166_

  _XIII. Blind Man's Block              180_

   _XIV. His Own Coin                   196_

    _XV. The Fact of the Matter         206_

       *       *       *       *       *




The Shadow of a Man




I

THE BELLE OF TOORAK


"And you're quite sure the place doesn't choke you off?"

"The place? Why, I'd marry you for it alone. It's just sweet!"

Of course it was nothing of the kind. There was the usual galaxy of log
huts; the biggest and best of them, the one with the verandah in which
the pair were sitting, was far from meriting the name of house which
courtesy extended to it. These huts had the inevitable roofs of
galvanised iron; these roofs duly expanded in the heat, and made the
little tin thunder that dwellers beneath them grow weary of hearing, the
warm world over. There were a few pine-trees between the buildings, and
the white palings of a well among the pines, and in the upper spaces a
broken but persistent horizon of salt-bush plains burning into the
blinding blue. In the Riverina you cannot escape these features: you may
have more pine-trees and less salt-bush; you may even get blue-bush and
cotton-bush, and an occasional mallee forest; but the plains will recur,
and the pines will mitigate the plains, and the dazzle and the scent of
them shall haunt you evermore, with that sound of the hot complaining
roofs, and the taste of tea from a pannikin and water from a water-bag.
These rude refinements were delights still in store for Moya Bethune,
who saw the bush as yet from a comfortable chair upon a cool verandah,
and could sing its praises with a clear conscience. Indeed, a real
enthusiasm glistened in her eyes. And the eyes of Moya happened to be
her chief perfection. But for once Rigden was not looking into them, and
his own were fixed in thought.

"There's the charm of novelty," he said. "That I can understand."

"If you knew how I revel in it--after Melbourne!"

"Yes, two days after!" said he. "But what about weeks, and months, and
years? Years of this verandah and those few pines!"

"We could cover in part of the verandah with trellis-work and creepers.
They would grow like wildfire in this heat, and I'm sure the owners
wouldn't mind."

"I should have to ask them. I should like to grow them inside as well,
to hide the papers."

"There are such things as pictures."

"They would make the furniture look worse."

"And there's such a thing as cretonne; and I'm promised a piano; and
there isn't so much of their furniture as to leave no room for a few of
our very own things. Besides, there's lots more they couldn't possibly
object to. Curtains. Mantel-borders. I'm getting ideas. You won't know
the place when I've had it in hand a week. Shall you mind?"

He did not hear the question.

"I don't know it as it is," he said; and indeed for Rigden it was
transformation enough to see Moya Bethune there in the delicious flesh,
her snowy frock glimmering coolly in the hot verandah, her fine eyes
shining through the dust of it like the gems they were.

His face said as much in the better language which needs no words.

"Then what's depressing you?" asked Moya brightly.

"I dread the life for you."

"But why?"

"I've been so utterly bored by it myself."

Her hand slid into his.

"Then you never will be again," she whispered, with a touching
confidence.

"No, not on my own account; of course not," said Rigden. "If only----"

And he sighed.

"If only what?"

For he had stopped short.

"If only you don't think better of all this--and of me!"

The girl withdrew her hand, and for a moment regarded Rigden critically,
as he leant forward in his chair and she leant back in hers. She did not
care for apologetic love-making, and she had met with more kinds than
one in her day. Rigden had not apologised when he proposed to her the
very week they met (last Cup-week), and, what was more to his credit,
had refused to apologise to her rather formidable family for so doing.
Whereupon they were engaged, and all her world wondered. No more
Government House--no more parties and picnics--but "one long picnic
instead," as her brother Theodore had once remarked before Moya, with
that brutal frankness which lent a certain piquancy to the family life
of the Bethunes. And the mere thought of her brother accounted for so
much in her mind, that Moya was leaning forward again in a moment, and
her firm little hand was back in its place.

"I believe it's Theodore!" she cried suspiciously.

"I--I don't understand," he said, telling the untruth badly.

"You do! He's been saying something. But you mustn't mind what Theodore
says; he's not to be taken seriously. Oh, how I wish I could have come
up alone!" cried Moya, with fine inconsistency, in the same breath. "But
next time," she whispered, "I will!"

"Not quite alone," he answered. And his tone was satisfactory at last.
And the least little wisp of a cloud between them seemed dispersed and
melted for ever and a day.

For Moya was quite in love for the first time in her life, though more
than once before she had been within measurable distance of that
enviable state. This enabled her to appreciate her present peace of mind
by comparing it with former feelings of a less convincing character. And
at last there was no doubt about the matter. She had fallen a happy
victim to the law of contrasts. Society favourite and city belle,
satiated with the attractions of the town, and deadly sick of the same
sort of young man, she had struck her flag to one who might have swum
into her ken from another planet; for the real bush is as far from
Toorak and Hawthorn, and The Block in Collins Street, as it is from Hyde
Park Corner.

It may be that Moya saw both bush and bushman in the same rosy light. To
the impartial eye Rigden was merely the brick-red, blue-eyed type of
Anglo-Saxon: a transparent character, clean of body and mind, modest but
independent, easy-going in most things, immovable in others. But he had
been immovable about Moya, whose family at its worst had failed to
frighten or to drive him back one inch. She could have loved him for
that alone; as it was it settled her; for Moya was of age, and the
family had forthwith to make the best of her betrothal.

This they had done with a better grace than might have been expected,
for the Bethunes had fine blood in them, though some of its virtue had
been strained out of this particular branch. Moya none the less
continued to realise the disadvantages of belonging to a large family
when one wishes to form a family of two. And this reflection inspired
her next remark of any possible interest to the world.

"Do you know, dear, I'm quite glad you haven't got any people?"

Rigden smiled a little strangely.

"You know what I mean!" she cried.

"I know," he said. And the smile became his own.

"Of course I was thinking of my own people," explained Moya. "They can't
see beyond Toorak--unless there's something going on at Government
House. And I'm so tired of it all--wouldn't settle there now if they
paid me. So we're out of touch. Of course I would have loved any one
belonging to you; but they mightn't have thought so much of me."

If she was fishing it was an unsuccessful cast. Rigden had grown too
grave to make pretty speeches even to his betrothed.

"I wish you had known my mother," was all he said.

"So do I, dear, and your father too."

"Ah! I never knew him myself."

"Tell me about them," she coaxed, holding his sunburnt hand in one of
hers, and stroking it with the other. She was not very inquisitive on
the subject herself. But she happened to have heard much of it at home,
and it was disagreeable not to be in a position to satisfy the curiosity
of others. She was scarcely put in that position now.

"They came out in the early days," said Rigden, "both of the colony and
of their own married life. Yet already these were numbered, and I was
born an orphan. But my dear mother lived to make a man of me: she was
the proudest and the poorest little woman in the colony; and in point of
fact (if this matters to you) she was not badly connected at home."

Moya said that it didn't matter to her one bit; and was unaware of any
insincerity in the denial.

"I don't tell you what her name was," continued Rigden. "I would if you
insisted. But I hate the sound of it myself, for they treated her very
badly on her marriage, and we never used to mention them from one year's
end to another."

Moya pressed his hand, but not the point, though she was sorely tempted
to do that too. She had even a sense of irritation at his caring to hide
anything from her, but she was quick to see the unworthiness of this
sentiment, and quicker to feel a remorse which demanded some sort of
expression in order to restore complete self-approval. Yet she would
not confess what had been (and still lingered) in her mind. So she
fretted about the trifle in your true lover's fashion, and was silent
until she hit upon a compromise.

"You know--if only anybody could!--how I would make up to you for all
that you have lost, dearest. But nobody can. And I am full of the most
diabolical faults--you can't imagine!"

And now she was all sincerity. But Rigden laughed outright.

"Tell me some of them," said he.

Moya hesitated; and did not confess her innate curiosity after all. She
was still much too conscious of that blemish.

"I have a horrible temper," she said at length.

"I don't believe it."

"Ask Theodore."

"I certainly shouldn't believe him."

"Then wait and see."

"I will; and when I see it I'll show you what a real temper is like."

"Then----"

"Yes?"

"Well, I suppose I've had more attention than I deserve. So I suppose
you might call me unreasonable--exacting--in fact, selfish!"

This was more vital; hence the hesitation on his part.

"When I do," said Rigden, solemnly, "you may send me about my business."

"It may be too late."

"Then we won't meet our troubles half-way," cried the young man, with
virile common-sense. "Come! We love each other; that's good enough to go
on with. And we've got the station to ourselves; didn't I work it well?
So don't let's talk through our necks!"

The bush slang made the girl smile, but excitement had overstrung her
finer nerves, and neither tone nor topic could she change at will.

"Shall we always love each other, darling?"

And there was the merest film of moisture upon the lovely eyes that were
fixed so frankly upon his own.

"I can only answer for myself," he said, catching her mood. "I shall
love you till I die."

"Whatever I do?"

"Even if you give me up."

"That's the one thing I shall never do, dearest."

"God bless you for saying it, Moya. If I knew what I have ever done or
can do to deserve you!"

"Don't, dear ... you little dream ... but you will know me by and by."

"Please Heaven!"

And he leant and kissed her with all his might.

"Meanwhile--let us promise each other--there shall be no clouds between
us while I am up here this week!"

"I'll kiss the Book on that."

"No shadows!"

"My dear child, why should there be?"

"There's Theodore----"

"Bother Theodore!"

"And then there are all those faults of mine."

"I don't believe in them. But if I did it would make no difference. It's
not your qualities I'm in love with, Moya. It's yourself--so there's an
end of it."

And an end there was, for about Rigden there was a crisp decisiveness
which had the eventual advantage of a nature only less decided than his
own. But it was strange that those should have been the last words.

Still stranger was it, as they sat together in a silence happier than
their happiest speech, and as the lowering sun laid long shadows at
their feet, that one of these came suddenly between them, and that it
was not the shadow of pine-tree or verandah-post, but of a man.




II

INJURY


It was not Theodore, however. It was a man whom Moya was thankful not to
have seen before. Nor was the face more familiar to Rigden himself, or
less unlovely between the iron-grey bristles that wove a wiry mat from
ear to ear, over a small head and massive jaws. For on attracting their
attention the man lifted his wideawake, a trick so foreign to the normal
bushman that Rigden's eyebrows were up from the beginning; yet he
carried his swag as a swag should be carried; the outer blanket was the
orthodox "bluey," duly faded; and the long and lazy stride that of the
inveterate "sundowner."

"Eureka Station, I believe?" said the fellow, halting.

"That's the name," said Rigden.

"And are you the boss?"

"I am."

"Then Eureka it is!" cried the swagman, relieving himself of his swag,
and heartily kicking it as it lay where he let it fall.

"But," said Rigden, smiling, "I didn't say I had any work for you, did
I?"

"And I didn't ask for any work."

"Travellers' rations, eh? You'll have to wait till my storekeeper comes
in. Go and camp in the travellers' hut."

Instead of a thank-you the man smiled--but only slightly--and shook his
iron-grey head--but almost imperceptibly. Moya perceived it, however,
and could not imagine why Rigden tolerated a demeanour which had struck
her as insolent from the very first. She glanced from one man to the
other. The smile broadened on the very unpleasant face of the tramp,
making it wholly evil in the lady's eyes. So far from dismissing him,
however, Rigden rose.

"Excuse me a few minutes," he said, not only briefly, but without even
looking at Moya; and with a word to the interloper he led the way to the
station store. This was one of the many independent buildings, and not
the least substantial. The tramp followed Rigden, and in another moment
a particularly solid door had closed behind the pair.

Moya felt at once hurt, aggrieved, and ashamed of her readiness to
entertain any such feelings. But shame did not remove them. It was their
first day together for two interminable months, and the afternoon was to
have been their very very own. That was the recognised arrangement, and
surely it was not too much to expect when one had come five hundred
miles in the heat of January (most of them by coach) to see one's
_fiance_ in one's future home. This afternoon, at least, they might have
had to themselves. It should have been held inviolate. Yet he could
desert her for the first uncleanly sundowner who came along! After first
telling the man to wait, he must needs show his strength by giving in
and attending to the creature himself, his devotion by leaving her alone
on a verandah without another soul in sight or hearing! It might only be
for the few minutes mentioned with such off-hand coolness. The slight
was just the same.

Such was the first rush of this young lady's injured feelings and too
readily embittered thoughts. They were more bitter, however, in form
than in essence, for the notorious temper of the Australian Bethunes was
seldom permitted a perfectly direct expression. They preferred the
oblique ways of irony and sarcasm, and their minds ran in those curves.
A little bitterness was in the blood, and Moya could not help being a
Bethune.

But she had finer qualities than were rife--or at all events
conspicuous--in the rank and file of her distinguished family. She had
the quality of essential sweetness which excited their humorous
contempt, and she was miraculously free from their innate and
unparalleled cynicism. At her worst she had warm feelings, justly
balanced by the faculty of cold expression. And at her best she was
quick to see her faults and to deplore them; a candid and enthusiastic
friend; staunch at your side, sincere to your face, loyal at all costs
behind your back.

It was this loyalty that came to her rescue now: she stood suddenly
self-convicted of a whole calendar of secret crime against the man whom
she professed to love. Did she love him? Could she possibly love him,
and so turn on him in an instant, even in her heart? Oh, yes, yes! She
was a little fool, that was all; at least she hoped it was all. To think
that her worst faults should hunt her up on the very heels of her frank
confession of them! So in a few minutes sense prevailed over
sensibility. And for a little all was well.

But these minutes mounted up by fives and then by tens. And the verandah
was now filled to blindness and suffocation by the sunken sun. And there
sat Moya Bethune, the admired of all the most admirable admirers
elsewhere, baking and blinking in solitary martyrdom, while, with a grim
and wilful obstinacy, she stoically waited the pleasure of a back-block
overseer who preferred a disreputable tramp's society to hers!

The little fool in her was uppermost once more. There was perhaps some
provocation now. Yet a little fool it indubitably was. She thought of
freckles. Let them come. They would be his fault. Not that he would
care.

Care!

And her short lip lifted in a peculiar smile; it was the war-smile of
the Bethunes, and not beautiful in itself, but Moya it touched with such
a piquant bitter-sweetness that some of her swains would anger her for
that very look. Her teeth were white as the wing of the sulphur-crested
cockatoo, and that look showed them as no other. Then there was the
glitter it put into her eyes: they were often lovelier, but never quite
so fine. And a sweet storm-light turned her skin from pale rose to
glowing ivory, and the short lip would tremble one moment to set more
unmercifully the next. Even so that those who loved and admired the
milder Moya, feared and adored her thus.

But this Moya was seldom seen in Toorak, or, for that matter, anywhere
else; and, of course, it was never to show itself any more, least of all
at Eureka Station. Yet it did so this first, this very afternoon, though
not all at once.

For the next thing that happened she took better than all that had gone
before, though those were negative offences, and this was a positive
affront.

It was when at last the store door opened, and Rigden went over to the
kitchen for something steaming in a pannikin, and then to his room for
something else. He passed once under Moya's nose, and once close beside
her chair, but on each occasion without a look or a word.

"Something is worrying him," she thought. "Poor fellow!"

And for a space her heart softened. But it was no space to speak of;
intensified curiosity cut it very short.

"Who can the horrid man be?"

The question paved the way to a new grievance and a new resolve.

"He ought to have told me. But he shall!"

Meanwhile the dividing door was once more shut; and now the better part
of an hour had passed; and the only woman on the station (she might
remain the only woman) had carried tea through the verandah and advised
Moya to go indoors and begin. Moya declined. But no one ever sat in the
sun up there. Moya said nothing; but at length gave so short an answer
to so natural a question that Mrs. Duncan retreated with a very natural
impression, false for the moment, but not for so many moments more.

For presently through the handful of pines, red-stemmed and resinous in
the sunset, there came the jingle of bit and stirrup, to interrupt the
unworthiest thoughts in which the insulted lady had yet indulged. She
was thinking of much that she had missed in town by coming up-country in
the height of the season; she was wishing herself back in Toorak. There
she was somebody; in Toorak, in Melbourne, they would not dare to treat
her thus.

Her fate was full of irony. There she could have had anybody, and,
rightly or wrongly, she was aware of the fact. No other girl down
there--or in Melbourne, for that matter--was at once a society belle, a
general favourite, and a Bethune. The latter titles smacked indeed of
the contradiction in terms, but their equal truth merely emphasised the
altogether exceptional character of our heroine. That she was herself
aware of it was not her fault. She had heard so much of her qualities
for so many years. But all her life it had been impressed upon her mind
that the Bethunes, as a family, were in a class by themselves in the
southern hemisphere. In moments of chagrin, therefore, it was only
natural that Moya should aggravate matters by remembering that she also
was a Bethune.

A Bethune engaged to a bushman who dared to treat her thus!

Such was the pith and point of these discreditable reflections when the
jingle of approaching horse put a sudden end to them. Moya looked up,
expecting to see her brother, and instinctively donning a mask. She
forgot it was in the buggy that Theodore had been got out of the way,
and it was with sheer relief that her eyes lit upon a sergeant and a
trooper of the New South Wales mounted police, with fluttering puggarees
and twinkling accoutrements, and a black fellow riding bareback in the
rear.

They reined up in front of the verandah.

"We want to see Mr. Rigden," said the sergeant, touching the shiny peak
of his cap.

"Oh, indeed!"

"Is he about?"

Moya would not say, and pretended she could not. The sudden apparition
of the police had filled her with apprehensions as wild as they were
vague. The trooper had turned in his saddle to speak to the blackfellow,
and Moya saw the great Government revolver at his hip. Even as she
hesitated, however, the store door opened, and Rigden locked it behind
him before sallying forth alone.

"Yes, here he is!" exclaimed Moya, and sat like a statue in her chair.
Yet the pose of the statue was not wholly suggestive of cold
indifference and utter unconcern.

"Glad to find you in, Mr. Rigden," said the sergeant. "We're having a
little bit of sport, for once in a way."

"I congratulate you. What sort?" said Rigden.

"A man-hunt!"

And there were volumes of past boredom and of present zest in the
sergeant's tone.

"That so?" said Rigden. "And who's the man?"

The sergeant glanced at the young lady. Rigden did the same. Their
wishes with respect to her were only too obvious. Moya took the fiercer
joy in disregarding them.

"I'd like to have a word with you in the store," said the sergeant.

"No, no!" said Rigden hastily. "Sergeant Harkness--Miss Bethune."

It was a cold little bow, despite this triumph.

"Miss Bethune will be interested," added Rigden grimly. "And she won't
give anything away."

"Thank you," said Moya. And her tone made him stare.

Harkness touched his horse with the spurs, and rode up close to the
verandah, on which Rigden himself now stood.

"Fact is," said he, "it oughtn't to get about among your men, or it's a
guinea to a gooseberry they'll go harbouring him. But it's a joker who
escaped from Darlinghurst a few days ago. And we've tracked him to your
boundary--through your horse-paddock--to your home-paddock gate!"

Rigden glanced at Moya. Her eyes were on him. He knew it before he
looked.

"Seen anything of him?" asked the sergeant inevitably.

"Not to my knowledge. What's he like?"

"Oldish. Stubby beard. Cropped head, of course. Grey as a coot."

"Height 5 ft. 11 in.," supplemented the trooper, reading from a paper;
"'hair iron-grey, brown eyes, large thin nose, sallow complexion, very
fierce-looking, slight build, but is a well-made man.'"

A dead silence followed; then Rigden spoke. Moya's eyes were still upon
him, burning him, but he spoke without tremor, and with no more
hesitation than was natural in the circumstances.

"No," he said, "I have seen no such man. No such man has been to me!"

"I was afraid of it," said Harkness. "Yet we tracked him to the
boundary, every yard, and we got on his tracks again just now near the
home-paddock gate. I bet he's camping somewhere within a couple of
miles; we must have another look while it's light. Beastly lot of sand
you have from the home-paddock gate right up to the house!"

"We're built upon a sandhill, you see," said Rigden, with a wry look
into the heavy yellow yard: "one track's pretty much like another in
here, eh, Billy?"

The black tracker shook a woolly pate.

"Too muchee damn allasame," said he. "Try again longa gate."

"Yes," said the sergeant, "and we'll bring him here for the night when
we catch him. You could lend us your travellers' hut, I suppose?"

"Oh, yes."

"So long then, Mr. Rigden. Don't be surprised if you see us back to
supper. I feel pretty warm."

And the sergeant used his spurs again, only to reign up suddenly and
swing round in his saddle.

"Been about the place most of the afternoon?" he shouted.

"All the afternoon," replied Rigden; "between the store and this
verandah."

"And you've had no travellers at all?"

"Not one."

"Well, never mind," cried the sergeant. "You shall have four for the
night."

And the puggarees fluttered, and the stirrup irons jingled, out of sight
and earshot, through the dark still pines, and so into a blood-red
sunset.




III

INSULT


Rigden remained a minute at least (Moya knew it was five) gazing through
the black trees into the red light beyond. That was so characteristic of
him and his behaviour! Moya caught up the _Australasian_ (at hand but
untouched all this time) and pretended she could see to read. The rustle
brought Rigden to the right about at last. Moya was deep in illegible
advertisements. But the red light reached to her face.

Rigden came slowly to her side. She took no notice of him. His chair was
as he had pushed it back an age ago; he drew it nearer than before, and
sat down. Nor was this the end of his effrontery.

"Don't touch my hand, please!"

She would not even look at him. In a flash his face was slashed with
lines, so deep you might have looked for them to fill with blood. There
was plenty of blood beneath the skin. But he obeyed her promptly.

"I am sorry you were present just now," he remarked, as though nothing
very tragical had happened. There was none the less an underlying note
of tragedy which Moya entirely misconstrued.

"So am I," said she; and her voice nipped like a black frost.

"I wanted you to go, you know!" he reminded her.

"Do you really think it necessary to tell me that?"

All this time she was back in her now invisible advertisements. And her
tone was becoming more and more worthy of a Bethune.

"I naturally didn't want you to hear me tell a lie," explained Rigden,
with inconsistent honesty.

"On the contrary, I'm very glad to have heard it," rejoined Moya. "It's
instructive, to say the least."

"It was necessary," said Rigden quietly.

"No doubt!"

"A lie sometimes is," he continued calmly. "You will probably agree with
me there."

"Thank you," said Moya promptly; but no insinuation had been intended,
no apology was offered, and Rigden proceeded as though no interruption
had occurred.

"I am not good at them as a general rule," he confessed. "But just now I
was determined to do my best. I suppose you would call it my worst!"

Moya elected not to call it anything.

"That poor fellow in the store----"

"I really don't care to know anything about him."

"--I simply couldn't do it," concluded Rigden expressively.

"Is he the man they want or not?"

The question came in one breath with the interruption, but with a change
of tone so unguardedly complete that Rigden smiled openly. There was no
answering smile from Moya. Her sense of humour, that saving grace of the
Bethunes as a family, had deserted her as utterly as other graces of
which she had more or less of a monopoly.

"Of course he's the man," said Rigden at once; but again there was the
deeper trouble in his tone, the intrinsic trouble which mere results
could not aggravate.

And this time Moya's perceptions were more acute. But by now pride had
the upper hand of her. There was some extraordinary and mysterious
reason for Rigden's conduct from beginning to end of this incident, or
rather from the beginning to this present point, which was obviously not
the end at all. Moya would have given almost anything to know what that
reason was; the one thing that she would not give was the inch involved
in asking the question in so many words. And Rigden in his innocence
appreciated her delicacy in not asking.

"I can't explain," he began in rueful apology, and would have gone on to
entreat her to trust him for once. But for some reason the words jammed.
And meanwhile there was an opening which no Bethune could resist.

"Have I asked you for an explanation?"

"No. You've been awfully good about that. You're pretty rough on a
fellow, all the same!"

"I don't think I am at all."

"Oh, yes, you are, Moya!"

For her tongue was beginning to hit him hard.

"You needn't raise your voice, Pelham, just because there's some one
coming."

It was only the Eureka jackeroo (or "Colonial experiencer"), who had the
hardest work on the station, and did it "for his tucker," but so badly
as to justify Rigden in his bargain. It may here be mentioned that the
manager's full name was Pelham Stanislaus Rigden; it was, however, a
subconscious peculiarity of this couple never to address each other by a
mere Christian name. Either they confined themselves to the personal
pronoun, or they made use of expressions which may well be left upon
their lovers' lips. But though scarcely aware of the habitual breach,
they were mutually alive to the rare observance, which was perhaps the
first thing to make Rigden realise the breadth and depth of his offence.
It was with difficulty he could hold his tongue until the jackeroo had
turned his horse adrift and betaken himself to the bachelors' hut
euphemistically yclept "the barracks."

"What have I done," cried Rigden, in low tones, "besides lying as you
heard? That I shall suffer for, to a pretty dead certainty. What else
have I done?"

"Oh, nothing," said Moya impatiently, as though the subject bored her.
In reality she was wondering and wondering why he should have run the
very smallest risk for the sake of a runaway prisoner whom he had
certainly pretended never to have seen before.

"But I can see there's something else," persisted Rigden. "What on earth
is it, darling? After all I did not lie to you!"

"No," cried Moya, downright at last; "you only left me for two mortal
hours alone on this verandah!"

Rigden sprang to his feet.

"Good heavens!" he cried; and little dreamed that he was doubling his
enormity.

"So you were unaware of it, were you?"

"Quite!" he vowed naively.

"You had forgotten my existence, in fact? Your candour is too
charming!"

His candour had already come home to Rigden, and he bitterly deplored
it, but there was no retreat from the transparent truth. He therefore
braced himself to stand or fall by what he had said, but meanwhile to
defend it to the best of his ability.

"You don't know what an interview I had in yonder," he said, jerking a
hand towards the store. "And the worst of it is that I can never tell
you."

"Ah!"

"God forgive me for forgetting or neglecting you for a single instant!"
Rigden exclaimed. "I can only assure you that when I left you I didn't
mean to be gone five minutes. You will realise that what I eventually
undertook to do for this wretched man made all the difference. It did
put you out of my head for the moment; but you speak as though it were
going to put you out of my life for all time!"

"For the sake of a man you pretended never to have seen before,"
murmured Moya, deftly assuming what she burned to know.

"It was no pretence. I didn't recognise him."

"But you do now," pronounced Moya, as one stating a perceptible fact.

"Yes," said Rigden, "I recognise him--now."

There was a pause. Moya broke it softly, a suspicion of sympathy in her
voice.

"I am afraid he must have some hold over you."

"He has indeed," said Rigden bitterly; and next moment his heart was
leaping, as a flame leaps before the last.

She who loved him was back at his side, she who had flouted him was no
more. Her hot hands held both of his. Her quick breath beat upon his
face. It was now nearly dark in the verandah, but there was just light
enough for him to see the tears shining in her splendid eyes. Rigden was
infinitely touched and troubled, but not by this alone. It was her voice
that ran into his soul. She was imploring him to tell her all; there
must be no secrets between them; let him but tell her the worst and she
would stand by him, against all the world if need be, and no matter how
bad the worst might be. She was no child. There was nothing he could
not tell her, nothing she could not understand and forgive, except his
silence. Silence and secrecy were the one unpardonable sin in her eyes.
She would even help him to conceal that dreadful man, no matter what the
underlying reason might be, or how much she might disagree with it, if
only the reason were explained to her once and for all.

It was the one thing that Rigden would not explain.

He entreated her to trust him. His voice broke and the words failed him.
But on the crucial point he was firm. And so was she.

"You said you were unreasonable and exacting," he groaned. "I didn't
believe it. Now I see that it is true."

"But this is neither one nor the other," cried Moya. "Goodness! If I
were never to exact more than your confidence! It's my right. If you
refuse----"

"I do refuse it, in this instance, Moya."

"Then here's your ring!"

There was a wrench, a glitter, and something fell hot into his palm.

"I only hope you will think better of this," he said.

"Never!"

"I own that in many ways I have been quite in the wrong----"

"In every way!"

"There you are unreasonable again. I can't help it. I am doing what I
honestly believe----"

His voice died away, for a whip was cracking in the darkness, with the
muffled beat of unshod hoofs in the heavy sand. They sat together
without a word, each waiting for the other to rise first; and thus
Theodore found them, though Moya's dress was all he could descry at
first.

"That you, Moya? Well, what price the bush? I've been shooting turkeys;
they call it sport; but give me crows to-morrow! What, you there too,
Rigden? Rum coincidence! Sorry I didn't see you sooner, old chap; but
I'm not going to retract about the turkeys."

He disappeared in the direction of the barracks, and Moya held out her
hand.

"Lend me that ring," she said. "There's no reason why we should give
ourselves away to-night."

"I think the sooner the better," said Rigden.

But he returned the ring.




IV

BETHUNE OF THE HALL


Theodore Bethune was a young man of means, with the brains to add to
them, and the energy to use his brains. As the eldest of his family he
had inherited a special legacy in boyhood; had immediately taken himself
away from the Church of England Grammar School, and booked his passage
to London by an early boat. On the voyage he read the classics in his
deck chair, asked copious questions in the smoking-room, and finally
decided upon Cambridge as the theatre of his academical exploits.

Jesus was at that time the College most favoured by Australasian youth:
this was quite enough for Theodore Bethune. He ultimately selected
Trinity Hall, as appearing to him to offer the distinction of Trinity
without its cosmopolitan flavour, and a legal instead of an athletic
tradition. In due course he took as good a degree as he required, and
proceeded to be called at the English bar before returning to practice
in Melbourne. In connection with his university life he had two or three
original boasts: he had never been seen intoxicated, never played any
game, and only once investigated Fenner's (to watch the Australians). On
the other hand, he had added appreciably to his income by intelligent
betting on Newmarket course.

Temperament, character, and attainment seemed to have combined to
produce the perfect barrister in Theodore Bethune, who was infinitely
critical but himself impervious to criticism, while possessed of a
capital gift of insolence and a face of triple brass. The man, however,
was not so perfect; even the gentleman may exhibit certain flaws. Of
these one of his sisters had latterly become very conscious; but they
came out as a boon to her on the second evening of this visit to Eureka
Station, New South Wales.

For in conversation Bethune was what even he would formerly have called
"a terror," an epithet which he still endeavoured to deserve, though he
no longer made use of it himself. Captious, cocksure, omniscient, he
revelled in the uses of raillery and of repartee. Nothing pleased him
more than to combat the pet theories of persons whom he had no occasion
to conciliate. He could take any side on any question, as became the
profession he never ceased from practising. He destroyed illusions as
other men destroy game, and seldom made a new acquaintance without
securing a fair bag. Better traits were a playful fancy and an essential
geniality which suggested more of mischief than of malice in the real
man; the pose, however, was that of uncompromising and heartless critic
of every creature of his acquaintance, and every country in which he had
set foot.

The first night he had behaved very well. Moya had made him promise that
he would not be openly critical for twenty-four hours. He had kept his
word like a man and a martyr. The second night was different. Theodore
was unmuzzled. And both Moya and Rigden were thankful in their hearts.

Sir Oracle scarce knew where to begin. There were the turkeys which a
child could have hit with a pop-gun; there were the emus which the
Queen's Prizeman could not have brought down with his Lee-Metford. But
Theodore had discovered that there was no medium in the bush. Look at
the heat! He had been through the Red Sea at its worst, but it had not
fetched the skin from his hands as this one day in Riverina. Riverina,
forsooth! Where were their rivers? _Lucus a non lucendo._

The storekeeper winked; he was a humorist himself, of a lower order.

"No good coming it in Greek up here, mister."

The jackeroo was the storekeeper's hourly butt. The jackeroo was a new
chum who had done pretty badly at his public school, and was going to do
worse in the bush, but he still knew Latin from Greek when he heard it,
and he perceived his chance of scoring off the storekeeper.

"Greek is good," said the jackeroo. "Greek is great!"

"Ah, now we have it!" cried the storekeeper, who was a stout young man
with bulbous eyes, and all the sly glances of the low comedian. "'Tis
the voice of the scholard, I heard him explain! He comes from Rugby, Mr.
Bethune; hasn't he told you yet? Calls himself an Old Rug--sure it isn't
a plaid-shawl, Ives? Oh, you needn't put on side because you can draft
Greek from Latin!"

Ives the jackeroo, a weak youth wearing spectacles, had put on nothing
but the long-suffering smile with which he was in the habit of receiving
the storekeeper's grape-shot. He said no more, however, and a brief but
disdainful silence on the part of Bethune made an awkward pause which
Rigden broke heroically. Hitherto but little talking had been required
of him or of Moya. The aggressive Theodore had been their unwitting
friend, and he stood them in better stead than ever when the young men
adjourned to smoke on the verandah.

This was the time when the engaged couple would naturally have
disappeared; they had duly done so the previous evening; to-night they
merely sat apart, out of range of the lamp, and the young men galled
them both by never glancing their way. Nothing had been noticed yet; nor
indeed was there anything remarkable in their silence after so long a
day spent in each other's exclusive society. From time to time, however,
they made a little talk to save appearances which were incriminating
only in their own minds; and all the time their eyes rested together
upon the black stack of logs and corrugated iron which was the store.

Once the storekeeper approached with discreet deliberation.

"I've lost my key of the store, Mr. Rigden; may I borrow yours?"

"It's I who've lost mine, Spicer, so I took yours from your room. No,
don't bother about your books to-night; don't go over there again. Look
after Mr. Bethune."

He turned to Moya when the youth was gone.

"One lie makes many," he muttered grimly.

There was no reply.

Meanwhile Bethune was in his element, with an audience of two bound to
listen to him by the bond of a couple of his best cigars, and with just
enough of crude retaliation from the storekeeper to act as a blunt
cutlass to Theodore's rapier. The table with the lamp was at the
latter's elbow, and the rays fell full upon the long succesful nose and
the unwavering mouth of an otherwise rather ordinary legal countenance.
There was plenty of animation in the face, however, and enough of the
devil to redeem a good deal of the prig. The lamp also made the most of
a gleaming shirt-front; for Theodore insisted on dressing ("for my own
comfort, purely,") even in the wilderness, where black coats were good
enough for the other young men, and where Mora herself wore a high
blouse.

"But there's nothing to be actually ashamed of in an illusion or two,"
the jackeroo was being assured, "especially at your age. I've had them
myself, and may have one or two about me still. You only know it when
you lose them, and my faith in myself has been rudely shattered. I've
shed one thundering big illusion since I've been up here."

The Rugby boy was not following; he had but expressed a sufficiently
real regret at not having gone up to Cambridge himself; and he was
wondering whether he should regret it the less in future for what this
Cambridge man had to say upon the subject. On the whole it did not
reconcile him to the university of the bush, and for a little he had a
deaf ear for the conversation. A question had been asked and answered
ere he recovered the thread.

"Oh, go on," said the storekeeper. "Give the back-blocks a rest,
Bethune!"

"I certainly shall, Mr. Spicer," rejoined Theodore, with the least
possible emphasis on the prefix, "once I shake their infernal dust from
my shoes. Not that I'd mind the dust if there was anything to do in it.
Of course this sort of thing's luxury," he had the grace to interject;
"in fact, it's far too luxurious for me. One rather likes to rough it
when one comes so far. Anything for some excitement, some romance,
something one can't get nearer home!"

"Well, you can't get this," said the loyal storekeeper.

"I never was at a loss for moonlight," observed Theodore, "when there
happened to be a moon. There are verandahs in Toorak."

Spicer lowered his voice.

"There was a man once shot dead in this one. Bushrangers!"

"When was that?"

"Oh, well, it was before my time."

"Ten years ago?"

"Ten to twenty, I suppose."

"Ten to twenty! Why, my good fellow, there was a blackfellows' camp in
Collins Street, twenty years ago! Corrobborees, and all that, where the
trams run now."

"I'm hanged if there were," rejoined Spicer warmly. "Not twenty years
ago, no, nor yet thirty!"

"Say forty if it makes you happy. It doesn't affect my argument. You
don't expect me to bolt out of this verandah because some poor devil
painted it red before I was breeched? What shall it profit us that
there were bushrangers once upon a time, and blacks before the
bushrangers? The point is that they're both about as extinct as the
plesiosaurus----"

"Kill whose cat?" interposed the storekeeper in a burst of his peculiar
brand of badinage. "He's coming it again, Ives; you'll have another
chance of showing off, old travelling-rug!"

"And all you've got to offer one instead," concluded Bethune, "besides
the subtleties of your own humour, is a so-called turkey the size of a
haystack, that'll ram its beak down your gun-barrel if you wait long
enough."

The Rugbeian laughed outright, and Spicer gained time by insulting him
while he rummaged his big head for a retort worthy of Bethune; it was
worthier of himself when it came.

"You want adventure, do you? I know the place for you, and its within
ten miles of where you sit. Blind Man's Block!"

"Reminds one of the Tower," yawned Bethune.

"It'll remind you of your sins if ever you get bushed in it! Ten by ten
of abandoned beastliness; not a hoof or a drop between the four fences;
only scrub, and scrub, and scrub of the very worst. Mallee and
porcupine--porcupine and mallee. But you go and sample it; only don't
get too far in from the fence. If you do you may turn up your toes; and
you won't be the first or the last to turn 'em up in Blind Man's Block."

"What of?" asked Bethune sceptically.

"Thirst," said Spicer; "thirst and hunger, but chiefly thirst."

"In fenced country?"

"It's ten miles between the fences, and not a drop of water, nor the
trace of a track. It's abandoned country, I'm telling you."

"But you could never be more than five miles from a fence; surely you
could hit one or other of them and follow it up?"

"Could you?" said the storekeeper. "Well, you try it, and let me know!
Try it on horseback, and you'll see what it's like to strike a straight
line through mallee and porcupine; and after that, if you're still hard
up for an adventure, just you try it on foot."

"Don't you, Theodore," advised Rigden from his chair. "I'm not keen on
turning out all hands to look for you, old chap."

"But is the place really as bad as all that?" inquired Moya, following
him into the conversation for the look of the thing.

"Worse," said Rigden, and leaned forward, silent. In another moment he
had risen, walked to the end of the verandah, and returned as far as
Bethune's chair. "Sure you want an adventure, Theodore? Because the
Assyrians are coming down in the shape of the mounted police, and it's
the second time they've been here to-day. Looks fishy, doesn't it?"

Listening, they heard the thin staccato jingle whose first and tiniest
tinkle had been caught by Rigden; then with one accord the party rose,
and gathered at the end of the verandah, whence the three black horsemen
could be seen ambling into larger sizes, among the tussocks of
blue-bush, between the station and the rising moon.

"What do they want?" idly inquired Bethune.

"A runaway convict," said Rigden, quietly.

"No!" cried Spicer.

"Is it a fact?" asked Ives, turning instinctively to Miss Bethune.

"I believe so," replied Moya, with notable indifference.

"Then why on earth have you been keeping it dark, both of you?" demanded
Bethune, and he favoured the engaged couple with a scrutiny too keen for
one of them. Moya's eyes fell. But Rigden was equal to the occasion.

"Because the police don't want it to get about. That's why," said he
shortly.

And Moya admired his resource until she had time to think; then it
revolted her as much as all the rest. But meanwhile the riders were
dismounting in the moonlight. Rigden went out to meet them, and
forthwith disappeared with Harkness among the pines.

"No luck at all," growled the sergeant. "We're clean off the scent, and
it licks me how he gave you such a wide berth and us the slip. We can't
have been that far behind him. None of the other gentlemen came across
him, I suppose?"

"As a matter of fact I've only just mentioned it to them," replied
Rigden, rather lamely. "I thought I'd leave it till you came back. You
seemed not to want it to get about, you know."

"No more I do--for lots of reasons. I mean to take the devil, alive or
dead, and yet I don't want anybody else to take him! Sounds well,
doesn't it? Yet I bet you'd feel the same in my place--if you knew who
he was!"

Rigden stood mute.

"You won't cut me out for the reward, Mr. Rigden, if I tell you who it
is, between ourselves? You needn't answer: of course you won't.
Well--then--it's good old Bovill the bushranger!" And the sergeant's
face shone like the silver buttons of the sergeant's tunic.

"Captain Bovill!" gasped Rigden, but only because he felt obliged to
gasp something.

"Not so loud, man!" implored the sergeant, who had sunk his own voice to
the veriest whisper. "Yes--yes--that's the gentleman. None other!
Incredible, isn't it? Of course it wasn't Darlinghurst he escaped from,
but Pentridge; only I thought you'd guess if I said; it's been in the
papers some days."

"We get ours very late, and haven't always time to read them then. I
knew nothing about it."

"Well, then, you knew about as much as is known in Victoria from that
day to this. The police down there have lost their end of the thread,
and it was my great luck to pick it up again by the merest chance last
week. I'll tell you about that another time. But you understand what it
would mean to me?"

"Rather!"

"To land him more or less single-handed!"

"I won't tell a soul."

"And don't you go and take the man himself behind my back, Mr. Rigden!"
the policeman was obliged to add, with such jocularity as men feign in
their deadliest earnest.

But Rigden's laugh was genuine and involuntary.

"I can safely promise that I won't do that," said he. "But ask the other
fellows if they've seen the kind of man you describe; if they haven't,
no harm done."

The unprofitable inquiry was conducted in Moya's presence, who abruptly
disappeared, unable to bear any more and still hold her peace. Thereupon
Rigden breathed more freely, and offered supper with an improving grace;
the very tracker was included in the invitation, which was accepted with
the frank alacrity of famished men.

"And it's not the last demand we shall have to make on you," said
Harkness, as he washed in Rigden's room; "we've ridden our cattle off
their legs since we were here in the afternoon. We must hark back on our
own tracks first thing in the morning. Beds or bunks we shall want for
the night, and fresh horses for an early start."

Rigden thought a moment.

"By all means, if you can stand the travellers' hut. It's empty, but in
here we're rather full. As for horses, I've the very three for you. I'll
run 'em up myself."

The storekeeper came to him as he was pulling on his boots. He was not a
conspicuously attractive young man, but he had one huge merit. His
devotion to Rigden was quite extraordinary.

"Why not let one of us run up those horses, sir?"

"One of you! I like that. Give us those spurs."

"Well, of course I meant myself, Mr. Rigden. The new chum wouldn't be
much use."

"I'm not sure that you'd be much better. You don't know the paddocks as
I know them, nor the mokes either. Nobody does, for that matter. But I
don't want the men to get wind of this to-night."

"I'll see that they don't, Mr. Rigden."

"Now I'm ready, and I'll be twice as quick as anybody else. What's the
time, Spicer?"

"Just on ten."

"Well, I'll be back by eleven. Now go in and see they've got everything
they want, and take Mr. Bethune in with you for a drink. That's your
billet for to-night, Spicer; you've got to play my part and leave the
store to take care of itself. Now I'm off."

But it was some minutes before he proceeded beyond the horse-yard;
indeed, he loitered there, though the jackeroo had the night-horse ready
saddled, until Theodore had accepted the storekeeper's invitation, and
the verandah was empty at last.

"Hang it! I'll have my dust-coat," he cried when about to mount. "Hold
him while I run back to the barracks."

"Can't I go for you, sir?"

"No, you can't."

And the Rugby boy thought wistfully of Cambridge while Rigden was gone;
for he was an absent-minded youth, who did not even notice how the
pockets of the dust-coat bulged when Rigden returned.

Only Moya, from her dark but open door on that same verandah, had seen
the manager slip from the barracks over to the store, and remain there
some minutes, with the door shut and the key inside, before creeping
stealthily out and once more locking the door behind him.




V

A RED HERRING


Rigden cantered to the horse-paddock gate, and on and on along the
beaten track which intersected that enclosure, and which led ultimately
to a wool-shed pitched further from the head-station than wool-shed ever
was before or since. Rigden rode as though he were on his way thither;
he certainly had not the appearance of a man come to cut out horses in a
horse-paddock. His stock-whip was added to the bulging contents of the
dust-coat pockets, instead of being ready as a lance in rest. The rider
looked neither right nor left as he rode. He passed a mob of horses in
the moonlight, not without seeing them, but without a second glance.

Suddenly he left the track at a tangent; but there was no symptom of the
sudden thought. Rigden sat loosely in his saddle, careless but alert, a
man who knew every inch of the country, and his own mind to an
irreducible nicety. A clump of box rose in his path; a round-shot would
have cut through quicker, but not more unerringly. Rigden came out on
the edge of a chain of clay-pans, hard-baked by the sun, and shining
under the moon like so many water-holes.

Rigden rode a little way upon the nearest hard, smooth surface; then he
pulled up, and, looking back, could see scarcely any trace of his
horse's hoofs. He now flung a leg across the saddle, and sat as the
ladies while his quiet beast stood like bronze. A night-horse is _ex
officio_ a quiet beast.

Rigden wondered whether any man had ever before changed his boots on
horseback. When he proceeded it was afoot, with his arm through the
reins, and the pockets of the dust-coat bulging more than ever. From his
walk it was manifest that the new shoes pinched.

But they left no print unless he stamped with all his might. And that
was a very painful process. Rigden schooled himself to endure it,
however, and repeated the torture two or three times on his way across
the clay-pans. On such occasions the night-horse was made to halt (while
the stamping was done under its nose) and to pirouette in fashion that
must have astonished the modest animal almost as much as each fresh
inspiration astonished Rigden himself.

On the sandy ground beyond he merely led the horse until a fence was
reached. Here some minutes were spent, not only in strapping down the
wires and coaxing the night-horse over, but in some little deliberation
which ended in the making of mock footprints with his own boots,
without, however, putting them on. Rigden had still another mile to do
in the tight shoes for this his sin. It brought him to the pouting lips
of a tank (so called) where the moon shone in a mirror of still water
framed in slime. Here he gave his horse a drink, and, remounting,
changed his boots once more. A sharp canter brought him back to the
fence; it was crossed as before; the right horses were discovered and
cut out with the speed and precision of a master bushman; and at
half-past eleven exactly the thunder of their hoofs and the musketry of
Rigden's stock-whip were heard together in the barracks, where the rest
had gathered for a final pipe.

"Good time," said the sergeant, who was seated with his subordinate on
the storekeeper's bed.

"Not for him," said Spicer. "He said he'd be back by eleven. He's
generally better than his word."

"A really good man at his work--what?"

Bethune had been offered the only chair, and was not altogether pleased
with himself for having accepted it. It was rather a menagerie, this
storekeeper's room, with these policemen smoking their rank tobacco.
Theodore had offered them his cigars, to put an end to the reek, but his
offer had come too late. He hardly knew why he remained; not even to
himself would he admit his anxiety to know what was going to happen
next. A criminal case! It would teach him nothing; he never touched
criminal work; none of your obvious law and vulgar human interest for
him.

"Good man?" echoed Spicer the loyal. "One of the best on God's earth;
one of the straightest that ever stepped. Don't you make any mistake
about that, Bethune! I've known him longer than you."

The testimonial was superfluous in its warmth and fulness, yet not
uncalled for if Bethune's tone were taken seriously. It was, however,
merely the tone in which that captious critic was accustomed to refer to
the bulk of humanity; indeed, it was complimentary for him. Before more
could be added, "the straightest man that ever stepped" had entered,
looking the part. His step was crisp and confident; there was a lively
light in his eye.

"Have a job to find them?" inquired his champion.

"Well," said Rigden, "I found something else first."

"The man?" they all cried as one.

"No, not the man," said Rigden smiling. "Where's your tracker,
sergeant?"

"Put him in your travellers' hut, Mr. Rigden."

"Quite right. I only wanted to ask him something, but I dare say you
can tell me as well. Get that track pretty plain before you lost it
this afternoon?"

"Plain as a pikestaff, didn't we?" said the sergeant to his sub.

"My oath!" asseverated the trooper, who was a man of few words.

"Notice any peculiarity about it, Harkness?"

"Yes," said the sergeant.

"What?" pursued Rigden.

"That," said Harkness; and he produced a worn heel torn from its sole
and uppers.

"Exactly," said Rigden, nodding.

The sergeant sprang from the bed.

"Have you struck his tracks?"

"I won't say that," said Rigden. "All I undertake is to show you a
distinct track with no left heel to it all down the line. No, I won't
shake hands on it. It may lead to nothing."

All was now excitement in the small and smoky bedroom. The jackeroo had
appeared on the scene from his own room, to which his sensitive soul
ever banished him betimes. All were on their feet but Bethune, who
retained the only chair, but with eyes like half-sheathed blades, and
head at full-cock.

"Did you follow it up?" asked the sergeant.

"Yes, a bit."

"Where did you strike it?"

"I'll tell you what: you shall be escorted to the spot."

"Um!" said the sergeant; "not by all hands, I hope?"

"By Mr. Spicer and nobody else. I'd come myself, only I've found other
fish to fry. Look here, Spicer," continued Rigden, clapping the
storekeeper on the shoulder; "you know the clay-pans in the
horse-paddock? Well, you'll see my tracks there, and you'd better follow
them; there are just one or two of the others; but on the soft ground
you'll see the one as plain as the other. You'll have to cross the fence
into Butcher-boy; you'll see where I crossed it. That's our
killing-sheep paddock, Harkness; think your man could kill and eat a
sheep?"

"I could kill and eat you," said the sergeant cordially, "for the turn
you've done me."

"Thanks; but you wait and see how it pans out. All I guarantee is that
the tracks are there; how far they go is another matter. I only followed
them myself as far as the tank in Butcher-boy. And that reminds me:
there'll be a big muster to-morrow, Spicer. The tank in Butcher-boy's as
low as low; the Big Bushy tanks always go one worse; we'll muster Big
Bushy to-morrow, whether or no. I've been meaning to do it for some
time. Besides, it'll give you all the freer hand for those tracks,
sergeant: we shall be miles apart."

"That's all right," said the sergeant. "But I should have liked to get
on them to-night."

"The moon's pretty low."

Harkness looked out.

"You're right," he said. "We'll give it best till morning. Come, mate,
let's spell it while we can."

The rest separated forthwith. Bethune bade his future brother-in-law
good-night without congratulation or even comment on the discovery of
the tracks. Rigden lingered a moment with his lieutenants, and then
remarked that he had left his coat in the harness-room; he would go and
fetch it, and might be late, as he had letters to write for the mail.

"Can't I get the coat, sir?" asked the willing jackeroo.

Rigden turned upon him with unique irritation.

"No, you can't! You can go to bed and be jolly well up in time to do
your part to-morrow! It's you I am studying, my good fellow," he made
shift to add in a kindlier tone; "you can't expect to do your work
unless you get your sleep. And I want you to round up every hoof in the
horse-paddock by sunrise, and after that every man in the hut!"




VI

BELOW ZERO


"May I come in?"

It was her brother at Moya's door, and he began to believe she must be
asleep after all. Theodore felt aggrieved; he wanted speech with Moya
before he went to bed. He was about to knock again when the door was
opened without a word. There was no light in the room. Yet the girl
stood fully dressed in the last level rays of the moon. And she had been
crying.

"Moya!"

"What do you want?"

"Only to speak to you."

"What about?"

"Yourself, to begin with. What's the trouble, my dear girl?"

He had entered in spite of her, and yet she was not really sorry that he
had come. She had suffered so much in silence that it would be relief to
speak about anything to anybody. Theodore was the last person in whom
she could or would confide. But there was something comfortable in his
presence just there and then. She could tell him a little, if she could
not tell him all; and he could tell her something in return.

She heard him at his match-box, and shut the door herself as he lit the
candles.

"Don't speak loud, then," said Moya. "I--I'd rather they didn't hear
us--putting our heads together."

"No fear. We've got the main building to ourselves, you and I. Rather
considerate of Rigden, that."

Indeed it was the best parlour that had been prepared for Moya, for in
your southern summers the best parlour of all is the shadiest verandah.
Theodore took to the sofa and a cigarette.

"Do you mind?" he said. "Then do please tell me what's the matter with
you, Moya!"

"Oh, can't you see? I'm so unhappy!"

Her eyes had filled, but his next words dried them.

"Had a row with Rigden?"

And he was leaning forward without his cigarette.

Moya hated him.

"Is that all that occurs to you?" she asked cuttingly. "I'm sorry to
disappoint you, I'm sure! I should have thought even you could have seen
there was enough to make one unhappy, without the consummation you so
devoutly----"

"Good, Moya! That's all right," said her brother, as he might have
complimented her across the net at lawn-tennis.

"It's quite unpleasant enough," continued Moya, with spirit, "without
your making it worse. The police in possession, and a runaway convict
goodness knows where!"

"I agree," said Theodore. "It _is_ unpleasant. I wonder where the beggar
can be?"

"It's no use asking me," said Moya; for the note of interrogation had
been in his voice.

"You didn't see any suspicious-looking loafers, I suppose? I mean this
afternoon."

"How could I? I was with Pelham all the time."

She would never marry him, never! That was no reason why she should give
him away. She would never marry a man with discreditable secrets which
she might not share, not because they were discreditable, but for the
other reason. Yet she must be a humbug for his sake! Moya felt a
well-known eye upon her, felt her face bathed in fire; luckily her
explanation itself might account for that, and she had the wit to see
this in time.

"I mean," she stammered, "one was on the verandah all the afternoon.
Nobody could have come without our seeing them."

"I don't know about that. Love is blind!"

His tone carried relief to Moya. The irony was characteristic, normal.
It struck her as incompatible with any strong suspicion. But the ground
was dangerous all the same.

"If we are made uncomfortable," said Moya, shifting it, "what must it be
for Pelham! It's on his account I feel so miserable."

And she spoke the truth; indeed, a truism; but she would be still more
miserable if she married him. She would never marry a man----the
haunting sentence went for once unfinished. Theodore was favouring her
with a peculiar scrutiny whose import she knew of old. She was on her
guard just in time.

"You haven't heard the latest development, I suppose?"

"Has there been something fresh since I came away?"

And even Theodore did not know that she was holding her breath.

"Something as fresh as paint," said he dryly. "Rigden thinks he's got on
the fellow's tracks."

Moya had braced herself against any sudden betrayal of alarm; she was
less proof against the inrush of a new contempt for her lover.

"You don't mean it!" she cried with indignation.

"Why not?" asked Theodore blandly.

"Oh, nothing. Only it's pretty disgraceful--on the part of the police, I
mean--that they should spend hours looking for what a mere amateur finds
at once!"

The brother peeped at her from lowered lids. He was admiring her
resource.

"I agree," he said slowly, "_if_--our friend is right."

"Whom do you mean?" inquired Moya, up in arms on the instant.

"Rigden, of course."

"So you think he may be mistaken about the tracks, do you?"

"I think it's possible."

"You know a lot about such things yourself, of course! You have a wide
experience of the bush, haven't you? What do the police think?"

"They're leaving it till the morning. They hope for the best."

"So everybody is pleased except my brilliant brother! I want to know
why--I want to know more about these tracks."

He told her more with unruffled mien; he rather enjoyed her sarcasm; it
both justified and stimulated his own. Sarcasm he held to be the salt of
intercourse. It was certainly a game at which two Bethunes could always
play.

"But we shall see in the morning," concluded Theodore. "The heathen is
to be put upon the scent at dawn; if he passes it, well and good."

"Meanwhile you don't?"

"No, I'm hanged if I do," said Theodore, bluntly.

"Because you haven't been to see?"

Theodore smiled.

"Because you wouldn't know a man's track from a monkey's if you went?"

Theodore laughed.

"Why drag in Darwin, my dear girl? No, I've not been to look, and yet
I'm not convinced. I just have my doubts, and a reason or so for them;
then I haven't your admirable ground of belief in the infallibility of
our host's judgment. He may be mistaken. Mistakes do get made by
moonlight. Let's put it at that."

But Moya knew that he was not putting it at that in his mind, and she
made up hers to learn the worst of his suspicions.

"If the tracks are not his, whose are they?" she demanded, as though it
mattered. "If the creature is not somewhere about the run, where is he?"

And this did matter.

"If you ask me," said Theodore, with great gravity for him, "I should
say that he was within a few yards of us all the time!"

"A few yards?"

"I should say," repeated Theodore, "that he was somewhere about the
homestead, not the run. And you know perfectly well that you agree!"

"I?"

She jumped up in a fury.

"How dare you say that to me? How dare you, Theodore?"

"My dear Moya, I'm at a loss to understand you!" and his eyebrows
underlined the words into largest capitals. "How on earth have I
offended? I'm quite sure that you have the same suspicion--not to call
it fear--that I entertain myself. If not, why be in such a state? Why
not go to bed and to sleep like a rational person? I confess I don't
feel like doing so myself--with the chance of waking up to find an
escaped criminal on your chest. I prefer to sit up and keep watch. I'm
convinced he's somewhere about; all these huts afford far better cover
than the open paddocks, bless you! He could easily have slipped among
them without either of you seeing him, and the chances are he has."

"If you think that," said Moya, "why didn't you suggest it?"

"I did--to Rigden. Wouldn't listen to me; so, of course, I can't expect
you to be so disloyal as to do so either."

But Moya had no more of that kind of fight in her. "So you intend to sit
up and watch?" was her sole rejoinder.

"I do."

"Then so do I!"

Theodore looked dubious, but only for an instant.

"You begin to think there may be something in my theory?"

"I think there--may be."

"Then I'll tell you more!" exclaimed Theodore with decision: "I believe
the fellow's over yonder in that store!"

His eyes were waiting for her face to change. But it changed very
little. Moya was beginning to wonder whether her terrible brother did
not already know all. One moment she thought he did, the next that he
did not; indifference was creeping over her with the long-drawn strain
of the situation. What did it matter if he did know? It would make no
difference between her and Pelham. That was at an end, in any case; all
that was at an end for ever.

Meanwhile she humoured Theodore just a little, particularly in the
matter of her sitting up. He begged her not to do so, and she feigned
consent. One of his objects in sitting up himself was to secure her
safety. He might be wrong in all his conjectures, and Rigden might be
right. Theodore was none the less virtuously determined not to give a
chance away.

"And if I am right I'll nab him the moment he shows his nose; and the
credit will belong to your humble brother. It isn't as if I hadn't
mentioned my general ideas to Rigden; otherwise it might be rather much
to take upon one's self; but as it is I have no scruples. If nothing
happens, I've simply been sleeping on the verandah, because it's cooler
there, and that long chair's as good as any bed. Do you mind doing
something for me, Moya?"

"What is it?"

"My room's at the back, as you know; do you mind keeping a look-out
while I go round and get into my pyjamas?"

"No, I don't mind."

"Particularly on the store, you know."

"Yes, I know."

"If anything happens come straight to me, but as quietly as possible."

"Very well."

"I mean if you see anybody."

"Yes."

"But I shan't be many minutes."

And he was gone.

At last!

Moya flung herself upon the bed, and lay for a few seconds with closed
eyes. Her forehead was wondrous white; the fine eyebrows and the long
lashes seemed suddenly to have gone black; the girl was fainting under
the triple strain of fear and shame and outraged love. Yes, she was in
love, but she would never marry him. Never! It was the irony of her
fate to love a man whom she would rather die than marry, after this! Yet
she loved him none the less; that was the last humiliation of women whom
she had scorned all her days for this very thing, only to become one of
them in the end.

But she at least would never marry the man she loved and yet despised.
That would be the only difference, yet a fairly essential one. And now
her strength was renewed with her resolve, so that she was up and doing
within the few seconds aforesaid; her first act was to blow out the
candle; her next, to open the door an inch and to take her stand at the
opening.

Nor was she much too soon. It was as though Rigden had been only waiting
for her light to go out. Within a minute he appeared in the sandy space
between the main building and the store. He was again wearing the yellow
silk dust-coat of which enough has been heard; it was almost all that
could be seen of him in the real darkness which had fallen with the
setting of the moon.

Moya heard his key in the heavy door opposite. Should she tell him of
Theodore's suspicions, or should she not? While she hesitated, he let
himself in, took out the key, and once more locked the door behind him.
Next moment a thread of light appeared upon the threshold; and, too
late, Moya repented her indecision.

Theodore would return, and then----

But for once he was singularly slow; minute followed minute, and there
was neither sign nor sound of him.

And presently the store door opened once more; the figure in the
dust-coat emerged as it had entered; and vanished as it had appeared, in
the direction of the horse-yard.

Once more the door was shut; but, once more, that thread of
incriminating light burnt like a red-hot wire beneath. And this time
Moya could not see it burn: the red-hot wire had entered her soul.
Theodore had been so long, he might be longer; risk it she must, and
take the consequences. Two steps carried her across the verandah;
lighter she had never taken in a ball-room, where her reputation was
that of a feather. Once in the kindly sand, however, she ran
desperately, madly, to the horse-yard. And she was just in time to hear
the dying beat of a horse's canter into infinity.

Then she must inform the wretch himself, the runaway ruffian in the
store! One sob came, and then this quick resolve.

She gained the store, panting; and instinctively tried the door before
knocking. To her amazement and alarm it was open. She stood confounded
on the threshold, and a head bending over the desk, under the lamp,
behind the counter, was suddenly transformed into a face. And it was not
the runaway at all; it was Rigden himself!

"I saw you come out!" she gasped, past recrimination, past anger, past
memory itself in the semi-insensibility of over-whelming surprise. He
looked at her very gravely across the desk.

"No, that was the man who has wrecked my life," he said. "I've got him
through them at last, I do believe."

And his eyes flashed their unworthy triumph.

"You could actually give him your horse!"

"I wish I could. It would be missed in a minute. No, he's only just to
run the gauntlet on it, and I shall find it at the first gate. But what
is it, Moya? You came for something?" and he was a miserable man once
more.

"I'm ashamed to say why I came--but I will!" cried Moya in a low voice.
"I did not want you to be found out through my own brother. He suspected
the man was in here--I don't know why. He was going to watch the store
all night, and I was watching it for him while he changed, and the light
under the door----"

Rigden held up his hand.

"Hush!" he said. "Here _is_ your brother."

Theodore was more than decent; he was positively gorgeous in striped and
tasselled silk. He stood in the doorway with expressive eyebrows and
eloquent nostrils, looking from Moya to Rigden until his gaze settled
upon the latter. It was almost an innocuous gaze by then.

"So it was you in here," he said. Rigden nodded. "Do you know who I was
ass enough to think it was?" continued Theodore, using a word which Moya
had never heard him apply to himself before, even in fun. "Has Moya told
you?"

"She has."

"I saw the light," said Moya, in elliptical explanation. Theodore
continued to address his host.

"I oughtn't to have interfered," he said, with a humility which was
already arousing Moya's suspicions. "I should have minded my own
business, Rigden, and I apologise. I'd got it into my head--I can't tell
you why. Will you forgive me? And have you any more whisky?"

"I've nothing to forgive," said Rigden, sincerely enough. "But a drink
we'll have; that's an excellent idea!"

But the counter was between them, and Theodore was the first to leave
the store; but on the threshold he stopped, and just turned to Moya for
an instant.

"By the way, you didn't see anybody else, I suppose?" said he.

There was an instant's pause. Then Moya committed her sin.

"Of course I didn't," were the words.

Theodore strolled over to the verandah. Moya waited behind as in
devotion while Rigden locked that fatal door for the last time.

"You see what you've brought me to!" she hissed. "But don't think it's
because I care a bit what happens to you--once I'm gone. And I _hate_
you for it--and I always shall!"

"Thank you," he said.

And that was all.




VII

A CAVALIER


Moya went to bed like one already in a dream. She smiled when she
realised what she was doing; there would be no sleep for her that night.
Yet she went through with the empty form, even to putting out the light
to rest her aching eyes. And in five minutes her troubles ceased for as
many hours; she had passed that pitch of excitement which is another
name for insomnia; she had reached the stage of sheer exhaustion, and
she reaped the recompense.

Spurred feet treading gingerly nevertheless awoke her towards dawn. It
was a bitter awakening. Further sleep was impossible, further rest
intolerable; besides, something must be done at once. It was an ordeal
to face, but sooner or later Theodore must be told, and then--good-bye!
Obviously the sooner the better, since the thing was settled between the
two whom it concerned; and Moya had the temperament which prefers to
precipitate the absolutely inevitable; but temperament for once was not
her lord. It was too hard!

Character came to the rescue. It must be done. And Moya dressed by
candle-light with a craven but a resolute heart.

Meanwhile the cautious footsteps and the low voices died away; and the
girl found a bare verandah, chill and silent as a vault in the twilight
of early morning. A lamp was burning in the dining-room, but the chairs
were pushed back, crusts left, and tea-cups half full. The teapot felt
quite heavy; and Moya took a cup and a bite before going to see whether
Theodore was awake. If not, she must wake him, for she could not wait.
But his room was deserted; his very boots were gone; and the craven
heart leapt, for all its resolution.

Moya returned to the verandah in time to see the new chum, Ives, coming
at a canter through the pines. She cut him off at the barracks, where,
however, he flung himself from the saddle and almost into her arms.

"I beg your pardon, Miss Bethune! Forgotten something as usual, you
see!"

Hurry and worry were behind his smile. Yet Moya had the heart to detain
him.

"Good morning, Mr. Ives. Where's everybody?"

"Gone mustering."

"Not my brother?"

"No; he's gone with the police."

"The police."

"You know, they've gone to follow up some tracks----"

"Oh, yes, I know!" cried Moya.

So Theodore was hand-in-glove with the enemy! Not that the police were
the enemy at all; they were only _his_ enemies; but the fact remained
that Theodore was one of them. Very likely he had already made them a
present of his suspicions; nothing likelier, or more fitting, than the
exposure of her "lover" through her own brother's agency. It will be
seen that her bitterness against one was rapidly embittering Moya's view
of all and sundry. She was not original in that.

"I forgot my water-bag," the jackeroo remarked. "I shall have to gallop
to catch them up."

But he was too polite to move.

"Must you catch them up?" inquired Moya, in flattering dumps: but indeed
it would be deadly at the station all day, and such a day, without a
soul to speak to!

"Well, they won't wait for me, because they told me what to do," said
Ives on reflection.

"And what have you to do?" asked Moya, smiling.

"Go down the fence; it's easiest, you know."

"But what are you all going to do? What does this mustering mean?"

Ives determined in his own mind to blow the odds. He was not only a
gentleman; he was a young man; and Miss Bethune should have all the
information she wanted and he could give. Ives began to appreciate her
attractions, and Rigden's good fortune, for the first time as they
deserved. It would be another place after the marriage. She was a ripper
when you got her to yourself.

Aloud he explained the mustering as though he had the morning to spare.
It meant sweeping up all the sheep in a given paddock, either to count
them out, or to shift them altogether if feed or water was failing where
they were. A big job in any case, but especially so in Big Bushy, which
was by far the largest paddock on Eureka; it was seven miles by seven.

"And do you generally go mustering at a night's notice?"

"No, as a rule we know about it for days before; but last night the
boss--I beg your pardon----"

"What for?" said Moya. "I like to hear him called that."

And she would have liked it, she hardly knew why. But he was not her
boss, and never would be.

"Thanks awfully. Well, then, the boss found a tank lower than he
expected in Butcher-boy, that's the killing-sheep paddock, and it's next
door to Big Bushy, which is stocked with our very best. If the tanks
were low in Butcher-boy, they might be lower still in Big Bushy----"

"Why?" asked Moya, like a good Bethune.

"Oh, I don't know; only the boss seemed to think so; and of course it
wouldn't do to let our best sheep bog. So we've got to shift every hoof
into Westwells, where there's the best water on the run."

Moya said no more. This seemed genuine. Only she was suspicious now of
every move of Rigden's; she could not help it.

"And why must you have a water-bag?" she asked, for asking's sake.

"Oh, we never go without one in this heat. The boss won't let us. So of
course I went and forgot mine. I'm no good in the bush, Miss Bethune!"

"Not even at mustering?" asked sympathetic Moya.

"Why, Miss Bethune, that's the hardest thing of the lot, and it's where
I'm least use. It's my sight," said the young fellow ruefully; "I'm as
blind as a mole. You ought to be able to see sheep at three miles, but I
can't swear to them at three hundred yards."

"That's a drawback," said Moya, looking thoughtfully at the lad.

"It is," sighed he. "Then I haven't a dog, when I do see 'em; altogether
it's no sinecure for me, though they do give me the fence; and--and I'm
afraid I really ought to be making a start, Miss Bethune."

The outward eye of Moya was still fixed upon him, but what it really saw
was herself upon that lonely verandah all day long--waiting for the next
nice development--and waiting alone.

"I have excellent eyes," she observed at length.

"To say the least!" cried her cavalier.

"I meant for practical purposes," rejoined Moya, with severity. "I'm
sure that I could see sheep at three miles."

"I shouldn't wonder," said he enviously.

"And I see you have a spare horse in the yard."

"Yes, in case of accidents."

"And I know you have a lady's saddle."

"It was got for you."

Moya winced, but her desire was undiminished.

"I mean to be the accident, Mr. Ives," said she.

"And come mustering?" he cried. "And be my--my----"

"The very eyes of you," said Moya, nodding. "I shall be ready in three
minutes!"

And she left him staring, and bereft of breath, but flushed as much with
pleasure as with the rosy glow of the Riverina sunrise which fell upon
him even as she spoke; she was on the verandah before he recovered his
self-possession.

"Your horse'll be ready in two!" he bawled, and rushed to make good his
word. Moya had to remind him of the water-bag after all.

First and last she had not delayed him so very long, and the red blob of
a sun was but clear of the horizon when they obtained their first
unimpeded view of it. This was when they looked back from the gate
leading into Butcher-boy: the homestead pines still ran deep into the
red, and an ink-pot would still have yielded their hue.

In Butcher-boy, which was three miles across, there was nothing for them
to do but to ride after their shadows and to talk as they rode, neck
and neck, along the fluted yellow ribbon miscalled a road, between tufts
of sea-green saltbush and faraway clumps of trees.

"I wish I wasn't such a duffer in the bush," said Ives, resolved to make
the most of the first lady he had met for months. "The rum thing is that
I'm frightfully keen on the life."

"Are you really?" queried Moya, and she was interested on her own
account, for what might have been.

"Honestly," said Ives, "though I begin to see it isn't the life for me.
The whole thing appeals to one, somehow; getting up in the middle of the
night (though it was an awful bore), running up the horses (though I
can't even crack a stock-whip), and just now the station trees against
the sunrise. It's so open and fresh and free, and unlike everything
else; it gets at me to the core; but, of course, they don't give me my
rations for that."

"Should you really like to spend all your days here?"

"No; but I shouldn't be surprised if I were to spend half my nights here
for the term of my natural life! I shall come back to these paddocks in
my dreams. I can't tell why, but I feel it in my bones; it's the light,
the smell, the extraordinary sense of space, and all the little things
as well. The dust and scuttle of the sheep when two or three are
gathered together; it's really beastly, but I shall smell it and hear it
till I die."

Moya glanced sidelong at her companion, and all was enthusiasm behind
the dusty spectacles. There was something in this new chum after all.
Moya wondered what.

"You're not going to stick to it, then?"

Ives laughed.

"I'm afraid it won't stick to me. I can't see sheep, I'm no real good
with horses, and I couldn't even keep the station books; the owner said
my education had been sadly neglected (one for Rugby, that was!) when he
was up here the other day. It's only through Mr. Rigden's good-nature
that I'm hanging on, and because--I--can't--tear myself away."

"And what do you think of doing eventually?"

"Oh, I don't know. I shall go home again, I suppose; I only came out for
the voyage. After that, goodness knows; I was no real use at school
either."

Insensibly the rocking-chair canter of the bush horses had lapsed into
the equally easy amble which is well-nigh their one alternative; and the
shadows were shortening, and the back of the neck and the ears were
beginning to burn. The jackeroo was sweeping the horizon for pure
inexplicable delight in its dirty greens and yellows; but had quite
forgotten that he ought already to have been scouring it for sheep.

"And so the boss is good-natured, is he?" said Moya, she could not have
told herself why; for she would not have admitted that it could afford
her any further satisfaction to hear his praises.

"Good-natured?" cried the jackeroo. "He's all that and much more;
there's not a grander or a straighter chap in Riverina, and we all swear
by him; but--well, he is the boss, and let's you know it."

A masterful man; and Moya had wanted her master all these years! She
asked no more questions, and they rode a space in silence, Ives glancing
sidelong in his turn, and in his heart congratulating Rigden more and
more.

"By Jove," he cried at last, "I think I shall have to get you to use
your influence on my behalf!"

"For what?" asked Moya, wincing again.

"Another chance! They mustn't give me the sack just yet--I must be here
when you come. It's the one thing we need--a lady. It's the one thing
_he_ needs to make him as nearly perfect as it's comfortable for other
people for a man to be. And I simply must be here to see."

"Let's canter," said Moya. The blood came rushing to his face.

"I apologise," he cried. "It was horrid cheek of me, I know!"

Moya's reassuring smile was all kindly, and not all forced; indeed, the
tears were very close to the surface, and she could not trust herself to
say much.

"Not cheek at all," was what she did say, with vigour. "Only--you'll
change your mind."

With that her eyes glistened for an instant; and young Ives loved her
himself. But neither of them was sorry when another gate grew large
above the horses' ears, with posts and wires dwindling into perspective
on either side to mark the eastern frontier of Big Bushy.




VIII

THE KIND OF LIFE


"Now what do we do, Mr. Ives?"

He had shut the gate and joined her on a sandy eminence, whence Moya was
seeking to prove the excellence of her eyesight at the very outset. But
the paddock had not got its name for nothing; it was overrun with the
sombre scrub, short and thick as lichen on a rock; and from the open
spaces no sheep swam into Moya's ken.

"Turn sharp to the left, and follow the fence," replied the jackeroo.

"But I can't see a solitary sheep!"

"No, because you're looking slap into the paddock; that's the ground the
others are going over, and they've already cleared it as far as we can
see for the scrub. Each man takes his own line of country from this gate
to the one opposite--seven miles away--and collects every hoof on the
way. My line is the left-hand fence. Got to keep it in sight, and drive
everything down it, and right round to the gate."

"Well, my line is yours," said Moya, smiling; and they struck off
together from the track.

"It's the long way round, but we can't miss it," said Ives; "all we have
to do is to hug the fence. Slightly inglorious, but I'd rather that than
make a fool of myself in the middle."

"Is it so very difficult to ride straight through the bush?"

"The most difficult thing in the world. Why, only the other week----"

"I see some!"

The girl was pointing with her riding-switch, to make other use of it
next instant. Her mount, a shaggy-looking roan mare, as yet imperfectly
appreciated by Moya, proved unexpectedly open to persuasion, and found
her gallop in a stride. Ives followed, though he could see nothing but
sand and saltbush in the direction indicated. Sheep there were, however,
and a fair mob of them, whose behaviour was worthy of their kind. In all
docility they stood until the last instant, then broke into senseless
stampede, with the horses at their stubby tails.

"Round them up," cried Ives, "but look out! That mare can turn in her
own length, and will when they do!"

The warning was timely to the very second: almost simultaneously the
sheep doubled, and round spun both horses as in the air. Moya jerked and
swayed, but kept her seat. Ives headed the mob for the fence, and for
the moment the nonsense was out of them.

"Bravo, Miss Bethune!" said he. "You'll make a better bushman than ever
I should."

Moya clouded like an April sky; the instant before she had been
deliciously flushed and excited. Her companion, however, was happily
intent upon his sheep.

"That's the way to start," he said, "with fifty or sixty at one swoop;
you can work a mob like that; it's the five or six that give the
trouble. I have reason to know! There's a corner of one of the paddocks
in our South Block where a few of the duffers have a meet every morning,
just because there's some water they can smell across the fence; won't
draw to their own water at the opposite corner of their own paddock,
not they! No, there they'd stick and die of thirst if one of us wasn't
sent to rout them out. It was my billet every day last week, and a
tougher one I never want. One time there was less than half a dozen of
'em: think of driving five weak sheep through eight or nine miles of
scrub without a dog! It would be ten miles if I followed both fences
religiously; but I'm getting so that I can cut off a pretty fair corner.
Yes, it's pretty hard graft, as they say up here, a day like that; but
your water-bag holds nectar, while it lasts; and may your wedding-cake
taste as good as the bit of browny under a pine, Miss Bethune!"

"What's browny?" asked Moya hastily.

"Raisins and baking-powder," said Ives, with a laugh; "but I've got
enough for two in my pocket, so you shall sample it whenever you like.
By the way, aren't you thirsty yet?"

Moya was.

"It's the dust from the sheep, which you profess to relish, Mr. Ives."

"Only because it's like no other dust," explained the connoisseur. "And
water-bag water's like no other kind."

The canvas bag was wet and heavy as he detached it from the saddle and
handed it to Moya after drawing the cork from the glass mouthpiece; and
from the latter Moya drank as to the manner born, the moist bag
shrinking visibly between her hands.

"Steady!" cried Ives, "or we shall perish of thirst before we strike the
gate. Well, what do you think of it?"

"A little canvassy, but I never tasted anything cooler, or more
delicious," said Moya in all sincerity, for already the sun was high,
and the dry heat of it stupendous.

The jackeroo sighed as he replaced the cork after a very modest sip.

"Ah!" said he, "I wish we were taking sheep to water in the paddock I
was telling you about! Long before you get to their water, you strike a
covered-in tank, that is if you cut off your corner properly and hit the
other fence in the right place. It's really more like a well, without
much water in it, but with a rope and a bucket with a hole in it. That
bucket's the thing! You fill it a bumper, but it runs out faster than it
comes up, and you're lucky if you can pour a wineglassful into the crown
of your hat; but that wineglassful's sweeter than the last drop from the
bag; it's sweeter than honey from the honeycomb, and I shall say so all
my life!"

The boy's enthusiasm was very hard on Moya. It pricked every impression
deep in her heart for ever; she caught the contagion of his acute
receptivity, upon which the veriest trifles stamped themselves with
indelible definition; and it was the same with her. She felt that she
should never quite lose the sharp sensations of this one day of real
bush life, her first and her last.

Down the fence they fell in with frequent stragglers, and the mob
absorbed them in its sweep; then Moya made a sortie to the right, and
Ives lost sight of her through the cloud of dust in which she rode, till
the beat of hoofs came back with a scuttle of trotters, and the mob was
swollen by a score at least, and the thickening cloud pierced by Moya
radiant with success. Her habit was powdered as with sullen gold, and
the brown gold streamed in strands from her adorable head. Ives
worshipped her across the yellow gulf between their horses.

"Where's the dog?" she asked. "I'm certain that I heard one barking."

He turned his head and she heard it again, while the lagging rearguard
broke into a run.

"Yet you say you are no bushman!" remonstrated Moya. "No wonder you can
do without a four-wheeled dog!"

"It's my one worthy accomplishment," said the barker, modestly; "picked
it up in that other paddock; simply dumb with it, sometimes, when I
strike the covered-in well I was telling you about. But here we are at
the corner; there's a seven-mile fence to travel now, and then as much
again as we've done already. Sure you can stand it, Miss Bethune?"

"Is there any water on the way, if we run short?" queried Moya.

Ives considered.

"Well, there's an abandoned whim in the far corner, at the end of this
fence; the hut's a ruin, but the four-hundred-gallon tank belonging to
it was left good for the sake of anybody who might turn up thirsty. Of
course it may be empty, but we'll see."

"We'll chance it, Mr. Ives, and have another drink now!"

For it was nearing noon, and beyond the reek of the travelling mob, now
some couple of hundred strong, the lower air quivered as though molten
metal lay cooling in the sand. Moya had long since peeled off her riding
gloves, and already the backs of her hands were dreadfully inflamed. But
the day would be her first and last in the real bush; she would see it
through. She never felt inclined to turn back but once, and that was
when a sheep fell gasping by the way, its eyes glazed and the rattle in
its neck. Moya insisted on the remnant of water being poured down its
throat and the tears were on her cheeks when they rounded up the mob
once more, leaving a carcass behind them after all, and the blue crows
settling on the fence.

Otherwise the seven miles were uneventful travelling; for even Moya's
eyes discerned few more sheep on their side of the wires; and beyond
these, to the left, was the long and ragged edge of a forest so dense
(though low) that Moya, riding with Ives at the tail of the mob, said it
was no wonder there were no sheep at all on the other side.

"Oh, but that's not Eureka over there," explained Ives; "that's the
worst bit of country in the whole of Riverina. No one will take it up;
it's simply fenced in by the fences of the blocks all round."

Moya asked what it was called. The name seemed familiar to her. It was
Blind Man's Block.

"Ah! I know," she said presently, suppressing a sigh. "I heard them
speaking of it on the verandah last night."

"Yes, Spicer was advising your brother to sample it if he wanted an
adventure; but don't you let him, Miss Bethune. I wouldn't lose sight
of the fence in Blind Man's Block for all I'm ever likely to be worth:
there was a man's skeleton found there just before I came, and goodness
knows how many there are that never will be found. Aha! there's the whim
at last. I'm jolly glad!"

"So am I," said Moya, with a little shudder; and she fixed her eyes upon
some bold black timbers that cut the sky like a scaffold a mile or two
ahead; yet more than once her eyes returned to the line of dingy scrub
across the fence to the left, as if fascinated by its sinister repute.

"We must bustle them along, by Jove!" exclaimed Ives, and he yelped and
barked with immediate effect. "You can't do more than a couple of miles
an hour with sheep; and at that rate we shan't be at the gate much
before three o'clock; for I see that it's already close upon one."

"But how do you see it?" asked Moya curiously. "I've never seen you look
at a watch."

Ives smiled, for he had led up to the question, and was about to show
off in yet another branch of the bushman's craft which even he had
succeeded in mastering.

"The fences are my watch," said he; "they happen to run due east and
west and north and south on this station. This one is north and south.
So at noon the shadows of the posts lie exactly under the wires: put
your head between 'em, and when the bottom wire bisects the shadow it's
as near noon as you would make it with a quadrant and sextant. The rest
comes by practice. Another dodge is to put a stick plumb in the ground
and watch when the shadow is shortest; that's your meridian."

"Yet you say you are no good in the bush!"

"I have two of the unnecessary qualifications, Miss Bethune, and I've
taken care to let you see them both," laughed the open youth. "My only
other merit as a bushman is a good rule which I am sorry to say I've
broken through talking to you. I always have my lunch at twelve under
the biggest tree in sight. And I think we shall find something in that
pine-ridge within a cooee on the right."

But they could not find shade for two, and Moya voted the pine-tree a
poor parasol; whereupon her companion showed off still further by
squatting under the very girths of his horse, but once more spoilt his
own effect by confessing that they gave him the quietest horse on the
station. So the two of them divided bread and meat and "browny" for one,
of which last Moya expressed approval; but not until she was asked; for
she was not herself during this interval of inaction, or rather she was
herself once more. Care indeed had ridden behind her all the morning;
but now the black imp was back before her troubled eyes, and for the
moment they saw nothing else. But Ives began to see and to wonder what
in the world it could be. She was engaged to one of the best of good
fellows. She took to the bush as to her proper element, and but now had
seemed enchanted with her foretaste of the life. Why then the grim
contour of so sweet a face, the indignant defiance in the brooding eyes?
Ives thought and thought until his youthful egoism assumed the blame,
and shot him from his precarious shelter, all anxiety and remorse.

"What a brute I am! You're simply perishing of thirst!"

Moya coloured, but had the wit to accept his construction.

"Well, it isn't your fault, at any rate, Mr. Ives."

"But I might have ridden on and filled the bag; there's certain to be
something in the tank at the hut."

"Then let's ride on together."

"No, you ride ahead and fill the water-bag. It'll save time, Miss
Bethune, because I can be cutting off the corner with the mob."

But the mob had first to be rounded up, for it had split and scattered,
and over a square mile every inch of shade was covered by a crouching
fleece. The mounted Ives made a circuit with his patent yelp, and each
tuft and bush shook out its pure merino. It was harder work to head them
off the fence at an angle of forty-five, and to aim for the other fence
before a post of it was discernible by near-sighted eyes. Ives was too
busy to follow Moya's excursion, but was not less delighted than amazed
at the speed with which she returned from the hut.

"Good riding, Miss Bethune! A drink, a drink, my kingdom----"

Moya's face stopped him.

"I'm sorry to say I've got nothing for you to drink, Mr. Ives."

Ives licked the roof of his mouth, but tried to be heroic.

"Well, have you had some yourself?"

"No. I--the fact is I couldn't see the tank."

"Not see the tank! Why, you ought to be able to see it from here; no,
it's on the other side; give me the bag!"

"What for?" asked Moya, more startled than he saw.

"I'll go this time. You stay with the sheep."

"But what's the good of going if the tank has been removed? If I
couldn't see it I'm sure you can't," said Moya bluntly.

"Did you ride right up?"

"Of course I did."

And Moya smiled.

"Well, at all events there's the whim-water. It's rather brackish----"

"Thank you," said Moya, smiling still.

"But I thought you were knocked up with thirst? I am, I can tell you.
And it's only rather salt--that's why we've given up using that
whim--but it's not salt enough to make you dotty!"

Moya maintained the kindly demeanour which she had put on with her
smile; it cost her an effort, however.

"Go on your own account, by all means," said she; "but not on mine, for
I shan't touch a drop. I'm really not so thirsty as you suppose; let me
set you an example of endurance, Mr. Ives!"

That was enough for him. He was spurring and yelping round his mob next
moment. But Moya did not watch him; she had turned in her saddle to take
a last look at the black hieroglyph of a whim, with the little iron roof
blazing beside it in the sun. She even shaded her eyes with one sunburnt
hand, as if to assure herself that she had made no mistake.

"So the whim is abandoned, and the hut unoccupied?"

"Yes, ever since Mr. Rigden has been manager. I hear it was one of his
first improvements."

They had struck the farther fence, and the mob was well in hand along
the wires. Moya and the jackeroo were ambling leisurely behind, and
nothing could have been more natural than Moya's questions.

"And the hut is unoccupied?" was her next.

"Quite; as a matter of fact, it's unfit for occupation."

"Yet you wanted me to drink the water!"

"That might have been all right; besides any water's better than none
when you're as thirsty as I thought you were."

Moya said no more about her thirst; it was intolerable; but they must be
getting near the gate at last. She was silent for a time, a time of
imaginative torment, for her mind ran on the latter end of such
sufferings as she was only beginning to endure. She was just
uncomfortable enough to have a dreadful inkling of the stages between
discomfort and death.

"It's a pity not to use the hut," she said at length.

"I believe it was more bother than the class of water was worth,"
returned Ives. "Yes, now I think of it, I remember hearing that they
couldn't get men to stay there. Blind Man's Block used to give them the
creeps. They're frightfully superstitious, these back-blockers!"

"I'm not surprised," said Moya, with a shudder. "I never want to see
Blind Man's Block again, or the hut either."

"But you will, you know!" the jackeroo reminded her. And that put an end
to the conversation.

Over a thousand sheep were at the gate waiting for them, with half a
dozen horses and as many men. Of course Ives was the last to arrive with
his mob, but the goodly numbers of the latter combined with the amazing
apparition of Moya to save her friend from the reprimand he seldom
failed to earn. Rigden came galloping to meet them, and for both men's
sake Moya treated him prettily enough in front of Ives. Even through
that day's coat of red, Rigden glowed, and told Ives that he should make
something of him yet. His water-bag was not quite empty, and Moya had
enough to make her long for more as she cantered with the bag to Ives,
who had forged discreetly ahead.

"Don't let him know we went so long without, Mr. Ives!"

And his cracked lips were sealed upon the subject.

"Of course you cut off the corner, and didn't go right round by the
hut?" said Rigden, riding up; and the jackeroo felt justified in
speaking strictly for himself; and thought it so like Miss Bethune not
to compromise him by saying how near to the hut they had been: for Moya
said nothing at all.

"And now you shall see a count-out," cried Rigden, in better spirits
than ever, "as soon as we've boxed the mobs."

"Boxed them!" cried Moya. "Where?"

"Joined them, I mean. To think of your coming mustering of your own
accord, Moya!"

His voice had fallen; she did not lower hers.

"It's one of the most interesting days I ever had," she informed all
within hearing; "now let me see the end of it, and I'll go back happy."

The adjective was not convincing, but Rigden would not let it dishearten
him. The very fact of her presence was the end of his despair.

"I met one of our rabbiters, and arranged for tea at his tent," he said.
"He little expects a lady, but you'll have to come."

The prospect had material attractions which Moya was much too honest to
deny. "Then make haste and count!" was what she said.

And that followed which appealed to Moya more than all that had gone
before. The gate gaped wide, and Rigden on foot put his back to one
post. The rest kept their saddles, and began gently rounding up the mob,
till it formed a pear-shaped island of consolidated wool, with the
headland stretching almost to Rigden's feet. He turned and beckoned to
the jackeroo.

"Tally, Ives!"

"Tally, sir," the jackeroo rejoined, and urged his horse to the front.
He had managed to drift back to Moya's side, to ensure her complete
appreciation of a manoeuvre he delighted in, but at the word of command
he was gone without a glance, and visible responsibility settled on his
rigid shoulders.

Real dogs kept the mob together, but the head stood stubborn at the
gate, with none to lead the way till Rigden touched the foremost fleece
with his toe and the race began. Slowly and singly at the start, as the
first grains slip through the hour-glass; by wondering twos and threes,
as the reluctant leaders were seen alive and well in the farther
paddock; thereafter by the dozen abreast, so far as the ordinary eye
could judge; but Rigden was the only one that knew, as he stood in the
gateway, beating time to the stampede with raised forefinger, and
nodding it with bent head.

"Hundred!" he called after the first half-minute, and "hundred!" in
quarter of a minute more, while Ives raised a hand each time and played
five-finger exercises with the other hand upon his thigh. At the same
time Rigden vanished in a yellow cloud, whence his voice came quicker
and thicker, crying hundred after hundred above the dull din of a
scuffling and scuttling as of a myriad mice heard through a microphone.
And the dusty fleeces disappeared on one side of the cloud to reappear
on the other until all were through.

"And seventy-two!" concluded Rigden hoarsely. "How many, Ives?"

"Two thousand one hundred and seventy-two," replied the jackeroo
promptly.

"Sure?"

"Certain, sir."

"And so am I," said Moya, riding forward, "for I kept tally too. Yes,
the hundreds are all right; but nothing will convince me that they were
hundreds; you might as well count the falling drops in a shower!"

Rigden smiled as he wiped the yellow deposit from his scarlet face.

"I may be one per cent. out," said he; "but if I'm more I deserve the
sack."

So Moya allowed that it was the most marvellous performance her own eyes
had ever seen; and these were full of an unconscious admiration for
Rigden and his prowess; but Rigden was conscious of it, and his chin
lifted, and his jaw set, and his burnt face glowed again.

Two of the musterers were told off to take the sheep to their new tank,
for their own dust had set them bleating for a drink; the rest lit their
pipes and turned their horses' heads for home; but Ives was instructed
to stop at the rabbiter's camp and tell him whom to expect.

"It would be unfair to spring you on the poor chap," said Rigden to
Moya.

Ives also had a last word to say to her, though he had to say it before
the boss.

"That was something to see, wasn't it, Miss Bethune? Doesn't it make you
keener than ever on the bush? Or isn't that possible?"

And he took off his wideawake as he shot ahead; but Rigden and Moya rode
on together without speaking.




IX

PAX IN BELLO


In happier circumstances the rabbiter's camp would have had less charm
for Moya. Its strings of rabbit-skins would have offended two senses,
and she would have objected openly to its nondescript dogs. The tent
among the trees would never have struck Moya as a covetable asylum,
while the rabbiter himself, on his haunches over the fire, could not
have failed to impress her as a horrid old man and nothing else. He was
certainly very ragged, and dirty, and hot; and he never said "sir," or
"miss," or "glad to see you." Yet he could cook a chop to the fraction
of a turn; and Moya could eat it off his own tin platter, and drink tea
by the pint out of a battered pannikin, with no milk in it, but more
brown sugar than enough. The tea, indeed, she went so far as to commend
in perfectly sincere superlatives.

"Oh, the tea's not so dusty," said the rabbiter grimly; "it didn't ought
to be at the price you charge for it in your store, mister! But the tea
don't matter so much; it's the water's the thing; and what's the matter
with the water in these here tanks, that you should go shifting all your
sheep, Mr. Rigden?"

This was obviously Rigden's business, and Moya, pricking an involuntary
ear, thought that he might have said so in as many words. But Rigden
knew his type, and precisely when and in what measure to ignore its
good-humoured effrontery.

"It's the sort of thing to do in time, or not at all," said he. "You
catch me wait till my sheep begin to bog!"

"Bog!" cried the rabbiter. "Who said they were beginning to bog? I tell
you there's tons of good water in this here tank; you come and look!"

And he made as if to lead the way to the long yellow lip of excavation
that showed through the clump. But Rigden shook his head and smiled,
under two scrutinies; and this time he did not say that he knew his own
business best; but his manner betrayed no annoyance.

Moya, however, contrived to obtain a glimpse of the water as they rode
away. It looked cool and plentiful in the slanting sunlight--a rippling
parallelogram flecked with gold. There was very little mud about the
margin.

"So it is quite an event, this mustering?"

The question had been carefully considered over a mile or so of
lengthening shadows, with the cool hand of evening on their brows
already. It was intended to lead up to another question, which, however,
Rigden's reply was so fortunate as to defer.

"Oh, it's nothing to some of our other functions," said he.

And Moya experienced such a twinge of jealousy that she was compelled to
ask what those functions were; otherwise she would never know.

"First and foremost there's the shearing; if this interests you, I
wonder what you'll think of that?" speculated Rigden, exactly as though
they had no quarrel. "It's the thing to see," he continued, with
deliberate enthusiasm: "it means mustering the whole run, that does, and
travelling mob after mob to the shed; and then the drafting; that's
another thing for you to see, though it's nothing to the scene in the
shed. But it's no good telling you about that till you've seen the shed
itself. We shore thirty-eight thousand last year. I was over the board
myself. Two dozen shearers and a round dozen rouseabouts----"

"I'm afraid it's Greek to me," interrupted Moya dryly; but she wished it
was not.

"--and no swearing allowed in the shed; half-a-crown fine each time;
that very old ruffian who gave us tea just now said it was a _lapsus
lingua_ when I fined _him_! You never know what they've been, not even
the roughest of them. But to come back to the shed: no smoking except at
given times when they all knock off for quarter-of-an-hour, and the
cook's boy comes down the board with pannikins of tea and shearers'
buns. Oh, they take good care of themselves, these chaps, I can tell
you; give their cook half-a-crown a week per head, and see he earns it.
Then there's a couple of wool-pressers, a wool-sorter from Geelong, Ives
branding the bales, Spicer seeing the drays loaded and keeping general
tally, and the boss of the shed with his eye on everything and
everybody. Oh, yes, a great sight for you--your first shearing!"

Moya shook her head without speaking, but Rigden was silenced at last.
He had rattled on and on with the hope of reawakening her enthusiasm
first, then her sympathy, then--but no! He could not keep it up unaided;
he must have some encouragement, and she gave him none. He relapsed into
silence, but presently proposed a canter. And this brought Moya to her
point at last.

"Cantering won't help us," she cried; "do let's be frank! It's partly my
fault for beating about the bush; it set you off talking against time,
and you know it. But we aren't anywhere near the station yet, and
there's one thing you _are_ going to tell me before we get there. Why
did you move those sheep?"

Rigden was taken aback.

"You heard me tell that rabbiter," he replied at length.

"But not the truth," said Moya bluntly. "You know you don't usually
have these musters at a moment's notice; you know there was no
occasion for one to-day. Do let us have the truth in this one
instance--that--that I may think a little better of you, Pelham!"

It was the first time that she had called him by any name since the very
beginning of their quarrel. And her voice had softened. And for one
instant her hand stretched across and lay upon his arm.

"Very well!" he said brusquely. "It was to cover up some tracks."

"Thank you," said Moya; and her tone surprised him, it was so free from
irony, so earnest, so convincing in its simple sincerity.

"Why do you thank me?" he asked suspiciously.

"I like to be trusted," she said. "And I like to be told the truth."

"If only you would trust me!" he cried from his heart. "From the first I
have told you all I could, and only asked you to believe that I was
acting for the best in all the rest. That I can say: according to my
lights I am still acting for the best. I may have done wrong legally,
but morally I have not. I have simply sheltered and shielded a fellow
creature who has already suffered out of all proportion to his fault;
but I admit that I have done the thing thoroughly. Yes, I'll be frank
with you there. I gave him a start last night on my own horse, as indeed
you know. I laid a false scent first; then I arranged this muster simply
and solely to destroy the real scent. I don't know that it was
necessary; but I do know that neither the police nor anybody else will
ever get on his tracks in Big Bushy; there has been too much stock over
the same ground since."

There was a grim sort of triumph in his tone, which Moya came near to
sharing in her heart. She felt that she could and would share it, if
only he would tell her all.

"Why keep him in Big Bushy?" she quietly inquired.

"Keep him there?" reiterated Rigden. "Who's doing so, Moya?"

"I don't know; but he was there this morning."

"This morning?"

"Yes, in the hut. I saw him."

"You saw him in the hut? The fool!" cried Rigden. "So he let you see
him! Did you speak to him?"

"No, thank you," said Moya, with unaffected disgust. "I was riding up to
see whether there was any water at the hut. I turned my horse straight
round, and did without."

"And didn't Ives see him?"

"No, he was with the sheep; when I joined him and said I could see no
tank, which was perfectly true, he wanted to go back for the water
himself."

She stopped abruptly.

"Well?"

"I wouldn't let him," said Moya. "That's all."

She rode on without glancing on either hand. Dusk had fallen; there were
no more shadows. The sun had set behind them; but Moya still felt the
glow she could not see; and it was in like manner that she was aware
also of Rigden's long gaze.

"The second time," he said softly at last.

"The second time what?"

This tone was sharp.

"That you've come to my rescue, Moya."

"That I've descended to your level, you mean!"

He caught her rein angrily.

"You've no right to say that without knowing!"

"Whose fault is it that I don't know?"

He loosed her rein and caught her hand instead, and held it against all
resistance. Yet Moya did not resist. He hurt her, and she welcomed the
pain.

"Moya, I would tell you this moment if I thought it would be for your
good and mine. It wouldn't--so why should I? It is something that you
would never, never forgive!"

"You mean the secret of the man's hold upon you?"

"Yes," he said, after a pause.

"You are wrong," said Moya, quickly. "It shows how little you know me! I
could forgive anything--anything--that is past and over. Anything but
your refusal to trust me ... when as you say yourself ... I have twice
over...."

She was shaking in her saddle, in a fit of suppressed sobbing the more
violent for its very silence. In the deep gloaming it might have been an
ague that had seized her; but some tears fell upon his hand holding
hers; and next moment that arm was round her waist. Luckily the horses
were tired out. And so for a little her head lay on his shoulder as
though there were no space between, the while he whispered in her ear
with all the eloquence he possessed, and all the passion she desired.

In this she must trust him, else indeed let her never trust him with her
life! But she would--she would? Surely one secret withheld was not to
part them for all time! And she loved the place after all, he could see
that she loved it, nor did she deny it when he paused; she would love
the life, he saw that too, and again there was no denial. They had been
so happy yesterday! They could be so happy all their lives! But for that
it was not necessary that they should tell each other everything. It was
not as if he was going to question her right to have and to keep secrets
of her own. She was welcome to as many as ever she liked. He happened
to know, for example (as a matter of fact, it was notorious), that he
was not the first man whom she had fancied she cared about. But did he
ask questions about the others? Well, then, she should remember that in
his favour. And yet--and yet--she had stood nobly by him in spite of all
her feelings! And yes, she had earned the right to know more--to know
all--when he remembered that he was risking his liberty and her
happiness, and that she had countenanced the risk in her own despite!
Ah, if only he were sure of her and her forgiveness; if only he were
sure!

"You talk as though you had committed some crime yourself," said Moya;
"well, I don't care if you have, so long as you tell me all about it.
There is nothing I wouldn't forgive--nothing upon earth--except such
secrets from the girl you profess to love."

She had got rid of his arm some time before this, but their hands were
still joined in the deepening twilight, until at this he dropped hers
suddenly.

"Profess!" he echoed. "Profess, do I? You know better than that, at all
events! Upon my soul I've a good mind to tell you after that, and chance
the consequences!"

His anger charmed her, as the anger of the right man should charm the
right woman. And this time it was she who sought his hand.

"Then tell me now," she whispered. "And you shall see how you have
misjudged me."

It was hard on Moya that he was not listening, for she had used no such
tone towards him these four-and-twenty hours. And listening he was, but
to another sound which reached her also in the pause. It was the thud
and jingle of approaching horsemen. Another minute and the white
trappings of the mounted police showed through the dusk.

"That you, Mr. Rigden?" said a queer voice for the sergeant. "Can you
give us a word, please?"

Rigden had but time to glance at Moya.

"I'll ride on slowly," she said at once; and she rode on the better
part of a mile, leaving the way entirely to her good bush steed. At last
there was quite a thunder of overtaking hoofs, and Rigden reined up
beside her, with the sergeant not far behind. Moya looked round, and the
sergeant was without his men, at tactful range.

"Do they guess anything?" whispered Moya.

"Not they!"

"Sure the others haven't gone on to scour Big Bushy?"

"No, only to cross it on their way back. They've given it up, Moya! The
sergeant's just coming back for dinner."

His tone had been more triumphant before his triumph was certain, but
Moya did not notice this.

"I'm so glad," she whispered, half mischievously, and caught his hand
under cloud of early night.

"Are you?" said Rigden, wistfully. "Then I suppose you'll say you're
glad about something else. You won't be when the time comes! But now
it's all over you shall have your way, Moya; come for a stroll after
dinner, and I'll tell you--every--single--thing!"




X

THE TRUTH BY INCHES


He told her with his back against the gate leading into Butcher-boy.
Moya heard him and stood still. Behind her rose the station pines, and
through the pines peeped hut and house, in shadow below, but with each
particular roof like a clean tablecloth in the glare of the risen moon.
A high light or so showed in the verandah underneath; this was Bethune's
shirt-front, that the sergeant's breeches, and those transitory red-hot
pin-heads their cigars. Rigden had superb sight. He could see all this
at something like a furlong's range. Yet all that he did see was Moya
with the moon upon her, a feathery and white silhouette, edged with a
greater whiteness, and crowned as with gold.

"Your father!"

"Yes, I am his son and heir."

Her tone was low with grief and horror, but his was unintentionally
sardonic. It jarred upon the woman, and reacted against the man. Moya's
first feeling had been undefiled by self; but in an instant her tears
were poisoned at their fount.

"And you told me your father was dead!"

The new note was one of the eternal scale between man and woman. It was
the note of unbridled reproach.

"Never in so many words, I think," said Rigden, unfortunately.

"In so many words!" echoed Moya, but the sneer was her last. "I hate
such contemptible distinctions!" she cried out honestly. "Better have
cheated me wholesale, as you did the police; there was something
thorough about that."

"And I hope that you can now see some excuse for it," rejoined Rigden
with more point.

"For that, yes!" cried Moya at once. "Oh, dear, yes, no one can blame
you for screening your poor father. I forgive you for cheating the
police--it would have been unnatural not to--but I never, never shall
forgive you for what _was_ unnatural--cheating _me_."

Rigden took a sharper tone.

"You are too fond of that word," said he, "and I object to it as between
me and you."

"You have earned it, though!"

"I deny it. I simply held my tongue about a tragedy in my own family
which you could gain nothing by knowing. There was no cheating in that."

"I disagree with you!" said Moya very hotly, but he went on as though
she had not spoken.

"You speak as though I had hushed up something in my own life. Can't you
see the difference? He was convicted under another name; it was a thing
nobody knew but ourselves; nobody need ever have known. Or so I
thought," he ended in a wretched voice.

But Moya was outwardly unmoved.

"All the more reason why you should have told me, and trusted me," she
insisted.

"God knows I thought of it! But I knew the difference it would make. And
I was right!"

It was his turn to be bitter, and Moya's to regain complete control.

"So you think it's that that makes the difference now?"

"Of course it is."

"Would you believe me if I assured you it was not?"

"No; you might think so; but I know."

"You know singularly little about women," said Moya after a pause.

And her tone shook him. But he said that he could only judge by the way
she had taken it now.

There was another pause, in which the proud girl wrestled with her
pride. But at last she told him he was very dull. And she drew a little
nearer, with the ghost of other looks behind her tears.

But the high moon just missed her face.

And Rigden was very dull indeed.

"You had better tell me everything, and give me a chance," she said
dryly.

"What's the use, when the mere fact is enough?"

"I never said it was."

"Oh, Moya, but you know it must be. Think of your people!"

"Why should I?"

"They will have to know."

"I don't see it."

"Ah, but they will," said Rigden, with dire conviction. And though the
change in Moya was now apparent even to him, it wrought no answering
change in Rigden; on the contrary, he fell into a brown study, with dull
eyes fixed no longer upon Moya, but on the high lights in the verandah
far away.

"There's so little to tell," he said at length. "It was a runaway match,
and a desperately bad bargain for my dear mother, yet by no means the
unhappy marriage you would suppose. I have that from her own dear lips,
and I don't think it so extraordinary as I did once. A bad man may still
be the one man for a good woman, and make her happier than the best of
good fellows; it was so in their case. My father was and is a bad man;
there's no mincing the matter. I've stood by him for what he is to me,
not for what he is in himself, for he has gone from bad to worse, like
most prisoners. He was in trouble when he married my mother; the police
were on his tracks even then: they came out here under a false name."

"And your name?" asked Moya, pertinently yet not unkindly; indeed she
was standing close beside him now.

"That is not false," said Rigden. "My mother used it from the time of
her trouble. She would not bring me up under an alias; but she took care
not to let his people or hers get wind of her existence; never wrote
them a line in her poorest days, though her people would have taken her
back--without him. That wouldn't do for my mother. Yet nothing else was
possible. He was sent to the hulks for life."

Moya's face, turned to the light at last, was shining like the moon
itself; and the tears in her eyes were tears of enthusiasm, almost of
pride.

"It was fine of her!" she said, and caught his hand.

"She _was_ fine," he answered simply. Yet Moya's hand had no effect. He
looked at it wistfully, but let it go without an answering clasp. And
the girl's pride bled again.

She hardly heard his story after that. Yet it was a story to hear. The
villain had not been a villain of the meaner dye, but one of parts,
courage among them.

"There have been no bushrangers in your time," said Rigden; "but you may
have heard of them?"

"I remember all about the Kellys," said honest Moya. "I'm not so young
as all that."

"Did you ever hear of Captain Bovill?"

"I know the name, nothing more."

"I am glad of that," said Rigden, grimly. "It is the name by which my
unhappy father is going down to Australian history as one of its most
notorious criminals. The gold-fields were the beginning of the end of
him, as of many a better man; he could not get enough out of his claim,
so he took it from an escort under arms. There was a whole band of them,
and they were all taken at last; but it was not the last of Captain
Bovill. You have seen the old hulk _Success_? He was one of the
prisoners who seized the launch and killed a warder and a sailor between
them; he was one of those sentenced to death and afterwards reprieved.
That was in '56; the next year they murdered the Inspector-General; and
he was tried for that with fifteen others, but he got off with his neck.
He only spoilt his last chance of legal freedom in this life; so he
tried to escape again and again; and at last he has succeeded!"

The son's tone was little in keeping with his acts, but the incongruity
was very human. There was Moya beside him in the moonlight, but for the
last time, whatever she might say or think! And her mind was working
visibly.

"Why didn't the police say who it was they were after?" she cried of a
sudden; and the blame was back in her voice, for she had found new
shoulders for it.

Rigden smiled sadly.

"Don't you see?" he said. "Don't you remember what Harkness said at the
start about my fellows harbouring him? But he told me that evening--to
think that it was only last night!--as a great secret and a tremendous
piece of news. The fact is that my unhappy father was more than
notorious in his day; he was popular; and popular sympathy has been the
bugbear of the police ever since the Kellys. Not that he has much
sympathy for me!" cried Rigden all at once. "Not that I'm acting
altogether from a sense of filial duty, however mistaken; no, you shan't
run away with any false ideas. It was one for him and two for myself! He
had the whip-hand of me, and let me know it; if I gave him away, he'd
have given me!"

"If only you had let him! If only you had trusted me," sighed Moya once
more. "But you do now, don't you--dear?"

And she touched his coat, for she could not risk the repulse of his
hand, though her words went so far--so very far for Moya.

"It's too late now," he said.

But it was incredible! Even now he seemed not to see her hand--hers!
Vanity invaded her once more, and her gates stood open to the least and
meanest of the besetting host. _She_ make advances to _him_, to the
convict's son! What would her people say? What would Toorak say? What
would she not say herself--to herself--of herself--after this nightmare
night?

And all because (but certainly for the second time) he had taken no
notice of her hand!

When found, however, Moya's voice was as cold as her heart was hot.

"Oh, very well! It is certainly too late if you wish it to be so, and in
any case now. But may I ask why you are so keen to save me the trouble
of saying so?"

Rigden looked past her towards the station, and there were no more high
lights in the verandah; but elsewhere there were voices, and the
champing of a bit.

"If you go back now," he said, "you will just be in time to hear."

"Thank you. I prefer to have it here, and from you."

Rigden shrugged his shoulders.

"Then I am no longer a free agent. I am here on parole. I am under
arrest."

"Nonsense!"

"I am, though: harbouring the fugitive! They can't put salt on him, so
they have on me."

Moya stood looking at him in a long silence, but only hardening as she
looked: patience, pity and understanding had gone like so many masts,
by the board, and the wreckage in her heart closed it finally against
him in the very hour of his more complete disaster.

"And how long have you known this?" she inquired stonily, though the
answer was obvious to her mind.

"Ever since we met them on our ride home. They showed me their warrant
then. The trooper had done thirty miles for it this afternoon. They
wanted to take me straight away. But I persuaded Harkness to come back
to dinner and return with me later without fuss."

"Yet you couldn't say one word to me!"

"Not just then. Where was the point? But I arranged with Harkness to
tell you now. And by all my gods I've told you everything there is to
tell, Moya!"

"You should have told me this first. But you tell nothing till you are
forced! I might have known you were keeping the worst up your sleeve! I
shouldn't be surprised if the very worst were still to come!"

"It's coming now," said Rigden, bitterly; "it's coming from you, in the
most miserable hour of all my existence; you must make it worse! How
was I to know the other wouldn't be enough for you? How do I know now?"

"Thank you," said Moya, a knife in her heart, but another in her tongue.

The voices drew nearer through the pines; there was Harkness mounted,
with a led horse, and Theodore Bethune on foot. Rigden turned abruptly
to the girl.

"There are just two more things to be said. None of them know where he
is, and none of them know my motive. You're in both secrets. You'd
better keep them--unless you want Toorak to know who it was you were
engaged to."

The rest followed without a word. It might have been a scene in a play
without words, and indeed the moon chalked the faces of the players, and
the Riverina crickets supplied the music with an orchestra some millions
strong. The clink of a boot in a stirrup, a thud in the saddle, another
clink upon the off side; and Rigden lifting his wideawake as he rode
after Harkness through the gate; and Bethune holding the gate open,
shutting it after them, and taking Moya's arm as she stood like Lot's
wife in the moonlight.




XI

BETHUNE _v._ BETHUNE


"I don't want to rub things in, or to make things worse," said Theodore,
kindly enough, as they approached the house; "but we shall have to talk
about them, for all that, Moya."

"I'm ready," was the quick reply. "I'll talk till daylight as long as
you won't let me think!"

"That's the right child!" purred her brother. "Come to my room; it's the
least bit more remote; and these youths are holding indignation meetings
on their own account. Ah! here's one of them."

Spicer had stepped down from the verandah with truculent stride.

"A word with you, Bethune," said he, brusquely.

"Thanks, but I'm engaged to my sister for this dance," replied the airy
Theodore. Moya could not stand his tone. Also she heard young Ives
turning the horses out for the night, and an inspiration seized her by
the heels.

"No, for the next," said she; "I want to speak to Mr. Ives."

And she flew to the horse-yard, where the slip-rails were down, and Ives
shooing horse after horse across them like the incurable new chum he
was.

"Wait a moment, Mr. Ives. Don't have me trampled to death just yet."

"Miss Bethune!"

And the top rail was up again. But it was not her presence that
surprised him. It was her tone.

"A dreadful ending to our day, Mr. Ives!"

"I'm glad to hear you say that," cried the boy, with all his enthusiasm;
"to our day, if you like, but that's all! This is the most infernally
unjust and high-handed action that ever was taken by the police of any
country! Iniquitous--scandalous! But it won't hold water; these
squatters are no fools, and every beak in the district's a squatter;
they'll see Rigden through, and we'll have him back before any of the
hands know a word of what's up."

"But don't they know already?"

"Not they; trust us for that! Why, even Mrs. Duncan has no idea why he's
gone. But we shall have him back this time to-morrow, never you fear,
Miss Bethune!"

"How far is it to the police-barracks, Mr. Ives?"

"Well, it's fourteen miles to our boundary, and that's not quite
half-way."

"Then they won't be there before midnight. Is it the way we went this
morning, Mr. Ives?"

"Yes; he's going over the same ground, poor chap, in different company.
But he'll come galloping back to-morrow, you take my word for it!"

Ives leant with folded arms upon the restored rail. The animals already
turned out hugged the horse-yard fence wistfully. The lucky remnant were
licking the last grains of chaff from the bin. Moya drew nearer to the
rail.

"Mr. Ives!"

"Miss Bethune?"

"Would you do a favour for me?"

"Would I not!"

"And say nothing about it afterwards?"

"You try me."

"Then leave a horse that I can ride--and saddle--in the yard to-night!"

Ives was embarrassed.

"With pleasure," said he, with nothing of the sort--and began hedging in
the same breath. "But--but look here, I say, Miss Bethune! You're never
going all that way----"

"Of course I'm not, and if I do it won't be before morning, only first
thing then, before the horses are run up. And I don't want you, or
anybody, least of all my brother, to come with me, or have the least
idea where I've gone, or that I've gone anywhere at all. See? I'm
perfectly well able to take care of myself, Mr. Ives. Can I trust you?"

"Of course you can, but----"

"No advice--please--_dear_ Mr. Ives!"

It was Moya at her sweetest, with the moon all over her. She wondered at
the time how she forced that smile; but it gained her point.

"Very well," he sighed; "your blood----"

"I shan't lose one drop," said Moya brightly. "And no more questions?"

"Of course not."

"And no tellings?"

"Miss Bethune!"

"Forgive me," said Moya. "I'm more than satisfied. And
you're--_the_--dearest young man in the bush, Mr. Ives!"

The jackeroo swept his wideawake to the earth.

"And you're the greatest girl in the world, though I were to be drawn
and quartered for saying so!"

Moya returned to the house with pensive gait. She was not overwhelmed
with a present sense of her alleged greatness. On the contrary, she had
seldom felt so small and petty. But she could make amends; at least she
could try.

Horse-yard and house were not very far apart, but some of the lesser
buildings intervened, and Moya had been too full of her own sudden ideas
to lend an ear to any or aught but Ives and his replies. So she had
missed a word or two which it was just as well for her to miss, and more
even than a word. She did notice, however, that Mr. Spicer turned his
back as she passed him in the verandah. And she found Theodore dabbing
his knuckles in his bedroom.

"What's the matter? What have you done?"

"Oh, nothing."

But tone and look alike betokened some new achievement: they were
self-satisfied even for Bethune of the Hall.

"Tell me," demanded Moya.

"Well, if you want to know, I've been teaching one of your back-blockers
(yours no more, praises be!) a bit of a lesson. Our friend Spicer. Very
offensive to me all day; seemed to think I was inspiring the police.
Just now he surpassed himself; wanted me to take off my coat and go
behind the pines; in other words to fight."

"And wouldn't you?"

"Not exactly. Take off my coat to him!"

"So what did you do?"

"Knocked him down as I stood."

"You didn't!"

"Very well. Ask Mr. Spicer. I'm sorry for the chap; he meant well; and I
admire his pluck."

"What did he do?"

"Got up and went for me bald-headed."

"And you knocked him down again?"

"No," said Theodore, "that time I knocked him out."

And he took a cigarette from his silver case, while Moya regarded him
with almost as much admiration as disgust, and more of surprise than of
either.

"I didn't know this was one of your accomplishments," said she at
length.

"Aha!" puffed Theodore; "nor was it, once upon a time. But there's a
certain old prize-fighter at a place called Trumpington, and he taught
me the most useful thing I learnt up at Cambridge. The poetic justice of
it is that I 'read' with him, so to speak, with a view to these very
bush bullies and up-country larrikins. They're too free with their
tongues when they're in a good temper, and with their fists when they're
not. I suffered from them in early youth, Moya, but I don't fancy I
shall suffer any more."

Moya was not so sure. She caught herself matching Theodore and another
in her mind, and was not ashamed of the side she took. It made no
difference to her own quarrel with the imaginary champion; nothing could
or should alter that. But perhaps she had been ungenerous. He seemed to
think so. She would show him she was neither ungenerous, nor a coward,
before she was done. And after that the deluge.

Hereabouts Moya caught Theodore watching her, a penny for her thoughts
in either eye. In an instant she had ceased being disingenuous with
herself, and was hating him heartily for having triumphed over an
adherent of Rigden, however mistaken; in another she was sharing that
adherent's suspicions; in a third, expressing them.

"I shouldn't wonder if Mr. Spicer was quite right!"

"In accusing me of inspiring the police?"

"You suspected the truth last night. Oh, I saw through all that; we
won't discuss it. And why should you keep your suspicions to yourself?"

Bethune blew a delicate cloud.

"One or two absurd little reasons: because I was staying in his house;
because you were engaged to him; because, in spite of all temptations,
one does one's poor best to remain more or less a gentleman."

"Then why did you go with the policemen?"

"To see what happened. I don't honestly remember making a single
comment, much less the least suggestion; if I did it was involuntary,
for I went upon the clear understanding with myself that I must say
nothing, whatever I might think. I was a mere spectator--immensely
interested--fascinated, in fact--but as close as wax, if you'll believe
me."

Moya did believe him. She knew the family faults; they were bounded by
the family virtues, and double-dealing was not within the pale. And Moya
felt interested herself; she wished to hear on what pretext Rigden had
been arrested; she had already heard that it was slender.

"Tell me what happened."

Theodore was nothing loth: indeed his day in the bush had been better
than Moya's, more exciting and unusual, yet every whit as typical in its
way. Spicer had led them straight to the clay-pans where Rigden had
struck his alleged trail, and there sure enough they had found it.

"I confess I could see nothing myself when the tracker first got off;
but half a glance was enough for him; and on he went like a blood-hound,
with his black muzzle close to the ground, the rest of us keeping a bit
behind and well on one side. Presently there's a foot-print I can see
for myself, then more that I simply couldn't, then another plain one;
and this time Billy--they're all called Billy--simply jumped with joy.
At least I thought it was with joy, till I saw him pointing from his own
marks to the others, and shaking his black head. Both prints were about
the same depth.

"'Him stamp,' says Billy. 'What for him stamp?'

"But we pushed on and came to some soft ground where any white fool
could have run down the tracks; and presently they brought us to a
fence, which we crossed by strapping down the wires and leading our
horses over, but not where Rigden had led his. Well, we lost the tracks
eventually where Rigden said he'd lost them, at what they're pleased to
call a 'tank' in these parts; the black fellow went round and round the
waterhole, but devil another footmark could he find. So then we went
back on the tracks we had found. And presently there's a big
yabber-yabber on the part of William, who waddles about on the sides of
his feet to show his bosses what he means, and turns in his toes like a
clown.

"Well, I asked the sergeant what it was all about; but he wouldn't tell
me. And it was then that this fellow Spicer began to play the fool: he
had smelt the rat himself, I suppose. He made a still greater ass of
himself at the fence, where the blackfellow messed about a long time
over Rigden's marks when we got back there. After that we all came
marching home, or rather riding hell-to-leather. And the fun became fast
and furious; so to speak, of course; for I needn't tell you it was no
fun for me, Moya."

"Quite sure? Well, never mind; go on."

"There was no end of a row. Harkness and Myrmidons entered the barracks,
and Spicer ordered them out. They insisted on searching Rigden's room.
Spicer swore they shouldn't, and appealed to me. What could I do, a mere
visitor? I remonstrated, advised them to wait, and so forth; further
resistance would have been arrant folly; yet that madman Spicer was for
holding the fort with the station ordnance!"

"Go on," said Moya again: she had opened her lips to say something else,
but the obvious soundness of Theodore's position came home to her in
time.

"Well, the long and short of it is that the sergeant came to me on the
verandah with the very pair of boots with which the tracks had been
made; a heel was off one of them; they were too small for Rigden, yet
they were found hidden away in his room. The astounding thing is that
the blessed blackfellow had spotted that the tracks were not made by the
man to whom the boots belonged. He had turned in his toes and walked on
the outside of his feet; it wasn't so with the trail they followed up to
these pines yesterday; and diamond had cut diamond about as neatly as
you could wish to see it done. It was smart of Rigden to run alongside
his horse and make it look as though he were riding alongside the trail;
but it wouldn't do for the wily savage, and I'm afraid the result will
be devilish unpleasant."

There was no fear, however, in the clean-cut and clean-shaven face, nor
did Theodore's tone suggest any possible unpleasantness to him or his.
Moya could have told him so in a manner worthy of himself, but again she
showed some self-restraint, and was content to thank him briefly for
putting her in possession of all the facts.

"Ah!" said Theodore, "I only wish I could do that! You talked a little
while ago about my suspecting the truth; well, I give you my word that I
haven't even yet the ghost of an idea what the real truth can be."

"You mean as to motive?"

"Exactly. Why on earth should he risk his all to save the skin of a
runaway convict? What can that convict be to him, Moya? Or is the sole
explanation mere misplaced, chuckle-headed chivalry?"

"What should _you_ say?" asked Moya quietly.

"I'll tell you frankly," said Theodore at once; "as things were I should
have hesitated, but as things are there's no reason why I shouldn't say
what I think. It's evidently some relation; a man only does that sort of
thing for his flesh and blood. Now do you happen to remember, when
this--I mean to say that--engagement was more or less in the air, that
some of us rather wanted to know who his father was? Not that----"

"I know," Moya interrupted; "I'm not likely to forget it. So that's what
you think, is it?"

"I do; by Jove I do! Wouldn't you say yourself----"

"No, I wouldn't; and no more need you. What are your ideas, by the way,
if this is not the ghost of one? I congratulate you upon it from that
point of view, if from no other!"

Theodore stuck a fresh cigarette between his lips, and struck the match
with considerable vigour. It is not pleasant to be blown from one's own
petard, or even scathed in one's own peculiar tone of offence.

"I simply wanted to spare your feelings, my dear girl," was the
rejoinder, the last three words being thrown in for the special
irritation of Moya. "Not that I see how it can matter now."

The special irritant ceased to gall.

"Now!" echoed Moya. "What do you mean by now?"

"Why, the whole thing's off, of course."

"What whole thing?"

"Your late engagement."

"Oh, is it! Thanks for the news; it's the first I've heard of it."

"Then it won't be the last. You're not going to marry a convict's son,
or a convict either; and this fellow promises to be both."

"I shall marry exactly whom I like," said Moya, trembling.

"Don't flatter yourself! You may say so out of bravado, but you're the
last person to make a public spectacle of yourself; especially
when--well, you know, to put it brutally, this is pretty well bound to
ruin him, whatever else it does or does not. Besides, you don't like him
any more; you've stopped even thinking you do. Do you suppose I've got
no eyes?"

"Theodore," said Moya in a low voice, "if I were your wife I'd murder
you!"

"Oh, no, you wouldn't; and meanwhile don't talk greater rot than you can
help, Moya. Believe me it isn't either the time or the place. We must
get out of the place, by the way, the first thing to-morrow. I see
you're still wearing his ring. The sooner you take that off and give it
to me to return to him the better."

"It will come to that," said Moya's heart; "but not through Theodore;
no, thank you!"

"It shall never come to it at all!" replied her heart of hearts.

And her lips echoed the "Never!" as she marched to the door. Theodore
had his foot against it in time.

"Now listen to me! No, you're not going till you listen to reason and
me! You may call me a brute till you're black in the face. I don't mind
being one for your own good. This thing's coming to an end; in fact it's
come; it ought never to have begun, but I tell you it's over. The family
were always agreed about it, and I'm practically the head of the family;
at all events I'm acting head up here, and I tell you this thing's over
whether you like it or not. But you like it. What's the good of
pretending you don't? But whether you do or you don't you shall never
marry the fellow! And now you know it you may go if you like. Only do
for God's sake be ready in the morning, like the sane person you always
used to be."

Moya did not move an inch towards the opened door. Her tears were dry;
fires leapt in their stead.

"Is that all?"

"Unless you wish me to say more."

"What a fool you are, Theodore!"

"I'm afraid I distrust expert evidence."

"With all your wits you don't know the first thing about women!"

"You mean that you require driving like Paddy's pig? Oh, no, you don't,
Moya; go and sleep upon it."

"Sleep!"

It was one burst of all she felt, but only one.

"I'm afraid you won't," said Theodore, with more humanity. "Still it's
better to lose a night thinking things over, calmly and surely, as
you're very capable of doing, than to go another day with that ring upon
your finger."

Moya stared at him with eyes in which the fires were quenched, but not
by tears. She looked dazed.

"Do put your mind to it--your own sane mind!" her brother pleaded, with
more of wisdom than he had shown with her yet. "And--I don't want to be
hard--I never meant to be hard about this again--but God help you now to
the only proper and sensible decision!"

So was he beginning to send his juries about their vital business; and,
after all, Moya went to hers with as much docility as the twelve good
men and true.

Theodore was right about one thing. She must put her mind to it once and
for ever.




XII

AN ESCAPADE


She put her mind to it with characteristic thoroughness and honesty. Let
there be no mistake about Moya Bethune. She had faults of temper, and
faults of temperament, and as many miscellaneous faults as she was quick
to find in others; but this did not retard her from seeing them in
herself. She was a little spoilt; it is the almost inevitable defect of
the popular qualities. She had a good conceit of herself, and a naughty
tongue; she could not have belonged to that branch of the Bethunes and
quite escaped either. On the other hand, she was not without their
cardinal merits. There was, indeed, a brutal honesty in the breed; in
Moya it became a singular sincerity, not always pleasing to her friends,
but counterbalanced by the brightness and charm of her personality. She
was incapable of deceiving another; infinitely rarer, she was equally
incapable of deceiving herself; and could consider most things from more
standpoints than are accessible to most women, always provided that she
kept that cornerstone of all sane judgment, her temper. She had lost it
with Rigden and lost it with Theodore, and was in a pretty bad temper
with herself to boot; but that is a minor matter; it does not drive the
blood to the brain; it need not obscure every point of view but one. And
there were but two worthy of Moya's consideration.

There was her own point of view, and there was Rigden's. Moya took first
innings; she was the woman, after all.

She began with the beginning of this visit--this visit that the almanac
pretended was but fifty hours old after all these days and nights: Well,
to believe it, and go back to the first night: they had been happy
enough then, still happier next day, happiest of all in the afternoon.
Moya could see the shadows and feel the heat, and hear Rigden wondering
whether she would ever care for the place, and her own light-hearted
replies; but there she checked herself, and passed over the memorable
end of that now memorable conversation, and took the next phase in due
order.

Of course she had been angry; anybody of any spirit, similarly placed,
would have resented being deserted by the hour together for the first
wayfarer. And the lie made it worse; and the refusal to explain matters
made the lie incalculably worse. He had put her in an abominable
position, professing to love her all the time. How could she believe in
such love? Love and trust were inseparable in her mind. Yet he had not
trusted her for a moment; even when she stooped to tell a lie herself,
to save him, even then he could not take her into his confidence. It was
the least he could have done after that; it was the very least that she
had earned.

Most of the next day--to-day!--even Moya shirked. Why had it laid such a
hold upon her--the bush--the bush life--the whole thing? Was it the mere
infection of a real enthusiasm? Or was it but the meretricious glamour
of the foregone, and would the fascination have been as great if all had
still been well? Moya abandoned these points; they formed a side issue
after all. Her mind jumped to the final explanation--still ringing in
her ears. It was immeasurably worse than all the rest, in essence, in
significance, in result. The result mattered least; there was little
weakness in Moya; she would have snapped her fingers at the world for
the man she loved. But how could she forgive his first deceit, his want
of trust in her to the end? And how could she think for another moment
of marrying a man whom she could not possibly forgive?

She did not think of it. She relinquished her own point of view, and
tried with all her honesty to put herself in his place instead.

It was not very difficult. The poverty-stricken childhood (so different
from her own!) with its terrible secret, its ever-hidden disgrace; small
wonder if it had become second nature to him to hide it! Then there was
the mother. Moya had always loved him for the tone of his lightest
reference to his mother. She thought now of the irreparable loss of that
mother's death, and felt how she herself had sworn in her heart to
repair it. She thought of their meeting, his sunburnt face, the new
atmosphere he brought with him, their immediate engagement: the
beginning had come almost as quickly as the end! Then Moya darkened.
She remembered how her people had tried to treat him, and how simply and
sturdily he had borne himself among them. Whereas, if he had told them
all ... but he might have told her!

Yet she wondered. The father was as good as dead, was literally dead to
the world; partly for his sake, perhaps, the secret had been kept so
jealously all these years by mother and son. Moya still thought that an
exception should have been made in her case. But, on mature reflection,
she was no longer absolutely and finally convinced of this. And the mere
shadow of a doubt upon the point was her first comfort in all these
hours.

Such was the inner aspect; the outward and visible was grave enough. It
was one thing to be true to a prisoner and a prisoner's son, but another
thing to remain engaged to him. Moya was no hand at secrets. And now she
hated them. So her mind was made up on one point. If she forgave him,
then no power should make her give him up, and she would wear his ring
before all her world, though it were the ring of a prisoner in Pentridge
Stockade. But she knew what that would mean, and a brief spell of too
vivid foresight, which followed, cannot be said to have improved
Rigden's chances of forgiveness.

There was one thing, however, which Moya had unaccountably forgotten.
This was the sudden inspiration which had come to her an hour ago, among
the station pines. She was reminded of it and of other things by the
arrival of Mrs. Duncan with a tray; she had even forgotten that her last
meal had been made in the middle of the afternoon, at the rabbiter's
camp. Mrs. Duncan had discovered this by questioning young Ives, and the
tea and eggs were the result of a consultation with Mr. Bethune.

"And after that," smiled Moya, "you will leave me for the night, won't
you? I feel as if I should never want to get up again!"

"I'm sure you do, my dear," the good woman cried.

"I shall lock my door," said Moya. "Don't let anybody come to me in the
morning; beg my brother not to come."

"Indeed I'll see he doesn't."

And Mrs. Duncan departed as one who had been told little but who guessed
much, with a shake of her head, and a nod to follow in case there was
nothing to shake it over; for she was entirely baffled.

Moya locked the door on her.

"To think I should have forgotten! My one hope--my one!"

And she ate every morsel on the tray; then undressed and went properly
to bed, for the sake of the rest. But to sleep she was afraid, lest she
might sleep too long. And between midnight and dawn, she was not only up
once more, but abroad by herself in the darkest hour.

Her door she left locked behind her; the key she pushed underneath; and
she stepped across the verandah with her riding habit gathered up in one
hand, and both shoes clutched in the other.

"It is dreadful! I am as bad as he is. But I can't help it. There's
nobody else to do it for me--unless I tell them first. And at least I
can keep his secret!"

The various buildings lay vague and opaque in the darkness: not a spark
of light in any one of them. And the moon had set; the stars alone lit
Moya to the horse-yard.

Luckily she was not unused to horses. She not only had her own hack at
home, but made a pet of it and kept her eye upon the groom. A single
match, blown out in an instant, showed Moya the saddle and bridle which
she had already used, with a water-bag hanging hard by, in the hut
adjoining the yard. The bag she filled from the tank outside. The rest
was an even simpler matter; a rocking-horse could not have stood quieter
than the bony beast which Ives had left behind with the night-horse.

It proved a strong and stolid mount, with a hard, unyielding, but
methodical canter, and only one bad habit: it shaved trees and gateposts
a little too closely for a rider unaccustomed to the bush. Moya was near
disaster at the start; thereafter she allowed for the blemish, and
crossed Butcher-boy without mishap.

It was now the darkest quarter of the darkest hour; and Moya was quite
thankful that she had no longer a track to follow or to lose. For in Big
Bushy she turned sharply to the left, as in the morning with young Ives,
and once more followed the fence; but this time she hugged it, and was
not happy unless she could switch the wires to make certain they were
there.

It was lighter when she reached the first corner: absolute blackness had
turned to a dark yet transparent grey; it was as though the ink had been
watered; but in a little it was ink no more. Moya turned in her saddle,
and a broadening flail of bloodshot blue was sweeping the stars one by
one out of the eastern sky.

Also Moya felt the wind of her own travelling bite shrewdly through her
summer blouse; and she put a stop to the blundering, plodding canter
about half-way down the east-and-west fence whose eastern angle
contained the disused whim and hut.

It was no longer necessary to switch the wires; even the line of trees
in Blind Man's Block had taken shape behind them; and that sinister
streak soon stood for the last black finger-mark of the night.

Further down the fence a covey of crows got up suddenly with foul outry;
and Moya, remembering the merino which had fallen by the way, steeled
her body once more to the bony one's uneasy canter.

The beast now revealed itself a dapple-grey; and at last between its
unkempt ears, and against the slaty sky to westward, Moya described the
timbers of the whim.

She reined in again, her bent head puzzling over what she should say.

And again she cantered, the settled words upon her lips; but there they
were destined to remain until forgotten; for it was at this point that
Moya's adventure diverged alike from her purpose and her preconception.

In the first place the hut was empty. It took Moya some minutes to
convince herself of the fact. Again and again she called upon the
supposed occupant to come out declaring herself a friend come to warn
him, as indeed she had. At last she dismounted and entered, her whip
clutched firmly, her heart in her mouth. The hut was without partition
or inner chamber. A glance proved it as empty as it had seemed.

Moya was nonplussed: all her plans had been built upon the supposition
that she should find the runaway still skulking in the hut where she had
seen him the previous forenoon. She now perceived how groundless her
supposition had been; it seemed insane when she remembered that the
runaway had as certainly seen her--and her sudden flight at sight of
him. Unquestionably she had made a false start. Yet she did not see what
else she could have done.

She led her horse to the whim itself. Twin shafts ran deep into the
earth, side by side like the barrels of a gun. But this whim was finally
forsaken; the long rope and the elaborate buckets had been removed and
stored; and the slabbed shafts ended in tiny glimmering squares without
break or foot-hole from brink to base.

Moya stood still to think; and very soon the thought of the black
tracker put all others out of court. It came with a sigh: if only she
had him there! He would think nothing of tracking the fugitive from the
hut whithersoever his feet had carried him; was it only the blacks who
could do such things?

How would he begin? Moya recalled her brother's description, and thought
she knew. He would begin by riding down the fence, and seeing if anybody
had crossed it.

She was doing this herself next minute. And the thought that had come
with a sigh had already made her heart beat madly, and the breath come
quicker and quicker through her parted lips; but not with fear; she was
much too excited to feel a conscious qualm. Besides, she had somehow no
fear of the unhappy man, _his_ father.

Excitement flew to frenzy when she actually found the place. She knew it
on the instant, and was never in doubt. There were several footmarks on
either side of the fence; on the far side a vertebrate line of them,
pointing plainly to the scrub; even her unskilled eye could follow it
half the way.

The next thing was to strap down the wires, but Moya could not wait for
that. She galloped to a gate that she had seen in the corner near the
whim, and came up the other side of the fence also at a gallop.

The trail was easily followed to the scrub: among the trees the ground
was harder and footprints proportionately faint. By dismounting,
however, and dropping her handkerchief at each apparent break of the
chain, Moya always succeeded in picking up the links eventually. Now
they gave her no trouble for half-an-hour; now a check would last as
long again; but each half-hour seemed like five minutes in her
excitement. The trees grew thicker and thicker, but never any higher.
Their branches swept the ground and interlaced; and many were the
windings of the faint footmarks tenaciously followed by Moya and the
dapple-grey. They were as divers wandering on the bed of a shallow sea;
for all its shallowness, the patches of sunlight were fewer and fewer,
and farther between; if they were also hotter, Moya did not notice the
difference. She did not realize into what a labyrinth she was
penetrating. Her entire attention was divided between the last footprint
and the next; she had none over for any other consideration whatsoever.
It was an extreme instance of the forcing of one faculty at the expense
of all the rest. Moya thought no more even of what she should say when
she ran her man to earth. She had decided all that before she reached
the hut. No pang of hunger or of thirst assailed her; excitement and
concentration were her meat and drink.

Yet when the end came her very first feeling was that of physical
faintness and exhaustion. But then it was an exceedingly sudden and
really terrifying end. Moya was dodging boles and ducking under
branches, the dapple-grey behind her, her arm through the reins, when
all at once these tightened. Moya turned quickly, thinking the horse was
unable to follow.

It was.

A gnarled hand, all hair and sinew, held it by the bridle.




XIII

BLIND MAN'S BLOCK


It was some moments before Moya looked higher than that hand, and it
prepared her for a worse face than she found waiting for her own. The
face was fierce enough, and it poured a steady fire upon the girl from
black eyes blazing in the double shade of a felt wideawake and the
overhanging mallee. But it was also old, and lined, and hunted; the man
had grown grey in prison; whatever his offences, there was rare spirit
in a last dash for freedom at his age. Moya had not thought so before.
She was surprised that she should think it now. The last thing that she
had expected to feel was an atom of real sympathy with the destroyer of
her happiness. And yet it was the first thing she felt.

"Please don't look at me like that," she begged. "I wish you no harm,
believe me!"

There was a pause, and then a first stern question.

"Who sent you here?"

"Nobody."

"Rot!"

"It's the truth."

"How else did you find me?"

"I saw you yesterday in the hut; you know that; you saw me."

"This is not the hut."

"No, but as you weren't there I looked for your tracks. And I found
them. And here I am."

Shaggy brows rose above the piercing eyes.

"I thought you didn't come from the bush?"

"Nor do I; but I have heard a good deal about tracking, this last day or
two; and I had luck."

"You've come all this way alone?"

"Absolutely."

"Then nobody else knows anything about it. That's certain. But they will
know! You'll be followed, and I shall be found!"

"I don't think so; they'll think I've gone somewhere else."

The convict gave her a long look, and his hawk's eye gleamed; then he
turned his attention to the dapple-grey. It was over a minute before he
spoke again.

"Do you know who I am?" he then asked.

"Captain Bovill."

He smiled wickedly.

"And nothing else?"

"Oh, yes," said Moya, sadly; "I know what else you are, of course. His
father!"

"So he's had the pluck to tell you, after all?"

"He should have told me at once."

"And lost you?"

"He hasn't lost me yet!" cried Moya impulsively, but from her loyal
heart none the less.

"Then why break away from him like this? Wasn't his word good enough?"

"I haven't broken away," said Moya, "from him. I couldn't. I've come to
tell you why. They've taken him to prison!"

"Taken _him_!"

"On your account. They know he helped you. That's all they do know."

The convict stared; but, in the perpetual twilight of the mallee that
was the only fact to which Moya could have sworn. She could make nothing
of the old man's expression. When he spoke, however, there was no
mistaking his tone. It was hard and grim as a prison bell.

"In his turn!" said he. "Well, it'll teach him what it's like."

"But it isn't his turn," cried Moya, in a fury; "what has he done to
deserve such degradation, except a good deal more than his duty by you?
And this is all the thanks he gets! As though he had taken after you!
How can you speak like that of him? How dare you--to me?"

So Moya could turn upon the whilom terror of a colony, a desperado all
his days, yet surely never more desperate than now; and her rings
flashed, and her eyes flashed, and there was no one there to see! No
soul within many miles but the great criminal before her, whose turn it
was to astonish Moya. He uncovered; he jerked a bow that was half a
shrug, but the more convincing for the blemish; and thereafter hung his
cropped head in strange humility.

"You're right!" said he. "I deserve all you've said, and more. He has
treated me ten thousand times better than I deserve, and that's my
gratitude! Yet if you had been half a lifetime in the hulks--in
irons--chained down like a wild beast--why, you'd _be_ one, even you!"

"I know," said Moya in a low voice. "It is terrible to think of!"

"And God bless you for admitting that much," the old man whined, "for
it's few that will. Break the law, and the law breaks you--on a wheel!
Talk about the wrongs of prisoners; they have neither wrongs nor rights
in the eyes of the law; it's their own fault for being prisoners, and
that's the last word."

"It is very terrible," said Moya again.

"Ah, but you little know how bad it is; and I'm not going to tell you.
It's worse than your worst dreams, and that must do for you. The
floggings, the irons, the solitary confinement in your irons with the
blood running down your back! No, I said I wouldn't, and I won't. But
it's hard to hold your tongue when you're talking to a lady for the
first time in thirty years. And to think of a young lady like you coming
all this way, alone too, to say a kind word to a double-dyed old rogue
like me! It's the most wonderful thing I ever heard of in all my days. I
can't think why you did it, for the life of me I can't!"

"It was to tell you about your son," Moya reminded him.

"Ah, poor fellow! God help him, for I can't."

"Are you quite sure?" said Moya gently, and for once rather nervously as
well.

"Sure? Of course I'm sure! Why, what can I do?" cried the other, with
sudden irritation as suddenly suppressed. "Hiding--hunted--with every
hand against me but yours--I'd help him if I could, but I can't."

"So he's to go to prison instead of you?"

Moya spoke quietly, but with the more effect; indeed, she was herself
beginning to feel surprised at her success with a desperate man in vital
straits. He was more amenable than she had imagined possible. That he
should parley with her at all was infinite encouragement. But now there
came a pause.

"I see what you're driving at," he cried savagely at last. "You want me
to give myself up! I'll see you--further."

The oath was dropped at the last moment--another strange sign--but the
tone could not have been stronger. Yet the mere fact that he had seen
her point, and made it for her, filled Moya with increasing confidence.

"I don't wonder," she had the tact to say. "How could you be expected to
go back--to that--of your own free will? And yet what can be worse than
waiting--waiting till----"

"I'm taken, eh? Is that what you want to say? They shall never take me
alive, curse them; don't you trouble about that!"

The tone was stubborn, ferocious, blood-curdling, but at least it was in
keeping with the blazing eyes and the great jowl beneath. Moya looked
steadily at the bushranger, the mutineer, the indomitable criminal of
other days; more remained of him than she had fancied. And to think that
he had soft answers for her!

She made haste to earn another.

"Please--please--don't speak like that! It is dreadful. And I feel sure
there is some middle course."

"I'm no believer in middle courses!"

"That I know. Yet--you have suffered so--I feel sure something could be
done! I--that is my people--have influence--money----"

"They can keep their money."

Moya begged his pardon. It was not an act in which she excelled. Yet
nothing could have been sweeter than her confusion, nothing finer than
her frank humility.

"I was only wondering if there was anything--anything--we could any of
us do! It would be understood so well. His father! Surely that would be
enough! I know the Governor. I would think nothing of going to him. I
honestly believe that he would pardon you both!"

Moya felt the black eyes burning, and for once her own eyes fell; indeed
she was a wondrous picture of beauty and youth and enthusiasm, there in
that place, in her dainty blouse and habit, with the dull green mallee
above and all around her. But they were a yet more extraordinary pair,
the old bushranger of a bygone day, and the Melbourne beauty of the
present.

"So you believe that, do you?" said the former sardonically.

"From the bottom of my heart."

"Suppose you were wrong?"

"I would move heaven and earth."

"Then jump on your horse!"

"Why?"

"I'm coming with you--to the police-barracks!"

It was like a dream. Moya could have rubbed her eyes, and soon had to do
so, for they were full of tears. She sobbed her thanks; she flung out
both hands to press them home. The convict waited grimly at her horse's
head.

"Better wait and see what comes of it," said he. "And think yourself
lucky worse hasn't come of it yet! I'm not thinking of myself; do you
know where you are? Do you know that this is Blind Man's Block? Haven't
you heard about it? Then you should thank your stars you've a good old
bushman to lead you out; for it's like getting out of a maze, I can tell
you; and if you'd been warned, as I was, I don't think you'd have
ventured in."

Moya had never realised that it was into Blind Man's Block she had
plunged so rashly. Nor did the discovery disturb her now. She was too
full of her supreme triumph to dwell for many moments upon any one of
the risks that she had run for its accomplishment. Neither did she look
too far ahead. She would keep faith with this poor creature; no need to
count the cost just yet. Moya set her mind's eye upon the reunion at the
police-barracks: her advent as the heroine of a bloodless victory, her
intercession for the father, her meeting with the son.

The prospect dazzled her. It had its gravely precarious aspect. But one
thing at a time. She had done her best; no ultimate ill could come of
it; of that she felt as certain as of the fact that she was sitting in
her saddle and blindly following an escaped criminal through untrodden
wilds.

Suddenly she discovered that she was not doing this exactly. She had not
consciously diverged, and yet her leader was bearing down upon her with
a scowl.

"Why don't you follow me?" he cried. "Do you want to get bushed in Blind
Man's Block?"

"I wasn't thinking," replied Moya. "It must have been the horse."

Bovill seized the bridle.

"It's a fool of a horse!" said he. "Why, we're quite close to the fence,
and it wants to head back into the middle of the block!"

Moya remarked that she did not recognise the country.

"Of course you don't," was the reply. "You came the devil of a round,
but I'm taking you straight back to the fence. Trust an old hand like
me; I can smell a fence as a sheep smells water. You trust yourself to
me!"

Moya had already done so. It was too late to reconsider that. Yet she
did begin to wonder somewhat at herself. That hairy hand upon the
bridle, it lay also rather heavily on her nerves. And the mallee shrub
showed no signs of thinning; the open spaces were as few as ever, and as
short; on every hand the leaves seemed whispering for miles and miles.

"We're a long time getting to that fence," said Moya at length.

The convict stopped, looked about him in all directions, and finally
turned round. In doing so his right hand left the bridle, but in an
instant the other was in its place. Moya, however, was too intent upon
his face to notice this.

"I'm afraid I've missed it," said he calmly.

"Missed the fence?"

"It looks like it."

"After what you said just now? Oh, what a fool I was to trust you!"

Their eyes were joined for the next few seconds; then the man's face
relaxed in a brutal grin. And Moya began to see the measure of her
folly.

"Hypocrite!" she gasped.

"Don't call names, my dear. It's not kind, especially to your
father-in-law that is to be!"

Moya shuddered in every member except the hand that gripped her
whalebone switch. The gold-mounted handle was deep in her flesh.

"Leave go of my bridle," she said quietly.

"Not just yet, my dear."

The whalebone whistled through the air, and came slashing down upon the
dapple-grey's neck, within an inch of the hairy fingers, which were
nevertheless snatched away. Moya had counted on this and its result. The
animal was off at its best pace; but the desperate hands grabbed Moya's
habit as it passed, and in another instant she was on the ground. In yet
another she had picked herself up, but she never even looked for the
horse; she fixed her eye upon her loathly adversary as on a wild beast;
and now he looked nothing else, with canine jaw and one vile lip
protruding, and hell's own fire in his wicked eyes.

Luckily her grip of the riding-whip had tightened, not relaxed; but now
she held it as a sword; and it helped her to cow a brute who had the
real brute's dread of the lash. But also she was young and supple, and
the man was old. The contrast had never been so sharp; for now they were
both in their true colours; and every vileness of the one was met by
its own antithesis in the other. It was will against will, personality
against personality, in an open space among the mallee and the full
glare of a climbing sun, mile upon mile from human help or habitation.
And the battle was fought to a finish without a word.

Moya only heard a muttering as the wretch swung round upon his heel, and
walked after the dapple-grey, which had come to a standstill within
sight. But she was not done with the blackguard yet. She watched him
remove the lady's saddle, then carefully detach the water-bag, and sling
it about himself by means of the stirrup-leather. Then he mounted,
bare-back; but Moya knew that he would not abandon her without his say;
and she was waiting for him with the self-same eye that had beaten him
off.

He reined up and cursed her long and filthily. Her ear was deaf to that;
but little of it conveyed the slightest meaning; her unchanged face
declared as much. So then he trimmed his tongue accordingly.

"Sorry to take the water-bag; but through you I've forgot mine and my
swag too. Better try and find 'em; they're away back where I camped last
night; you're welcome to the drop that's left, if there is one. You look
a bit black about the gills as it is. Have a drop to show there's no
ill-feeling before I go."

And he dangled the bag before her, meaning to whisk it back again. But
Moya disappointed him. She was parched with thirst, though she only
realised it now. She neither spoke nor moved a muscle.

"Then die of thirst, and be damned to you! Do you know where you are?
Blind Man's Block--Blind Man's Block! Don't you forget it again, because
I shan't be here to remind you; a horse was what I wanted, and was
promised, so you're only keeping that poor devil's word for him. Give
him my blessing if you ever see him again; but you never will. They say
it's an easy place to die in, this here Blind Man's Block, but you'll
see for yourself. A nice little corpse we'll make, won't we? But we'll
die and rot the same, and the crows'll have our eyes for breakfast and
our innards for dinner! And do you good, you little white devil, you!"

Moya remained standing in the same attitude, with the same steady eye
and the same marble pallor, long after the monster disappeared, and the
last beat of the dapple-grey's hoofs was lost among the normal wilds of
the bush. Then all at once a great light leapt to her face. But it was
not at anything that she had heard or seen; it was at something which
had come to her very suddenly in the end. And for a long time after
that, though lost and alone in Blind Man's Block, and only too likely to
die the cruel death designed for her, Moya Bethune was a happier woman
than she had been for many an hour.




XIV

HIS OWN COIN


"Cooo-eee!"

It was a far cry and faint, so faint that Moya was slow to believe her
ears. She had not stirred from the scene of her late encounter, but this
inactivity was not without design. Moya was tired out already; she had
too much sense to waste her remaining strength upon the heat of the day.
She found the chewing of leaves avert the worst pangs of thirst, so long
as she remained in the shade, and there she determined to rest for the
present. Sooner or later she would be followed and found, and the fewer
her wanderings, the quicker and easier that blessed consummation. Her
plight was still perilous enough, and Moya did not blink this fact any
more than others. Yet another fact there was, of which she was finally
convinced, though she had yet to prove it; meanwhile the mere conviction
was her stay and comfort. She was gloating over it, a leaf between her
dry lips, and her aching body stretched within reach of more leaves,
when she thought she heard the coo-ee.

She sat up and listened. It came again. And this time Moya was sure.

She sprang to her feet, and, deliverance within hail, realised her
danger for the first time fully. Sunburnt hands put a trembling trumpet
to her lips, and out came a clearer call than had come to Moya.

The answer sounded hoarse, and was as far away as ever; but prompt
enough; and now Moya was as sure of the direction as of the sound
itself. Nor had she occasion to coo-ee any more. For the first thing she
saw, perhaps a furlong through the scrub, was a riderless horse, bridled
but unsaddled, with a forefoot through the reins.

True to its unpleasant habit, the dapple-grey had done noble service to
the human race, by swerving under a branch at full gallop, and scraping
its rider into space.

The wretch lay helpless in the sun, with a bloody forehead and an
injured spine. Moya's water-bag had fallen clear, and lay out of his
reach by a few inches which were yet too many for him to move. He
demanded it as soon as she came up, but with an oath, and Moya helped
herself first, drinking till her hands came close together upon the wet
canvas.

"Now you can finish it," she said, "if you're such a fool. I've left you
more than you deserve."

He cursed her hideously, and a touch of unmerited compassion came upon
her as she discovered how really helpless he was. So she held his head
while he drained the last drop, and as it fell back he cursed her again,
but began whining when she made off without a word.

"My back must be broken--I've no feeling in my legs. And you'd let me
die alone!"

"Your own coin," said Moya, turning at her distance.

"It wasn't. I swear it wasn't. I swear to God I was only doing it to
frighten you! I was going for help."

"How can you tell such lies?" asked Moya sternly.

"They're not, they're the solemn truth, so help me God!"

"You're only making them worse; own they are lies, or I'm off this
minute."

"Oh, they are then, damn you!"

Only the oath was both longer and stronger.

"Swear again, and it won't be this minute, it'll be this very second!"
cried Moya decisively. "So own, without swearing, that you _did_ mean me
to die of thirst, so far as you were concerned."

"You never would have done it, though; they'll be on your track by this
time."

"That may be. It doesn't alter what you did."

"I offered you a drink, didn't I? It was my only chance to take the
horse and the water-bag. I meant to frighten you, but that's all. And
now I'm half mad with pain and heat; you'd swear yourself if you were in
my shoes; and I can't even feel I've got any on!"

Moya drew a little nearer.

"Nearer, miss--nearer still! Come and stand between me and the sun. Just
for a minute! It's burning me to hell!"

Moya took no notice of the word, nor yet of the request.

"Before I do any more for you," said she, "you must tell me the truth."

"I have!"

"Oh, no, you haven't: not the particular truth I want to know. I know it
already. Still I mean to hear it from you. It's the truth on quite a
different matter; that's what I want," said Moya, and stood over the
poor devil as he desired, so that at last the sun was off him, though
now he had Moya's eyes instead. "I--I wonder you can't guess--what I've
guessed!" she added after a pause.

But she also wondered at something else, for in that pause the
blood-stained face had grown ghastlier than before, and Moya could not
understand it. The man was so sorely stricken that recapture must now be
his liveliest hope: why then should he fear a discovery more or less?
And it was quite a little thing that Moya thought she had discovered; a
little thing to him, not to her; and she proceeded to treat it as such.

"You know you're not Captain Bovill at all," she told him, in the quiet
voice of absolutely satisfied conviction.

"Who told you that?" he roared, half raising himself for the first time,
and the fear and fury in his eyes were terrible to see.

"Nobody."

"Ah!"

"But I know it all the same. I've known it this last half-hour. And if I
hadn't I should know it now. I see it--where I ought to have seen it
from the first--in your face."

"You mean because my son's not the dead spit of his father? But he never
was; he took after his mother; he'll tell you that himself."

"It's not what I meant," said Moya, "though it is through the man you
call your son that I know he is nothing of the kind. His father may have
been a criminal; he was something else first; he would not have left a
woman to perish of thirst in the bush, a woman who had done him no
harm--who only wished to befriend him--who was going to marry his son!"

There were no oaths to this; but the black eyes gleamed shrewdly in the
blood-stained face, and the conical head wagged where it lay.

"You never were in the hulks, you see," said the convict; "else you'd
know. No matter what a man goes in, they all come out alike, brute
beasts every one. I'm all that, God help me! But I'm the man--I'm the
man. Do you think he'd have held out a finger to me if I hadn't been?"

"I've no doubt you convinced him that you were."

"How can one man convince another that he's his father?"

"I don't know. I only know that you have done it."

"Why, he knew me at once!"

"Nonsense! He had never seen you before; he doesn't remember his
father."

"Do you suppose he hasn't seen pictures, and heard plenty? No, no; all
the rest's a true bill; but Captain Bovill I've lived, and Captain
Bovill I'm going to die."

Moya looked at him closely. She could not help shuddering. He saw it,
and the fear of death laid hold of him, even as he sweltered in the
heat.

"With a lie on your lips?" said Moya, gravely.

"It's the truth!"

"You know it isn't. Own it, for your own sake! Who can tell how long I
shall be gone?"

"You shan't go! You shan't go!" he snarled and whined at once. And he
clutched vainly at her skirts, the effort leaving him pale as death, and
in as dire an agony.

"I must," said Moya. "There's the horse; the saddle's quite near; you
shall have all the help that I can bring you, with all the speed that's
possible."

She moved away, and the ruthless sun played on every inch of him once
more.

"I'm burning--burning!" he yelled. "Have I been in hell upon earth all
these years to go to hell itself before I die? Move me, for Christ's
sake! Only get me into the shade, and I'll confess--I'll confess!"

Moya tried; but it was terrible; he shrieked with agony, foaming at the
mouth, and beating her off with feeble fists. So then she flung herself
bodily on an infant hop-bush, and actually uprooted it. And with this
and some mallee-branches she made a gunyah over him, though he said it
stifled him, and complained bitterly to the end. At the end of all Moya
knelt at his feet.

"Now keep your promise."

"What promise?" he asked with an oath, for Moya had been milder than her
word.

"You said you would confess."

"Confess what?" he cried, a new terror in his eyes. "I'm not going to
die! I don't feel like dying! I've no more to confess!"

"Oh, yes, you have--that you're not his father--nor yet Captain Bovill."

"But I tell you I am. Why--" and the pallid face lit up suddenly--"even
the police know that, and you know that they know it!"

It was a random shot, but it made a visible mark, for in her instinctive
certainty of the main fact Moya was only now reminded that Rigden
himself had told her the same thing. Her discomfiture, however, was but
momentary; she held obstinately to her intuition. The police might know
it. She knew better than the police; and looking upon their quarry, and
going over everything as she looked, came in a flash upon a fresh theory
and a small fact in its support.

"Then they don't know who it is they're after!" cried Moya. "You're not
even _their_ man; his eyes were brown; it was in the description; but
yours are the blackest I ever saw."

It was not a good point. He might well make light of it. But it was
enough for Moya and her woman's instinct; or so she said, and honestly
thought for the moment. She was less satisfied when she had caught the
horse and still must hear the mangled man; for he railed at her, from
the gunyah she had built him, to the very end. And to Moya it seemed
that there was more of triumph than of terror in his tone.




XV

THE FACT OF THE MATTER


Sergeant Harkness had his barracks to himself. To be sure, the cell was
occupied; but, contrary to the usual amenities of the wilderness, such
as euchre and Christian names between the sergeant and the ordinary run
of prisoners, with this one Harkness would have nothing to do. It was a
personal matter between them: the capital charge had divided them less.
Constable and tracker had meanwhile been called out on fresh business.
That was in the middle of the day. Since then the coach had passed with
the mail; and Harkness had been pacing his verandah throughout the
sleepiest hour of the afternoon, only pausing to read and re-read one
official communication, when Moya's habit fluttered into view towards
four o'clock.

"Well, I'm dished!" exclaimed the sergeant. "And alone, too, after all!"

He hastened to meet her.

"Where on earth have you been, Miss Bethune? Do you know there's another
search-party out, looking for _you_ this time? My sub and the tracker
were fetched this morning. I'd have gone myself only----" and he jerked
a thumb towards a very small window at one end of the barracks.

"Mr. Rigden?" said Moya, lowering her voice.

"Yes."

"So you've got him still! I'm glad; but I don't want him to know I'm
here. Stay--does he think I'm lost?"

"No. I thought it better not to tell him."

"That was both wise and kind of you, Sergeant Harkness! He must know
nothing just yet. I want to speak to you first."

And she urged the dapple-grey, now flagging sorely, towards the other
end of the building; but no face appeared at the little barred window;
for Rigden was sound asleep in his cell.

"We're all right," said Moya, sliding to the ground; "we stopped at a
tank and a boundary-rider's hut, but not the Eureka boundary. I didn't
get out the same way I got in, you see--I mean out of the Blind Man's
Block."

"Blind Man's Block! Good God! have you been there? You're lucky to have
got out at all!"

"It wasn't easy. I thought we should never strike a fence, and when we
did I had to follow it for miles before there was a gate or a road. But
the boundary-rider was very kind; he not only gave me the best meal I
ever had in my life; he set me on the road to you."

Indeed the girl was glowing, though dusty and dishevelled from head to
foot. Her splendid colouring had never been more radiant, nor had the
bewildered sergeant ever looked upon such brilliant eyes. But it was a
feverish brilliance, and a glance would have apprised the skilled
observer of a brain in the balance between endurance and suspense.

"What on earth were you doing in Blind Man's Block?" asked Harkness,
suspiciously.

"I'll tell you. I'll tell you something else as well! But first you must
tell me something, Sergeant Harkness."

"I believe you know where he is," quoth the sergeant, softly.

"Do _you_ know _who_ he is?" cried Moya, coming finely to her point.

Harkness stared harder than ever.

"Well, I thought I did--until this afternoon."

"Who did you think it was?"

"Well, there's no harm in saying now. Rightly or wrongly, I only told
Mr. Rigden at the time. But I always thought it was Captain Bovill, the
old bushranger who escaped from Pentridge two or three weeks ago."

"Then you thought wrong," said Moya, boldly.

Nevertheless she held her breath.

"So it seems," growled the sergeant.

"Why does it seem so?"

It was a new voice crying, and one so tremulous that Harkness could
scarcely recognise it as Miss Bethune's.

"I've heard officially----"

"What have you heard?"

"You see we were all informed of Bovill's escape."

"Go on! Go on!"

"So in the same way we've been advised of his death."

"His--death!"

"Steady, Miss Bethune! There--allow me. We'll get in out of the sun; he
won't hear us at this end of the verandah. Here's a chair. That's the
ticket! Now, just one moment."

He returned with something in a glass which Moya thought sickening. But
it did her good. She ceased giggling and weeping by turns and both at
once.

"So he's dead--he's dead! Have you told Mr. Rigden that?"

"No; I'm not seeing much of Mr. Rigden."

"I am glad. I will tell him myself, presently. You will let me, I
suppose?"

"Surely, Miss Bethune. There's no earthly reason why he should be here,
except his own obstinacy, if you'll excuse my saying so. He was remanded
this morning; but Mr. Cross of Strathavon, who signed the warrant
yesterday, and came over for the examination this forenoon, not only
wanted to take bail, but offered to find it himself. Wanted to carry him
off in his own buggy, he did! But Mr. Rigden said here he was, and here
he'd stick until his fate was settled. Would you like to see him now?"

"Presently," repeated Moya. "I want to hear more; then I may have
something to tell you. When and where did this death occur, and what
made you so sure that it was the dead man who came to Eureka? You will
understand my questions in a minute."

"Only I must answer them first," said the sergeant, smiling. "I am to
give myself clean away, am I?"

"We must all do that sometimes, Sergeant Harkness. It will be my turn
directly. Let us trust each other."

Harkness looked into her candid eyes, calmer and more steadfast for
their recent tears, and his mind was made up.

"I'll trust you," he said; "you may do as you like about me. Perhaps you
yourself have had the wish that's father to the thought, or rather the
thought that comes of the wish and nothing else? Well, then, that's
what's been the matter with me. The moment I heard of that old rascal's
escape, like every other fellow in the force, I yearned to have the
taking of him. Of course it wasn't on the cards, hundreds of miles
up-country as we are here, besides being across the border; yet when
they got clear away, and headed for the Murray, there was no saying
where they might or might not cast up. Well, it seems they never reached
the Murray at all; but last week down in Balranald I heard a rum yarn
about a stowaway aboard one of the Echuca river-steamers; they never
knew he was aboard until they heard him go overboard just the other side
of Balranald. Then they thought it was one of themselves, until they
mustered and found none missing; and then they all swore it was a log,
except the man at the wheel who'd seen it; so I pretended to think with
the rest--but you bet I didn't! I went down the river on the off-chance,
but I never let on who I hoped it might be. And what with a swaggy whose
swag had been stolen, and his description of the man who he swore had
stolen it, I at last got on the tracks of the man I've lost. He was
said to be an oldish man; that seemed good enough; they were both of
them oldish men, the two that had escaped."

"The two!" cried Moya in high excitement. "The two! I keep forgetting
there were two of them; you see you never said so when you came to the
station."

"I wanted to keep it all to myself," confessed the crest-fallen
sergeant. "I only told two living men who I thought it was that I was
after. One was my sub--who guessed--and the other was Mr. Rigden."

"Were the two men who escaped anything like each other?"

"Well, they were both old lags from the _Success_, and both superior men
at one time; old particulars who'd been chained together, as you might
say, for years; and I suppose that sort of thing does beat a man down
into a type. However, their friendship didn't go for much when they got
outside; for Gipsy Marks murdered Captain Bovill as sure as emu's eggs
are emu's eggs!"

"Murdered him!" gasped Moya; and her brain reeled to think of the hours
she had spent with the murderer. But all was clear to her now, from the
way in which Rigden had been imposed upon in the beginning, to the
impostor's obstinate and terrified refusal to own himself as such to the
very end.

"Yes, murdered him on the other side of the Murray; the body's only just
been found; and meanwhile the murderer's slipped through my fingers,"
said the sergeant, sourly; "for if it wasn't poor old Bovill I was
after, at all events it was Gipsy Marks."

Moya sprang to her feet.

"It was," she cried; "but he hasn't slipped through your fingers at all,
unless he's dead. He wasn't when I left him two or three hours ago."

"When you _left_ him?"

"Yes, I found him, and was with him all the morning."

"In Blind Man's Block--with that ruffian?"

"He took my horse and my water-bag, and left me there to die of thirst;
but the dear horse turned the tables on him--poor wretch!"

"And you never told me!"

"I am trying to tell you now."

And he let her finish.

But she would not let him go.

"Dear Sergeant Harkness, I can't pretend to have an ounce of pity left
for that dreadful being in Blind Man's Block. A murderer, too! At least
I have more pity for some one else, and you must let me take him away
before you go."

"Impossible, my dear young lady--that is, before communicating with Mr.
Cross."

"About bail?"

"Yes."

"What was the amount named this morning?"

"Fifty pounds."

"Give me a sheet of paper and a stamp, and I'll write a cheque myself."

Harkness considered.

"Certainly that could be done," he said at length.

"Then quickly--quickly!"

Yet even when it was done she detained him; even when he put a big key
into her hand.

"_Must_ this go further--before the magistrates--after you have found
him?"

Harkness hardened.

"The offence is the same. I'm afraid it must."

"It will make it very unpleasant for me," sighed Moya, "when I come up
here. And when I've found him for you--and undone anything that was
done--though I don't admit that anything was--I--well, I really think
you _might_!"

"Might what?"

"Withdraw the charge!"

"But those tracks weren't his. Mr. Rigden made them. He shouldn't have
done that."

"Of course he shouldn't--if he did."

"But of course he _did_, Miss Bethune. I've known Mr. Rigden for years;
we used to be very good friends. I shouldn't speak as I do unless I
spoke by the book. But--why on earth did he go and do a thing like
that?"

Moya paused.

"If I tell you will you never tell a soul?"

"Never," said the rash sergeant.

"Then he was imposed upon. The wretch pretended he--had some claim--I
cannot tell you what. I can tell you no more."

It was provokingly little to have to keep secret for lifetime; yet
Harkness was glad to hear even this.

"It was the only possible sort of explanation," said he.

"But it won't explain enough for the world," sighed Moya, so meaningly
that the sergeant asked her what she did mean.

"I must really get off," he added.

"Then I'll be plain with you," cried the girl. "Either you must withdraw
this charge, and pretend that those tracks were genuine, or I can never
come up here to live!"

And she looked her loveliest to emphasise the threat.

"I must see Mr. Rigden about that," was, however, all that Harkness
would vouchsafe.

"Very well! That's only fair. Meanwhile--I--_trust you_, Sergeant
Harkness. And I never yet trusted the wrong man!"

That was Moya's last word.

It is therefore a pity that it was not strictly true.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a wonderful ride they had together, that ride between the
police-barracks and the station, and from drowsy afternoon into cool
sweet night. The crickets chirped their welcome on the very boundary,
and the same stars came out that Moya had seen swept away in the
morning, one by one again. Then the moon came up with a bound, but hung
a little as though caught in some pine-trees on the horizon, that seemed
scratched upon its disc. And Moya remarked that they were very near
home, with such a wealth of tenderness in the supreme word that a mist
came over Rigden's eyes.

"Thank God," said he, "that I have lived to hear you call it so, even if
it never is to be."

"But it is--it is. Our own dear home!"

"We shall see."

"What do you mean, darling?"

"I am going to tell Theodore the whole thing."

"After I've taken such pains to make it certain that none of them need
ever know a word?"

"Yes; he shall know; he can do what he thinks fit about letting it go
any further."

Moya was silent for a little.

"You're right," she said at last. "I know Theodore. He'll never breathe
it; but he'll think all the more of you, dearest."

"I owe it to him. I owe it to you all, and to myself. I am not naturally
a fraud, Moya."

"On the other hand, it was very natural not to speak of such a thing."

"But it was wrong. I knew it at the time. Only I _could_ not risk----"

Moya touched his lips with her switch.

"Hush, sir! That's the one part I shall never--quite--forgive."

"But you have taught me a lesson. I shall never keep another thing back
from you in all my life!"

"And I will never be horrid to you again, darling! But of course there
will be exceptions to both rules; to yours because there are some things
which wouldn't be my business (but this wasn't one of them); to mine,
because--well--we none of us have the tempers of angels."

"But you have been my good angel already--and more--so much more!"

They came to the home-paddock gate. The moon was high above the pines.
Underneath there were the lesser lights, the earthly lights, but all
else was celestial peace.

"I hope they're not looking for me still," said Moya.

"If they are I must go and look for them."

"I won't let you. It's too sweet--the pines--the moonlight--everything."

They rode up to the homestead, with each roof beaming to the moon.

"Not much of a place for the belle of Toorak," sighed Rigden.

"Perhaps not. But, of all places, the place for me!"

"You're as keen as Ives," laughed Rigden as he helped her to dismount.
"And I was so afraid the place would choke you off!"

       *       *       *       *       *




    OTHER BOOKS BY MR. HORNUNG

    "'Peccavi' is at once the most serious and the strongest novel
    that has issued from Mr. Hornung's engaging pen.... A striking
    and admirable story."--_The Spectator_.

    PECCAVI

    _12mo, $1.50_

    "It must be said that the erring parson is a fine figure,
    standing aloof, yet never passive in his awful solitude. He
    works out a grand and unselfish salvation in an heroic
    way."--_The Athenaeum_.

    "One of the strongest novels published this autumn. In it Mr.
    Hornung has taken a long step forward in his work as a
    novelist.... Here at last is a novel of power and purpose.... In
    vividness of writing the book is remarkable."--_The Outlook_.

    "One of the strongest and most touching of recent novels.
    Describes the moral fall of an English clergyman and his
    strange, brave, victorious struggle to win back public respect
    and confidence."--_The Congregationalist_.

    Charles Scribner's Sons, New York




    The Amateur Cracksman

    _30th Thousand. 12mo, $1.25. The titles of the stories are:_

    I. The Ides of March
    II. A Costume Piece
    III. Gentlemen and Players
    IV. Le Premier Pas
    V. Wilful Murder
    VI. Nine Points of the Law
    VII. The Return Match
    VIII. The Gift of the Emperor

    "For sheer excitement and inventive genius the burglarian
    exploits of 'The Amateur Cracksman' carry off the palm. Raffles
    is as distinct and convincing a creation as Sherlock
    Holmes."--_The Bookman_.

    "Raffles is amazing; his resource is perfect; he talks like a
    gentleman and acts like one, except when occupied with pressing
    business in another man's house, at midnight, and naturally he
    has a 'cool nerve,' a nerve positively arctic. They all have
    nerves like that, these Raffleses."--_New York Tribune_.




    Dead Men Tell No Tales

    _A Novel. 12mo, $1.25_

    "In this novel, as in the previous ones from Mr. Hornung's pen,
    there is a wealth of well-handled incidents. It is story-telling
    of the most direct kind and holds the attention from the first
    page to the last. Mr. Hornung seems to us in each succeeding
    book from his pen to gain in confidence and authority, and we do
    not hesitate to place him among the first of the comparatively
    new writers who must be reckoned with."--_Literature_.




    The Rogue's March

    _A Romance. 12mo, $1.50_

    "Mr. Hornung has succeeded admirably in his object: his
    Australian scenes are a veritable nightmare; they sear the
    imagination, and it will be some time before we get Hookey
    Simpson, the clank of the chains, and the hero's degradation off
    our mind."--_London Saturday Review_.

    "Vividly and vigorously told."--_London Academy_.




    _Each 12mo, $1.25_:

    My Lord Duke

    "Mr. Hornung is a natural humorist, and has the art of telling a
    story."--_Philadelphia Evening Telegraph_.

    "It is pleasant to turn to a real story by a real story-writer.
    Such is 'My Lord Duke.' ... Its story is its own, both in plot
    and in characterization. It is a capital little novel."--_The
    Nation_.




    Young Blood

    "Whether Lowndes be entirely realized or not does not much
    matter; the conception of him is already a distinction. He is an
    adventurer of genius, but not built on the usual lines.... And
    his vitality is inexhaustible. We leave him, not without a stain
    upon his character, but with considerable regret in our
    minds."--_The Bookman_.




    Some Persons Unknown

    "In about half-a-dozen cases the scene is laid in Australia, and
    the dramatic and tragic aspects of Colonial life are treated by
    Mr. Hornung with that happy union of vigor and sympathy which
    has stood him in such good stead in his earlier
    novels."--_London Spectator_.




    _In the Ivory Series. Each 16mo, 75 cents_:

    The Boss of Taroomba

    "There are passages in E. W. Hornung's latest story, 'The Boss
    of Taroomba,' which remind us by their vividness and fantastic
    quality of Stevenson in some of his South Sea Island tales....
    The hero is an uncommon creation even for fiction."--_Chicago
    Times-Herald_.




    A Bride from the Bush

    "Mr. E. W. Hornung is one of the most successful delineators of
    Bush life."--_Chicago Tribune_.




    Irralie's Bushranger

    "A capital little story of Australian love and adventure. There
    is no flagging in the press and stir of the story."--_The
    Nation_.

    Charles Scribner's Sons, New York

       *       *       *       *       *

  Transcriber's Notes:
  All apparent printer's errors retained.
  Page 23, "blackfellow" and "black fellow" both present in text
  Page 45, "succesful" retained from original text
  Page 48, "its" retained from original text
  Page 175, "outry" retained from original text
  Some inconsistency in hyphenating words:
    bare-back and bareback both present in text
    coo-ee and cooee both present in text
    foot-print and footprint both present in text
    salt-bush and saltbush both present





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Shadow of a Man, by E. W. Hornung

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SHADOW OF A MAN ***

***** This file should be named 33651.txt or 33651.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/6/5/33651/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, Tim Madden and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
