The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Cocoanut, by William S. Lyon

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Cocoanut
       With reference to its products and cultivation in the Philippines

Author: William S. Lyon

Release Date: October 7, 2010 [EBook #33844]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COCOANUT ***




Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net/ for Project
Gutenberg (This file was produced from images generously
made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)







                         Bureau of Agriculture.


                        Farmer's Bulletin No. 8.

                              THE COCOANUT

             With Reference to Its Products and Cultivation
                          in the Philippines.



                                   By

                            WILLIAM S. LYON,

                In charge of Division of Plant Industry.


                                Manila:
                       Bureau of Public Printing.
                                 1903.





CONTENTS.


                                                 Page.

    Letter of transmittal                           4
    Introduction                                    5
    History                                         5
    Botany                                          6
    Uses                                            6
        Copra and cocoanut oil                      6
        Coir                                       10
        Tuba                                       12
        Minor uses                                 13
    Cultivation                                    14
        Selection of location                      14
        The soil                                   16
        Seed selection                             17
        Planting                                   18
        Manuring                                   21
        Irrigation                                 27
    Harvest                                        28
    Enemies                                        28
    Remedies                                       29
    Renovation of old groves                       30
    Conclusion                                     30





LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL.


Bureau of Agriculture,

                                             Manila, June 1, 1903.

Sir: In responding to numerous inquiries about the cocoanut, its
uses, cultivation, and preparation for market, I have prepared,
by your direction, the accompanying bulletin, which is intended to
cover the general field of the inquiries addressed to this Bureau,
and herewith submit the same, with the recommendation that it be
published as Farmers' Bulletin No. 8.


    Respectfully,

        Wm. S. Lyon,
        In Charge of Division of Plant Industry.

            To Hon. F. Lamson-Scribner,
            Chief Bureau of Agriculture, Manila.





THE COCOANUT.

INTRODUCTION.


The following pages are written chiefly in the interests of the
planter, but the writer feels that the great agricultural importance
which the cocoanut palm is bound to assume in these Islands is
sufficient to justify the presentation of some of its history and
botany.

For that part of the bulletin which touches upon the botany of the
cocoanut I am indebted to Don Regino Garcia, associate botanist of the
Forestry Bureau; for that relating to its products and local uses, to
the courtesy of manufacturers in Laguna; and, for the rest, to personal
experience and observations made in Laguna Province and in the southern
Visayan Islands where, as elsewhere in this Archipelago, the cocoanut
may properly be considered a spontaneous and not a cultivated product.





HISTORY.


The legendary history of the "Prince of Palms," [1] as it has been
called, dates back to a period when the Christian era was young,
and its history is developing day by day in some new and striking
manifestation of its utility or beauty. It seems not unreasonable to
assume that much of the earlier traditionary history of the cocoanut
may have been inspired as much by its inherent beauty as by its
uses. Such traditional proverbs Or folklore as I have gathered in
the Visayas recognize the influence of the beautiful, in so far as
the blessings of the trees only inure to the good; for instance,
"He who is cruel to his beast or his family will only harvest barren
husks from the reproving trees that witness the pusillanimous act;"
and, again, "He who grinds the poor will only grind water instead of
fat oil from the meat."

To this day the origin of the cocoanut is unknown. De Candolle (Origin
of Cult. Plants, p. 574) recites twelve specific claims pointing to
an Asiatic origin, and a single, but from a scientific standpoint
almost unanswerable, contention for an American derivation. None of
the remaining nineteen species of the genus Cocos are known to exist
elsewhere in the world than on the American continent. His review of
the story results in the nature of a compromise, assigning to our
own Islands and those to the south and west of us the distinction
of having first given birth to the cocoanut, and that thence it was
disseminated east and west by ocean currents.





BOTANY.


The cocoanut (Cocos nucifera Linn.) is the sole oriental representative
of a tropical genus comprising nineteen species, restricted, with
this single exception, to the New World.

Its geographical distribution is closely confined to the two
Tropics. [2]

Not less than nineteen varieties of C. nucifera are described by
Miquel and Rumphius, and all are accepted by Filipino authors.

Whether all of these varieties are constant enough to deserve
recognition need not be considered here. Many are characterized by
the fruits being distinctly globular, others by fruits of a much
prolonged oval form, still others by having the lower end of the
fruit terminating in a triangular point.

In the Visayas there is a variety in which the fibrous outer husk
of the nut is sweet and watery, instead of dry and astringent, and
is chewed by the natives like sugar cane. Another variety occurs in
Luzon, known as "Pamocol," the fruit of which seldom exceeds 20 cm. in
diameter. There is also a dwarf variety of the palm, which rarely
exceeds 3 meters in height, and is known to the Tagalogs as "Adiavan."

These different varieties are strongly marked, and maintain their
characters when reproduced from seed.





USES.


The cocoanut furnishes two distinct commercial products--the dried
meat of the nut, or copra, and the outer fibrous husk. These products
are so dissimilar that they should be considered separately.



COPRA AND COCOANUT OIL.

Until very recent years the demand for the "meat" of the cocoanut
or its products was limited to the uses of soap boilers and
confectioners. Probably there is no other plant in the vegetable
kingdom which serves so many and so varied purposes in the domestic
economy of the peoples in whose countries it grows. Within the past
decade chemical science has produced from the cocoanut a series of
food products whose manufacture has revolutionized industry and placed
the business of the manufacturer and of the producer upon a plane of
prosperity never before enjoyed.

There has also been a great advance in the processes by which the
new oil derivatives are manufactured. The United States took the
initiative with the first recorded commercial factories in 1895. In
1897 the Germans established factories in Mannheim, but it remained
for the French people to bring the industry to its present perfection.

According to the latest reports of the American consul at Marseilles,
the conversion of cocoanut oil into dietetic compounds was undertaken
in that city in 1900, by Messrs. Rocca, Tassy and de Roux, who in
that year turned out an average of 25 tons per month. During the year
just closed (1902) their average monthly output exceeded 6,000 tons
and, in addition to this, four or five other large factories were
all working together to meet the world's demand for "vegetaline,"
"cocoaline," or other products with suggestive names, belonging to
this infant industry.

These articles are sold at gross price of 18 to 20 cents per kilo to
thrifty Hollandish and Danish merchants, who, at the added cost of a
cent or two, repack them in tins branded "Dairy Butter" and, as such,
ship them to all parts of the civilized world. It was necessary to
disguise the earlier products by subjecting them to trituration with
milk or cream; but so perfect is the present emulsion that the plain
and unadulterated fats now find as ready a market as butter. These
"butters" have so far found their readiest sale in the Tropics.

The significance of these great discoveries to the cocoanut planter can
not be overestimated, for to none of these purely vegetable fats do the
prejudices attach that so long and seriously have handicapped those
derived from animal margarin or margarin in combination with stearic
acid, while the low fusion point of pure dairy butters necessarily
prohibits their use in the Tropics, outside of points equipped with
refrigerating plants. The field, therefore, is practically without
competition, and the question will no longer be that of finding a
market, but of procuring the millions of tons of copra or oil that
this one industry will annually absorb in the immediate future.

Cocoanut oil was once used extensively in the manufacture of fine
candles, and is still occasionally in demand for this purpose in the
Philippines, in combination with the vegetable tallow of a species
of Stillingia. It is largely consumed in lamps, made of a tumbler or
drinking glass half filled with water, on top of which float a few
spoonfuls of oil, into which the wick is plunged. In remote barrios it
is still in general use as a street illuminant, and so perfect is its
combustion that under a constant flicker it emits little or no smoke.

When freshly expressed, the oil is an exceptionally good cooking fat,
and enters largely into the dietary of our own people. The medicinal
uses of the oil are various, and in the past it has been strongly
advocated for the cure of eczema, burns, as a vermifuge, and even
as a substitute for cod-liver oil in phthisis. Its medicinal virtues
are now generally discredited, except as a restorative agent in the
loss of hair resulting from debilitating fevers. Its value in this
direction may be surmised from the splendid heads of hair possessed
by the Filipino women, who generally use the oil as a hair dressing.

Cocoanut oil is derived from the fleshy albumen or meat of the ripe
fruit, either fresh or dried. The thoroughly dried meat is variously
known as copra, coprax, and copraz. The exportation of copra is
detrimental to the best interests of the planter, tending to enrich
the manufacturer and impoverish the grower. The practice, however,
is so firmly established that the writer can only record a probably
futile protest against its continuance.

The causes which for a long time will favor the exportation of copra
instead of oil in this Archipelago may be briefly stated as follows:

(1) An oil-milling plant, constructed with due regard to economy of
labor and the production of the best quality of oil, would involve
an outlay of capital of $2,500, gold, and upward, according to
capacity. The production of copra requires the labor of the planter's
hands only.

(2) The oil packages must be well-made barrels, casks, or metallic
receptacles. The initial cost of the packages is consequently great,
their return from distant ports impracticable, and their sale value
in the market of delivery is not sufficient to offset the capital
locked up in an unproductive form. On the other hand, copra may be
sold or shipped in boxes, bags, sacks, and bales, or it may even be
stored in bulk in the ship's hold.

(3) When land transportation has to be considered, the lack of good
roads still further impedes the oil maker. He can not change the
size and weight of his packages from day to day to meet the varying
passability of the trail. On the other hand, packages of copra may
be adjusted to meet all emergencies, and the planter can thus take
advantage of the market conditions which may be denied to the oil
maker.

(4) Perhaps the most serious difficulty the oil maker has to contend
with is the continuous discouragement he encounters from the agent
of foreign factories, who buys in the open market and, bidding up to
nearly the full oil value of the copra, finds an ample manufacturer's
profit paid by the press cake, so valuable abroad, but, unfortunately,
practically without sale or value here. The residue from the mill may
be utilized both for food and for manure by the oil maker who is a
tree owner and who maintains cattle. For either of these purposes
its value rates closely up to cotton-seed cake, and the time is
not remote when it will be recognized in the Philippines as far
too valuable a product to be permitted to be removed from the farm
excepting at a price which will permit of the purchase at a less
figure of an equivalent in manure. So active are the copra-buying
agents in controlling this important branch of the industry, that
they refuse to buy the press cake at any price, with the result that,
in two instances known to the writer, they have forced the closure
of oil-milling plants and driven the oil maker back to his copra.

Many copra-making plants in India and Ceylon are now supplied with
decorticating, breaking, and evaporating machinery. The process
employed in this Archipelago consists in first stripping the ripe
fruit of the outer fibrous husk. This is effected by means of a stout,
steel spearhead, whose shaft or shank is embedded firmly in the soil
to such a depth that the spear point projects above the ground rather
less than waist high. The operator then holds the nut in his hands
and strikes it upon the spear point, gives it a downward, rotary
twist, and thus, with apparent ease, quickly removes the husk. An
average operator will husk 1,000 nuts per day, and records have been
made of a clean up of as many as 3,000 per day. The work, however,
is exceedingly hard, and involves great dexterity and wrist strength.

Another man now takes up the nut and with a bolo strikes it a smart
blow in the middle, dividing it into two almost equal parts. These
parts are spread out and exposed to the sun for a few hours, or such
time as may be necessary to cause the fleshy albumen to contract and
shrink away from the hard outer shell, so that the meat may be easily
detached with the fingers.

Weather permitting, the meat thus secured is sun dried for a day
and then subjected to the heat of a slow fire for several hours. In
some countries this drying is now effected by hot-air driers, and a
very white and valuable product secured; but in the Philippines the
universal practice is to spread out the copra upon what may be called
a bamboo grill, over a smoky fire made of the shells and husks, just
sufficient heat being maintained not to set fire to the bamboo. The
halves, when dried, are broken by hand into still smaller irregular
fragments, and subjected to one or two days of sun bath. By this time
the moisture has been so thoroughly expelled that the copra is now
ready to be sacked or baled and stored away for shipment or use.

All modern cocoanut-oil mills are supplied with a decorticator armed
with revolving discs that tear or cut through the husk longitudinally,
freeing the nut from its outer covering and leaving the latter in
the best possible condition for the subsequent extraction of its
fiber. This decorticator is fed from a hopper and is made of a size
and capacity to husk from 500 to 1,000 nuts per hour.

Rasping and grinding machinery of many patterns and makes, for
reducing the meat to a pulp, is used in India, Ceylon, and China;
and, although far more expeditious, offers no improvements, so far
as concerns the condition to which the meats are reduced, over the
methods followed in the Philippines. Here the fleshy halves of the
meat are held by hand against a rapidly revolving, half-spherical
knife blade which scrapes and shaves the flesh down to a fine degree
of comminution. The resulting mass is then macerated in a little water
and placed in bags and subjected to pressure, and the milky juice which
flows therefrom is collected in receivers placed below. This is now
drawn off into boilers and cooked until the clear oil is concentrated
upon the surface. The oil is then skimmed off and is ready for market.

The process outlined above is very wasteful. The processes I have seen
in operation are very inadequate, and I estimate that, not less than
10 per cent of the oil goes to loss in the press cake. This is a loss
that does not occur in establishments equipped with the best hydraulic
presses. It is true that very heavy pressure carries through much
coloring matter not withdrawn by the primitive native mill, and that
the oil is consequently darker, and sooner undergoes decomposition;
but modern mills are now supplied with filtration plants through
which this objection is practically overcome.

The principles of the above process are daily reproduced in thousands
of Filipino homes, where the hand rasping of the nut, the expression
of the milky juice through coarse cloth, its subsequent boiling down
in an open pan, and the final skimming off of the oil are in common
practice. Notwithstanding the cheapness of labor, it is only by
employing a mill well equipped with decorticating, rasping, hydraulic
crushing, and steam-boiling machinery, and with facilities to convert
the residue to feeding or other uses, that one may hopefully enter
the field of oil manufacture in these Islands in competition with
copra buyers.



COIR.

The fiber of the cocoanut husk, or coir, as it is commercially known,
has never yet been utilized in this Archipelago, excepting occasionally
for local consumption.

Second in value only to the copra, this product has been allowed to
go to waste. The rejected husks are thrown together in immense heaps,
which are finally burned and the ashes, exceedingly rich in potash
and phosphoric acid, are left to blow away.

As the commercial value of the fiber is greater than the manurial
value of the salts therein, it is economy to utilize the fiber and
purchase potash and phosphoric acid when needed to enrich the soil.

Highly improved and inexpensive power machinery for the complete and
easy extraction of the fibers of the husk, either wet or dry, is now
rapidly superseding the tedious hand process once in such general
use. Good patterns of machinery are shown in the "husk-crushing mill"
(fig. 1) and in the "fiber extractor" (fig. 2). The first breaks,
crushes, and flattens out the husks by means of powerful, fluted metal
rollers and, in the second the broken husks are fed over a revolving
drum set with teeth especially devised for tearing out the fiber from
the entire mass. Finally, it is fed into one of the many forms of
"willowing" machines, which reduces the mass to clean fiber, which
is now ready for grading, baling, and shipment. The residual dust
and waste from this operation may be used as an absorbent for liquid
manures, and ultimately returned to the plantation. The yield of fiber
varies from 12 to 25 quintals of coir and 4 to 7 quintals of brush
fiber per 10,000 average husks. In the Philippines the nuts yield
a large amount of fiber and a relatively small percentage of chaff
and dust. With improved machinery and careful handling, 18 quintals
of spinning coir and 5 quintals of bristle fiber from every 10,000
husks is a fair estimate of the product.

As the cost of manufacture is generally rated at one-half the selling
price, and as we must add a further charge of 20 per cent to cover
freight and commission, we have resulting from the sale of the 23
quintals, or 2,300 kilos, at L16 per English ton, a balance of L11
11s. per hectare.

But there are other considerations which should not be overlooked. The
husks of 10,000 cocoanuts will withdraw from the land 61.5 kilos of
potash and 3 kilos of phosphoric acid, and the restoration of the full
amount is called for to compensate for the growing wants of the tree,
in addition to that withdrawn by the crop. The necessary fertilizers
are worth, approximately, 5 1/2d. per kilo, making a further reduction
of L1 8s. and leaving as a net profit L10 3s., or, reduced to American
money, nearly $50, gold, per hectare.

The machines above referred to will cost $800, gold, and $1,200
additional will purchase and house the power necessary to operate
them. Such a plant will work up 1,000 nuts a day, and handle in a
year the output of a grove of 30 hectares. With the addition of two
or more fiber extractors the capacity of the plant may be doubled
without material expense, and it should rather more than pay its
entire cost in one year.



TUBA.

Tuba is the fresh or mildly fermented sap drawn from the inflorescence
of the cocoanut.

There are no figures or data of any kind available as a basis for an
estimate as to the importance of this product, but its extent may be
inferred from the fact that the outlying groves about Cebu, Iloilo,
and the larger Visayan towns are practically devoted to the production
of tuba, and not to the manufacture of copra.

Tuba is collected from the unexpanded blossoms as soon as they have
fairly pushed through the subtending bracts. To prevent any lateral
expansion, the flowers are tied with strips of the green leaf blade
and then, with a sharp knife, an inch or two of the extreme tip is
removed. The whole flower cluster is now gently pulled forward until
it arches downward. In a day or two the sap begins to drip and is then
caught in a short joint of bamboo, properly secured for the purpose.

As a healthy tree develops at least one or more flowering racemes
every month, and the flow of sap extends frequently over a period of
two or more months, it is not uncommon to see a number of tubes in
use upon one tree.

The workmen usually visits the tree twice daily to collect the
liquor drawn during the preceding twelve hours in the larger tube,
which he carries upon his back. He slices daily a thin shaving from
the tip of the flower, in order that the wound may be kept open and
bleeding. This process is kept up until nearly all of the flower
cluster has been cut away, or until the sap ceases to flow.

More than a liter a day is sometimes drawn from one tree, and 5
hectoliters is considered a fair annual average from a good bearing
tree.

In its fresh state tuba has a sweetish, slightly astringent taste;
but, as the vessels in which it is collected are rarely cleansed,
they become traps for many varieties of insects, etc., and it is,
therefore, not a very acceptable beverage to a delicate stomach. When
purified by a mild fermentation it is far more palatable.

A secondary fermentation of tuba results in vinegar, and on this
account, chiefly, so much space has been devoted to this feature of
the industry. The vinegar so produced is of good strength and color, of
the highest keeping qualities, and of unrivaled flavor. Its excellence
is so pronounced that upon its inherent merits it would readily find
sale in the world's markets; and, although the local demand for the
tuba now exceeds the production, its conversion into vinegar will
probably prove the more profitable industry in the future.

Spirits are distilled and in some places sugar is still made from the
flower sap; and, while the importance of these great staples may not
be overlooked, their commercial value as products of this tree are
relatively insignificant.



MINOR USES.

In addition to eighty-three utilities described by Mr. Pereira,
[3] it is in very common use in the Philippines for:

1. Cocoanut cream. The freshly ground fruit, reduced to a pulp and
strained, is consumed in that form or made into cakes with rice. It
makes a delicious and nutritious food. According to Dr. W. J. Gies,
in experiments lately published, [4] its nutritive value is due to
35.4 per cent of oil, about 10 per cent of carbohydrates, and 3 per
cent of protein. The amount of cellulose (fibrous matter) is only 3
per cent, and its digestibility is easy when the mass, by grating,
is reduced to a fine degree of comminution.

2. The "milk" or water is used sparingly as a beverage. It is also
fermented and converted into inferior vinegar.

3. The hard shell is used as fuel. When calcined, it produces a black,
lustrous substance, used for dyeing leather.

4. The same shell, aside from many uses quoted by Pereira, is used
here for every conceivable form of cup, ladle, scoop, and spoon.

5. From the tough midrib of the leaf, strong and beautiful baskets of
many designs are made, also excellent and durable brooms, and from
the part where the midrib coalesces with the petiole pot-cleaning
brushes are made.

6. The roots are sometimes used for chewing, as a substitute for
Areca. They also furnish red dyestuff and with one end finely
subdivided may be used in making toothbrushes.

7. The leaves and midribs, when burned, furnish an ash so rich in
potash that it may be used alone in water as a substitute for soap
or when a powerful detergent is required.

8. The fiber of the husk is used extensively by the natives for
calking boats.

9. The milk is used in the preparation of a native dish of rice,
known as "casi." It is an excellent and highly prized dietary article,
prepared with rice or in combination with chicken or locusts.

10. The oil, melted with resins, is an effective and lasting covering
for anything desired to be protected from the ravages of white ants.

11. The timber is used to bridge streams and bog holes, and the slowly
decaying leaves to fill them up and render them temporarily passable.

12. The fiber is used in cordage and rope making, but to a far less
extent here than in India.

Its further uses are, in general, those current in the Orient. Briefly
summed up, its timber is employed in every form of house construction;
its foliage in making mats, sacks, and thatches; its fruit in curry
and sweetmeats; its oil for medicine, cookery, and illumination;
its various juices in the manufacture of wines, spirits, sugar, and
vinegar; while not to overlook a final and not inconsiderable Filipino
product, the splinters of the midrib are used in making toothpicks.





CULTIVATION.


SELECTION OF LOCATION.

In the selection of a site for a cocoanut grove it is best to select
land near the seashore and not extending inland more than 2 or 3
miles. Within this narrow zone there is commonly a deposit of rich,
permeable, well-drained alluvium offering soil conditions of far
greater importance to successful tree growth than the mere exposure
to marine influences. The success that has followed cocoanut growing
in Cochin China, remote from the seaboard, in Annam and up the Ganges
basin one hundred or more miles from the coast, and in our own interior
Province of Laguna, definitely proves that immediate contiguity to
the sea is not essential to success.

That the cocoanut will grow and thrive upon the immediate seashore, in
common with other plants, is simply an indication of its adaptability
to environment. That it is at a positive disadvantage as a shore plant
may be determined conclusively by anyone who will examine the root
system of a seashore-grown tree upturned by a wash or tidal wave, and
one uprooted from any cause, farther inland. It will be seen that the
root system of the maritime plant is immensely larger than the other,
and that a corresponding amount of energy has been expended in the
search through much inert material to forage for the necessary plant
food which the more favored inland species has found concentrated
within a smaller zone.

The planting must be made in a thoroughly permeable soil.

The thick, fleshy roots of the newly upturned palm are loaded with
water, and tell us that an inexhaustible store of this fluid is an
indispensable element of success. If further evidence of this were
required, the testimony of drooping leaves and of crops shrunken
from one-half to two-thirds, throughout the cocoanut districts and
upon our own orchard in Mindanao, as the result of drought, confirm
it and bespeak the necessity of copious water at all times.

The living tree upon the sea sands further emphasizes this necessity;
for, while its roots are lapped by the tides, it never flags or wilts,
and from this we may gather the added value of a site which can be
irrigated. The careful observer will note that along miles of sea
beach, among hundreds of trees whose roots are either in actual contact
with the incoming waves, or subjected to the subterranean influence of
the sea, there will never be so much as one tree growing in any beach
basin which collects and holds tidal water for even a brief time;
and that, notwithstanding the large number of nuts that must have
found lodgment and favorable germinating influence in such places,
none succeed in growing. From this we may derive the assurance that
the desired water must be in motion and that land near stagnant water,
or marsh land, is unsuitable to the plant.

It may frequently be observed that trees will be found growing
fairly thriftily upon mounds or hummocks, in places invaded by
flood or other waters which, by reason of backing or damming up,
have become stagnant. An examination of the roots of an overthrown
tree in such a locality will show that all of those in the submerged
zone have perished and rotted away, but that such is the vitality and
recuperative energy of the tree that it has thrown out a new feeding
system in the dryer soil of the mound immediately surrounding the stem,
which has been sufficient to successfully carry on the functions of
nutrition, but altogether ineffective to anchor the tree securely,
or to prevent its prostration before the first heavy gale.

While this phase of the question will receive more attention when
we come to consider the chemistry of suitable manures, it may be
said that, although analysis of the cocoanut ash derived from
beach-grown nuts shows a larger percentage of those salts that
abound in sea water than those grown inland, yet the equal vigor,
vitality, and fruitfulness of the latter simply confirm the plant's
exceptional adaptability to environment and ability to take up and
decompose, without detriment, the salts of sea or brackish waters. As
a victim to the maritime idea, the writer in 1886 planted, far inland,
several hundred nuts in beds especially devised to reproduce littoral
conditions; shore gravel, sea sand, broken shells, and salt derived
from sea water being used in preparing the seed beds. The starting
growth was unexcelled. Then came a long period of yellowing decline
and almost suspended animation, ultimately followed by a complete
restoration to health and vigor. The early excellent growth was
due to the fact that the first nourishment of the plant is entirely
derived from the endosperm, and careful lifting of the young plants
disclosed the fact that recovery from their moribund condition was,
in every instance, coincident with the time that the roots first
succeeded in working through the unpalatable mess about them into
the outlying good, sweet soil.

The exposure of the plantation is an important consideration, and
a maritime site should be selected in preference to one far inland,
unless it be on an open, unprotected flat, exposed to the influence
of every breeze or the fiercest gales that blow.

The structure of the cocoanut seems well fitted to endure winds of
almost any force, and that a remarkably abundant and strong circulation
of air is essential to its best development is well shown by comparing
a tree subjected to it with the wretched, spindling specimen growing
in a sheltered glen or ravine.

Strong confirmation of this may be found within the artificial
environment of a plant conservatory, where it is feasible to reproduce,
in the minute detail of soil, water, temperature, and humidity,
every essential to its welfare except a good, strong breeze. As a
consequence, the palm languishes and it has long been deemed, on
this account, one of the most rebellious subjects introduced into
palm-house cultivation.



THE SOIL.

The soils for cocoanut growing are best selected by the process of
exclusion. The study of the root development of the palm will prove
to be an unerring guide to proper soil selection.

The roots of monocotyledons, to which great division this palm belongs,
are devoid of the well-defined descending axis, which is possessed
by most tree plants, and is often so strongly developed as to permit
of rock cleavage and the withdrawal of food supplies from great depths.

The cocoanut has no such provision for its support. Its subterranean
parts are simply a mat-like expanse of thick, fleshy, worm-like
growths, devoid of any feeders other than those provided at the
extreme tips of the relatively few roots. These roots are fleshy (not
fibrous) and can not thrive in any soil through which they may not grow
freely in search of sustenance. It then becomes obvious that stiff,
tenacious, or waxy soils, however rich, are wholly unsuitable. All
very heavy lands, or those that break up into solid, impervious lumps,
and, lastly, any land underlaid near the surface with bed rocks or
impervious clays or conglomerates, are naturally excluded. All other
soils, susceptible of proper drainage, may be considered appropriate
to the growth of the palm. Spons (Encyclop.) advocates light, sandy
soils. Simmonds (Trop. Agric.) names nine different varieties suitable
for this purpose, describing each at tedious length, and laying more
or less emphasis upon a sandy mixture. These might all have been
covered by the single word "permeable."

As a matter of fact every grain of sand in excess of that required to
secure a condition of perfect permeability is a positive disadvantage
and must be paid for by a correspondingly larger area of cultivation
and by future soil amendment. For the rest, the richer and deeper
the soil the less the expense of maintaining soil fertility.

The preparatory work of establishing an orchard is light, provided
the location is not one demanding the opening of drainage canals,
and on lands of good porosity it involves neither subsoiling nor a
deeper plowing than to effectually cover the sod or any minor weed
growths with which it may be covered.

It has long been the reprehensible practice of cocoanut growers to
merely dig pits, manure them, set the plants therein, and permit
the intervening lands (except immediately about the trees) to run to
weeds or jungle.

In the Philippines the native planter has not yet progressed beyond
the pit stage, nor do his subsequent cultural activities include more
than the occasional "boloing" of such weeds as threaten to choke and
exterminate the young plants.

Fortunately it will not be long till the force and influence of
example are sure to be felt by our own planters. The progressive
German colonist of Kamerun, German East Africa, and the South
Pacific Islands, as well as the French in Congo and Madagascar,
are vigorously practicing conventional, modern orchard methods in
the treatment of their cocoanut groves, and it is amazing to read
of discussions between Ceylon and Indian nut growers as to the best
method of tethering cattle upon cocoanut palms in pasture, so as to
obtain the most benefit from their excreta.

With an intelligent study of the plant and its characteristics
it is believed that our native planter may put into practical use
the knowledge that the veteran Indian planter has in fifty years
failed to learn or utilize. He will learn that in time the entire
superficies of his orchard will be required by the wide-spreading,
surface-feeding roots of the trees, and that pasture crops of any
kind, grown for any purpose other than soiling or for green manuring,
are prejudicial to future success. He will know that the initial
preparation of all of his orchard and its continuous maintenance in
good cultivation are essential not only to the future welfare of
his trees but as a necessary means in connection with a judicious
intermediate crop rotation.

Hence the preparatory requirements may be summed up as such preliminary
soil breaking as would be required for a corn crop in similar lands,
succeeded by such superficial plowings and cultivations as would be
required to raise a cotton or any other of the so-called hoed crops.



SEED SELECTION.

Preliminary to planting the very important question of seed selection
calls for close scrutiny on the planter's part.

The small native planter is often familiar with the individual
characteristics of his trees. Owners of small estates in Cuyos and
about Zamboanga have pointed out to me trees that have the constant
fruiting habit confirmed, others that will fruit erratically, and
others that flower yet rarely bear fruit. The fruitfulness of the
first class is undoubtedly a result of accidental heredity, for the
planter has in the past made no selection except by chance, nor is the
characteristic in any way due to his cultural system, which consists
in planting the nut and letting nature and heredity do the rest. One
tree in Zamboanga, the owner assured me, had never produced less than
200 nuts annually for fully twenty-three years. Asked as to the bearing
of all of his trees (of which he owned some three hundred), he stated
that from the lot he averaged 20 nuts at a picking, five times a year,
a total of 100 nuts; that the crop of these was very fluctuating,
some years falling to 60 nuts, again running as high as 130. The
especially prized tree did not vary appreciably. In very dry seasons
the nuts shrunk somewhat in size and the copra in weight, but the yield
of nuts never fell below 200, and only once had amounted to 220. He
had raised a great number of seedlings, but it had never occurred to
him to select for planting the nuts from that particular tree.



PLANTING.

We have pointed out the necessity of selecting seed trees of known good
bearing habits, and equal care should be exercised in selecting those
the nuts of which are well formed and uniform. This precaution will
suggest itself when one observes that some trees have the habit of
producing a few very large nuts and many of very small and irregular
size and shape, and it is obviously to the planter's interest to lend
no assistance to the propagation and transmission of such traits. In
view of what has been previously stated, it is almost superfluous
earnestly to recommend planters to sow no seeds from young trees. The
principle for this contention--that no seed should be selected except
from trees of established, well-known fruiting habits--would seem to
cover the ground effectually.

The best seed should be selected and picked when perfectly mature and
lowered to the ground. The fall from a lofty tree not infrequently
cracks the inner shell, without giving any external evidence of the
injury. A seed so injured will never sprout and therefore is worthless
for seed purposes.

Freshly collected seed nuts contain in the husk more moisture than
is required to effect germination, and if planted in this condition,
decay is apt to set in before germination occurs. To avoid this the
natives tie them in pairs, sling them over bamboo poles where they are
exposed to the air but sheltered from the sun, and leave them until
well sprouted. It is, however, more expeditious to pile the nuts up in
small heaps of eight to ten nuts, in partial shade, where the surface
nuts may be sprinkled occasionally to prevent complete drying out.

Germination is very erratic, sometimes occurring within a month
and sometimes extending over four, five, or more months. When the
young shoot or plumule (see illustration) has fairly thrust its way
through the fibrous husk it is a good practice to go over the heaps
and segregate those that have sprouted, carefully placing them so
that the growing tip be not deformed or distorted by the pressure
of superincumbent nuts. When these sprouts are 30 to 50 cm. high,
and a few roots have thrust through the husk, they are in the best
possible condition for permanent planting.

First. The original preparation of the land should be good and the
surface tilth at the time of planting irreproachable; i. e., free
from weeds and so mellow that the soil can be closely and properly
pressed around the roots by hand.

Second. The orchard should be securely protected from the invasion of
cattle, etc. It is sometimes impossible to protect orchards against
entry of these animals. If the success of these precautions can not
be assured, then the nuts had better be grown in a closely protected
nursery until about a year old, when the albumen of the seed will be
completely assimilated and will therefore no longer attract vermin,
and when the larger size of the plant will give it more protection
from stray cattle.

In either case planting should be made concurrently with the opening of
the rainy monsoon, during which season further field operations will
not be required except when an intermittent, drier period indicates
the advisability of running the cultivator.

The planting "pit" fetish, in such common use in India, has nothing
to commend it. If stable manures of any kind are available, a good
application at the time of planting will effect wonders in accelerating
the growth of the young plants.

Where the necessary protection is assured, the young seedling planted
out as above recommended should start at once, without check of any
kind, into vigorous growth.

The nursery-grown subject receives an unavoidable setback. Its roots
have been more or less mutilated and, as we may not prune the top
sufficiently to compensate for the root injury, it is generally several
months before the equilibrium of top and root is fully restored. In
most cases, by the end of the second year, it will have been far
outstripped in the growing race by the former.

The history, habits, and characteristics of the cocoanut tree indicate
that it needs a full and free exposure to sun, air, and wind; and,
as it makes a tree, under such circumstances, of wide crown expansion,
these indispensables can not be secured except by very wide planting.

Conventional recommendations cover all distances, from 5 to 8 meters,
with quincunx (i. e., triangular plantings) urged when the 8-meter
plan is adopted. But the writer has seen too many groves spaced at
this distance in good soil, with interlacing leaves and badly spindled
in the desperate struggle for light, air, and sun, ever to recommend
the quincunx, or any system other than the square, at distances not
less than 9 meters and, in good soils, preferably 9.5 meters.

The former distance will allow for 123 and the latter 111 trees to
the hectare. They should be lined out with the greatest regularity, so
as to admit at all times of cross plowing and cultivation as desired.

From this time forward the treatment is one of cultural and manurial
routine.

Annual plowings should not be dispensed with during the life
of the plantation. These plowings may be relatively shallow,
sufficient to cover under the green manures and crops that are made
an indispensable condition to the continued profitable conduct of
the industry. Nothing is to be gained by the removal of the earliest
flowering spikes. Flowering is the congestion of sap at a special point
which, if the grower could control it, he would wish to direct, in the
case of young plants, to the building up of leaf and wood. Cutting the
inflorescence of the cocoanut results in profuse bleeding and, unless
this be checked by the use of a powerful styptic or otherwise, it is
doubtful if the desired end would be accomplished. The earlier crops
of nuts should all be taken with extension cutters or from ladders. No
shoulders for climbing should be cut in any tree, the stem of which
has not become dense, hard, and woody. Cut when the wood is the least
bit succulent, they become inviting points of attack for borers.

With these reservations, there is everything to commend the practice
of shouldering the tree, as offering the safest, most expeditious
and economical way of making it possible to climb and secure the
harvest. It is, of course, understood that the cuts should be made
sloping outward, so as not to collect moisture and invite decay,
and no larger than is strictly necessary for the purpose.



MANURING. [5]

The manuring problem must be met and solved by the best resources at
our command. The writer has had pointed out hundred of trees that,
wholly guiltless of any direct application of manure, have borne
excellent crops for many successive years; but he has also seen
hundreds of others in their very prime, at thirty years, which once
produced a hundred select nuts per year, now producing fluctuating
and uncertain crops of fifteen to thirty inferior fruits.

Time and again native growers have told me of the large and uniformly
continuous crops of nuts from the trees immediately overshadowing their
dwellings and, although some have attributed this to a sentimental
appreciation and gratitude on the part of the palm at being made one
of the family of the owner, a few were sensible enough to realize
that it came of the opportunity that those particular trees had to
get the manurial benefit of the household sewage and waste.

Yet, the lesson is still unlearned and, after much diligent inquiry,
I have yet to find a nut grower in the Philippines who at any time
(except at planting) makes direct and systematic application of manure
to his trees.

In India, Ceylon, the Penang Peninsula, and Cochin China, where the
tree has been cultivated for generations, the most that was ever
attempted until very recently was to throw a little manure in the
hole where the tree was planted, and for all future time to depend
on the inferior, grass-made droppings of a few cattle tethered among
the trees, to compensate for the half million or more nuts that a
hectare of fairly productive trees should yield during their normal
bearing life.

Upon suitable cocoanut soils--i. e., those that are light and
permeable--common salt is positively injurious. In support of this
contention, I will state that salt in solution will break up and
freely combine with lime, making equally soluble chlorids of lime
which, of course, freely leach out in such a soil and carry down
to unavailable depths these salts, invaluable as necessary bases
to render assimilable most plant foods; and that, on this account,
commercial manures containing large amounts of salt, are always to
be used with much discretion, owing to the danger of impoverishing
the supply of necessary lime in the soil.

Finally, so injurious is the direct application of salt to the roots
of most plants that the invariable custom of trained planters (who,
for the sake of the potash contained, are compelled to use crude
Stassfurt mineral manures, which contain large quantities of common
salt) is to apply it a very considerable time before the crop is
planted, in order that this deleterious agent should be well leached
and washed away from the immediate field of root activity.

That the cocoanut is able to take up large quantities of salt may not
be disputed. That the character of its root is such as to enable it to
do so without the injury that would occur to most cultivated plants
I have previously shown, while the history of the cocoanut's inland
career, and the records of agricultural chemistry, both conclusively
point to the fact that its presence is an incident that in no way
contributes to the health, vigor, or fruitfulness of the tree.

Mr. Cochran's analysis, based upon the unit of 1,000 average nuts,
weighing in the aggregate 3,125 pounds, discloses a drain upon soil
fertility for that number, amounting in round numbers to--


                         Pounds.

    Nitrogen                 8 1/4
    Potash                  17
    Phosphoric acid          3


Reducing this to crop and area, and taking 60 fruits per annum per tree
as a fair mean for the bearing groves in our cocoanut districts and
on those rare estates where a systematic spacing of about 173 trees
to the hectare has been made, we should have an annual harvest of
10,300 nuts, or, stated in round numbers, 10,000, which will exhaust
each year from the soil a total of--


                        Pounds.

    Nitrogen               82 1/2
    Potash                170
    Phosphoric acid        30


The cocoanut, therefore, while a good feeder, may not be classed with
the most depleting of field crops.

To make this clear I exhibit, by way of contrast, the drafts made
by a relatively good crop of two notoriously soil-impoverishing
crops--tobacco and corn--and, on the other hand, the drafts made by
an equivalent average cotton crop--a product considered to make but
light drains upon sources of soil fertility.

A proportionate tobacco crop of 1,000 kilos per hectare will withdraw
from the soil (reduced to the same standard of weights adopted by
Mr. Cochran)--


                      Pounds.

    Nitrogen            168
    Potash              213
    Phosphoric acid      23


An equivalent crop of shelled corn, say, of 125 bushels per hectare,
will withdraw--


                      Pounds.

    Nitrogen            200
    Potash              135
    Phosphoric acid      75


while a relative crop of lint cotton of 237 kilos (700 pounds) per
hectare [6] will only exhaust, in round numbers--


                      Pounds.

    Nitrogen            114
    Potash               70
    Phosphoric acid      30


There is an analogy between these four products that makes them
all comparable, in so far as all are largely surface feeders, and,
as experience shows that there can be no continuing success with
the last three that does not include both cultivation and manuring,
we may use the analogy to infer a like indispensable necessity for
the successful issue of the first.

Cultivation as a manurial factor should, therefore, not be overlooked,
and all the more strongly does it become emphasized by the very
difficulties that for some years to come must beset the Philippine
planter in the way of procuring direct manures.

When it comes to the specific application of manures and how to make
the most of our resources, we shall have to turn back to the analysis
of the nut and note that, relatively to other crops, it makes small
demands for nitrogen. At the same time it must not be forgotten that
these chemical determinations only refer to the fruit and that,
with the present incomplete data and lack of investigation of the
constituent parts of root, stem, leaf, and branch, we have nothing
to guide us but what we may infer from the behavior of the plant and
its relationship to plants of long-deferred fruition, whose manurial
wants are well understood.

It is now the most approved orchard practice to encourage an early
development of leaf and branch by the liberal application of nitrogen,
whose stimulant actions upon growth are conceded as the best.

In temperate regions, the exigencies of climate exact that this be
done with discretion and care, in order that the unduly stimulated
growths may be fully ripened and matured against the approach of an
inclement season. In the Tropics no such limitations exist, and the
early growth of the tree may be profitably stimulated to the highest
pitch. That this general treatment, as applied to young fruit trees,
is specifically the one indicated in the early life of the cocoanut,
may be quickly learned by him who will observe the avidity with
which the fleshy roots of a young cocoanut will invade, embrace,
and disintegrate a piece of stable manure.

Notwithstanding lack of chemical analysis, we may not question the
fact that considerable supplies of both potash and phosphoric acid
are withdrawn in the building up of leaf and stem; but these are
found in sufficient quantity in soils of average quality to meet
the early requirements of the plant. It is only when the fruiting
age is reached that demands are made, especially upon the potash,
which the planter is called upon to make good.

Good cultivation, the application of a generous supply of stimulating
nitrogen during its early career, and the gradual substitution in
later life of manures in which potash and phosphoric acid, particularly
the former, predominate, are necessary.

How, then, may we best apply the nitrogen requirements of its early
life? Undoubtedly through the application of abundant supplies of
stable manures, press cakes, tankage, or of such fertilizers as furnish
nitrogen in combination with the large volume of humus necessary to
minister to the gross appetite of the plant under consideration. But
the chances are that none of these are available, and the planter
must have recourse to some of the green, nitrogen-gathering manures
that are always at his command.

He must sow and plow under crops of pease, beans, or other legumes
that will furnish both humus and nitrogen in excess of what they
remove. Incidentally, they will draw heavily upon the potash deposits
of the soil, and they must all be turned back, or, if fed, every
kilo of the resulting manure must be scrupulously returned. He must
pay for the cultivation of the land, for the growing of crops that
he turns back as manure (and that involves further expense for their
growing and plowing under), and, in addition, he must be subject to
such outlay for about seven years before he can begin to realize for
the time and labor expended.

But there are expedients to which the planter may have recourse
which, if utilized, may return every dollar of cultural outlay. By
the use of a wise rotation he can not only maintain his land in a good
productive condition but realize a good biennial crop that will keep
the plantation from being a financial drag. The rotation that occurs
to me as most promising on the average cocoanut lands of these Islands
would be, first, a green manure crop, followed by corn and legumes,
succeeded by cotton, and then back to green manures.

To make the first green crop effective as a manure, both lime and
potash are essential--the former to make available the nitrogen we
hope to gather, and the potash in order to secure the largest and
quickest growth of the pulse we are to raise for manurial purposes.

Both these elements are generally in good supply in our cocoanut lands;
but, if there is uncertainty upon this point, both should be supplied,
in some form. Fortunately, the former is cheap and abundant in most
parts of the Archipelago, and, when well slaked, may be freely applied
with benefit, at the rate of a ton or even more to the hectare.

In default of the mineral potash salts, the grower must seek unleached
wood ashes, either by burning his own unused jungle land to procure
them or by purchasing them from the neighbor who has such land to
burn over. If located on the littoral, he will carefully collect
all the seaweed that is blown in, although in our tropical waters
the huge and abundant marine algae are mostly lacking. Such as are
found, however, furnish a not inconsiderable amount of potash, and,
in the extremities to which planters remote from commercial centers
are driven, no source is too inconsiderable to be overlooked.

The first green crop selected will be one known to be of tropical
origin which, with fair soil conditions, will not fail to give a good
yield. He may with safety try any of the native rank-growing beans,
or cowpeas, soja, or velvet beans; or, if these are not procurable, he
has at command everywhere an unstinted seed supply of Cajanus indicus,
or of Clitorea ternatea, which will as well effect the desired end--to
wit, a great volume of humus and a new soil supply of nitrogen. It
remains for the planter to determine if the crop thus grown is to
be plowed under, or if he will use it to still better advantage by
partially feeding it, subject, as previously stated, to an honest
return to the land of all the manure resulting therefrom.

He may utilize it in any way, even to selling the resulting seed
crop, provided all the remaining brush is turned back to the land
and a portion of the money he receives for the seed be reinvested in
high-grade potash and phosphatic manures. The plantation should now
be in fair condition for a corn crop, and, as a very slight shading
is not prejudicial to the young palms, the corn can be planted close
enough to the trees, leaving only sufficient space to admit of the
free cultivation that both require.

It must not be forgotten that corn makes the most serious inroads
upon our soil fertility of any of the crops in our rotation, and,
unless by this time the planter is prepared to feed all the grain
produced to fatten swine or cattle, it had better be eliminated from
the rotation and peanuts substituted. In addition to this, he must
still make good whatever drains the corn will have made upon this
element of soil fertility.

Cropping to corn attacks the cocoanut at a new and vulnerable point,
against which the careful grower must make provision. It will be
remembered that an average corn crop makes very considerable drafts
upon the soil supply of phosphoric acid; but, if the grain is used
for fattening swine, whose manure is much richer in phosphates than
most farm manures, and the latter is restored to the land, serious
soil impoverishment may be averted.

The next step in our suggested rotation is the cotton crop. Here,
too, limitations are imposed upon the planter who is without abundant
manurial resources to maintain the future integrity of his grove. He
may sell the lint from his cotton, but he can not dispose of it
(as is frequently done here) in the seed.

If the enterprise be not upon a scale that will justify the equipment
of a mill and the manufacture of the oil, he has no alternative but
to return the seed in lieu of the seed cake, wasteful and extravagant
though such a process be.

The oil so returned is without manurial value and, if left in the
seed, is so much money wasted. The rational process, of course,
calls for the return of the press cake, either direct or in the form
of manure after it has been fed. With this is also secured the hull,
rich in both the potash and the phosphoric acid [7] which we now know
is so essential to the future welfare of the grove.

The above rotation is simply suggested as a tentative expedient.

The ground will now be so shaded that we can not hope to raise more
catch crops for harvesting, although it may be possible during the
dry season to raise a partial stand of pulses, of manure value only;
but, from the fruiting stage on, this becomes a minor consideration.

This stage of the cultural story brings us once more face to face
with the principle contended for at the beginning of this paper,
namely, that there can be no permanent prosperity in this branch of
horticulture until the crop is so worked up into its ultimate products
that none of the residue of manufacture goes to waste.

At best the return of these side products is insufficient, and, despite
their careful husbandry, we can not ultimately evade a greater or less
resort to inorganic manures of high cost and difficult procurement.

The residue from the press cake is rich in nitrogen and humus, which,
in the ever-increasing shade of the grove, will become more and more
difficult to produce there through nitrogen-making agencies; but the
waste from the manufacture of coir and the ashes from the woody shell
will go far toward supplying the needed potash.

Such a system would, if closely followed, practically restrict the
farmer's ultimate purchases to a small quantity of acid phosphates,
or of bone dust, which, in conjunction with good tillage, should
serve to maintain the grove in a highly productive condition for an
indefinite term of years.



IRRIGATION.

As an auxiliary manurial agent of definite, well-proven value in this
Archipelago, I will briefly recite some of the benefits that may be
expected to follow occasional irrigation during the dry season.

It strongly accelerates growth and early maturity. A few irrigated
trees, reputed to be under five years from seed and already bearing
fruit, were shown the writer on the Island of Jolo. The growth was
remarkably strong and vigorous, notwithstanding that the water of
irrigation had been applied in such a way that the tree could only
hope to derive a minimum of benefit from its application. It had merely
been turned on from a convenient ditch whenever the soil seemed baked
and dry, at intervals of one to three weeks, as circumstances seemed
to require.

Irrigation, but always in connection with subsequent cultivation,
may be considered equal to a crop guaranty that is not afforded so
effectually by any purely cultural system.

Rarely has a better opportunity occurred to demonstrate the
unquestioned benefits that have inured to these few Jolo trees from
the use of irrigating waters than the present season of 1902-3. From
many sources reports come to this Bureau of trees failing, or dying
outright, from lack of moisture. While it is true that the present
dry season has had no parallel since 1885-86, and that the rainfall
during the dry season has been less than half the normal, yet it
should not be forgotten that, during the eight months from October to
May, inclusive, the average precipitation on the west coast, at the
latitude of Manila, is only about 460 mm. and that, when the amount
falls below this, the cocoanut is bound to suffer.

Though it is true that the evil effects of drought may be modified,
if not altogether controlled, by cultivation, the assistance of
irrigation places the cultivator in an impregnable position. If
evidence in support of this statement were called for, it might be
found to-day in the deplorable condition of those groves that have
been permitted to run to pasture, as compared with those in which some
attempts have been made to bolo out the encroaching weeds and grasses.

It is probably true that, except on very sandy soils, continued surface
irrigation would aggravate the superficial root-developing tendency
of the tree; and to what extent, if any, occasional laceration by
deep shovel tooth cultivation would injure the tree remains to be
seen. There are, however, few economic plants that so quickly repair
root damage as the Palmae, and, unless the seat of injury extends over
a very large area, it is probable that the resulting injury would be
of no consequence, as compared with the general benefits that would
result from irrigation.





HARVEST.


Harvest of the crop requires but a brief discussion. The nuts should
be plucked when ripe. The phenomenon of maturity can not be readily
described in print. It frequently is as evident in nuts of a bright
green color as in those of a golden-yellow color, and the recognition
is one of those things that can only be learned by experience.

The practice, so general in the Seychelles, of allowing the nut to
hang till it falls to the ground is certainly undesirable in these
Islands. On the contrary, the overripe nuts will seldom fall until
dislodged by a storm, and it is no uncommon thing to see nuts that
have sprouted and started to grow upon trees in plantations where the
harvest is left to the action of natural causes. Such nuts, of course,
are entirely worthless for the manufacture of oil or copra, and even
the husk has depreciated in value, the finest coirs, in fact, being
derived only from the fruits that have not attained full ripeness. In
any case, the nuts should be picked and the crop worked up before any
considerable enlargement or swelling of the embryo occurs. From this
time onward physiological changes arise which injuriously affect the
quantity and quality of what is called the meat.

The heaping up of the nuts for some time after harvest favors some milk
absorption, which seems to facilitate the subsequent easy extraction
of the endosperm.





ENEMIES.


Outside of certain insects of the order Coleoptera, cocoanuts in
the Philippines are reasonably free from enemies; in some districts,
close to forest-clad areas, the raids of monkeys do some damage. A
tree-nesting rat, which nibbles the young nuts, is also a source of
considerable loss. The rat is best overcome by frequent disturbance of
his quarters. This involves the removal of the dead leaves and thatch
that form constantly about the base of the crown. But the wisdom of
this recommendation will depend entirely upon circumstances. As the
planter may find that rats or the rhinoceros beetle are the lesser
evil, so should he be governed.

There are localities in the Archipelago where the plague of rats
is unknown and where the beetles abound. In that case it would be
unwise to disturb the leaves which are very tardily deciduous and
do not naturally fall till the wood beneath is hard, mature, and
practically impervious to the attacks of insects.

Where rats are numerous and insects few, which is the case in some
localities, the dead and dying leaves, among which the rat nests,
may be advantageously cleared away whenever the tree is climbed to
harvest the fruit.

Among serious insect enemies we have to contend largely with the very
obnoxious black beetle, Oryctes rhinocerus, and, fortunately, to a
lesser extent, with Rhynchoporus ferrugineous (probably the same as
R. ochreatus of Eydoux), while R. pascha, Boehm, and Chalcosma atlas,
Linn., are also said to appear occasionally.

However different their mode of attack, the general result is the
same, and their presence may surely be detected by the appearance of
deformed or badly misshapen or lacerated leaves.

The attacks of all species are confined to the growing point and as
far downward as the wood is tender and susceptible to the action of
their powerful mandibles.

The black beetle makes its attacks when fully mature, eating its way
into the soft tissues and generally selecting the axil of a young
leaf as the point of least resistance. Others simply deposit their
eggs, which hatch out, and the resulting grub is provided with jaws
powerful enough to do the same mischief. Two or three of these grubs,
if undisturbed, are sufficient in time to completely riddle the
growing tip, which then falls over and the tree necessarily dies.





REMEDIES.


Remedies may be described as preventive and aggressive, and, by an
active campaign of precaution, many subsequent remedial applications
can be avoided.

Most of the beetles attacking the palm are known to select heaps of
decomposing rubbish and manure as their favorite (if not necessary)
breeding places, and it is obviously of importance to break up and
destroy such; nor can any better or more advantageous way of effecting
this be suggested than by promptly spreading and plowing under all such
accumulations as fast as they are made; or, if this be impracticable,
by forking or turning over or otherwise disturbing the heaps, until
convenient to dispose of them as first suggested.

A truly preventive and simple remedy, and one that I can commend as a
result of close observation, is the application of a handful or two
of sharp, coarse, clean sand in the axillae of the young leaves. The
native practice is to mix this with ashes, salt, or tobacco dust;
but it is questionable if the efficacy of the remedy lies so much in
these additions as in the purely mechanical effect of the sand, the
constant attrition of which can not be other than highly objectionable
to the insect while burrowing.

Of offensive remedies, probing with a stout hooked wire is the only
form of warfare carried on in these Islands; but, as the channel of the
borer is sometimes tortuous and deep, this is not always effective. A
certain, simple, and easily applied remedy may be found in carbon
bisulphid. It could be applied in the holes (which invariably trend
downward) with a small metal syringe. The hole should be sealed
immediately with a pinch of stiff, moist clay.

It is likely that this remedy and probing with a wire are the only
successful ways of combatting the red beetle, whose grub strikes in
wherever it finds a soft spot; but, for these species which attack
the axils of the leaves, I have great faith in the efficacy of the
"sand cure," and no nut picker should go aloft unprovided with a small
bamboo tube of dry, sifted sand, to protect the bases of recently
expanded leaves.

In Selangor cocoanut trees now come under the government inspection,
and planters and owners, under penalties, are compelled to destroy
these pests. Mr. L. C. Brown, of Kuala Lampur, in that State,
who writes intelligently on this subject, [8] lays great stress on
the value of clean cultivation in subduing beetles, and repeats a
cultural axiom that never grows old and that will, consequently,
bear reiteration here--that it is rarely anything but the neglected
plantation that suffers, and that the maintenance at all times of a
healthy, vigorous growth is in itself almost a guaranty of immunity
from attacks of these pernicious insects.

While we, unfortunately, know that this is not in all cases an assured
protection against diseases or insect enemies, it certainly minimizes
the danger and, in itself, is a justification of the high-pressure
cultural treatment advocated throughout the preceding pages.





RENOVATION OF OLD GROVES.


Material improvement of old plantations may sometimes be effected
and, unless the trees are known to be upward of fifty years old,
generally repays the labor. Marked increase in crop has followed a
heavy thinning out of trees upon the Government cocoanut farm at San
Ramon, Mindanao. The improvement that a freer circulation of air and
abundant sunlight have effected is very marked. Where it can be done,
plowing is also sometimes feasible and should be followed by immediate
crop improvement. The average native plow is not so well adapted for
working over an old or neglected grove as it is for original soil
preparation. It acts more as a subsoiler and will tear and lacerate
more roots than is desirable. A single carabao, or one-horse American
garden plow, is the better implement for this work. Extensive bat guano
deposits are found in Mindoro, Guimaras, and Luzon. Some of them show
richness in nitrogen and, when accessible at a moderate cost, would
be useful in the renovation of old groves, where the shade would be
adverse to the rearing of good crops of nitrogen gatherers.





CONCLUSION.


1. There are large areas throughout the littoral valleys of the
Archipelago, as yet unexploited, which, in the essentials of soil,
climate, irrigation facilities, and general environment are suitable
for cocoanut growing.

2. The present conditions present especially flattering attractions
to cocoanut growers capable of undertaking the cultivation upon a
scale of some magnitude. By cooperation, small estates could combine
in the common ownership of machinery, whereby the products of the
grove could be converted into more profitable substances than copra.

3. The present production of copra (estimated at 278,000 piculs in
1902) is an assurance of a sufficient supply to warrant the erection
of a high-class modern plant for the manufacture of the ultimate (the
"butter") products of the nut. The products of such an enterprise would
be increased by the certainty of a local market in the Philippines for
some part of the output. The average market value of the best grades of
copra in the Marseilles market is $54.40, gold, per English ton. The
jobbing value on January 1 of this year, of the refined products,
were, for each ton of copra:


    Butter fats              $90.00
    Residual soap oils        21.00
    Press cake                 5.20
                             ------
          Total              116.20


the difference representing the profit per ton, less the cost of
manufacture.

4. The minimum size of a plantation, on which economical application
of oil and fiber preparing machinery could be made, is 60 hectares.

5. There is no other horticultural tropical product which may be grown
in these Islands where crop assurance may be so nearly guaranteed,
or natural conditions so nearly controlled by the planter who,
knowing correct principles, has the facilities for applying them.

6. The natural enemies and diseases of the plant are relatively few,
easily held in check by vigilance and the exercise of competent
business management.

7. The labor situation is bound more seriously to affect the small
planter, wholly dependent upon hand labor, than the estate conducted
on a large enough scale to justify the employment of modern machinery.

8. In view of an ever-expanding demand for cocoanut products, and in
the light of the foregoing conclusions, the industry, when prosecuted
upon a considerable scale and subject to the requirements previously
set forth, promises for many years to be one of the most profitable
and desirable enterprises which command the attention of the Filipino
planter.

The greatest mine of horticultural wealth which is open to the shrewd
planter lies in the heaps of waste and neglected husks that he can
now procure from adjoining estates for the asking and cartage.

With labor at 1 peso per diem and at the present price of potash and
phosphoric acid, all the husks in excess of 300 per diem which could
be hauled would be clear profit. The ashes of these, when burned and
applied to the old grove, would have an immediate and revivifying
influence.

Many trees in an old plantation have ceased to bear. Whether this is
due to exhaustion from old age or from soil exhaustion is immaterial;
each should be eradicated and the time-honored custom of replanting
a fresh tree in its place abandoned. These renewals are difficult
enough in any fruit or nut orchard where the scientific cultural
conditions have been of the best. Renewals in a cocoanut grove,
unless the vacant space is abnormally large and can be subjected to
some years of soil improvement, are unprofitable.

There is a wide range of opinion as to the bearing life of a cocoanut
tree. It is said to vary from thirty to one hundred and thirty
years. Grown more than forty, or possibly fifty years old, the writer
would hesitate to undertake the improvement or renewal of the grove.

Palms, unlike exogenous trees, afford no evidence by which their
age may be determined. In general, with advanced years, come great
height and great attenuation. In the open, and where fully exposed
to atmospheric influences, these form an approximate criterion of
age. The so-called annular scars, marking the earlier attachments of
leaves, furnish no clue to age.





NOTES


[1] "The Prince of Palms," Treloar.

[2] The cocoanut palm has been reared as far north as Indian River,
Florida, latitude 28 deg. N., but has not proven a profitable commercial
venture.

[3] Quoted in "Watts's Dict.," II, 456.

[4] Bull. Torr. Bot. Club, 1902.

[5] Throughout this paper the writer uses this word in preference to
"fertilizing" even when speaking of so-called "commercial fertilizers."

[6] Farmers' Bulletin 114, United States Department of Agriculture.

[7] Conn. Exp. Sta. Rep. 1897, Part II.

[8] Ag. Bull. Fed. Malay States, February, 1903.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Cocoanut, by William S. Lyon

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COCOANUT ***

***** This file should be named 33844.txt or 33844.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/8/4/33844/

Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net/ for Project
Gutenberg (This file was produced from images generously
made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
