The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Menace of Prohibition, by Lulu Wightman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Menace of Prohibition

Author: Lulu Wightman

Release Date: October 17, 2010 [EBook #33920]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MENACE OF PROHIBITION ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)









  THE MENACE
  _of_
  PROHIBITION


  BY LULU WIGHTMAN

  ADVOCATE OF CIVIL AND RELIGIOUS LIBERTY.


  They that can give up essential liberty to
  obtain a little temporary safety deserve
  neither liberty nor safety.--_Patrick Henry_


  Price 10 Cents

  Los Angeles Printing Co. 314 West First Street.




+GREAT QUESTIONS OF THE HOUR+

A pamphlet containing a series of Mrs. Wightman's Lectures on themes of
absorbing interest----about the very things that +YOU+ are +THINKING+ and
+TALKING+ about +TO-DAY!+

  --the all-important questions
  --the perplexing questions
  --the paramount questions

Mrs. Wightman's views on public matters--political, religious and
economic--should claim the serious attention of every citizen of the
United States.

A Third Edition necessary to meet the demand

64 pages, with portrait of the author, good paper, clear type,
attractive cover.

PRICE, 25 CENTS, BY MAIL, POSTPAID

Write Name and Address Plainly

Address the Author

Mrs. LULU WIGHTMAN

314 West First St., Los Angeles, Cal.




THE MENACE of PROHIBITION


BY LULU WIGHTMAN


"No man in America has any right to rest contented and easy and
indifferent, for never before, not even in the time of the Civil War,
have all the energies and all the devotion of the American democracy
been demanded for the perpetuity of American institutions, for the
continuance of the American republic against foes without and more
insidious foes within than in the year of grace 1916."

     _--Hon. Elihu Root, in address before the New York State Bar
     Association, Hotel Astor, New York, January 15th, 1916._


Copyright, 1916, by Lulu Wightman




PREFACE


Most writers, in viewing the question of Prohibition, have followed
along a beaten track. They have confined themselves generally to
consideration of moral, economic, and religious phases of the subject.

While I have not entirely ignored these phases, I have chiefly engaged
in the task of pointing out a particular phase that it appears to me
entirely outweighs all others put together; namely, that of the effect
of Prohibition, in its ultimate and practical workings, upon the
political--the structure of American civil government.

I have endeavored to steer clear of its professions and obsessions, all
of which can be of little consequence in the light of my contention that
the major matter with which Prohibition is concerned is the capture and
overturning of our present system of jurisprudence; and that the danger
threatening from this tendency is real and foreboding I have
conscientiously tried to make clear in these pages.

That National Prohibition is an approaching enemy to free government, of
which the people should be warned even at the risk of being grossly
misunderstood, is my opinion. From the watch-towers of American liberty
the warning should go forth. For my own part, I feel well-repaid with
the conscientious effort I have made in "The Menace of Prohibition."

LULU WIGHTMAN.




[Illustration: LULU WIGHTMAN.]




CONTENTS


                                      PAGE

  A False Principle                      6

  Political Power the Object             9

  Political Activities at Washington    10

  Prohibition and Sunday Laws           13

  Sumptuary Laws Increasing             14

  A Dangerous Combination               17

  An Old-Time Fallacy                   21

  Industrial Conditions Responsible     23

  The Opinion of an Economist           24

  Effects of Prohibition                26

  Collective Tyranny in Government      29

  Prohibition Censorship Despotic       30




     We hold these truths to be self-evident: that all men are created
     equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain
     inalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty, and the
     pursuit of happiness.--_The Declaration of Independence._


=John Stuart Mill defines Prohibition in this language:=

"Prohibition: A theory of 'social rights' which is nothing short of
this--that it is the absolute right of every individual that every other
individual shall act in every respect exactly as he ought; that
whosoever fails thereof in the smallest particular violates my social
rights and entitles me to demand from the legislature the removal of the
grievance. So monstrous a principle is far more dangerous than any
single interference with liberty;--there is no violation of liberty
which it would not justify."

And in the light of the last sentence, "so monstrous a principle is far
more dangerous than any single interference with liberty;--there is no
violation of liberty which it would not justify," the writer would
especially examine this modern crusaders movement for Prohibition. Many
other writers have viewed the question from sociological, economic, and
religious standpoints; but the =principle= of the thing,--that in which it
is based--a "monstrous" principle, which, as Mill says, "=is far more
dangerous than any single interference with liberty=," deserves more
serious consideration than any other phase of the question: a principle,
in fact, of intolerant coercion as against the great principle of
individual liberty so thoroughly established as the inherent right of
the citizen at the very inception of this government in the Western
world.

To do justice to this particular phase of the question of Prohibition--a
principle so dangerous and "monstrous" that there is "no violation of
liberty which it would not justify"--it is necessary to be courageous,
honest, unafraid, and not "soaked to the pulp in the pseudo-puritanical,
moral antiseptic bath of conventional prejudices." Here in America we
have had enough of base misrepresentation, rotten hypocrisy, and
sugar-coated sentimentality. What we really need now is honesty of
purpose and courage of conviction, let the criticizing mob be of "the
upper ten thousand or lower," it matters not.




A False Principle


=What Is the Real Menace of Prohibition?=

It is the false =principle= from which it derives its life and being. "We
are the good people," say the moral reformers: "you are the bad;
therefore it is the duty of the good people to seek control of the
government and to enact laws that will make you bad people good." The
platform of the Prohibition Party of Ohio states it in a different way,
but in essence it is the same thing:

"The Prohibition Party of Ohio ... recognizing Almighty God, revealed in
Jesus Christ, and accepting the law of God as the ultimate standard of
right ... the referendum in all matters of legislation not distinctively
moral."

In this scheme of government, as it is plainly revealed, "the law of
God" as it would be =interpreted= by the Prohibitionists, would be the
supreme standard of all matters distinctively moral, and the initiative
and referendum would be relied upon, and allowed in all matters of
legislation "=not= distinctively moral."

This was exactly what happened in the Dark Ages and early New England:
"good people" sought and secured the control of the government, "the law
of God" was made "the ultimate standard of right" as interpreted by the
"good people" in power, and the "bad people" were put to the torture.

As the result of just such a scheme, barbaric practices reigned in the
name of law: thumb-screw and rack were brought into requisition, Calvin
burned Servetus, Quakers were hanged and witches burned, Roger Williams
banished, and Mary Dyer hung by the neck until she was dead,--and all
because "Almighty God, revealed in Jesus Christ," was recognized in
government, and "the law of God" made the ultimate standard of right.

But between "Almighty God" and "the law of God" there always stood the
interpreter of that law, and the bigoted, blinded, fanatical follower of
Creed who mistook his creed for God, and his =will= and =opinion= for the
law of God. Had God and His law been left alone, no possible harm could
have resulted.

Under this scheme of religious and moral government, Jews, agnostics,
and non-Christian elements, and even Christians that do not acquiesce in
the scheme, have no recognition; and under the administration of the
moral reform element would have no place in the country, except on
sufferance! And just what would happen to people who repudiated a
church-and-state system of government like this! Let us see:

The Prohibitionist invariably argues that "the God of the Bible"
authorizes Prohibition in civil government; it is religious, and a Bible
doctrine, he contends, and therefore should receive recognition not only
by the people, but by the government as well; and all who cannot,
whether from conscientious scruples or other reasons, agree with them,
are opponents of "the God of the Bible," of true religion, and of
government. Very frequently the charge of "anarchist" is hurled against
those who cannot agree with them, and ofttimes the most unscrupulous and
un-Christian methods are resorted to, to crush out all opposition. And
what the opponents of Prohibition might expect, if Prohibition ever
reaches the zenith of political power, may be determined from a
statement by Rev. E. B. Graham, in a speech made at York, Neb. He said:

"We might add, in all justice, if the opponents of the Bible do not like
our government and its Christian features, let them go to some wild and
desolate land, and in the name of the devil and for the sake of the
devil, subdue it, and set up a government of their own on infidel and
atheistic ideas; and then if they can stand it, stay there till they
die."

The foregoing, at least, shows some of the Christian features (?) of the
program of the Reform party. The program winds up with the banishment of
the minority to some wild and desolate land where they may remain until
they die! The trouble is, if liberty-loving citizens of the United
States, jealous of their rights and constitutional guaranties and
determined to preserve them even to the point of quitting their beloved
country, should go to some wild and desolate land, and set up a
government where they could enjoy religious and personal freedom, it
would not satisfy the Prohibition moral-reform forces. All past history
shows that they would follow to the wild and desolate land, and destroy,
if possible, every vestige of such government as was opposed to their
narrow and intolerant ideas!




Political Power the Object


The initiative and referendum is good enough for the Prohibition Party
when applied to "all matters of legislation not distinctively moral;"
but when morals are involved, "the law of God" only is binding, and the
initiative and referendum is repudiated. Their =interpretation= of the
demands of "the law of God"--not actually the law itself--would become
the supreme law of the land, and all the power of the government, in
their hands, would be set to enforcing it. Need it be said that this
would be repeating the history of the Dark Ages and Medieval times in
the most accurate detail!

Mr. Eugene W. Chafin, Prohibition candidate for president, in 1912,
said:

"I don't want any person who claims to be a party Prohibitionist--a
middle-of-the-road Prohibitionist--ever to sign another petition, or ask
Congress or any legislature anywhere under the American flag to pass any
prohibitive laws on the liquor question. We don't want any laws of any
kind whatever passed. =All we want is to be elected to power....= Elect us
to power, and we will repeal a few laws and do the rest by
=interpretation= of the constitution and =administration= of the
government."

Mr. Ferdinand Cowle Inglehart, N. Y., Supt., of the Anti-Saloon League,
in the =Review of Reviews=, February, 1915, page 216, said:

"The pastors and members of the churches turned the State (Oregon) into
=an organized political camp=."

This was indeed a frank confession upon the part of Mr. Inglehart. He
might have truthfully added that it was the Anti-Saloon League which was
the moving spirit that invaded the churches and spurred on the "pastors
and members of the churches" to turn the sovereign State of Oregon into
"=an organized political camp=." A political camp is, beyond question,
organized for political ends. Prohibition in Oregon, as elsewhere, was
the "Cheshire cheese," and political power the goal of its ambition. And
now in Oregon, as elsewhere, we shall hear the cry: "Now that we have
Prohibition, we must fill the public offices with 'good men' to enforce
the law: 'turn the rascals out' and put good men in office"; and, of
course, "good men" must be Prohibitionists always. None others need
apply. Oh, it is a fine scheme; but unfortunately, it takes no
cognizance of the =minority=--those who are quite equal in American
citizenship, and who lose none of their civil rights by virtue of their
being the =minority=.




Political Activities at Washington


Mr. L. Ames Brown, in "Prohibition and Politics," published in the =North
American Review= of December, 1915, points to some of the features of the
Anti-Saloon League programme, in the nationalization of prohibition--a
very interesting and valuable contribution upon the subject. Very
accurately--and apparently without any prejudices--Mr. Brown shows the
workings of the Prohibitionists in the political.

He calls attention to the Prohibition rider in the District of Columbia
Appropriation Bill, "an amendment to the District Bill to foist
prohibition upon the people of the District without a referendum," and
continuing, says:

"The Prohibitionists, with one or two exceptions, refused to listen to
suggestions that the legislation be submitted to a vote of the District
of Columbia, thus disregarding the principle of self-government which
they had agitated so vigorously in local option campaigns."

In this attempt to force the people of the District to submit to their
dictation, and to keep them from voting upon the measure, the
Prohibitionists showed clearly that they were =without regard for the
sentiment of the people to be affected=. This was evidently one of those
"distinctively moral" questions upon which the people are not supposed
to vote--or at least are not to be allowed to vote, if the
Prohibitionists can have their way--but in this act at the seat of
government, they have, indeed, given proof of their absolute disregard
for the principle of self-government which they prate so much about in
local option campaigns. They have shown to what lengths they would go,
if they could.

Mr. Brown is authority for the statement that had this District Bill
gone to President Wilson without a provision for a =referendum=, he would
have immediately vetoed it.

According to Mr. Brown, the Anti-Saloon League is strongly intrenched at
Washington. He says that it "maintains at Washington one of the most
powerful lobbies ever seen at the National Capital," and regarding its
influence upon the nation's law-makers he has this to say:

"Its representatives, backed by an organized influence of public
opinion, are enabled to dictate the attitude of a considerable number of
Congressmen on a pending question, with the result that Congressmen
oftentimes are driven to vote against their own views and their own
consciencies in favor of measures advocated by the lobby."

Mr. Brown gives a very lucid account of the bold and defiant activities
of the powerful Anti-Saloon League lobby at Washington--and as to the
results, he has this to say:

"The harmful effect of such a lobbying enterprise upon our system of
government does not admit of controversy."

Mr. Brown is convincing to the reader in his conclusions of "Prohibition
and Politics" which, to sum up, may be stated as--=A GROWING AND
INSIDIOUS POWER IN THE POLITICAL REALM, INIMICAL TO THE AMERICAN
INSTITUTIONS OF GOVERNMENT=. And if a rapidly growing power, which was
practically unknown a decade ago, is so great in =politics= and
=government= today, what may we expect a decade hence!

The Prohibition movement then, unquestionably, is simply a means to an
end,--the stepping-stone to political power,--the pathway to the goal of
political ambition; and it seems only fair to presume that all the hue
and cry over drunkenness and the inability of some men to control their
natural appetites is, after all, only a minor matter; but the question
of seizing the political power, and filling governmental offices only
with "good men" is the major matter. And the real issue, power to rule
and to enjoy the emoluments of public office. And the real menace, the
overturning of the present system of government wherein the privileges
and rights of the individual are safeguarded, and the setting up of a
new standard of authority, namely, "the law of God" as =interpreted= by
the Prohibitionists and moral reformers. =And it is the interpretation
that is to be feared!=

The remotest possibility of the success of such an unjust, un-American,
illiberal and dangerous form of tyranny in government, should alarm the
American people beyond and above every other question, even that of war;
and should set them to the task of a close analysis of the subject and
trend of Prohibition.

When the true American finds that as a result of the outgrowths of the
"monstrous principle," and under rapidly multiplying laws and
regulations, he is forbidden to dispose of his property as he pleases;
forbidden to amuse himself as he pleases on holidays; forbidden to read
what books he pleases and to look at what pictures he pleases; to dress,
think and drink as he pleases, he will set his face like a flint against
the tyrannical and inquisitorial demands of the modern Crusaders, and he
will attempt to halt their inroads and innovations on the government.
The ballot-box is his opportunity. There he may register his
disapprobation, and put a curb on the restless, uneasy, political
charlatan who, under the guise of moral reform, would seize the
machinery of political government and make it an engine of tyranny and
oppression.

It must be kept in mind that the clerical politicians of the Prohibition
party (no distinction can be made between the Prohibition Party and the
Anti-Saloon League: they are one and the same in intent and purpose) are
interested not merely in the enactment of prohibitory liquor laws. They
want laws prohibiting everything that does not conform to their
interpretation of theological dogmas.




Prohibition and Sunday Laws


They are as determined to secure compulsory Sabbath Day observance laws
as they are to obtain Prohibition laws; and wherever and whenever you
find a movement for one, you invariably find, sooner or later, a demand
for the other. Prohibition and Sunday laws go hand in hand. In fact,
they result from the same cause--the desire to control individuals; the
application in civil law of the fallacious theory that it is "the social
right of every individual that every other individual shall act in every
respect exactly as he ought to act." Nothing is further from the truth
of the principle of free and popular government, and nothing so
destructive of the rights and privileges of man.

Sunday laws can find no justification except in a church-and-state
system of government which essays to establish a practice grounded in
religious belief; to fix upon a particular rest-day, and say to
individuals how they shall observe that day. A compulsory law for Sunday
or Sabbath observance is equivalent to a law for compulsory baptism, or
compulsory church service, or the support of the church: in like manner,
sumptuary laws that determine what one may not drink, may extend to
defining what one may eat, =_ad infinitum_=, until a thousand and one
articles of food and drink are "unlawful"--articles of diet and
consumption that to a large proportion of the citizens may seem
harmless, if not, indeed, beneficial. The Sabbath law says to you what
you must religiously do; and if it may extend to the observance =of a
day=, it may extend to =all= religious duties and practices without
exception: the Prohibition law tells you what you may not =drink=, and if
it presumes the right to prescribe in the matter of drink, it may extend
to the matter of determining what is fit, and what is not fit, =to
eat=--and it could continue until a Dietary List and a Fashion Plate had
been fixed by legal enactment. It is not difficult to see that the
Sunday law and Prohibition are quite identical in character; the source
of their origin must be the same: at least, it is plain that their
introduction and operation =in civil government= is destructive of
personal freedom and choice.




Sumptuary Laws Increasing


These restrictions by law are eternally increasing, so that it has
become almost impossible for a citizen of the republic to live a single
day without violating one or more laws. In almost every relation of life
the conduct of the American is minutely regulated.

Many of these restrictions are founded upon a muddled conception of the
public good: their aim would seem to be to protect the innocent
bystander. But we cannot see how the innocent bystander profits, when
the free citizen is forbidden to go fishing on Sunday, to smoke in
public, to see certain plays, to get Anthony Comstock reports and the
Kreutzer Sonata through the mails; to say in public just what he wants
to say--to exercise freedom of speech; to kiss his girl in the parks, or
a woman to wear abbreviated skirts,--=_ad libitum!_=

These prohibitions burden the individual without conferring any
appreciable advantage upon the mass, or even upon other individuals. The
struggle between two wholly different theories of life--the Puritanical
spirit on one hand, and the Liberal spirit on the other--is on, and it
is becoming fiercer every day. Said Congressman Richard Bartholdt, in a
speech made in the House of Representatives:

"The attempts to further and further restrict our liberties in a Puritan
sense are carried on in the garb of a religious movement, and the
ministers of all churches and the members of all congregations are
constantly called upon for support and money to maintain lobbies in both
the national and state capitals; and these lobbyists are cracking the
whip over our lawmakers, and are urging them to pass more and more
restrictive laws,--laws which in their mistaken zeal, they believe will
make people good. I do not exaggerate, my friends, when I say that if
this movement is not stopped, and stopped soon, the American people
before long will find themselves wrapped up in a network of 'don't's'
which will completely hamper their freedom of action; and instead of
being freemen in all matters of personal conduct, they will be slaves
fettered by the chains of un-American laws.

"Permit me, in this connection, to call attention to a most remarkable
fact; namely, that the people in many cases =actually vote to enslave
themselves=. History tells us of despots who kept their subjects in
perpetual serfdom, and of rulers who robbed the people of their freedom;
but there is no case on record, so far as we know, where the people of
their own volition and by their own votes robbed themselves of their own
birthright. The United States is the first example of this kind. The
history of the human race is =a constant struggle for liberty=, and every
concession wrung from the oppressors was heralded as a new triumph of
progress and civilization. Here we have the example of a generation
which, though being free, =voluntarily surrenders its social liberty and
forges with its own hands the fetters of slavery=. Now, can you account
for that? Is it because we do not sufficiently appreciate our heritage
on the theory that what you inherit and what comes to you easily you do
not value as what you have to fight for yourselves? Or is it because the
people do not fully realize just what they are doing =by joining forces
with those who are conspiring against their highest interests=? I leave
these questions for you to answer. Perhaps we are guilty on both
counts."

If the writer were to answer these questions, she would be constrained
to say that the last count is the strongest count: the people do not
realize what they are doing =by joining forces with those who are
conspiring against their highest interests=. The average American has
become a chronic joiner. He does not stand for something: he must belong
to something. The Prohibition movement comes along and appeals to his
sentimental and emotional nature. He has been schooled to depend
largely on sentiment, and trained to march with the crowd. To act as a
responsible unit has been practically impossible. He has never thought
upon the question deeply; he has been part of a muddled mass of
humanity, thinking as the mass thought and acting as they acted: he has
not been the soul-free individual he imagined himself to be; his acts
and opinions have been nothing more than weak reflections of the
opinions and acts of the muddled mass. He joins the Prohibition forces,
and thereafter thinks less than before, because, being joined to
something, he can safely trust to that something--the organized mass
which, in turn, thinks and acts just as a few self-appointed and
ambitious leaders think and act. There is no more for him to do now than
to walk up to the polls and vote precisely as he is bidden to do. He has
become a real automaton.

And he does not once realize that he has =joined forces with those who
are conspiring against his highest interests=. He helps to pass a law
that takes away his neighbor's rights and privileges, and does not dream
that in so doing he is taking away his own rights and constitutional
guaranties, and as surely undermining the fabric of our free
institutions and thereby hastening national decay and national ruin.




A Dangerous Combination


Prohibitionists, once they are seated upon the throne of civil power, do
not intend to stop at the passage of laws prohibiting the liquor
traffic. As has already been stated, they are fully as interested in
securing compulsory Sabbath observance laws, and in fact, as stated at
the [1]Inter-Church Conference in New York City in 1905, "to secure a
larger combined influence for the churches of Christ in =all matters=
affecting the =moral= and =social= conditions of the people, so as to
promote the application of the law of Christ =in every relation of human
life=." This, indeed, means a wide range of activities, and the
individual citizen may well enquire, and with apprehension, as to just
how far this =combined influence= is to go in its invasion of "=every
relation of human life=." If it actually means what it says, and proposes
to invade "every relation of human life" with a string of laws and
regulations as complex and as multitudinous as the relations of human
lives, the student of political government, if not the citizen, may ask
of this gigantic combination of the so-called moral forces of the
country: =what will be the ultimatum? Where will it all end? What is to
become of the unit of citizenship?=

"Straws show which way the wind is blowing," is an old saying. In this
connection, the following article--a portion of an editorial--that
appeared in the =Sacramento (Cal.) Bee=, Oct. 7, 1915, is both interesting
and significant:

     As a further example of the intolerant, domineering and
     narrow-minded tendencies of the prohibitionists, witness this
     communication recently published by the New York Evening Sun,
     signed "Herman Trent, of the Anti-Saloon League," and dated at
     Englewood, New Jersey:

     "Speaking now in my personal capacity, and not as a member of the
     Anti-Saloon League, I will say I regard the anti-liquor crusade =as
     merely the beginning of a much larger movement=--a movement that
     will have as its watchword 'Efficiency in Government.'

     "If I had my way I would not only close up the saloons and the
     race-tracks. I would close all tobacco shops, confectionery stores,
     delicatessen shops and other places where gastronomic deviltries
     are purveyed--all low theatres and bathing beaches.

     "I would forbid the selling of gambling devices such as playing
     cards, dice, checkers and chess sets; I would forbid the holding of
     socialistic, anarchistic and atheistic meetings; I would abolish
     the sale of tea and coffee, and I would forbid the making or sale
     of pastry, pie, cake and such like trash."

This at least is consistent. And Mr. Trent is startlingly frank in thus
boldly publishing his programme. In a lecture work extending to all
parts of this country and for a quarter of a century of time, I have
found a great many Herman Trents, and I fear they are increasing, and I
know they are becoming emboldened. After all, are we so far removed from
the blue-law regime of early New England? Be certain of one thing:
=today, we would see just such a regime except for a due regard for the
Constitution and a minimum majority of votes=.

As to compulsory Sabbath observance by civil law, we have the
recommendation of the general assembly of the Presbyterian Church, held
in Chicago recently. The resolutions of this national church body were
as follows:

"That the general assembly reiterates its strong and emphatic
disapproval of all secular uses of the Sabbath day, all games and
sports, in civic life, and also in the army and navy, all unnecessary
traveling and all excursions.

"That we most respectfully call attention of all public officials to the
potent influence of their position on all moral questions, and the
necessity of greater care on their part, proportioned to the exalted
nature of their offices which they occupy, that they may strengthen
rather than weaken by their influence public and private observance of
the Lord's day.

"That the general assembly reiterates its emphatic condemnation of the
Sunday newspaper, and urges the members of the Presbyterian church to
refuse to subscribe for it or read it or advertise in it."

Here is a demand for blue laws, pure and simple. If any American citizen
will read the history of the blue laws of Connecticut, and how Cotton
Mather whipped the people through the streets of early New England towns
for failure to attend Sunday services in the meeting-houses, he will
think seriously before lending a helping hand to the work of
re-inaugurating a social and civil system like that.

Prohibition and Sunday laws are so closely allied, so thoroughly
interwoven in the acts and lives of our modern reformers, that I may
venture to say that should the Prohibitionists ever gain complete
political power in this country =we shall see rigid, intolerant Sunday
laws in comparison to which those early blue laws of Connecticut would
be a delicate shade=.

To doubt this, would be to refute the absolute facts that appear. A
Prohibition nation would be, beyond every reasonable doubt, a
religio-politico system of government in which every spark of the
liberties of the people would be extinguished; and this because, as Mill
says, "so monstrous a principle is far more dangerous than any single
interference with liberty;--there is no violation of liberty which it
would not justify."

Therefore, we conclude that the principle underlying and giving rise to
Prohibition, should it obtain everywhere, would crush out every vestige
of =individual liberty=, and its adherents would justify their course by
the "monstrous principle"; namely, that "it is the absolute social right
of every individual that every other individual shall act in every
respect exactly as he ought to act." Prohibitionists must necessarily
stand for this "monstrous principle," and therefore, as certainly as
two and two make four, =Prohibition is a menace to the American system of
government=.




An Old-Time Fallacy


For many years the Prohibitionists have systematically promulgated the
fallacy that the poverty of the working class is caused by drink. And
this they continue to do in face of all the facts, amply proven by all
available statistics, that flatly contradict the fallacy.

On the question of poverty and drink, the opinion of Francis E. Willard
ought to be accepted by the Prohibitionists first of all. She says:

"For myself, twenty-three years of study and observation have convinced
me that =poverty is the prime cause of intemperance=, and that misery is
the mother and hereditary appetite the father of the drink
hallucination.... For this reason I have become an advocate of such =a
change in social conditions= as shall stamp out the disease of poverty
even as medical science is stamping out leprosy, smallpox, and cholera;
and I believe the age in which we live will yet be characterized as one
of those dark, dismal, and damning ages when some people were so dead to
the love of their kind that they left them in poverty without a
heartache or a blush."

An editorial in the =New York World= some time ago contained the following
significant statement:

"Only two families in every hundred of the 1575 which have been in the
care of the Association for Improving the Condition of the Poor this
summer were brought to poverty =through intemperance=. The percentage goes
against preconceived notions and is, indeed, surprisingly small. It
should disturb that prosperous complacency which sees in poverty only
or mainly the penalty for wanton misdeed. The Association's report for
1909 showed that intemperance, imprisonment, desertion, 'shiftlessness
and inefficiency,' all told, accounted for not 12 per cent of those
brought to want. The figures for that year showed that 65 per cent of
the poverty was due to two causes--sickness and unemployment."

Carroll D. Wright, in the "Eighteenth Annual Report of the Commission of
Labor," shows that only one-fourth of one per cent of all cases of
non-employment in the United States is due to intemperance.

During the winter months of 1913-14, the number of unemployed men and
women in the United States was appalling. New York, Chicago, San
Francisco, and the large cities, were taxed to the utmost to care for
the "jobless."

It was estimated that New York City had its quota of 400,000 idle,
Chicago 200,000, San Francisco 30,000. Organized armies of the
unemployed clamored for work and for bread, and in the country districts
idle men were everywhere tramping to and fro in search of work. "THE
UNEMPLOYED" was a standing headliner of the public press. Suicides from
inability to find work were startlingly prevalent; and the whole country
was perplexed as to how to adjust complex conditions so as to relieve
untold suffering and misery.

Were the Prohibitionists on hand at that time with any sort of a
program, solution or panacea for the difficulty? Not at all. All their
efforts were reserved for election day; their energies stored up for the
glad time when well-paid agitators travel the country in Pullman cars to
tell the people of rural communities that "poverty is caused by drink."




Industrial Conditions Responsible


The fact of the matter is: that in the time when the situation of the
unemployed is most aggravated--when it attracts nation-wide
attention--singularly enough, no voice was raised, either by
individuals, societies, labor organizations, or the press, publicly,
attributing the abnormal and distressing conditions =to the drink habit=.

All these know better. They know, as the New York Association discovered
by its investigation, that inability to find work, and sickness, has
brought the great army of idle men and women to their plight. They know
that our productive ability is increasing much more rapidly than our
consumptive capacity, and that the statesmen-ship of this country as
well as that of every other country in the world is grappling not with
any merely individual or national, but with a world problem.

They know that in China, with its hundreds of millions of frugal,
temperate, hard-toiling people; in Turkey, with its sober, industrious,
Mahomet-worshiping masses; in India, with its almost countless
thousands, governed by strict religious, moral and ethical codes,--the
trouble is identical: =it is economic=. In the present industrial system
of those lands, as well as our own, there is no longer work enough for
all, not sufficient jobs for the number of toilers, and thus,
necessarily and unfortunately, there must be the great bodies of the
unemployed.

The trouble lies in the industrial and social system, and not in the
individual primarily, whether he be Turk, Chinaman, Hindoo or Christian.
All the statistics gathered from every available source will bear out
the assertion that =the problem is economic=, and it is only unwise
presumption that will even attempt to lay these distressing conditions
and results to the drink habit.

But you may explode this popular fallacy of the prohibitionist into
atoms, and he persistently gathers together the fragmentary portions of
his fanciful theory, and comes back with the same old story and tells it
in the same old way.

Perhaps he realizes that to allow its peaceful demise, means to leave
Prohibition standing absolutely without a remedy for the problem of
unemployment or the general industrial conditions of over-production.
Then, having no practical remedy for intemperance, no remedy for the
ills and troubles of the working-class, and no remedy for anything else,
he should graciously step aside and make room for the real
world-movements for improvement and progress along rational and
practical lines of individual and national development.

He ought to realize that in the final analysis all evils are connected
with life itself, for evil is not in things, but in men or women who
abuse or misuse things. And he should recognize the patent truth that
"you cannot legislate men by civil action into the performance of good
and righteous deeds."




The Opinion of an Economist


Mr. J. B. Osborne, in "The Liquor Question--Political, Moral and
Economic Phases," says:

"The abolition of poverty and better education for the masses, are the
only remedies for the disease of alcoholism.

"Alcoholism, however, is not as prevalent as Mr. Chafin or the usual
advocate of Prohibition would have you believe. United States reports
for 1909 show the average number of deaths attributed to alcoholism to
be only 2811; from scalds and burns, 6772; from drowning, 5387; from
poison, 3390; from suicide, 5498; while killed and maimed on railroads
we have a total of about 18,000.

"Certainly no one would advocate the prohibition of water because 5000
people annually get drowned; nor the abolition of the railroads because
18,000 are killed and maimed annually.

"Thousands of workingmen lose their lives every year in the coal and
lead mines, but no efforts are made by the prohibitionists to secure
proper ventilation and inspection of the mines or safety appliances for
the railroads. That the State has power to prohibit or abolish the
legalized sale of liquor no intelligent person will deny. The State has
power also to abolish the Church and transform its property into State
property as was recently done in France under the direction of Premier
Clemenceau.

"The action of the French government in this instance, however, did not
reduce the amount of religion in France; on the contrary, it had the
effect of making the lukewarm churchman more active and zealous in the
church's cause.

"Under laws prohibiting the liquor business we find the same results. In
the State of Maine, the oldest prohibition State in the Union, we find
more arrests for drunkenness, in proportion to the population, than in
any State where we have the licensed saloon.

"All Christian nations have for centuries accepted the prohibitory laws
of the ten commandments such as 'Thou Shalt Not Kill,' and yet it is the
same Christian nations that have the largest armies and navies, and that
have been doing nearly all the killing for thousands of years; likewise,
'Thou shalt not steal,' while today the most respected citizens of every
Christian nation in the world are, at the same time, the world's biggest
robbers.

"The power of government is limited when it comes to controlling or
regulating the thought of the individual, nor is it in the province of
government to say when, where, or what, citizens should eat, drink or
wear. The wisest government would promote conditions under which the
people would have plenty to eat, plenty to drink, plenty to wear and
good houses to live in. What he should eat and drink as well as the
amount and kind, or the color of the clothes he should wear, should be
the function of the individual."




Effects of Prohibition


The effect of Prohibition, sumptuary law enacted in government, upon the
political fabric of the government, should claim the serious attention
of American citizens particularly. We can hardly recur to the
consideration of this subject too often.

Prohibition is essentially a repressive measure, and all history shows
that repressive measures, under ordinary conditions, not only fail, but
worse than fail. In aiming to do away with one evil, Prohibitionists set
up a vastly greater one. In our American political life the very worst
political conditions may ensue.

Prohibition laws do not actually prohibit, as every one knows; but they
do bring about a state of affairs, upon whatever scale attempted,
abhorrent to every right-thinking person. As to some of the results,
Professor Hugo Munsterberg, of Harvard University, says:

"Judges know how rapidly the value of the oath sinks in courts where
=violation of the prohibition laws= is a frequent charge, and how habitual
perjury becomes tolerated by respectable people. The city politicians
know still better how closely blackmail and corruption hang together, in
the social psychology, with the enforcement of laws that strike against
the belief and traditions of wider circles. The public service becomes
degraded, the public conscience becomes dulled. And can there be any
doubt that disregard of laws is the most dangerous psychological factor
in our present-day American civilization."

And upon this question of the effectiveness of Prohibitory legislation,
and the effects of such legislation on the moral life of the nation, the
Committee of Fifty on the Physiological Aspects of the Liquor Problem in
its exhaustive report published in 1905, said:

"There has been concurrent evil of prohibitory legislation. The efforts
to enforce it during forty years have had some unlooked-for effects on
public respect for courts, judicial proceedings, oaths and laws in
general, and for officers of the law, legislators and public
servants.... The public has seen law defied, a whole generation of
habitual law-breakers schooled in evasion and shamelessness, courts
ineffective through fluctuations of policy, delays, perjuries,
negligencies and other miscarriages of justice, officers of the law
double-faced and mercenary, legislators timid and insincere, candidates
for office hypocritical and truckling, and office-holders unfaithful to
pledges and public expectation. Through an agitation which has always
had a moral end, =these immoralities have been developed and made
conspicuous=."

Representative Claude U. Stone, of Illinois, in the debate in Congress
over the Hobson resolution for National Prohibition, said:

"There is State-wide prohibition in Maine, and the Webb-Kenyon law
prevents the overriding of that law by other States, and yet there are
cities in Maine that have more shops per capita for the public sale of
liquor than my home city, which is the greatest distilling city in the
world. In parts of Maine candidates for sheriff, who have the enforcing
of the law, =cannot be elected to office if they do not give a public
pledge that they will violate their oath of office and will not enforce
the laws=. The same can be said of Georgia, another prohibition State. It
is for this reason that the people should be permitted to determine by
their own votes the character of restraint that should be placed upon
themselves."

In the same debate in Congress, Representative Julius Kahn, of
California, remarked:

"Mr. Speaker, prohibition is not temperance. Temperance makes for human
progress. It should be invoked in regard to our food, our drink, our
dress, and even our physical exercise. As many people die from
overeating as die from excessive use of alcohol. Excessive physical
exercise has frequently led to heart failure and death. Temperance not
alone in the use of alcohol, but temperance in everything that affects
the human race, is what should be taught in the homes and schools of
this country. Temperance harms no one, on the contrary, it does good.
=Prohibition on the other hand, has generally resulted in making men
liars, sneaks and hypocrites.= If men want liquor, they can invariably
get it, and they can get it even in prohibition States."

The testimony is quite overwhelming: that Prohibition in government
corrupts courts, encourages false oaths, intimidates legislators, causes
public officials to be double-faced and mercenary; makes sneaks, liars
and hypocrites out of men; increases bribery; opens the way for illegal
traffic, and fosters an immoral negligence of law and order! And in
addition to all this, it lessens drunkenness not a whit; but on the
contrary, increases intemperance, making it more possible and perhaps
more inviting to those unable to curb the appetite.

What an indictment is this of prohibition; and being true, it would seem
these well-established and undeniable facts concerning the results of
Prohibition would serve to convince the citizen who is governed by
reason and sound judgment rather than by sentiment and emotion, that
Prohibition in its practical development is =a real menace to the
American system of government=!




Collective Tyranny in Government


Left to impractical theorizing, Prohibition is harmless: allowed to
enter the realm of civil government as a practical working force, it
becomes dangerous, threatening not only one liberty, but all the
liberties of the people. For in the principle of Prohibition lies the
germ of collective tyranny from which may arise every species of
intolerance and despotism--an intolerative principle as far removed from
=the principle of American liberty= as heaven is from hell, and as
different in every essential from the spirit of republican government--a
true democracy--as the breath of the polar iceberg is different from the
blaze of the equatorial sun!

Could the American public see Prohibition =as it is=, and not what it
seems to be:--then this un-American and un-Christian movement would
speedily be relegated to the shades of oblivion, and =real and effective
reform along moral, social and intellectual lines would begin=. As it is,
Prohibition actually stands, like a Chinese Wall, in the pathway of =real
reform=.

Says Professor Munsterberg:

"The evils of drink exist, and to neglect their cure would be criminal;
but to rush on to the conclusion that every vineyard ought, therefore,
to be devastated is unworthy the logic of a self-governing nation."

The evils of gluttony also exist, and that more people die from direct
and indirect causes arising from overeating than from drink will not be
denied, yet who would propose a law to close the butcher shops, and
prohibit the milling of fine flour and the importation of tea and
coffee--higher medical and dietary authorities having decided all these
latter to be injurious--in order to improve the physical condition of
the people!

Compulsory Prohibition, according to Mr. Joseph Chamberlain, M.P., "only
leads to drinking in worse forms than under the old system." Count
Tolstoi, in speaking of the Prohibition movement in America expressed
the belief that "the people in America seem to be tending in a wholly
wrong direction in this matter." Justin McCarthy, M.P., alludes to
Prohibition in the United States as a "gross and ludicrous imposture."
President Andrew D. White refers to the theory and practice as regards
the drink problem as "pernicious." Sir William Treloar, former Lord
Mayor of London, calls these restrictive measures "ridiculous." Bishop
Hall, of Vermont, asserts that "Prohibition drives underground the
mischief which it seeks to cure."

Thousands of good, well-informed citizens of this country, high in
public and social life, many of these leaders in religious sentiment and
thought, are united in the belief that Prohibition begins at the wrong
end of the matter, and they renounce it as not only weak, inefficient
and impractical, but destructive to the American ideals. The art of
self-control, public and scientific education, an understanding of
hygienic and healthful living, proper social and economic development
and surroundings: in these lie the true solution of the problem of
intemperance; and not at all in sumptuary laws and prohibitory
legislation, simply because these latter "put the cart before the
horse," strike at effects and not at causes.




Prohibition Censorship Despotic


Let us not forget the principles for which our great American republic
stands. Recollect, that the tendency toward imperial government and
despotic rule is here today as it has been in every nation and in every
age of the world. Menaces to the rights and privileges of the people are
ever-present: the continued structure of safeguarding laws and
constitutions presuppose the enemy to be ever near:--tyranny may
slumber, but let bigotry and intolerance call ever so softly, and it
springs into active life and being, and on every occasion, with
consummate cunning, justifies its demands with a specious
pretext--censorship for the good of the people.

Prohibition censorship is one of these specious pretexts; but censorship
invariably arrogates to itself the prerogatives of monarchy and the
exactions of martial law. Government of an Emperor is as well as
government by unreasoning, tyrannous =majority=. In government, middle
ground is rarely found, and if it is, it is only for a temporary period
and for reasons of expediency: it; is a question of republic or empire,
freedom or slavery, liberty or despotism, the life or death of the
people! Censorship by =the majority=--as to what the individual shall eat,
or drink, or wear, or religiously or irreligiously do or observe--is as
hateful to the genuine American citizen as would be the censorship of =a
Czar=! Censorship is dictatorial and despotic: it overrides American law
and American ideals; it is the rule of =a suzerainty= in place of
=fundamental government=: it claims to be acting =under= government, but
it is actually acting =above= government. Censorship is not =freedom=; the
very word itself precludes the view: censorship is =slavery=, intensified
or modified; it is the same thing whether it be under American rulers or
the Great Khan of Tartary. Prohibition censorship is only the =beginning=:
it is not the end. Beneath it all, lie the claws of the tiger--the claws
of fanatical bigotry and misrule--and ultimately, if not checked, the
whole American people =will feel those claws=. =But then: IT WOULD BE TOO
LATE!=

Long ago John Quincy Adams sounded a timely warning. He said:

"Forget not, I pray you, the right of personal freedom: =self-government
is the foundation of all our political and social institutions=. Seek not
to enforce upon your brother =by legislative enactment= the virtue that he
can possess =only= by the =dictates of his own= conscience =and the energy
of his will=."

In conclusion: John Stuart Mill is right, when he says Prohibition is
"so monstrous a principle" as to be "far more dangerous than any single
interference with liberty"; a principle that there is "=no violation of
liberty which it would not justify=."

All religious despotism commences by combination and influence, and as
well-said by Col. Richard M. Johnson in his memorable U. S. Senate
Report of 1829, "when that influence begins to operate upon the
political institutions of a country the civil power soon bends under it;
and the catastrophe of other nations furnishes an awful warning of the
consequence."

Will the people of this great nation listen to the siren voice of this
modern destroyer of personal freedom, and cutting loose from ancient
moorings, turn back to the hateful paths of despotism? Will the republic
deny the sacred principles of religious and personal liberty, whose
first purchase-price was the blood of the minutemen of Lexington? Or,
like a political rock of Gibraltar, stand fast upon the fundamental
principles of its being, continuing to safeguard and maintain the
constitutional guaranties of all its citizens?

It is the American people that must answer these momentous questions!
And answer them they will! There is no escape from the responsibility!
=The future of the Republic rests upon their decision!=

It is the bounden duty of every American freeman, to speak against, to
write against, to vote against =the menace of Prohibition=!

=PROHIBITION IS A MENACE TO=

     =THE PROSPERITY OF THE COMMUNITY.=

     =THE PEACE AND TRANQUILLITY OF THE PEOPLE.=

     =THE CONSTITUTIONAL LIBERTIES OF THE CITIZENS.=

     =THE POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS OF THE LAND.=

     =THE STABILITY OF THE REPUBLIC.=

=A vote against Prohibition is a vote against THESE MENACES!=




+The Menace of Prohibition+

Should be widely circulated by every advocate and champion of Personal
Liberty and Constitutional Rights

Right at this time--in the crisis of American Liberty!

There is nothing just like it

The arguments are not of the +stereotyped+ class

The facts given are indisputable

It does not offend +the man on the other side of the question+

It appeals to the citizen who desires fair play--and wants to see the
American Republic continue a free nation, safeguarding the interests of
+ALL+ and granting "special privileges to none"

REMEMBER ALWAYS--

"Eternal Vigilance is the price of Liberty"

SINGLE COPIES, 10 CENTS EACH

BY MAIL, POSTPAID

Special rates on large quantities--100, 500 and 1000 lots--will be given
upon application

Address the Author--

Mrs. LULU WIGHTMAN

314 West First St., Los Angeles, Cal.




Footnote:

[1] Inter-church Conference was the beginning of the National Federation
of the Churches, which maintains a Prohibition department and is
committed to the programme of Prohibition.




Transcriber's Notes:

Passages in italics are indicated by _italics_.

Passages in bold are indicated by =bold=.

Underlined passages are indicated by +underline+.

Punctuation has been fixed without note.






End of Project Gutenberg's The Menace of Prohibition, by Lulu Wightman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MENACE OF PROHIBITION ***

***** This file should be named 33920.txt or 33920.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/9/2/33920/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
