The Project Gutenberg EBook of Company B, 307th Infantry, by Julius Klausner

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Company B, 307th Infantry
       Its history, honor roll, company roster, Sept., 1917, May, 1919

Author: Julius Klausner

Release Date: October 12, 2010 [EBook #33932]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COMPANY B, 307TH INFANTRY ***




Produced by Patrick Hopkins and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)





Transcriber's Note

- Illustration captions in {brackets} have been added by the transcriber
for reader convenience.

- The position of some illustrations has been changed to improve
readability.

- Minor typographical errors have been corrected without note. In all
other cases geographical references, spelling, hyphenation, and
capitalization have been retained as in the original publication.

                  *       *       *       *       *




  [Illustration: {Statue of Liberty with "77"}]




  [Illustration: _U. S. Official Photo_
    _La Foret de Nesle, France. 307th Infantry in France_]




                            COMPANY B
                          307th INFANTRY

                               ITS
                             HISTORY
                            HONOR ROLL
                          COMPANY ROSTER



            Sept., 1917 [Illustration: AEF] May, 1919



                          _Compiled by_
                      Julius Klausner, Jr.
                               1920



  =============================================================
  Upton * Flanders * Vosges * Lorraine * Vesle * Argonne * Home
  =============================================================




  [Illustration: _We Who Live Remember--_]

And remembering, we shall always seek to justify the self-sacrifice made
by those companions who trained with us and fought with us but whom by
virtue of their supreme service, we returned without.

They died, but being dead, live on, and their spirits beckon us to
strive toward that for which they died.

The flag was their shrine--the fields of France their tomb--and they
shall ever be wreathed with God's great glory.

  [Illustration: (C) _Underwood & Underwood_
    MAJOR-GENERAL ROBERT ALEXANDER
    Commander of the Seventy-Seventh Division]




Major-General Robert Alexander to Company B


GREETINGS!

I am very glad that Company B--307th Infantry is putting into this form
the many memories of the Great War which remain with those of us who
participated therein as bright spots in our path through life.

The work done by the 77th Division was most notable and in that work
Company B--307th Infantry took full part and contributed its full share.
The record of the Company is one of which any organization might well be
extremely proud. It took part in the operations in the Vosges; on the
line of the Vesle; and in the advance from the Vesle to the Aisne--the
77th Division being the _only_ American division to reach the latter
river. In the Argonne-Meuse Offensive which brought the war to a
successful conclusion, the Company, with its Regiment, Brigade, and
Division, played a noteworthy part. The battle losses incurred by
Company B and the battle honors conferred upon members thereof speak for
themselves.

Not the least of the Company's exploits was that which, culminating on
the evening of October 7th, 1918, brought relief to the long-beleaguered
Battalion under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel Charles W.
Whittlesey--the so-called "Lost" Battalion.

The officer to whom was granted the supreme honor of sharing with you as
your Divisional Commander the toils, the dangers, and the honors of that
supreme campaign salutes you! No Commander could ask more loyal support
from his comrades of all ranks than was freely given me. For your future
careers in civil life or wherever Fortune may lay your paths, you will
carry with you my sincere best wishes and my affectionate regard. The
qualities of courage, fidelity, and loyalty displayed by you during your
service as soldiers will be, I am sure, at the disposal of your Country
as well in Peace as they were in War.

                             [Illustration: Signature]
             _Formerly Major-General in Command of the 77th Division._

November 19th, 1919.




  [Illustration: CAPTAIN BLANTON BARRETT
    _Killed in Action, July 21st, 1918_ ]




  =============================================================
  Upton * Flanders * Vosges * Lorraine * Vesle * Argonne * Home
  =============================================================


THE HISTORY OF COMPANY B

307th INFANTRY


Camp Upton--September 10th to April 5th

Invited--all of us. And we trooped down Yaphank-way, out
on Long Island, as tho bound for a picnic. Which, for a week, it was.
Then we were brought up short. On September 17, 1917, the 77th Division
came to life. One of the first units to be organized within the division
was Company B--307th Infantry, formed also on September 17th.

Immediately we were on paper as a regular unit, we quickly took
semblance of a military organization. Under the leadership of Captain
Blanton Barrett, 1st Lieutenant Alexander D. B. Pratt, and 2d
Lieutenants Philip Cheney and Everett A. Butterfield, we were gradually
whipped into an efficient machine. Corporals were made and
unmade--sergeants came and went--and we were drilled, drilled, drilled.

We had exchanged our hair mattresses for straw, our china for tin, our
homes for barracks, and they made us like it. At first we occupied but
one building,--a rambling two-story affair having bunk rooms on all the
upper floor. The lower floor was given over to kitchen, mess hall, and
recreation room. The recreation room, however, was short lived, for as
we grew in numbers it became necessary to fill it with bunks. And then,
when we had grown to full strength--two hundred and fifty officers and
men--we overflowed into another barracks of which we occupied half of
both upper and lower floors.

The advantages of a billiard table, a piano, and a talking machine were
ours. We supported a miniature barber shop and a tailor. Talent we had
a-plenty, and we ran our own shows.

But we drilled, drilled, drilled. And we had schools--lots of 'em. When
we were not doing the "school of the soldier", we attended bayonet
school. The "school of the squad" divided time with gas instruction. The
study of the automatic rifle was complicated, but so was the "school of
the platoon". We practiced the manual of arms and learned how to throw
hand grenades. Little by little we were perfected in the art of
thinking, and knowing, and doing, the right thing at the right time.

  [Illustration: _Camp Upton, New York. Bird's-eye View from Tower
    Hill_]

Early in 1918 we felt ready. On Washington's Birthday our division
paraded down Fifth Avenue a complete fighting machine. We were prepared
for the next move and the cheers of the crowds had barely died when it
came.


Upton to France--April 6th to April 20th

On the night of April 5th we were ordered to roll packs. We stacked our
bunks and drew ammunition. And we were posted on a vigil of waiting.
April 6th, 1918, Saturday, was the first anniversary of America's
declaration of war. At two-thirty on that morning, in an air pleasantly
crisp and flooded with moonlight, we marched to the railroad and
entrained. Leaving Camp Upton at three-fifteen, we pulled into Long
Island City just in time to be greeted by the usual six o'clock factory
whistles.

A waiting ferry engulfed our battalion and we were transported down the
East River, around the Battery, and up the Hudson to Pier 59, at the
foot of West Eighteenth Street, Manhattan. A methodical transfer was
accomplished from the squat and stunted ferry to the gigantic but little
known _Justicia_.

While still under process of construction in the shipyards at Belfast,
in Ireland, for the Holland American Line, the _Statendam_ was
commandeered by Great Britain at the beginning of the European war and
was operated as a transport under the name _Justicia_ by the White Star
Line. She was at the time the fifth largest vessel afloat and that she
was the especial prey of the German undersea navy is indicated by the
fact that a submarine attacked her on a subsequent trip from England to
the United States, on July 20th, and after a dramatic engagement lasting
some twenty-four hours, she was sunk. Fourteen of a crew of seven
hundred were lost.

All day men and equipment poured onto the decks and into the hold of the
giant transport. Our entire regiment and one battalion of the 308th
Infantry were quartered between decks. Next morning, before reveille,
the _Justicia_ slipped quietly down New York Bay, thru Ambrose Channel,
and into the Atlantic.

B Company had no quarters _de luxe_. We were crowded into small
space--Section K--far down on D deck, with sleeping hammocks slung over
our mess tables. And our mess, served by the British, was a sorry series
of meals. We were compelled to wear during the day, and to sleep with
during the night, ungainly life preservers. But discomforts were
subordinated to the interest in our new surroundings. The mysteries of
the big ship, its spotless engine-room, the intricacies of navigation,
the precautions against possible attack,--all held us.

  [Illustration: _Among Those Present--A Group of NCO'S at Camp_]

On leaving New York we pursued a northerly course, and at nine o'clock
that night anchor was dropped in lower Bedford Bay, at Halifax. Early
next morning we steamed up into the inner harbor and before us lay the
sadly devastated city of Halifax. Immense areas of the city had been
totally destroyed by the explosion resulting from the collision between
a Belgian relief ship and one bearing a cargo of explosives.

That day and the next, while waiting for our convoy to assemble, was
spent in practicing with lowered boats.

Late on the afternoon of April 9th our convoy of ten passenger and cargo
ships passed out of the harbor, sped by the cheers of the crews of two
American battleships. We were escorted by _U. S. S. St. Louis_ and _H.
M. S. Victoria_.

Boat drill, a well-ordered scramble for life boats, took place twice
daily. Each morning we indulged in strenuous setting-up exercises in
order that we might remain in trim. Practice with depth bombs and smoke
screens helped to relieve the tedium of the long trip.

As we neared our unknown destination, our escort was increased by ten
British torpedo boat destroyers. Veritable sea dogs they were, darting
every which-way, breasting wave after wave, ever watchful for the tricky
Hun.

And then, on Friday. April 19th, land! Just a ridge above the
horizon--the blue hills of Wales--but already we could feel in our
imaginations the solidity which our unsailorly legs had missed.

As the day waned we sighted the lighthouse at the mouth of the River
Mersey. With cheers of relief we were permitted to doff our bulky life
belts. Just before dusk we entered the Mersey, passing closely by the
beautiful seaside resort of New Brighton.

Forging up the river we reached Liverpool and, at nine o'clock that
evening, after almost fourteen days afloat, our transport was moored.
The city, as we saw it from the decks of the _Justicia_, lay quietly,
with lights beginning to twinkle in the increasing gloom.

One by one the companies formed and debarked, and at 11:15 P.M. B
Company marched down the gang plank, thru half-lighted sheds, into those
curious side-door railway cars so peculiar to Europe. Exactly at
midnight our train pulled out of Liverpool. At 3:00 A.M. a short stop
for hot coffee was made at Rugby. We passed thru the outskirts of London
at 6:00 A.M. and at nine-twenty the train rolled into the terminal at
Dover.

The private yacht of Belgium's Queen Elizabeth had been pressed into
service as a cross-channel ferry and in this royal craft, under escort
of destroyers, aeroplanes, and dirigibles, we crossed to Calais in an
hour and thirty-five minutes. The crossing was enlivened when two
riflemen of the crew took to firing at mines that endangered our
passage.


Picardy and Flanders--April 20th to June 10th

  [Illustration: (C) _Underwood & Underwood_
    _"Let's Go!" Washington's Birthday, 1918_]

Once in Calais we found that we divided honors with Company C of our
regiment in being the first two National Army companies to land in
France, having debarked on French soil April 20, 1918.

That night we experienced our first real touch of war. Sheltered in
tents in British Rest Camp No. 6, we received a call of welcome from a
squadron of Jerry aeroplanes. A truly thrilling reception it was, with
the thunder of Hun bombs alternating with the "ping!" of British
anti-aircraft guns,--and thru it all the "pat-pat" of a multitude of
machine guns. But best of all, there were no casualties.

Next day we spent in adding to our equipment gas masks and trench
helmets and we exchanged our American Enfield rifles for British
Enfields,--lighter, shorter pieces having a magazine capacity of ten
rounds of ammunition.

April 23d introduced us to the famous little "_40 hommes--8 chevaux_"
box-cars of the French. A three-hour journey in these brought us to the
British base at Audruicq. Our first real hike started from here and
ended at Zouafques, a little village in Picardy. We occupied some of the
best sheep-pens, cattle stalls, and hen roosts in town and during our
five-week stay we became really comfortable inhabitants.

Zouafques proved to be a sort of military high school, where we polished
our elementary knowledge of tactics. Our "noncoms" were sent to
specialized schools in scouting, sniping, musketry, automatic rifles,
grenades, and infantry tactics. The instruction, as well as the food and
equipment, was distinctly British.

Five weeks of this work and we took our next step trench-ward. Hiking
from Zouafques at 1.30 A.M., May 13th, we entrained _a la chevaux_ at
Audruicq. A day's journey _via_ Calais, Boulogne, Etaps, and Doullens
brought us to Mondrecourt, in Flanders. Then an almost heartbreaking
hike thru Pas to the war-worn village of Couin.

Our assimilation by the British forces became most complete when we
found ourselves brigaded with a battalion of the Lancashire Fusileers of
the 125th British Brigade. Our position was in reserve of the British
lines north of Amiens and southwest of Arras.

Here another five weeks of training gave us the right to work alone.
Once again we traded rifles, retrieving our American guns, and on June
6th we started on a three-day march. Thru Gezaincourt, Bernaville, Ailly
le-Haut Clocher, to Pont Remy, where we entrained.


Vosges and the Lorraine--June 11th to August 7th

Two days by rail, _via_ Amiens, Versailles, Bar-le-Duc, and Nancy, and
we detrained on June 11th at Thaon, in the Vosges. Then an intermittent
hike, with stops at Longchamps, Destord, and Menil, passing thru
Rambervillers and Baccarat, to Vacqueville, in the Lorraine.

A stirring incident occurred _en route_ when we passed the boys of the
old Sixty-Ninth New York Regiment. Brooklyn hailed Brooklyn; Harlem
called to Harlem; Bronx met Bronx. It was a breath of home to the
already veteran Sixty-Ninth and more than a cheering welcome to us.

We shared Vacqueville with a battalion of the Alabama regiment of the
42d "Rainbow" Division. Advance parties were sent into the lines to
acquaint themselves with the position which we were to take over. And in
the dead of night, on June 20th-21st, Company B took over that part of
the line between Ancerviller and Badonviller designated as P. C. (post
commandant) Hameau and P. C. Montreux.

The first and second platoons of our Company held a position in the
Grand Bois (Big Woods), a section of forest southeast of Ancerviller.
The second and third platoons and Company headquarters occupied the
ruined village of St. Maurice. St. Maurice was a part of the line at
this point and had been subjected at different times to severe shelling.
Only bare skeletons of the buildings remained and any nook or cranny
between sections of walls and under a bit of roof was used as shelter.
Deserted cellars had been bolstered, reinforced, and barricaded so that
they would serve as shell-proof protection in the event of attack.


The First Gas Attack

It was usually Fritz's intention to place a harassing barrage on any
section of the line where he knew that a relief was being effected. But
he was less watchful than usual when we went in.

  [Illustration: _U. S. Official Photo_
    _"Hotel de Barn"--Showing Barber Shop and Reading and Writing
    Rooms_]

The enemy awoke, however, three days later, on the morning of Monday,
June 24th, and attacked our regimental outposts. In order to effectively
prevent any assistance being rendered by the platoons stationed in St.
Maurice, a heavy barrage was laid on the town beginning at 3:30 A.M.
During the early part of the shelling the continual use of H. E.'s
(high explosive shells), with an occasional gas shell, served to keep
the men not only penned in their bomb-proof cellars, but also forced the
continued use of gas masks. Gradually the H. E.'s were interspersed with
gas shells until a point was reached where far more gas shells than high
explosives fell into the town, resulting in a heavy blanket of phosgene,
mustard, and lachrymatory gases settling over the position.

The barrage did not lift until 6:00 A.M. and when it did the platoons
were forced to take a defensive position to guard against any possible
success of the enemy.

During the night before the attack, the men had been digging until a
late hour on a system of trench defense. This entailed a lack of sleep
which, together with the continued wearing of the gas mask and the
exposure endured immediately after the barrage, weakened their
resistance to such an extent as to make them easy victims to the
poisonous gases.

Seventy-nine men were forced to the hospital by the effects of the
combined phosgene and mustard. Among them were our first sergeant,
supply and mess sergeants, all but one of our cooks, and both mechanics,
which left us decidedly crippled.

The shadow of our losses was deepened when we heard that Cook George
Alberts, always popular, had died from gas inhaled while trying to
prepare the company breakfast in a gas-filled kitchen. He was our first
loss by death.

  [Illustration: _U. S. Official Photo_
    _Shell-Proof Dugout--A Shelter in St. Maurice_]

An immediate result of our losses was the extra work shouldered by those
who had escaped any of the serious effects. The men left in St. Maurice
remained on constant guard until the Company was relieved several days
later.

During the short rest period that followed, a reorganization of the
Company was accomplished and we again entered the lines in July, taking
over P. C.'s Hameau and Montreux, as before.


The Daylight Raid

On Sunday, July 21st, a patrol of fifty-two men from our Company,
accompanied by two medical first-aid men, engaged in a raid on the
German trenches at two-thirty in the afternoon. The party advanced on
the enemy lines in single file, divided in four groups which were
respectively commanded by Sergeant Todd, Captain Barrett, Sergeant
Bromback and Lieutenant Mohlke.

The intent was to surprise the enemy with a daylight raid and thereby
obtain information thru capture and observation. But either thru
knowledge or by chance, the Germans had prepared against this maneuver
and the surprise was reversed.

Waiting until our patrol was fairly within their lines, and then
partially surrounding them, the enemy centered upon our men a deadly
fire of rifles, machine guns, and grenades. The raiders fought valiantly
in return but were outnumbered four to one. After an hour's fighting,
seventeen of our party, including Captain Barrett, lay dead, and sixteen
were captured. Of the twenty-one who returned, thirteen were wounded. We
were informed by two German prisoners captured a few days later that
seventeen Germans had been killed.

The loss sustained in this daylight raid occasioned considerable
comment, chiefly because it was generally believed that Captain Barrett
had misread his orders,--that the time for action had really read 2:30
A.M. instead of 2:30 P.M. This, however, is quite untrue, inasmuch as
all the Company officers, as well as the supply sergeant and company
clerk, were conversant with the orders. Captain Barrett's immediate
battalion and regimental superiors were present at or near the time of
action and possessed full knowledge of the entire plan.

The defeat was caused solely by the lack of the intended element of
surprise. Whether or not the enemy had possession of our plans, and if
they had possession, how they obtained it, is something we shall never
know.

  [Illustration: _The Baccarat Sector, Showing St. Maurice and the
    Grand Bois_]

A telegram was received by the Divisional Commander from General
Headquarters to the effect that the entire action had been investigated
and found creditable.

The casualties suffered from the raid, together with those resulting
from the gas attack of June 24th, so depleted the Company as to make an
immediate relief imperative and that same night Company L took over our
sector.

A subsequent reorganization of the entire regiment distributed the men
of the various companies so that all would have an equal strength. Our
numbers were so few that we lost none of our men in this process but
instead received increases not only from many of the other companies,
but also from the 76th New England Division.

As tribute to those men whom we had lost, a Company B mass was held at
the Catholic Church in Vacqueville at which Chaplain Father Walsh of
our battalion officiated. The entire strength of the Company was
present.

Another rest and another turn up front, after which the entire division
was relieved by the 37th Ohio and Kentucky Division. Once again we
crossed the Vosges, halting for three days at Seranville. Leaving there,
we bivouaced for a night in the Foret de Charmes and entrained at
Charmes next morning, August 7th, at dawn.


From the Vesle to the Aisne--August 10th to September 15th

  [Illustration: _The Advance from the Vesle to the Aisne_]

Two days later, August 10th, we took transport on an immense train of
motor trucks--"lorries" we called them, after the English. They were
driven by Indo-Chinese serving under the French. After nine cramped but
interesting hours--we passed thru Chateau-Thierry--our trip ended at
Fere en Tardenois. For three days we camped in a small wood and then we
moved to a position supporting the attack on Fismes. We were stationed
in the Bois de la Pissotti, adjoining the Foret de Nesle. While there we
were engaged in digging a series of reserve trenches near
Mont-sur-Courville.

On August 28th the battalion moved around Chery-Chartreuve to a position
east of Le Pres Farm. September 1st we again shifted, this time crossing
the Vesle and relieving the Third Battalion, just east of Bazoches. Here
we repulsed a raiding party, inflicting heavy losses upon the enemy. We
were then moved to a ravine, which gave us the opportunity of taking a
two-day rest.

Our next move brought us to face with the enemy just south of Merval,
where we took a position in an exposed field, our only protection being
the individual "funk holes" which had been deserted by the retreating
German troops.

After three days of little water and practically no food, at 5:30 on the
afternoon of September 8th--still brilliant daylight--we crawled from
our funk holes and, each squad in single file in formation known as
"squad columns", we advanced against German artillery in an effort to
straighten the line. As we reached the outskirts of Merval we were
subjected to an intense barrage of H. E.'s, suffering the loss of four
men killed and five injured.

  [Illustration: _Our Path Thru the Argonne_]

No gain was made by this sortie and we drew back to our funk-hole
position awaiting further developments.

Early on the morning of September 14th, supported by a barrage laid down
by combined American, French, and Italian artillery, we attacked the
enemy position that lay on the far side of the Ravine Merval.

The advance was made down the side of the valley in the face of a
withering fire of enemy machine guns. Tho suffering heavy casualties,
our progress was unchecked and we swarmed up the opposite slope with
undiminished vigor. So rapid were our gains that we had to pause to
allow our flanks to catch up. Our Third Platoon was so far ahead of the
line of advance as to be mistaken by the commander of the cooperating
French forces for a body of the enemy and it required considerable
persuasion to correct his misconception. The day's end saw the German
horde driven across the Aisne, and we were well beyond our original
objective. But we had advanced true to form. Commenting on a previous
attack made by another American unit, a French officer had remarked:
"The Americans,--they are fools. Tell them to take one trench,--and they
take _three_!"

We had been operating on the line of the Vesle with several divisions
but the 77th was the only American division to drive its way to the
Aisne.

Our gains were paid for with numerous casualties and when we received
our relief it was thoroly welcome. It had been our longest consecutive
stretch in the front line and we suffered not only from battle losses
but we had also endured the utmost privation. Short rations, little
water, exposed positions, and the constant necessity for watchfulness
had undermined our strength to an unusual degree. We had been operating
on the will to accomplish rather than on food and water.

An Italian unit relieved our Company and we withdrew to a reserve
position in the Vesle Valley, east of Fismes. Here, on the night of
September 16th, our division was relieved by an Italian division and we
pulled out of the sector.

We looked forward to a period of rest, but it was not to be. Twenty
kilometres of hiking brought us to the Arcis le Ponsart Forest, where we
bivouaced for a day. Then into lorries for an all-night ride to Le
Chatelier-sur-Marne, where our losses were replaced by a detachment from
the 40th "Sunshine" Division. Two days of speculating as to our chances
for a rest terminated when on the night of September 20th we were
ordered to roll packs. We stepped off on a thirty-two kilometre hike at
1:00 A.M., _via_ St. Menehould and Florent, and seventeen hours later we
dragged ourselves into the Foret de Maisons Petites where we were
quartered in barracks at the edge of the Argonne Forest.


The Argonne--September 26th to November 11th

The memorable and decisive drive known as the Argonne-Meuse Offensive
started on September 26th. That day found us entrenched near the main
road at Florent,--a position in reserve of the 1st Army Corps.

Actual operations were started that night, when the entire cannon of
half a hundred divisions poured forth on the enemy its scorching fire.
Next morning we moved to a position north of Florent, and three days
later we moved thru the town of Le Four de Paris into those trenches
north of La Harazee that had been deserted by the 122d German Regiment
of the 2d Landwehr Division.


The "Lost" Battalion

October 2d we left the reserve and assumed a support position. On that
day the forces in the line drove forward, but in the execution of the
advance Companies E, H, I, K, L, and M of the 308th Infantry and Company
K of the 307th Infantry found themselves trapped by the enemy on a hill
north of the Bois de la Buironne. These units were the only ones to
reach their objective but by thus advancing ahead of their flanks, they
gave the enemy an opportunity to surround them. In this hazardous
position they struggled as the "Lost" Battalion.

  [Illustration: _U. S. Official Photo_
    _Grim Business in the Argonne_
    _A Unit of the 307th Infantry Waiting Orders to "Mop Up"_]

We went forward to their relief on October 4th, but were held back by
the effective machine-gun fire of the enemy. Next day we again strove to
extricate the besieged battalion, but again we failed. Certain enemy
machine guns were so placed that their hail of death was impassable.
They seemed an insurmountable obstacle in the path of the entire 307th
Infantry. The men of Company B knew that the machine-gun positions of
the enemy must be taken. There was nothing, at that moment, that counted
more than the capture of these positions. So on October 6th we attacked,
giving no thought to risk. We did what we thought would have been
impossible before we knew that it had to be done. Persistently we
attacked in the face of the enemy fire and as the German resistance
gradually weakened, we took the heretofore impregnable positions. Seven
of our men were that day cited for exceptional bravery.

On October 7th our division organized a concerted attack on the German
lines. We realized the awful plight of the "Lost" Battalion and all day
we fought against the enemy machine-gun nests. One by one they were
silenced, and at 5:00 P.M. Company B, alone of all the division,
succeeded in reaching and saving the "Lost" Battalion. The Germans were
driven beyond the hill and once more the line was straightened out.


Grand-Pre

Another week and we had driven the Germans across the River Aire. We
remained in a clump of woods until October 16th and then, not even
waiting for our engineers to throw their bridges across the Aire, we
waded the river and drove against Grand-Pre, which was the keystone of
the enemy defense in the sector opposed by our division.

  [Illustration: _U. S. Official Photo_
    _The Ruined Prize--Grand-Pre, Captured October 16th, 1918_]

We were stubbornly opposed by the 253d German Infantry of the 76th
Reserve Division. Again and again we assaulted the position and finally,
after a running fight thru the streets, the town was ours and the
American wedge was in a fair way to split the entire German defense.

We pulled out of the line on October 17th and withdrew 10 kilometres to
a small forest near Apremont, being relieved by the 78th New Jersey
Division. As usual, there was no rest, and on October 21st we moved to
Fleville for a three-day stretch of trench digging. October 31st was
spent in digging trenches in the Chattel Valley.

We resumed our activities at the front on November 2d, keeping in mind
that half injunction, half promise, credited to General Pershing: "Hell,
Heaven, or Hoboken by Christmas!" We gave little thought to Heaven and
less to Hell but, we were beginning to long for Hoboken, and we went
forward with irresistible determination. Hiking _via_ St. Juvin to
Thenorgues, we loaded into motor trucks. Unloading close to the lines,
we swung into immediate action and on November 3d we wrested the village
of Fontenoy from the 45th German Reserve Division, the following day
capturing the village of Oches from the 76th German Reserve Division.


Stonne

Stonne, a village of strategical importance, was next selected by the
enemy as a point of resistance. On November 5th the combined strength of
our entire Regiment was hurled against the 195th German Division, and
Stonne fell to us. The capture succeeded in liberating a French
population that for four years had been under the dominance of an enemy
army.

  [Illustration: _The Company Sergeants. Camp Mills, May 1st, 1919_]

The enemy by this time was retreating fast, and so closely did we press
them, we were far in advance of our cannon. The progress of the big guns
was much delayed by poor roads, but the spirit of victors was in us all
and little did we miss our artillery.

In quick succession we took town after town, the enemy losing to us in
one day,--November 6th,--the villages of Raucourt, Haraucourt,
Angecourt, and Remilly. The terror-stricken Hun gave little resistance
and we kept within five minutes of their rear guard.


The Armistice

We came to a halt on the banks of the Meuse, four miles from the
historic city of Sedan and, after augmenting our depleted ranks by
replacement from the 38th "Cyclone" Division, we organized for what we
hoped would be our final attack.

But the final attack had already been made. The unconquerable Argonne
had been conquered; a ruthless enemy was vanquished.

Germany sued for Peace with defeat rather than face peace with Death.
The last shot was fired at the Eleventh Hour of the Eleventh Day of the
Eleventh Month, Nineteen Eighteen, and we rested on our arms worn and
tired, but victorious and happy.

The joy of accomplishment was ours and we celebrated the declaration of
the armistice in a spirit far more triumphant than relieved.

On November 12th the same French who had laughed at us in pity as we
shouldered their task in the Argonne, hailed us with gratitude as they
took over our positions.

The march from the Meuse to our rest base in the Chateauvillain area
took twenty-four days and covered 300 kilometres. It was an intermittent
hike and we stopped successively at La Berliere, Oches, Harricourt,
Fleville, Le Four de Paris, Florent, Sivry-sur-Ante, Noyers, Andernay,
Hoericourt, Eclaron, Fresnay, Maisons, and Bayel, arriving at our base
in Lanty on December 5th.

It was soon apparent that altho we had been spared the alternatives we
still were not going to see Hoboken before Christmas. So we made
ourselves comfortable and settled down to a long stay.

It was necessary to the maintenance of discipline and the morale of the
army that drills should be continued, and as well as any recruit, we
were once again schooled in the finesse of the salute, the art of the
right face, and the strategy of shoulder arms. We engaged in manouvers
to practice the lessons that we learned in the Argonne. And we passed in
reviews before princes, generals, and congressmen. Time passed: not too
quickly, but still it passed.


Christmas, 1918

Christmas was not the dreary day a Christmas away from home usually is.
We had much for which to be thankful, and the intervening miles between
Lanty and Home were no bar to those good wishes that came from our
folks.

We celebrated, we ate, and we played Santa Claus. A tree was erected in
the centre of the village and we passed out to the civilian population
candy and biscuits and tobacco. The women and children and men sincerely
appreciated our tokens, and happiness reigned.

The mess sergeant had an inspiration of genius and he served us with a
truly Christmas dinner.

New Year's Day was red-lettered with another meal worthy of our mess
sergeant's reputation. The holiday season was over and we entered upon
the new year full of new hopes and ambitions.


Home

Not until February 9th was another move made. Then, _en freight car_, we
journeyed to the Le Mans area, detraining at Poille from whence we hiked
to La Roches Farm, near Auvers-le-Hamon. April 15th we entrained at
Sable for Brest, where we were quartered at Camp Pontazaine.

  [Illustration: (C)_Underwood & Underwood_
    _"La Guerre est Fini!" The Parade on Our Return. May 6th, 1919_]

On April 19th, exactly one year after our arrival at Liverpool, we were
lightered out to the United States Transport _America_.

A fast ship and smooth waters combined to give us a rapid and enjoyable
voyage and we docked at Hoboken at 9:00 A.M., April 28th. We proceeded
to Camp Mills, Mineola, Long Island, where immediate passes gave us the
opportunity to greet our home folks, eat home meals, and sleep in
regular beds.

The Company moved on May 5th to the armory of the 22d New York Engineers
in New York City to await final orders for the parade of welcome
arranged by New York City.

We formed for the parade near Washington Square at 8:00 A.M. next
morning and at 10:00 A.M. we marched out to Fifth Avenue and swept up
that thorofare to the acclaim of a million throats. No greeting could
have been more sincere, no welcome more impressive, and this, our last
hike as Company B, was a march of glory.

We returned to Camp Upton, our first station and our last, and we were
demobilized on May 9th, 1919, to return to our respective states. Ours
was a truly American company, composed of true and representative
Americans. Our homes lay in thirty-two different states, scattered
between New York and Maine in the east, Minnesota and the Dakotas in the
north, Utah, Oregon, and California in the west, and Texas, Louisiana,
and Florida in the south.

So ends the History of Company B. We were mustered out of the service
military, but the spirit that withstood the Lorraine, the valor that
gained the Aisne, and the fire that conquered the Argonne, lives on, and
we have banded ourselves together so that we may, in the words of our
commander, Major General Robert Alexander, "serve our Country as well in
Peace as we did in War".


Sept., 1917 [Illustration: AEF] May, 1919




  [Illustration: THEY SLEEP

  GEORGE ALBERTS
  CLAIR ANDREWS
  BARNEY BARDMAN D.S.C.
  BLANTON BARRETT
  CHRISTIAN A. BATY
  RAFFELE BIBO
  JOHN BLACKBURN
  JACOB BORKER
  HUGH A. BRADY
  LOUIS BRETH
  WILLIAM F. BROPHY
  CLAUDE C. BROWER
  FRANK W. BURKE
  MICHAEL CARLO
  WALTER CASSIDY
  FRANK CHARLES
  JAMES CONNER
  JAMES L. CRONIN
  RICHARD CULLEN
  JOHN P. DOLAN
  JOSEPH V. DOMKUS
  HYMAN FISHFANGER
  ROBERT FLANAGAN
  JAMES FOLLIAT, JR.
  IRVING H. FRIEDMAN
  HUGO GARBADEN
  GEORGE E. GERRETT
  JOHN GROVE
  CLARENCE I. GRUBBS
  JOSEPH P. HANLEY
  SALIE HAUSNER
  GEORGE L. HICKY
  CHARLES L. KAURIN
  JOSEPH KAYES
  JOHN E. KELLY
  PETER KNAB
  MICHAEL MCCORMICK
  MARTIN MCHUGH
  ANDREW MCKINLEY
  W. ALAN MATHEWS
  EARL MILLSAP D.S.C.
  ROYAL E. MORRIS
  CHARLES MUNZINGER
  ALFRED W. NICKERSON
  PRIVATE NOONAN
  WILLIAM OTTO
  ALBERT C. PETERSON, D.S.C.
  ERNEST W. PETERSON
  PRIVATE PLAUMAN
  ALBERT PRITCHARD
  WILLIAM R. REID, D.S.C.
  JOHN P. RHYNARD
  ALBERT J. ROBARE
  JAMES ROBINSON
  W. ROZICHUCK
  GEORGE F. RUSSELL
  ELMER O. SELLERS
  PRIVATE SCHILDKNECHT
  BENJAMIN SILVERMAN
  FRANK SKEETS
  FRANK STANISKI
  JOSEPH STRAUSS
  MAURICE WACHTEL
  JAMES WALSH
  G. H. WOODS
  PAUL ZUKASKY]




  [Illustration: ROOKIES--_Camp Upton_.]

THE ROSTER OF COMPANY B

  Major Weston C. Jenkins, D. S. C.   208 West Thomas St., Rome, N. Y.
  Major Fred A. Tillman, Legion of
      Honor                           19 Commercial St., Boston, Mass.
  Captain Blanton Barrett, DECEASED   Chamblee, Georgia.
  *Captain Everett A. Butterfield,
      Black Star                      Lambs' Club, New York.
  Captain Philip Cheney               South Manchester, Connecticut.
  Captain Alexander D. B. Pratt       120 Broadway, New York.
  Captain Alonzo D. Slagle            Address unknown.
  Captain Howard S. Smith             New Haven, Connecticut.
  1st Lieutenant Joseph D. M. Adrian,
      Jr.                             50 Broad St., New York.
  1st Lieutenant Marcus L. Chasins    27 William St., New York.
  1st Lieutenant Alexander J.
      Gillespie                       251 West 81st St., New York.
  1st Lieutenant Kenneth C. Lincoln   29 Bedford St., Fall River, Mass.
  1st Lieutenant George S. Mott       Scranton, Pennsylvania.
  1st Lieutenant William R. Reid,
      D. S. C., DECEASED              Brooklyn, New York.
  1st Lieutenant Harry R. Weiman      St. Louis, Missouri.
  2d Lieutenant Atwood                New York City.
  2d Lieutenant William Eliot         Long Island City, New York.
  2d Lieutenant Clarence I. Grubbs,
      DECEASED                        Kansas City, Missouri.
  2d Lieutenant Foster A. Gunn        Main St., Ottawa, Kan.
  2d Lieutenant Arthur J. Hamblen     150 West 106th St., New York.
  2d Lieutenant F. Hartig             Address unknown.
  2d Lieutenant Hardon                Yale Club, New York.
  2d Lieutenant Harrison McCann       2156 Cortelyou Road, Brooklyn, N. Y.
  2d Lieutenant George C. Mohlke      816 Grand Ave., Racine, Wis.
  2d Lieutenant O'Connell, DECEASED   New York City.
  2d Lieutenant Thomas O'Sullivan     New York City.
  2d Lieutenant William Randall       New York City.
  2d Lieutenant James Schofield       88 Main St., North Andover, Mass.
  2d Lieutenant Austin W. Woolford    Virginia.
  *1st Lieutenant William F. Babor    417 East 75th St., New York.
  *1st Lieutenant Arthur D. Bromback  41 Division St., New Rochelle, N. Y.
  *1st Lieutenant Raymond S. Hill     East St. Louis, Illinois.
  *1st Lieutenant Euclid L. Levasseur Farmers Loan & Trust Co., Paris, Fr.
  *2d Lieutenant Herbert H. Harris    1445 Broadway, New York.
  *2d Lieutenant Arthur S. Hoit       71 Broadway, New York.
  *2d Lieutenant Paul F. Hunnewell    287 Main St., Winthrop, Mass.
  *2d Lieutenant Louis Katz           New York City.
  *2d Lieutenant W. Alan Mathews,
      DECEASED                        Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
  *2d Lieutenant David H. Rose        915 Intervale Ave., New York.
  *2d Lieutenant Edgar L. Schwartz    10 West 93rd St., New York.

The officers before whose names has been placed an asterisk (*) were
commissioned from the enlisted ranks of Company B and assigned to duty
with other organizations.

  Elwin Abbott, 188 Crescent St., Rutland, Vt.
  Samuel Abrahamson, Nicolet, Minn.
  Clarence R. Ackerly, 624 Broad St., Bridgeport, Conn.
  Allan Adams, 68 West 102d St., New York.
  James Adams, 107 West 89th St., New York.
  Adolph Albrecht, 190 East 3d St., New York.
  Carl Aldridge, Glen Allen, Ala.
  Fred Alexander, Carterville, Ill.
  M. Alpert, Watertown, N. Y.
  Machis Ambrogio, 412 N. 21st St., Herrin, Ill.
  Samuel Anders, McConnells, Ala.

  [Illustration: _N. Y., February, 1918_]

  Lloyd C. Anderson, Binghamton, N. Y.
  Robert Angeles, Route 2, Bethpage, Tenn.
  Paul Annello, Box 19, Bristol, Conn.
  Hugo Antonelli, 732 Nostrand Ave., Bklyn, N. Y.
  Paul Antonelli, 732 Nostrand Ave., Bklyn, N. Y.
  Nathan Aronson, 26 Norman St., Salem, Mass.
  Isaac Ascher, 111 Haverschoff St., Boston.
  Elmer O. Barber, Hillsboro, Ore.
  Luke M. Barendsen, Valier, Vt.
  Robert Barr, 108 West 49th St., New York.
  John Barry, Newburgh, N. Y.
  Harry Bartlett, Mendon, Utah.
  Fred C. Batchellor, 260 Laurel St., Hartford, Conn.
  Thomas Baxter, 604 N. Maine St., Butte, Mont.
  Herman Beck, 84 Rivington St., New York.
  Louis Beckendorf, Brooklyn, N. Y.
  William Bell, 158 East 107th St., New York.
  Earl D. Bement, Route 3, Sioux Falls, S. D.
  David Bennett, 438 52d St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
  Thomas Bennett, Seymour, Conn.
  Fred Berge, Bismarck, N. D.
  Edward Bolma, Hill, Mont.
  Paul D. Bond, 208 Cedar Ave., Richmond Hill, N. Y.
  J. A. Boyle, Long Island City, N. Y.
  Leslie Bradney, Pangborn, Ark.
  Charles H. Bradshaw, 179 Bainbridge St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
  Michael Bresnan, 95 Myrtle Ave., Ansonia, Conn.
  Ralph U. Brett, 701 West 178th St., New York.
  William Brunner, 193 Ann St., Newburgh, N. Y.
  Harry Buckley, Columbia, Miss.
  Volney Burnett, Box 464, Buhl, Idaho.
  George Busko, Breckenridge, Minn.
  Paul Calandra, 3 Eighth St., Rochester, N. Y.
  Frank Camp, Route 10, Shelbyville, Ind.
  James Carlin, 1115 Portland Ave., Woodhaven, N. Y.
  Albert Carlson, Route 5, Hillsboro, Ore.
  Charles J. Carolan, 497 Chauncey St., Bkln, N. Y.
  Thomas Carroll, 1894 Third Ave., New York.
  Amedeo Caruso, 254 Allen St., Buffalo, N. Y.
  Gregory Cavanaugh, 298 Lockwood Ave., Buffalo, N. Y.
  Tony Charmonte, 2134 Moody Ave., Chicago.
  Nordahl Chilsen, Blue Earth, Minn.
  Nels C. Christiansen, Route 31, Tyler, Minn.
  Isidore Cohen, 71 West 115th St., New York.
  Leroy Connett, 2412 Roosevelt Ave., Indianapolis, Ind.
  Patrick Conway, New York.
  Frederick Coombs, Freeport, N. Y.
  Joseph Coscia, 830 Cortland Ave., New York.
  Leo Covert, Newburgh, N. Y.
  Edward M. Crimmins, 38 Maiden St., Binghamton, N. Y.
  Michael J. Cudmore, 12 Mygott St., Binghamton, N. Y.
  Joseph Covington, Meridan, Miss.
  George Dahlquist, Winchester, Mass.
  Walter L. Daum, Sullivan, Ill.
  Antonio De Santis, 768 Vernon Ave., Long Island City, N. Y.
  George Diegel, 22 Wissner Ave., Newburgh, N. Y.
  A. James DiMaggio, 83 Oldtown Road, Staten Island, N. Y.
  Hugh A. Donnelly, 240 Ainslie St., Bklyn, N. Y.
  Abraham Drazien, 446 E. 145th St., N. Y.
  Fred Durham, Toluca, Ill.
  Edward J. Dwyer, 523 North Division St., Buffalo, N. Y.
  Elisha Eaves, Route 3, Macon, Miss.
  Harold Eckstrom, 148 East 54th St., New York.
  William Ehrmann, 138 Carlton Ave., Bkln, N. Y.
  Max Eisenberg, 547 83d St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
  Elwin M. Eldredge, 780 Jefferson Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
  Lewis Ellenbogen, 531 Bedford Ave., Bkln, N. Y.
  Ezra Epstein, 109 Eighth Ave., New York.
  Anthony Esposito, South Nyack, N. Y.
  Josiah E. Evans, 90 High St., Ansonia, Conn.
  Thomas J. Fisher, Lincoln Ave., Bkln, N. Y.
  Don Fitzgerald, Wallerville, Miss.
  Jerry Flanagan, 76 Michigan Ave., Buffalo, N. Y.
  Albert Flass, 121 Ash St., Buffalo, N. Y.
  M. Fontanetta, 453 East 186th St., New York.
  Charles Freidman, 107 East 2d St., New York.
  Hershel Friedland, 215 Caldwell Ave., N. Y.
  Samuel Friedman, 634 Kosciusko St., Bkln, N. Y.
  Richard Gadd, 375 61st St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
  Leslie Gaines, 713 South Huston Ave., Denniston, Tex.
  George Gibson, Kimball, S. D.
  J. Joseph Gillig, 324 East 4th St., Mount Vernon, N. Y.
  Leslie Gleason, St. Mary's Home, Binghamton, N. Y.

  [Illustration: VETERANS--_Auvers-le-Hamon_.]

  Fred A. Gleiforst, 56 Freedom Ave., Richmond Hill, N. Y.
  John E. Glynn, 232 Jackson St., Bklyn, N. Y.
  Samuel Goldenberg, 647 East 5th St., N. Y.
  Ira Gomer, Marion, Pa.
  Rossie Goodie, Prairie Elk, Mont.
  Max Gordon, 761 Blake Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
  John Greany, 171 East 99th St., New York.
  Max Green, 1033 Hoe Ave., New York.
  Herman Greening, 1029 Sherman Ave., South Bend, Ind.
  Frank Guaracio, 612 Fort Hamilton Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
  Edwin F. Haeg, Route 3, Ronneby, Minn.
  Harry Hagen, Box Elder, Mont.
  P. M. Hagen, Lansford, N. D.
  Virgil M. Hale, Case Creek, Ark.
  William J. Halperin, Dixwell Ave., New Haven, Conn.
  Chris Hanson, Hannaford, N. D.
  Gillrock Hanson, Route 1, Creston, Mont.
  Theodore Harris, 500 West 175th St., N. Y.
  Michael Hartnett, Main St., Ansonia, Conn.
  Richard Hayden, Derby, Conn.
  Raymond Healy, 547 West 186th St., New York.
  Alfred Heller, 461 Steinway Ave., Astoria, N. Y.
  John Henchy, 172 East 112th St., New York.
  August Henke, Goshen, N. Y.
  James Herron, Englewood, N. J.
  Joseph Holland, Heber Springs, Ark.
  Carl Holmes, Lambert Paper Co., Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Carroll Honnicut, Burnsville, Miss.
  William F. Howard, 315 Sixth Ave., Bklyn, N. Y.
  John Huston, Newburgh, N. Y.
  Ernest C. Hutchings, Manhasset, N. Y.
  John Jackson, Box 145, Troy, Ind.
  Leslie Jacobus, Broadway, Grand View, N. Y.
  Harry Jensen, Route 9, Penn Yann, N. Y.
  Kenneth Jensen, Shelly, Idaho.
  Edward T. Johnson, Elkland, Pa.
  Robert R. Johnson, Newburgh, N. Y.
  Julius Kaplan, 15 Walnut St., New Rochelle, N. Y.
  Henry Kaufman, 1652 Madison Ave., N. Y.
  Edward Kelly, 352 West 18th St., New York.
  John F. Kelly, Adler, Mont.
  J. H. Kiernan, 575 Main St., Wareham, Mass.
  W. Claire Kiernan, 402 Second St., Bklyn, N. Y.
  Elbert N. Kipp, 19 Charlotte St., Binghamton, N. Y.
  Terence Kirk, 3 Hill St., Granton, N. J.
  Julius Klausner, Jr., 324 East 4th St., Mount Vernon, N. Y.
  George A. Klein, Jr., 95 Vernon Ave., Bklyn, N. Y.
  Wallace S. Kline, Route 3, Neshoba, Tenn.
  Frank X. Klotz, Davenport's Neck, New Rochelle, N. Y.
  Peter Koch, Box 96, Stickney, S. D.
  Anthony Kochan, Box 1000, Gowanda, N. Y.
  Jack Konowich, Lackawanna, N. Y.
  Reuben Koplowitz, 236 New Jersey Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
  Harvey L. Kreuscher, N. Spgville, S. I., N. Y.
  Richard Lamb, Brooklyn, N. Y.
  Arthur Lantman, Box 517, Hibbing, Minn.
  Samuel Lapidus, 136 Clinton St., New York.
  Timothy Leary, 427 West 13th St., New York.
  David Leff, 91 Throop Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
  Patrick Lenihan, 249 West 135th St., New York.
  Samuel Lesowitz, 1865 Park Place, Bklyn, N. Y.
  Isaac Liebowitz, 531 Dumont Ave., Bklyn, N. Y.
  Herman Lipman, 33 Montgomery St., N. Y.
  Carl Lucas, 41 Water St., Ansonia, Conn.
  James J. Lydon, 68 Gansevoort St., New York.
  Thomas McCann, 709 West Dominick St., Rome, N. Y.
  John McGinley, 183 Kingsland Ave., Bkln, N. Y.
  Arthur McManus, 199 Howard Ave., Ansonia, Conn.
  Walter K. McNair, 26 East Ave., Gasport, N. Y.
  James J. Malone, 28 Sedway St., Buffalo, N. Y.
  William Manz, 1275 Third Ave., New York.
  John Marrow, Newburgh, N. Y.
  Waclaw Matyzasik, Beacon Falls, Conn.
  William Mayer, 1919 Seventh Ave., New York.
  James Menzies, 13A Green St., Everett, Mass.
  E. R. Meyrowitz, 371 Vernon Ave., Bklyn, N. Y.
  Ray Milburn, Keensburgh, Ill.
  Herbert Millville, R. F. D. 14, La Salle, N. Y.
  Joseph P. Monihan, 706 Woodlawn Ave., Wilmington, Del.
  Richard Morgan, Dewitt, Ark.
  David M. Moroney, 337 West 12th St., N. Y.
  Thad L. Morris, Creshaw, Miss.
  Edward Murphy, 56 West 105th St., New York.
  Maurice Murphy, 124 Adelphi St., Bklyn, N.Y.
  Stephen A. Murphy, 108 Eighth Ave., N. Y.
  Harold Nicolson, Falton, Minn.
  Morgan Norris, Cashion, Okla.
  Charles A. O'Bryan, 1002 E. 98th St., Bkln, N. Y.
  John Occhino, 6 Hanover Square, New York.
  Carl Oeftering, 48 Penn Ave., Binghamton, N. Y.
  Daniel O'Neil, 951 Lafayette Ave., Bklyn, N. Y.
  S. Oshinsky, Wards Island, New York.

  [Illustration: _France, April, 1919_]

  Gilbert Paneth, 326 East 91st St., New York.
  Gustave Pankratz, 17 Madison St., Rochester.
  Benjamin Parker, 77 Kingsbury St., Waterbury, Conn.
  Elmer Patterson, Burt, N. Y.
  George Petersen, Kimbalton, Iowa.
  Julian Poluzzi, 59 Hall Pl., W. Quincy, Mass.
  John Prescott, 305 Webster St., Monterey, Cal.
  Porter Priest, Mt. Morriston, Fla.
  Andrew R. Purcella, 128 Caroline St., Derby, Conn.
  John J. Quinn, Main St., Beacon Falls, Conn.
  Patrick J. Quinn, 155 McConnell Ave., Buffalo.
  Isidore Rabelskie, 55 Avenue C, New York.
  Vito Racano, 1946 First Ave., New York.
  Robert Radford, 112 Wilson Ave., Bklyn, N. Y.
  Joseph Rainone, 438 East 116th St., New York.
  Carey J. Reed, Prospect, Tenn.
  Ralph Reid, Route A, St. Petersburg, Fla.
  Frank Reid, 967 Madison St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
  Edward Rennie, 29 Franklin St., Binghamton, N. Y.
  George F. Roberts, 15 Ivy St., Elmhurst, N. Y.
  Johannes Rodenburg, Star Route, Cumberland, Iowa.
  Howard F. Roeding, 97 Miller Ave., Bklyn, N. Y.
  Harry Roessler, 409 16th St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
  John A. Ross, 14 First St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
  Alexander Rossino, 228 Myrtle Ave., Buffalo.
  Theodore Rubinstein, 215 Fourth Ave., N. Y.
  Frank Russell, Carthage, Tenn.
  James Sareri, Box 176, Oyster Bay, N. Y.
  Edward Sasse, 204 Fifth Ave., Astoria, N. Y.
  Clyde Savage, 80 Maple St., Bangor, Me.
  Thomas J. Scanlon, 354 West 12th St., N. Y.
  William Schaeffer, E. Topper St., Buffalo, N. Y.
  Sigmund Schulz, 748 9th Ave., L. I. C., N. Y.
  Harry Schwartz, 702 East Fifth St., New York.
  Karl Schwarz, Jamaica Creek, Springfield Gardens, N. Y.
  Fred E. Shaddock, 151 Ridgewood Ave., Brooklyn, N. Y.
  Harry Shapiro, 230 East 115th St., New York.
  Aris M. Shellman, 303 West 111th St., N. Y.
  Carl Shubert, Suffolk, Mont.
  Abraham Siegel, 251 Amboy St., Bklyn, N. Y.
  Morris Silver, 210 Riverdale Ave., Bkln, N. Y.
  William Simpson, 620 Hudson St., New York.
  William Skeets, Lockport, N. Y.
  William Slater, South Dartmouth, Mass.
  William Smith, Englewood, Cal.
  W. E. Snyder, Binghamton, N. Y.
  Lee Solomon, Palmyra, Ill.
  Arthur D. Soper, 28 Huron St., East Lynn, Mass.
  Soren Sorenson, Ruthton, Minn.
  Jacob Squire, 568 Grand St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
  Christopher Staudigal, 143 Bleecker St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
  Brodie Stewart, Rutherford, Tenn.
  Earl C. Stewart, White Pine, Tenn.
  William J. Strong, R. F. D. 12, Springville, Ala.
  Otis Summers, Dwyer, Tenn.
  Martin Swenson, Wetonka, S. D.
  Thomas Swinehardt, 223 East Hendrick St., Shelbyville, Ind.
  Philip Tasman, 155 Hickory St., Buffalo, N. Y.
  Dudley Taylor, Turner, Ore.
  James Taylor, Newmarket, Tenn.
  Norman Taylor, Ashley, Mont.
  R. F. Taylor, Binghamton, N. Y.
  Volney O. Thompson, Honesdale, Idaho.
  Voss Thompson, Honesdale, Idaho.
  Monroe Todd, Allen, S. C.
  Deorato Tortora, 7 Old Wood Point Road, Brooklyn, N. Y.
  Ray Turk, 6 Cedar St., Binghamton, N. Y.
  Thomas F. Twyford, 807 E. 8th St., Bkln, N. Y.
  John Urban, 28 Crandall St., Binghamton, N. Y.
  Hillery Vaughn, Briggsville, Ark.
  John P. Vaughn, 567 East Ave., Akron, O.
  Modestino Vecchiarino, 16 Durand St., Danbury, Conn.
  Fred Viemer, 11 Meadow St., Seymour, Conn.
  Joseph Visentin, Wappinger Falls, N. Y.
  Abraham Wald, 238 East 24th St., New York.
  Cleve Wallace, Dyersburg, Tenn.
  Donald M. Wallach, 71 East 92nd St., N. Y.
  Harry Wernet, Eagle Grove, Iowa.
  John J. Whalen, Binghamton, N. Y.
  Pearl Whittington, Gloucester, Miss.
  Lee Wilkerson, Winchester, Ark.
  Joseph Will, 12 Alice St., Rochester, N. Y.
  Roland H. Williams, 25 Summerfield Place, Staten Island, N. Y.
  Edward J. Williamson, Jeffrey, La.
  Albert G. Wilson, Jr., 400 Third St., Bklyn, N. Y.
  William Wilson, 240 Chestnut St., Lockport, N. Y.
  Charles O. Woods, Beaver, Ore.
  Merton Yandes, 115 South Union St., Rochester, N. Y.
  Lewis Yasner, 190 Floyd St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
  Samuel Zashinsky, 381 Leonard St., Bklyn, N. Y.
  Edward P. Zehler, Strykersville, N. Y.




  [Illustration: {Distinguished Service Cross medal}]

All Hail the Brave!

Courage--that fidelity to purpose despite physical welfare--is the
natural attribute of the soldier. But there are those exceptional deeds
of valor that are committed beyond the right of expectation; they are
deeds that combine the highest intelligence with the utmost bravery;
they are those instances of self-sacrificial service that are rendered
not with thought of hardship nor of pain nor of reward, but only with
the hope that the foundations of our Country and our Homes remain
unshaken.

  [star] Star indicates a posthumous award.
  * Asterisk denotes those who were killed after their citation.

  [star]Private 1st Class Barney Bardman, Distinguished Service Cross,
    Brooklyn, N. Y.
  [star]Private Earl Millsap, Distinguished Service Cross, Asotin,
    Washington.
  [star]Private Albert C. Peterson, Distinguished Service Cross, Stacy,
    Minnesota.
  [star]1st Lieutenant William R. Reid, Distinguished Service Cross,
    Brooklyn, N. Y.
  Major Weston C. Jenkins, Distinguished Service Cross, Rome, New York.
  Major Fred A. Tillman, Chevalier, Legion d'Honneur de France, Ulster,
    Pa.
  Captain Everett A. Butterfield, French Order of the Black Star,
    New York.


Divisional Citations

  Capt. Alexander D. B. Pratt, New York.
  [star]2d Lt. Clarence I. Grubbs, Kansas City, Mo.
  2d Lt. Arthur J. Hamblen, New York.
  2d Lt. F. Hartig, address unknown.
  2d Lt. Kenneth C. Lincoln, Fall River, Mass.
  2d Lt. Harry R. Weiman, St. Louis, Mo.
  Sergt. Lloyd C. Anderson, Binghamton, N. Y.
  Sergt. Charles H. Bradshaw, Brooklyn, N. Y.
  Pvt. 1st Class Louis Beckendorf, Brooklyn, N. Y.
  *Private Jacob Borker, Brooklyn, N. Y.
  Sergt. Ralph U. Brett, New York.
  Pvt. 1st Class George Busko, Breckenridge, Minn.
  *Pvt. James Conner, New York.
  Corp. Patrick Conway, New York.
  Sergt. Edward M. Crimmins, Binghamton, N. Y.
  Sergt. A. James DiMaggio, Staten Island, N. Y.
  Pvt. 1st Class Hugh A. Donnelly, Brooklyn, N. Y.
  Corp. Edward J. Dwyer, Buffalo, N. Y.
  Pvt. William Ehrmann, Brooklyn, N. Y.
  Sergt. Josiah E. Evans, Ansonia, Conn.
  Pvt. 1st Class John Greany, New York.
  Pvt. 1st Class P. M. Hagen, Lansford, N. D.
  Corp. Gilrock Hanson, Creston, Mont.
  Sergt. William F. Howard, Brooklyn, N. Y.
  Sergt. Ernest C. Hutchings, Manhasset, N. Y.
  Pvt. 1st Class Robert R. Johnson, Newburgh, N. Y.
  Pvt. John F. Kelly, Adler, Mont.
  Sergt. George A. Klein, Jr., Brooklyn, N. Y.
  Sergt. Harvey A. Kreuscher, Staten Island, N. Y.
  Pvt. 1st Class James J. Lydon, New York.
  Sergt. Joseph P. Monihan, Wilmington, Del.
  [star]Pvt. Alfred Nickerson, Lewiston, N. Y.
  Pvt. Andrew R. Pucella, Derby, Conn.
  Sergt. John A. Ross, Brooklyn, N. Y.
  [star]Sergt. George F. Russell, Brooklyn, N. Y.
  Pvt. 1st Class Thomas J. Scanlon, New York.
  Sergt. Aris M. Shellman, New York.
  [star]Pvt. 1st Class Joseph Strauss, New York.
  Sergt. Monroe Todd, Allen, S. C.
  [star]Pvt. J. Robinson, Newfane, N. Y.
  Pvt. Volney O. Thompson, Honesdale, Idaho.
  Corp. Frederick Viemer, Seymour, Conn.
  Sergt. Donald M. Wallach, New York.




                         The
  Burke [Illustration: {American Legion seal}] Kelly
                         Post



That spirit of dominant Americanism with which the war was fought seems
in these times of peace to be best reflected by the American Legion.

Appreciating this, those members of Company B, 307th Infantry, who
regarded with favor the idea of a post-bellum organization applied to
the American Legion for a charter. One was granted and they were
admitted as the Burke-Kelly Post No. 172.

The name was selected in honor of the memory of two of their comrades:
Sergeant Frank W. Burke, killed by a high explosive shell on the line of
the Vesle, August 23d, 1918, and Corporal John E. Kelly, killed by a
high explosive shell during the battle of Merval, September 8th, 1918.

This publication of the History of Company B was made possible by the
members of the Burke-Kelly Post under the following officers:

  _President_
  WILLIAM F. HOWARD

  _Vice-Presidents_
  JOHN A. ROSS
  ARTHUR J. HAMBLEN
  ALFRED HELLER

  _Secretary_
  A. JAMES DIMAGGIO

  _Treasurer_
  THOMAS F. TWYFORD

  _Corresponding Secretary_
  JULIUS KLAUSNER, JR.

  _Executive Committee_
  DONALD M. WALLACH
  FRED A. GLEIFORST
  RALPH U. BRETT




  [Illustration: Watching the Home Fires]


They were watched, and high they burned, by those who more than all else
represented to us the concrete reason for which we served.

None of us but _felt_ that we were fighting for our Country; but all of
us _knew_ that we were fighting for our Home.

Our Home Folks,--our Mothers and our Fathers, our Sisters and our Wives
and our Sweethearts and our Friends--all banded together so that we,
while never losing the _thought_ of Home, were also not to lose its
_touch_.

Those tenders of the fireside whom we knew as the "Family Unit" were
organized as the Company B Family Unit and were affiliated with the
307th Regimental Family Unit. They formed on our embarkation for
overseas, and by virtue of a succession of meetings under the active and
enthusiastic leadership of Mrs. William Vanamee and Miss Virginia Fuller
they became welded into a body that accomplished immeasurable benefit
not only for our physical but also for our spiritual welfare.

The socks, the cigarettes, the wristlets and the soap were needs of vast
import, but our knowledge that those behind us were marshaled just as we
were was more warming than wristlets, more comforting than cigarettes.

The officers during the early period were Miss Virginia Fuller,
President; Miss Helen Pritchard, Secretary; Mrs. W. B. Wise, Treasurer.
The meetings were held in a barren loft at 6 East 30th Street, New York
City. Here the ideas were conceived, the plans formulated, and the
policies acted upon, that were so far-reaching and effective.

Tho first drawn together for the good of Company B, their own sufferings
served to consolidate their interests and to strengthen their purpose.

As notice after notice issued from Washington advising as to losses in
battle by death and by wounds, the need for common consolation became
most urgent and a noble response came from those who were in a position
to give comfort. These were trying days, days of mental agony, days of
longing and hoping and praying.

In September one of our own men, Sergeant George A. Klein, Jr., who had
been returned to the United States as an instructor, appeared at a
meeting and gave word, mostly welcome, some sad, to the news-hungry
relatives.

These various activities were recorded in a small four-page bulletin
published for and distributed to us overseas.

And then the Armistice. Relief from the tension of the meetings was
given by the final let-up of the war and soon the time came when much
thought was given to filling those "9x4x3" boxes of Christmas cheer.

  [Illustration: _The Ring_]

The date of our return was flashed across the waters during the early
part of April and immediately wheels were set in motion to prepare for
it.

Their welcome took the form of a reception and dance. For the first
time, and the only time, Company B and the Family Unit were together.
And as a token of their affection and regard they presented to each of
us a silver signet ring bearing our Divisional insignia--Liberty,
together with the Company and Regimental designation. Inside the ring
they had placed as their wish: "May God Protect You."

Guests of especial honor were the two McIntyre sisters, who were so
active overseas with the Salvation Army and who for so long a time had
been identified with our Division, having for a while been assigned to
our own Regiment.

Thus culminated the activities of the Family Unit of Company B. But just
as we have decided upon a continuation of our organization--the same in
substance, if not in form,--so the Unit decided to serve as the
Auxiliary to the Burke-Kelly Post, American Legion.

The Auxiliary meetings are held in the rooms adjoining those of the
Burke-Kelly Post, at the 77th Division Club. The original board of
officers includes Mrs. A. J. Hamblen, President; Miss Virginia Fuller,
Miss Sarah Kelly, and Mrs. William Charles, Vice-Presidents; Miss Anna
Charles, Secretary, and Mrs. W. B. Wise, Treasurer.

And their banner is still held aloft. A new name, but the old purpose.

  [Illustration: {Decoration}]

  [Illustration: {Bugler playing Taps}]





End of Project Gutenberg's Company B, 307th Infantry, by Julius Klausner

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COMPANY B, 307TH INFANTRY ***

***** This file should be named 33932.txt or 33932.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/9/3/33932/

Produced by Patrick Hopkins and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
