Project Gutenberg's Godey's Lady's Book, Vol. XLII., May 1851, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Godey's Lady's Book, Vol. XLII., May 1851

Author: Various

Release Date: September 23, 2010 [EBook #33983]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GODEY'S LADY'S BOOK, MAY 1851 ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Rose Koven, Emmy and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
Music by Linda Cantoni











GODEY'S

LADY'S BOOK.

PHILADELPHIA, MAY, 1851.




TABLE OF CONTENTS.

VOL. XLII.


  A Hindoo Belle, by _J. E. P._,                      322

  A Spring Carol, by _Mrs. A. A. Barnes_,             326

  Cottage Furniture,                                  329

  Design for a Lady's Work-Box,                       364

  Develour, by _Professor Charles E. Blumenthal_,
                              51, 102, 182, 257, 323, 377

  Editors' Table,             65, 134, 201, 266, 330, 391

  Editors' Book Table,        66, 135, 202, 267, 332, 392

  Etruscan Lace Cuff,                                 328

  Fashions,                   70, 140, 205, 270, 336, 396

  Flowers, by _G. H. Cranmer_,                        284

  Garden Decorations,                       251, 282, 372

  Good For Evil, by _Angele de V. Hull_,         252, 285

  Home; or, the Cot and the Tree, by
      _Robert Johnson_,                               295

  Incidents in the Life of Audubon, by _the author
      of "Tom Owens, the Bee Hunter,"_                306

  Knitted Flowers,                 61, 199, 263, 328, 386

  Model Cottages,                             4, 126, 283

  Moral Courage, by _Alice B. Neal_,             316, 367

  Publisher's Department,                   269, 334, 394

  Sabbath Lyrics, by _W. Gilmore Simms_,
                                        26, 109, 174, 366

  Sonnet, by _Mrs. L. S. Goodman_,                    281

  Sonnets, by _William Alexander_,
                               42, 75, 169, 215, 277, 390

  Spring, by _Fanny Fales_,                           292

  Spring--a Ballad, by _Mary Spenser Pease_,          278

  Susan Clifton; or, the City and the Country,
      by _Professor Alden_,    29, 93, 170, 246, 302, 360

  Taking Care of Number One, by _T. S. Arthur_,       320

  The Judge; a Drama of American Life, by
      _Mrs. Sarah J. Hale_,         21, 88, 154, 237, 298

  The Language of Flowers, by _Jno. B. Duffey_,       277

  The Last of the Tie-Wigs, by _Jared Austin_,        296

  The Tiny Glove--a May-Day Story, by _Blanche_,      280

  The Young Enthusiasts, by _Frank I. Wilson_,   309, 346

  To A. E. B., or Her who Understands it, by
      _Adaliza Cutter_,                               297

  Undersleeves and Caps,                              327

  Various Useful Receipts,    69, 139, 205, 270, 335, 396

  Women of the Revolution, by _Mrs. E. F. Ellet_,     293

  Ye Come to me in Dreams, by _Nilla_,                279




  LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


  MAY.

  May-Day Morning.
  The Language of Flowers.
  Spring.
  "Now be Careful."
  Music, &c.




THE LANGUAGE OF FLOWERS.

BY JNO. B. DUFFEY.

(_See Plate._)


          AS, wandering forth at rosy dawn,
          When sparkling dew-drops deck the lawn,
          From glen and glade, and river-side,
          We bring young flowers--the morning's pride.

          And, bound in wreaths, or posies sweet,
          With flowers our favored ones we greet;
          For flowers a silent language own,
          That makes our maiden wishes known.

          A language that by love was wrought,
          And by fond love to mortals taught;
          A language, too, that lovers know,
          Where, watched by love, sweet flowers may blow.

          A language richer, purer far
          Than all the tongue-born dialects are;
          And, as the flowers, devoid of art,
          It is the language of the heart.

          Thoughts that would perish all untold
          Live on the tongues that flowers enfold:
          Thus will the Tulip's crimson shell
          The love of stammering youth unveil.

          And happy will that trembler be,
          If she, with cheek of modesty,
          Shall give his soft avowal room,
          And twine it with the Myrtle's bloom.

          But, should her heart feel not his glow,
          The mottled Pink may answer "No;"
          Yet Friendship, in an Ivy wreath,
          A balm upon the wound will breathe.

          The Morning-glory's dewy bell
          In mystic tones of hope may tell--
          Tell of a struggle in the breast,
          Where, warring, love 'gainst love is pressed.

          The Heartsease, flower of purple hue,
          Seeks an affection ever true;
          And, in the Bay-leaf's still reply,
          Speaketh a love will never die.

          The little Daisy grows for her
          Who heedeth not the flatterer;
          And spotless Lilies love the breast
          Where child-like Innocence is pressed.

          Young Beauty's symbol is the Rose
          Whose blushing petals half unclose;
          And in the snowy Violet
          Sweet Modesty her home hath set.

          And thus of feeling, every shade
          May be through voiceless flowers conveyed;
          And all the fond endearments known
          To deep-felt love, thus greet love's own.

[Illustration: THE LANGUAGE OF FLOWERS

Engraved expressly for Godey's Lady's Book by W. E. Tucker

Printed by H. Quig.]


SONNET.--AUDUBON.[A]

BY WM. ALEXANDER.


    AH! is he blind, who erst, untiringly,
      Searched wildwood, prairie, meadow, rock, and wold,
      For you, sweet songsters, clad in yellow gold?
    When comes spring's carnival, enchantingly
    Sing ye to him, with sorrow in your song;
      For that his sightless orbs now roll in vain,
      No more to view your rainbow-tints again--
    Love-lays in gratitude to him belong,
    From matin Lark, loud herald of the day--
      From Philomel, coy chorister of night:
      Listens he yet, ye birds, with dear delight,
    In rapture musing on your plumage gay,
    Hoping to soar, when life's short day is done,
    On eagle-pinions up to yonder central sun.

FOOTNOTE:

[A] Written previous to his death.




SPRING.--A BALLAD

BY MARY SPENSER PEASE.

(_See Plate._)


           SPRING, with its glad influences
             Stealing up from bosky dell,
           Once more quickens Nature's heart-pulse
             With its sunny, witching spell.

           Each new morn the boughs hang thicker
             With the leaves of Nature's book;
           Each new eve adds a new chapter
             To the life of bird and brook.

           Each new morn the world is greener;
             Age forgets its shriveled years
           In the warmth and life upspringing
             Out from Winter's chill and tears.

           Each new morn the song grows sweeter--
             Song of loving bee and bird;
           Each new eve, from youth and maiden,
             Softer cadences are heard.

           Each new morn her heart beat warmer,
             Dreaming o'er his tale of love;
           Each new eve, that tale repeated,
             Brighter spells around her wove.

           At the early, early daybreak,
             To caress her as she slept,
           Greetingly, the light spring zephyr
             Through her open lattice crept.

           Roving mid the golden tangles
             Of her tresses' braidless flow,
           Nestling in the half-veiled dimples
             Of her bosom white as snow.

           Mingling with her fragrant breathing,
             Closely to her ear it came,
           Murm'ring to her gentle dreaming,
             In sweet music, his dear name.

          "Through the valley, o'er the mountain,"
             Sang the zephyr in her ear,
          "At my own sweet will, I wander
             All the loving, livelong year.

          "With the lowly, tender grass-blade,
             With the solemn, stately trees,
           With each swelling bud and blossom
             Sport I ever as I please.

          "All the humble wayside flowers--
             Daisy, king-cup, light harebell;
           All the tall and proud ones--Kalmia,
             Rose, and orchis--know me well.

          "Of the brightest, sweetest flower-buds,
             Sheltered by the mountain's brow,
           Blooming in the wide, wide valley,
             Loveliest of them all art thou.

          "That is why he loves thee dearly,
             Modest, gentle as thou art,
           The proud lord of wood and manor
             The proud lord of thy young heart.

          "Oh, I heard a song last evening,
             Sung to tremulous guitar,
           Through the yellow, mellow moonlight,
             Floating on the air afar;

          "Breathing warmest, truest passion
             For one bearing thy sweet name,
           Telling of that passion thwarted
             Bending unto station's claim:

          "Telling how the claim of station
             Must at last be overborne,
           By a will and faith unyielding,
             By a love no time can turn.

          "'I must see her at the day-dawn,'
             Sighed he, at the ballad's close,
           'By the brook in the still copse-wood,
             Where the purple violet grows.'"

           Rose the maiden from her slumbers,
             Fresher than the break of dawn,
           Binding up her heavy tresses,
             Looked she out upon the lawn.

           Like a shower of yellow guineas
             Flashing back the morning sun,
           Crocuses and dandelions
             Half the golden fields had won.

           From the green and yellow shining,
             Flecking it with flakes of white,
           Drooping lilies, palest snow-drops,
             Spread their petals to the light.

           Looking out upon the copse-wood,
             As she clasped her simple dress,
           Suddenly the thought came o'er her,
             "I will seek its wilderness.

          "By the brook down in its thicket,
             Where the purple violet grows,
           I shall find the wild sweetbriar,
             And the wind-flower, and--who knows?

          "Who knows but my Edgar Lincoln
             May be wandering that way,
           Tempted by this fragrant morning--
             Brightest morning yet of May.

          "Oh, I know he loves me dearly,
             And he knows I love him well;
           That my love is deep and boundless,
             More than tongue of mine can tell."

           On she wandered, singing lightly
             Snatches of some olden song--
           How a lord and lowly maiden
             Loved each other well and long:

           How the haughty claim of station
             Came at last to be o'erborne
           By a will and faith unbending,
             By a love no time could turn.

           Singing lightly, on she wandered
             Over hill and meadow lone;
           Said she "This broad wood and valley
             Soon I'll proudly call my own.

          "Not one beggar, not one hungered
             Shall there be in all the land;
           Not one loathing life from hardship,
             When I'm lady proud and grand."

           Wandering on, she plucked wild flowers,
             Flowers filled with morning dew,
           Looking backward ever, ever,
             Listening for a step she knew.

           Press the flowers to thy soft bosom,
             Braid them in thy shining hair,
           Love them while their tender petals
             Fragrant life and freshness wear;

           For too soon they'll droop and wither,
             Plucked and worn but one short day,
           And too soon thy youth and freshness
             May, like them, be flung away.

           Light of heart, she nears the copse-wood,
             From its depths sweet voices throng;
           Voices of the jay and blue-bird,
             And the wild wood-robin's song.

           By the water-brook she's standing,
             Where the purple violets grow,
           Where the wind-flower and sweetbriar,
             And the starry woodbines blow.

           By the water-brook she's standing,
             And her heart begins to fail;
           Still she watches, still she listens,
             Hearing but the night-owl's wail.

           Silent shadows flit around her,
             Looming darkly, broad, and tall;
           But one shadow well remembered
             Sees she not among them all.

           Ah, perhaps--perhaps he may be
             To his vow a traitor base!
           Down into the clear brook glancing
             There she sees her own sweet face.

           Down into the clear brook gazing
             There she sees her own sweet face;
           Sees she also there reflected
             One of noble, manly grace.

          "Effie! Effie! late last evening,"
             Spake he, circling her soft waist,
          "My proud sire--and soon thine, darling--
             Read the lines thy hand had traced;

          "Breathing of thy sweet self, Effie,
             Full of tenderness and truth--
          'Such a heart, such wit and wisdom
             Must be cherished, by my sooth!'

          "Thus my sire--the lines re-reading
             Traced by thy beloved hand--
           Still he spake, 'Such wit, such wisdom.
             Would grace lady of the land!'

          "Then it was, my darling Effie,
             Pleaded I thy cause and mine--
          'Yes, yes, yes, I've watched thee, youngster,
             Watched thee sigh, and pale, and pine!'

          "More he said, my darling Effie--
             For he knew my death he'd mourn
           That the haughty claim of station
             Is at last by love o'erborne."

[Illustration: SPRING.

Engraved expressly for Godey's Lady's Book by J.B. Neagle.]



YE COME TO ME IN DREAMS.

BY NILLA.


          YE come to me in dreams, baby,
            In visions of the night;
          Thy blue eye, full of blessedness,
            Is glancing on my sight:
          The music of thy breath, baby,
            Is falling on my ear,
          In those dear old-accustomed tones
            I loved so well to hear.

          Again upon my heart, baby,
            Thy little hand is prest,
          Again thy little nestling head
            Is pillowed on my breast;
          Again my lips are murmuring
            Low words of love and prayer;
          I strive to draw thee closer yet,
            But clasp the vacant air;

          And then I wake to weep, baby,
            Rememb'ring thou art dead;
          And never more can my poor heart
            Pillow thy little head!
          Yet I am happy even now--
            This thought my grief disarms--
          A few short months I fondly clasped
            An angel in my arms:

          That loftier minds than mine, baby,
            Will now instruct thy youth,
          And holier hearts will point the path
            Of innocence and truth.
          Thou wert my blessing here on earth,
            And though tears dim my eyes,
          I feel that I am richer far
            To have thee in the skies!




THE TINY GLOVE.--A MAY-DAY STORY.

BY BLANCHE.




CHAPTER I.


BRIGHT, gladsome May-day!--the fairest maiden in all the train of the
merry "Queen of Seasons." May-day! what happy scenes this word
recalls--the day of all days for childhood's pleasures! I see the little
darlings tripping along the streets of my native town with baskets on
their chubby arms, smiles on their lips, and happiness in their eyes,
soon clustered in merry groups on some favorite spot in the suburbs,
laughing and chatting, arranging their pic-nic dinners, or sporting
beneath the shady trees.

But to my story. A mile or two from the village of A. were collected
some fifty or sixty little girls and boys, for the purpose of
celebrating their annual holiday. The May-pole, bedecked with flowers of
every hue and form, towered aloft, and around its base they frisked and
gamboled like so many little fairies. Some were "wafted in the silken
swing" high up among the boughs of the beech and elm; others sought the
brink of the rippling rivulet, and amused themselves with ruffling its
smooth surface or looking at their mirrored faces. Far down the
streamlet, and alone, was quietly seated a little girl, weaving into
garlands the buds and blossoms which grew around her in wild profusion,
caroling with a bird-like voice snatches of some favorite air, ever and
anon raising her violet eyes and looking round her in wondrous delight.
Her childish face was strikingly beautiful; around her small perfect
mouth there rested an angel smile, and her short brown curls were parted
on a forehead of matchless contour.

She wove and sang, and smiled a sunny smile, and seemed wholly
unconscious of a pair of bright black eyes fixed upon her from the
opposite bank. At length she turned, as if to listen; and soon upon the
air floated distinctly sounds of "Alice! little Alice!" and she bounded
away to her playmates. No sooner had she disappeared than the owner of
the black eyes--a boy, seemingly of twelve years, clad in a green jacket
ornamented with silver buttons, loose white trowsers, and wide-brimmed
straw hat, which but partly concealed his glossy black hair--sprang
across the water and possessed himself of the tiny glove which lay
forgotten on the bank, and which had once covered the hand of "little
Alice."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Alice, my dove, you have brought but one glove from the May frolic."

"I lost the other one yesterday. I don't think I forgot it May-day,
mamma."

"Well, dear, go put this one away until you find the mate."

"Yes, mamma."

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER II.


'TIS night in a boarding-school. The doors of many small rooms open on
the dreary hall, and the glimmering light through the key-holes tells of
the fair students within. One is partly open, and through it we see two
young girls standing near a toilet: one is drawing a comb through a mass
of rich brown curls, which stray in playful wantonness about her snowy
shoulders. The other is rummaging amid the elegant trifles which
decorate the table.

"Alice," she began, "many, many times have I seen this beautiful little
glove among trumpery, and often thought I'd beg of you its history, but
always forgot it. Tell me now whose hand it once imprisoned."

"Mine, Kate, mine. When a little child of eight years old I lost the
fellow, and put this one away until I should find it. Years have rolled
away; but it speaks so eloquently of a happy May-day I then enjoyed,
that I have never been able to part with it, and still treasure it as an
index to the bright scenes of the past."




CHAPTER III.


AGAIN I beg the reader to pass over two years--short to you who possess
health and plenty, long to those in disease and want--and come with me
to the heights of the Alleghanies, crowded with stately trees all
covered with snow and ice, with here and there thick clambering
evergreens, looking all the richer for their bright unsullied winter
caps. Slowly and laboriously do the wheels of a heavy traveling carriage
wind along the rugged ascent, while the heaving flanks and dilated
nostrils of the noble steeds bear witness to the toilsome pathway.
Muffled in cloaks and furs, we scarcely recognize, in the inmates of the
coach, our two school-girls, lately emancipated from their narrow cell
and the thraldom of school-laws. We would willingly linger to admire
with them the grandeur and sublimity of these props of heaven; but we
will not attempt a description of that which was among the mightiest
works of Him, the Almighty; so we pass over the perilous and impressive
journey, nor pause until, again in her own village, again on the steps
of her dearly loved home, Alice Clayton is pressed to her mother's
bosom.

Now under her father's roof, she has become the glad child again. We see
her first with her companion, Kate Earle, wandering about the spacious
drawing-rooms, now tastefully arranging the folds of the heavy satin
curtains, or decorating the tables with rich bouquets; then trying the
full, clear tones of the piano; and at last, taking a delighted survey
of the whole, she trips away into the long dining-hall, contemplates a
moment the iced pyramids, foamy floats, transparent jellies, &c., then,
arm in arm, they seek their chamber, and are soon busily engaged in the
witching duties of the toilet.

Night hurries on, and the cold moon looks calmly down the quiet village:
but soon, no longer silent, we hear quickened foot-falls, rolling
carriages, the hum of busy tongues, and occasionally a silvery laugh
floats out upon the cool night air. Before the stately, and now
brilliantly-lighted, mansion of Mr. Clayton they pause, ascend the
steps, and are lost to view. But we will enter and look upon the happy
throng assembled here to welcome back their former playmate, sweet Alice
Clayton. Ah, how tenderly she greets them! Now do her soft eyes light up
and flash with intense joy as she receives her numberless guests with
unaffected grace, presenting many to her visitor, Kate Earle. The music
and the dance begin, youth and beauty eagerly join the circle, while the
older ones retire to the whist-tables, none marking the speedy flight of
the rosy hours. Some are there, strangers to the fair idol of the
brilliant concourse: one of these, a youth of striking mien and unusual
elegance, is now seeking a presentation from her father. With a
good-humored smile, he bows assent, and together they seek our heroine.

"Come, Alice dear, make your prettiest bow to my young friend, Percy
Clifford." Then, in a mock whisper, he added, "Guard well your heart,"
and left her, smiling maliciously at the painful blushes which his
remark had summoned to her cheeks.

However, the low, easy tones of Clifford's voice soon reassured her, and
a half hour glided away so pleasantly that her father's warning was
forgotten, or, if remembered, but too late. I don't mean to say that
Alice really gave her heart away before the asking; but that night when
she and Kate were repeating the sayings and doings of their late guests,
Percy Clifford's name was oftener on her lip, and when, with arms
entwined, they slept the sleep of innocence, Perry Clifford's musical
voice and captivating smile alone hovered round her pillow.




CHAPTER IV.


AGAIN and again they met; already had the finely-modeled features of
Alice Clayton gained an indescribable charm from the warm feelings of
her pure, ardent heart, which sprang up irresistibly to the surface. No
wonder that Percy Clifford yielded to the idolatrous affection which
grew and strengthened in his bosom for the fair girl. No wonder that his
passion knew no restraint when he pressed his lips on her innocent brow,
and drew in his clasp Alice, his betrothed.

       *       *       *       *       *

"My sweet Alice!--my 'little Alice;' for so I love to call you. The dear
name recalls the little brown-haired beauty who sat upon the bank
weaving into garlands the bright flowers, none half so lovely as
herself, while from the depths of her gentle heart gushed out a song as
witching and melodious as the carolings of all the feathered tribe.
Then, a boy, did I first gaze enraptured on your infantile beauty; then
did my heart unclose to the lovely vision which it has since treasured
through years and absence, joy and sorrow. My father always granted my
request to prosecute my studies at his country seat near A., and,
unknown, unnoticed, I followed you through girlhood, and experienced my
first pang when you left me for the distant seminary.

"None can tell the overwhelming sorrow, the keen agony which succeeded
your absence; my only solace was to seek the streamlet and mingle my
boyish tears with its limpid waters. Again I met you; and I have since
wondered how I could so well act the stranger--how I could speak so
calmly when my heart was bursting. Soon all doubts and fears were
banished--_you loved me_! I saw it in the tearful eye, the flickering
cheek. And now, Alice, dearest one, _you are mine_! With this, you see
this little glove. It will tell you how you have _always_ reigned, as
now, in the heart of Percy Clifford."

And how can I describe _her_ joy as, half laughing, half crying, she
kissed again and again the little wanderer, and how that night she
placed it _mated_ in his hand, emblem of themselves?




SONNET

BY MRS. L. S. GOODWIN.


    THE god of day hath laid ambition by,
      And closely pressing to the fair west's side,
      As ardent bridegroom to a beauteous bride,
    Rests on her blushing cheek his lustrous eye.
    List to the melody that floats adown
      The aisles of yonder greenwood orchestra!
      I fancy Nature's harp-strings lead the play,
    Coveting for their mistress fresh renown.
    And amorous zephyr, lo! with skillful touch,
      Her music pages turns; the while he toys
      With her vast wealth of fragrance. Naught alloys
    The peace which seems to copy heaven o'ermuch;
    Chaining the raptured spirit all too strongly here--
    Teaching it to forget the higher, holier sphere.




[Illustration: GARDEN ORNAMENTS.]


IN the present number of the Lady's Book, we give a style of fountains
somewhat different from that given in our last.

Should the house be in a style suitable, a drooping fountain, like that
shown in the engraving, may be used; and the central part may be altered
to suit a Gothic or an Elizabethan house.

Whatever pattern may be adopted, there are certain rules to be attended
to in the construction of all fountains, in order to make them play. A
fountain may be formed wherever there is either a natural or artificial
supply of water some feet higher than the level of the surface on which
the fountain is to be placed. This supply of water is called the head,
and its height varies according to circumstances. Where a drooping
fountain is to be adopted, the head need be very little higher than the
joint from which the water is expected to issue; but where the fountain
is to form a jet, the head must be six inches, a foot, or more, higher
than the height to which the jet is expected to rise; the height
required varying according to the diameter of the jet. When the jet is
small, say about the eighth of an inch in diameter, the height of the
head above that to which the jet of water is expected to rise need not
be above six or eight inches.

In the mountainous parts of the country, ornamental fountains may be
constructed with very little trouble or expense. The water which flows
from springs in hill-sides may be made to form the head. It may be
conducted to the fountain through leaden or earthen pipes, or pipes made
of any material that is perfectly water-tight. If these pipes be
extended to the door of the dwelling, excellent water may be at all
times available--thus answering the double purpose of ornament and use.




MODEL COTTAGE.


[Illustration]

_A Dwelling of two stories._

This cottage contains, on the ground floor, an entrance lobby, _a_;
staircase, _b_; kitchen, _c_; parlor, _d_; tool-house, _e_; pantry and
dairy, _f_; back-kitchen, _g_; wood-shed, _h_; dust-hole, _i_;
water-closet, _k_; and cow-house, with brew-house oven, _l_.

The cow-house is connected with a court-yard, which contains a shed for
hay and straw, piggeries, with a manure-well connected with the
water-closet. The platform, on three sides of this dwelling, forms a
handsome walk, from which there is a door into the court-yard.

[Illustration]

The bed-room floor contains a best bed-room, _m_; a second bed-room,
_n_; a third bed-room, _o_; and a stair, _p_.

[Illustration]

_General Estimate._--14,904 cubic feet, at 10 cents per foot, $1,490.40;
at 5 cents, $745.20.




FLOWERS.

BY G. H. CRANMER.


What a volume of thought and feeling is contained in the simple flower!
As the lightnings which flash along the firmament of heaven, or the
thunders which startle the silence of eternity, are typical of His anger
and might--so are the beauty and simplicity of a flower typical of His
purity and mercy.

A flower is no insignificant object. It is fraught with many a deep
though mute lesson of wisdom. It teaches us that even itself, the
brightest ornament of the vegetable world, must fade away and die--and
the life which we prize so highly may be seen, as in a mirror, through
its different changes.

The withered leaflet is like unto a crushed and broken heart. Its fading
loveliness is like the approach of age as it throws its mantle of
wrinkled care over the form of some lovely specimen of humanity. Its
sweet fragrance is like the joys and pleasures of our breasts ere they
have been contaminated by the rude touches of the world.

The dew-drop which, at morning's dawn, rests upon the half-oped bud, is
like the tear which dims the infant's speaking eye when his childish
glee has been reproved by the voice of affection.

A flower represents mankind in the changes of infancy, youth, manhood,
and old age. The young bud is infancy; the bursting flower is youth; the
flower full blown is manhood, and the withered and tailing leaf is the
type of old age.

Its uses are various and manifold. Sometimes the promptings of affection
lead us to place it, in its purity and beauty, over the tomb of some
beloved friend, where, shedding around its fragrance, it steals upon our
senses like the memory of the departed being beneath. Sometimes the hand
of pride will pluck it from its stem, to deck the hair of the blooming
bride, or add by its odor to the festive scene. And not unfrequently it
is the mute bearer of some fond tale of love to the ecstatic sense of
her whose heart and feelings are at length justified, by its sweet
language, in the thoughts they so long have harbored. It soothes the
cares of the troubled soul, and alleviates the pangs of sorrow. It wins
upon us by its modest though blooming appearance, and its gentle
influence steals into our bosoms and softens our natures.

Study the flowers, and behold the wisdom, the goodness, and mercy of the
Almighty. Anatomize them, and behold the innumerable parts which form
and make up the whole, and the system and order with which they are
joined together.

Refinement dwelleth among the flowers. There the affections of our
hearts are given license to rove, and there the enthusiasm of our nature
overcomes the diffidence of our feelings. Voluntary homage arises to the
Maker of objects so fair and beautiful, and the soul in the
contemplation sighs itself away in a delicious reverie. Not less
beautifully than truly has it been said:--

          "There is religion in a flower;
    Its still small voice is as the voice of conscience.
    Mountains, and oceans, planets, suns, and systems,
    Bear not the impress of Almighty power
    In characters more legible than those
    Which He has traced upon the tiniest flower
    Whose light bell bends beneath the dew-drop's weight."

                                                  _Wheeling, Va._




GOOD FOR EVIL

BY ANGELE DE V. HULL.

(Concluded from page 256.)


THEIR new home was a little bijou of a cottage, and Cora went to work
with a light heart. The furniture was of the very plainest kind; but
about the little rooms there was an air of comfort and refinement that
told of a woman's careful hand. Here and there hung pictures of her own
painting. In each apartment were one or two shelves, neatly stained and
varnished, on which were placed a few choice books. On the top stood the
nicely-trimmed lamp--thus making feminine ingenuity serve the double
purpose of library and bracket. The little octagon work-table, in one
corner, held a porcelain vase, daily ornamented with fresh flowers, for
in the sunny South the flowers bloom perpetually; and the white
counterpane on the small French bedstead in Cora's "spare room," tempted
one to long for an invitation from her sweet self to occupy it. How
proud and happy her husband felt as together they took their first
regular meal after the confusion was over, and Cora's housekeeping began
in good earnest!

A few weeks afterwards, she received a box containing her mother's
old-fashioned but costly set of China--and her tears fell fast and thick
as she looked once more on the well-known cups her childish lips had so
often pressed. No gift could have been so precious in her eyes, and she
kissed the souvenir of her early days with reverence. Many little
trifles had the good mother added to the welcome present--trifles that
Cora could not buy, because she could not afford it; and her heart
yearned towards her only parent, as she uncovered one after another of
the home treasures. An antique-looking silver coffee-pot, with cream-jug
and sugar-bowl, made Cora's little table look like the most _recherche_
in the land. Had Laura seen it, she would have cried with spite; for,
now that she had driven her sister-in-law from the house, the
remembrance of her own cruelty and injustice made her hatred more bitter
still. She had but one wish, and that was to see her brother and his
innocent wife in actual want!

Even in the street poor Cora was not safe from her violent rage. If by
chance they met, Laura's eye would flash, her cheeks grow pale, her lips
quiver, and she would pass, followed by Clara and Fanny, with a look of
scorn and gesture of defiance, which they would endeavor to imitate as
closely as they could, as a token of respect to their now wealthy
sister. Their father had long repented of his unkindness, but his weak
mind bent to that of Laura; and so they were as strangers--they who
should have been as closely united as God had made them! To Lewis they
made professions that disgusted him; but, at Cora's request, he still
paid Mr. Clavering the respect of calling occasionally. It was an
unhappy state of things indeed; but heartless, worldly people have no
ties, and easily sever the closest, should they bind inconveniently; so
it cost Laura and her sisters neither pang nor remorse to outrage a
brother's feelings. Margaret yearned towards Cora, and, as often as she
saw her, expressed the same unchanging affection, but dared not openly
avow her regret at her absence.

One day, as Cora sat in her room plying her needle, she heard some one
enter the back gate. In a moment Maggie was in her arms, weeping and
laughing by turns. She had stolen away, and came to spend the whole day.

"Darling Maggie!" said Cora, kissing her again and again, "how kind of
you to come! Lewis will be so happy, too!"

"Ah, Cora!" replied Margaret, untying her bonnet, "if you knew what a
time I had to get here! We were all invited out to dinner; I positively
refused to go--having laid my plans for you, sweetest! Laura was so
ill-humored, and the others so intent upon themselves, that they did not
remark my eagerness to remain. But they insisted on my going, until I
suggested that the carriage would not hold us all, large as it is, and
so they drove off to Rivertown in grand style, leaving me at length
alone. I danced with joy! I almost screamed. But I kept quiet enough
till T knew they were not going to return for some odd glove, a
handkerchief, or Fanny's eternal powder bag, and then started off."

"This shall be a _jour de fete_, then, my own Margaret; and I will put
up this work to show you my sweet little home. Oh, Maggie!" continued
Cora, clasping her hands, "were it not for the indifference of your
father and sisters to my poor Lewis, I would be the happiest woman on
the wide earth. He deserves so much affection, for he has given his own
so earnestly."

A few tears fell from her eyes, but she brushed them away and smiled
again. Margaret sighed, but was silent. This was a subject upon which
she never conversed, from her decided disapprobation of the course
adopted towards two beings so dearly loved. She remembered, with
bitterness and trembling, the thirty-sixth verse of the tenth chapter of
St. Matthew: "For a man's enemies shall be they of his own household,"
and pondered deeply over the means of reconciliation. But to-day she had
determined to be happy, and Cora was delighted at her open admiration
of their little _menage_. The China and silver particularly charmed
her--first, with their beauty; and secondly, with the air of luxury they
gave her brother's modest table. They were moreover, articles of real
value that were Cora's, no matter what the contingency; and Margaret's
gentle heart rejoiced at what she termed "their first piece of luck."

How these two chatted! How they valued each moment of the time allowed
them! Maggie drew out her thimble and insisted upon being employed, and
the hours flew lightly over their heads until noon, when Lewis entered.

"Maggie!" he cried, as she flew out from behind the door where she had
concealed herself. "This is indeed a pleasure."

This affectionate greeting made her burst into tears; and she held her
head, for a few moments, against his breast.

"How kind of you, dear sister, to brave all, and come to us at last! I
wish it were for ever; but we are such ungrateful mortals that we never
rest satisfied with present blessings. You have been happy to-day,
darling," continued Lewis, as Cora entered. "I can tell that by looking
at you."

"Ay, Lewis, as merry as a cricket ever since Maggie came before me, like
a good angel, this morning. Do get the girls to go out and spend the day
again, my own pet sister, and gleam on Lewis and me before we begin to
pine again for one of your soft kisses.".

"I wish you could put me in a cage, like a stray bird," said Margaret,
with a smile of love. "I think I should like a jailer like Cora, and be
content to stay captive for ever."

But, alas! dinner was over, and they had only the afternoon left them.
Maggie remained until it was nearly dusk, that she might get an early
cup of tea from Cora's pretty China; then, with Lewis and his wife at
her side, sauntered slowly home. The tears sprang into her eyes as she
bade them adieu, and she had just rung the bell when the carriage
containing her sisters drove up the street. Fortunately, it was too dark
for them to recognize her companions, and she succeeded in getting rid
of her bonnet and mantle before they had managed to get out, as Laura
insisted upon being carried in the parlor by poor Mr. Phillips, because
he had taken, at dinner, a little more wine than was positively good for
him. But he succeeded, in despite of occasional glimpses of two wives,
four sisters-in-law, and two Mr. Claverings. Laura was placed on a sofa,
where she lay until after the tea tray was carried out, and then,
calling her husband once more, desired to be taken to her room.

Fanny and Clara sat discussing the dinner, the furniture, and the
guests, and both seemed rather out of spirits. The old gentleman walked
up and down the piazza, thinking deeply, and Margaret alone looked fresh
and happy.

"Who was there, Fanny?" asked she, at length.

"Oh, a stupid set! Excepting ourselves and Mr. and Mrs. Denton, there
was not a decent creature there. Nearly all married people and old
bachelors. I declare, I have no patience with such incongruous
assemblies!"

"There was Mrs. Hildreth's brother! He is quite a beau, I'm sure; and
Clara expressed unbounded admiration of his mustaches and whiskers a few
days since."

"Yes, he was there, and is certainly a very unexceptionable young man.
But what is the use of one beau among four girls? The two Clays were
there, looking as forlorn as Shakspeare's nightingale: and Clara
monopolized Henry Bell, as though he belonged to her."

"Certainly I did," said Clara; "and so would you, if he had given you
the chance. Did you ever see such a dress as Betty Clay had on? She
looked like a buckwheat cake in it."

"And Mrs. Stetson's hair, Clara? Did you notice it? Screwed up behind
into an almost invisible little _catogan_, and put over her ears so
tight that she looked as if she had been in the pillory and came out
with her ears off."

"Was the dinner in good style?" again inquired Maggie.

"Yes, but too elaborate. Those people that have not always been upper
tens think it necessary to crowd their tables, and ruin one's digestive
organs. I declare, I thought I should swoon when that last course came
in. I was actually crammed with dinner, and looked forward to dessert
with a hope of relief!"

"And those two Charlotte Russes! As if one were not enough, with all
that ice-cream and jelly! Mrs. Hildreth said, at least half a dozen
times, how careful Soufflee was about having sweet cream, in spite of
the scarcity and expense. The idea of hinting to guests the cost of
their entertainment! These _parvenu_ people are _too_ absurd. I wish
they would learn _bienseance_ before they rise."

"So you had a dull day?" said Margaret, thinking of hers.

"Not precisely dull, but tedious. Laura does torment poor Phillips so,
that it makes us uncomfortable; and when people have to 'smile and
smile,' as we do, to gloss it over, it seems like that intense desire to
gap in stupid company, and the struggle to look as though you merely
meant to show now very wide awake you were. I do wish Laura would
confine her rudeness to ourselves; but no one ever dared tell her so but
Lewis, and he will never trouble himself to do it again."

"I wonder what he is doing now!" said Fanny. "I declare, I almost forgot
his existence. And that horrid woman, too! She had better do something
for herself, before she causes her husband to beg!"

"Depend upon it, Fanny, neither Lewis nor Cora would do _that_."

"Oh! you are their sworn champion, Margaret, we all know. But you cannot
do them any good, child--be sure of it. I wish she would go home, or
make Lewis mad, so that he could send her there."

"Fanny!" cried Margaret, shocked, "how unfeeling!"

"Pshaw! Did she not rob us of Lewis? Papa is poorer than ever; and we go
about dressed in shabby clothes, through her fault. Lewis used to pay
all our little bills, and now----."

"And now," interrupted Margaret, "instead of remembering his generosity
with gratitude, you abuse him for trying to be happy according to his
own ideas. You almost get on your knees to Laura if she but gives you a
cast-off ribbon. Be as full of deference to Lewis for past favors."

"We are obliged to curry favor with Laura," said Clara, lowering her
voice. "She has us all pretty much under her control since she promised
to live with us after her marriage."

"Excuse me," said Maggie, "but _I_ am not by any means under Laura's
dominion. She makes me no presents, and I make her no protestations. I
am civil to Mr. Phillips, however--and that is more than you are,
Clara."

"I am afraid," said she, laughing, "Laura is so _entichee_ of her love
that she does not like us to pay him attention. Cora won her eternal
hatred by speaking gently to him."

"How she must abuse us now!" exclaimed Fanny, after a pause. "I expect
Lewis is tired of our very names. She was always a vulgar thing, any
how."

"Vulgar!" cried Margaret. "You go rather too far, my dear sister. Cora
is as far from being vulgar as your own particular self--and you are not
sincere when you say so. Moreover, I believe she mentions our family as
seldom as possible. I wish that she could forget us, I am sure--for she
was brutally treated."

"Do hush, Maggie; here is papa, and you have half persuaded him to think
as you do. He seems actually conscience-stricken about Lewis's leaving
home. I would not be surprised to find him visiting Cora after a while."

"Where do they live, I wonder?" asked Fanny. "Laura will never let papa
know, if she can help it; and they might go to Kamschatka before we
Would discover it."

"Come, girls, go to your rooms," said Mr. Clavering, entering. "You talk
too much, and too lightly. Go to bed, and sleep if you can. It is more
than I have been able to do since you sent my poor boy from his father's
house."

The next morning at breakfast Laura seemed a little more amiable, and
began discussing plans for the summer excursions. Spring had set in, and
many were changing town homes for country ones.

"I vote for Dingleford," said Phillips, with a sudden burst of valor.

"You!" said his wife, with a look of scorn--"you!"

Mr. Phillips retired into himself, like Mr. Jenks of Pickwickian memory,
that being the only retirement _he_ was allowed; and Laura went on
without further notice.

"We will to Brooksford. The girls can come; for I will pay Clara's
expenses, and papa can easily do the rest. I heard the Martins, the
Hildreths, and the Fentons say they were going."

"Thank you for my share," said Margaret. "_I_ stay at home; your
fashionable friends are my aversion."

"You are so foolish, Maggie! You will never marry in the world."

"_Tant mieux_, I have no ambition to become _madame_. My tastes are very
simple, indeed. 'Liberty for me!' is my motto."

And it was arranged that Fanny and Clara should accompany Laura to
Brooksford to meet their friends, leaving Margaret and her father at
home to brave dust, heat, and musketoes as they could.

The old gentleman went to his counting-room to sit and think; Maggie
applied herself to some household occupation; Laura retired to her
chamber to fret like a peevish child; and Fanny and Clara prepared
themselves to go down to the front parlor to receive morning calls.

The bell rang, and the visits began. The consequence of each was easily
determined by the reception of the hostess, whose smiles were dispensed
more freely to some than to others. Mrs. Markham seemed determined to
outstay them all, and, being one of the "ultras," was encouraged to do
so. The dinner was once more discussed, as she had been one of the
invited, and Clara once more voted it a bore.

"I expected as much when I sent my refusal," said Mrs. Markham. "I hate
dinners; they are always dull and stupid. How can it be otherwise when
people meet expressly to eat?"

"And Mrs. Hildreth's piano is such an old kettle, too! I felt it almost
an insult to be asked to play on it."

"Yes; with such a sweet voice as yours, Clara, you ought to have a
perfect instrument. But where is Mrs. Clavering? She seems to have
withdrawn herself entirely from the world; we never see her now."

"She is not here," said Clara, coldly. "She does not live with us."

"No! Where is she then?" inquired Mrs. Markham, with more interest than
Clara liked. "She is a lovely creature. George fell quite in love with
her."

The girls seemed embarrassed; but Fanny's amiable expression advanced to
the rescue--

"The fact is, dear Mrs. Markham, we were somewhat disappointed in
Lewis's wife. She is very beautiful and accomplished, and, I dare say,
means well--in fact, I'm sure that her heart is very good, and all that;
but she hurt poor Laura's feelings so dreadfully one day that we really
had to notice it in spite of our love for Lewis. It almost breaks my
heart to think of it; but Cora was so violent after Laura once advised
her, in a mild, sisterly way, to be more economical (she _was_
extravagant), that we felt it our duty to rise against it; and she left
the house in great displeasure, making poor Lewis believe, of course,
what she liked. I _don't_ think she meant it," continued Fanny; "but it
_seemed_ unkind. I do not think she intended to be"--

"Then why did you notice it?" asked Mrs. Markham, abruptly. "I would
have found what palliation I could to prevent such a break up of ties."

This was something of a poser, and the two sisters exchanged glances;
but Fanny once more exerted her soft tones in behalf of "poor Laura."

"You know we could not hesitate between our own sister and Mrs.
Clavering. We could not have her insulted by a stranger, however
ignorant she may be of intentional wrong."

"But your brother is--your brother, is he not?"

Here Laura entered, and the conversation was stopped, to the infinite
relief of Fanny and Clara, who began to see that there was really
nothing to boast of in their treatment of Cora. The truth was, Mrs.
Markham had been on the opposite side of the street when they one
morning brushed against their sister-in-law with their usual
impertinence, and, amused at the scene, she tried to find out the cause
of it. On her return home, after her endeavors, she related what she
knew to her brother, and made her comments.

"Really, George, the idea of trying to persuade people that Cora
Clavering is a monster is, beyond everything, absurd; as if everybody
didn't see how unwelcome the poor thing was, how shabbily they served
her, and how they tried to hide her when she came among them. Why, they
never invited a soul to meet her as a bride; and when I asked for her
the day I called, you would have thought I mentioned a troublesome
animal."

"She is too pretty, Helen," said her brother. "That Mrs. Phillips is a
perfect tartar, and her sisters have no heart for anything but show.
They would sell their father for their love of fashion."

"All but Margaret, George."

"All but Margaret; and she is as far above them as heaven is above
earth. She must have had some other 'bringing up' than theirs. I would
swear that _she_ never ill treated Mrs. Clavering."

"Not she! Maggie loves her devotedly."

"Then that is sufficient proof to me of her perfect innocence and their
own falsehood. Mark that, Helen, Margaret's love proves that Mrs.
Clavering is worthy of kind and gentle treatment."

       *       *       *       *       *

One day Cora looked through the blind and saw her father-in-law before
the gate. He looked wistfully in, and stood for a few moments with his
hand on the latch. She would have gone out to meet him; but, remembering
their parting, felt reluctant to expose herself to farther insult. But
her heart yearned towards the poor old man, as she looked at his bent
form and face of care. He _was_ her husband's father, and as such
excited her sympathy. On Lewis's return, she mentioned the circumstance
to him.

"I wish he had seen you, dearest; he is sorry for the past, and
doubtless wished to come in, but dared not. He and Maggie are alone at
the house. I met her to-day, and she told me she was coming soon to see
you."

Dear Maggie! She came soon, and announced her approaching marriage with
Mrs. Markham's brother, George Seymour. She, whose motto was "Liberty
for me!"

"But, you see, Cora, I could not resist George; and all this time I have
loved him without being certain how it would terminate. I want to be
married in church; so does he; and you and Lewis will come and sit near
me. Laura and the girls are coming home for a week, and I want to
persuade papa to return with them. He will be so lonely without me! We
leave an hour or two after the ceremony."

"And when will you be back?" asked Cora, as the tears fell from her
eyes. "How I shall miss you, darling!"

"We are going North to see George's mother, and, of course, will not be
back before the fall. You will write constantly, Cora?"

"Of course I shall; it will be one of my pleasures to do so. May you be
happy, dear Margaret--God knows you deserve it! Lewis and I will both be
at church, dearest, with hearts full of love for you and your future
husband."

Margaret blushed, and, kissing her, tripped away with a light heart.

A few days after, she was in church to have her destiny for ever
changed. The long bridal veil concealed her sweet face, but her low,
distinct tones reached the brother and sister, sending a prayer into the
heart of each for that young thing's future.

It was over--Margaret's vows were spoken; her husband led her from the
altar with a look of pride, and friends pressed forward to congratulate
her. Tenderly met she the warm embrace of the two that loved her so
well, and her last words to Cora were a low whisper--

"Take care of my father!"

The others passed their brother's wife unheeded, though they spoke to
him a few words. They had ceased to care for him, and he was no more
than an acquaintance.

The carriages whirled away, and the bride left her home to learn
another's ways and habits. Laura returned to Brooksford with her
sisters. They could not remain at home; nor would their father go with
them. He tired of the world, and felt how little they cared for his
comfort.

Soon he fell ill, and sent for Lewis. Cora was alone when the message
came, and flew to see him. She was shocked at the change, and insisted
upon removing him to her own home. Once in that dear little room, he
seemed better, and, when Lewis came in, fell asleep clasping his hand.
Kindly watched Cora by the old man, soothing him, reading to him, and
attending to his every want. He seemed so grateful, and would follow her
light form with his eyes until the tears flowed from them. But he
gained no strength; the doctor shook his head and thought this a bad
symptom. _He_ could not "minister to a mind diseased," and the cares of
business had shattered that weak spirit. Lewis wrote to his sisters; but
they thought he was only too easily alarmed, and wrote in return for
further tidings. Their letter came when their father lay speechless in a
state of paralysis.

Fanny arrived in haste. Mr. Clavering knew her; but his look turned from
her to Cora, who held out her hand to her sister with an expression of
earnest sympathy. Fanny saw it, and burst into tears. Lewis led her from
the room, and an hysterical fit was the consequence. Her screams reached
the old man's ear, for he looked troubled; but Cora signed to the
servant to close the door, while she sat down beside him, trying to
soothe him into sleep. He soon fell into a quiet slumber, and she then
went to Fanny's assistance.

Her quiet but efficient help succeeded in calming her, and together the
three watched all night by their father's bed. He looked so pleased as
he opened his eyes and saw them together. Cora bent down and kissed him,
as she read his look, and once more held out her hand to Fanny. He
signed for her to come nearer. She kneeled at his side, and laid her
young, sweet cheek to his, and once more he closed his eyes. Towards
morning he grew weaker, and a few hours after he had gently breathed his
last, Laura, her husband, and Clara arrived.

Their grief was loud and violent, and painful to witness. If any feeling
of remorse visited their hearts, none knew it, for no reproach escaped
their lips. Fanny alone seemed stricken, and turned to Cora for comfort.

Mr. Clavering was buried by the side of his wife. His children followed
him to the grave; but in all that crowd not one mourned him as Cora did.
She loved the poor old man that clung to her so like a child; and as she
looked at Lewis and beheld his manly grief, she grieved anew over their
short separation.

The most becoming mourning was chosen, and the most fashionable
bombazine bonnets ordered. Laura and Clara hated black, and thought it a
dreadful thing to wear such an uncomfortable dress in the summer. But
custom was not to be braved, and they all appeared at church the Sunday
after, looking very proper, having asked Cora into their pew. There was
no longer an excuse for refusing to speak to her, and they had requested
her to appear with them in public once more, thinking, perhaps, that the
world would expect it--the world, with its countless eyes, ears, and
tongues!

Poor Margaret! Sorrow came soon to disturb her newly-found bliss, and
she returned earlier than she had intended, to weep over her father's
grave. Her pale face bore witness to her suffering, and Seymour's
tenderness alone called her from her indulgence of her grief. How she
blessed Cora for her care of her father! How she loved her for her
forgiving spirit!

She saw her now almost daily, for they lived so near; and Cora had this
one cause for thankfulness as troubles gathered around _her_ little
fireside. Lewis had striven with superhuman strength to increase his
slender capital, but in vain. Cora, whose stout heart never failed her,
retrenched here and there, deprived herself almost of the necessaries of
life to try and stay the storm. When her husband remained at the office
instead of returning to tea, Cora's evening meal was a slice of dry
bread with a cup of weak Bohea. For him she prepared some dish set by
from dinner, which she had seen him relish.

Turning down the lamp that the oil might not waste, she would sit
wondering how she could help her darling Lewis. She knew how much he
would object to have her apply to her mother, and, hating to grieve that
tender parent's heart, she wrote cheerfully and hopefully when her heart
was weighed down by anxiety. Lewis was growing thin, his buoyant spirit
was gone, and she wept over that, indeed. Maggie dreamed not of the
cause, but she, too, remarked the change in both, and felt doubly uneasy
about these two so dear to her. She questioned Cora closely; but Cora
was a sealed book this time. Lewis was peculiarly sensitive upon the
subject of his poverty, and could not bear the thoughts of the triumph
it would occasion Laura when she knew that his wife was really in
distress. Slowly, but alas too surely, the little sum diminished, and
Cora would soon lose her dignity of banker. She opened the drawer and
counted the remainder with a deep sigh, and began to feel how terrible
it was to be poor. Not that she repined for herself--oh no!--but the
idea of her husband's wan face was like a dagger in her heart. She
looked around her; there was nothing within her modest dwelling that
could be parted with, nothing but her mother's gift, and she knew that
Lewis would not hear of that. In a few days, she would be forced to tell
him that the drawer was empty, and not a cent left to provide for even
their scanty wants. She buried her face in her hands.

She did not see the servant enter, and Nora stood some time at the door
watching her with a look of sympathy, for she knew a portion of her
mistress's sorrow, and felt it, too.

"Won't I put on some more coal, Mrs. Clavering?" at length she asked.

Cora looked up; the fire was quite out, and it was a cold night, but she
had not heeded it.

"Never mind, Nora; my husband will soon be home now, and it would be
useless. You know he never sits up long after he returns."

"But it is a cold, wet night, ma'am, and Mr. Lewis will want to dry his
clothes," persisted Nora.

"_Is_ it a wet night, Nora?"

"Lord bless you, Mrs. Clavering, it has been pouring down rain for an
hour past!" and she ran back to the coal house, returning in a second
with the scuttle. "You see, ma'am," continued Nora, as she lighted the
fire and the cheerful light filled the room, "you thinks too much. I've
been here half a dozen times to-night, and seen you a ponderin' on sad
things. It won't do, ma'am; thinking don't fatten folks."

Cora smiled, and Nora went on. She was privileged, for she had been a
servant in old Mrs. Clavering's family, and at her instance came to live
with Cora when her household cares began.

"You see, Miss Cora"--(Nora never said Mrs. Clavering more than once or
twice)--"I know what ails you, and you ought not to take on about it so.
The darkest hour's before the dawn, and _your_ dawn an't come yet."

"I wish it were, Nora," said Cora, smiling again. "But there is a hope,
at all events, for worse than I am. You say that you know why I am sad,
Nora, and I am sure that you feel for one whom you have served so long.
Now, is there nothing I can do to help Mr. Clavering that you know of?
Nothing that will enable me to keep _you_? for, as things are now, there
is no use in concealing that I could no longer afford to employ a
servant, were there no brighter prospect."

"Takes two to make a bargain, Miss Cora, and you couldn't send me off if
I didn't choose to go," said Nora, stoutly. "It's a hard thing to see
you work, but I s'pose it's got to be. Would you sew, ma'am? I'm sure I
could get plenty of that."

"Certainly I would, gladly I would," said Cora, eagerly. "So keep your
word, Nora, and bring me something to do as soon as you can. You know
how nicely I can do fine work."

But Nora was crying, and went out of the room. Her pride for "the
Claverings" was sadly humbled, and her "poor Miss Cora too unhappy!" She
kept her promise, however; and long after the portfeuille lay useless in
the drawer, Cora's busy fingers earned wherewith to supply the every-day
wants of the house. What mattered it if her bonnet grew rusty and her
gloves were mended? She was always pretty and neat, and had always that
sweet fresh color that a consciousness of right sent to her cheek. The
same glad smile ever welcomed her husband, the same rich, clear voice
sang the touching songs he loved, and he seemed to catch a portion of
her undying spirit.

He returned home one evening earlier than usual, and going up to Cora,
threw something into her lap.

"That is for the bank, my singing-bird: it is a long time since I made a
deposit, is it not? Oh, Cora!" and Lewis's deep voice faltered as he
said it--"oh, Cora, if you knew how I dreaded to have you tell me that
it was all gone, when I had no more to give! What hours of misery I have
endured, my darling, since I came so near actual want! And you, my
noble-hearted wife, how bravely you gazed at the coming clouds--how
firmly you awaited the storm!"

"And has the storm ceased, Lewis?--is the sunshine returning?"

"There is a glimpse of it shining through the crevice, Cora, and I dare
hope for better times, even with no prospects. I feared this, dearest,
when my poor father sent me on the wide world with the slender sum I
placed in your hands. It must be all gone now; is not your drawer empty?
for, with your strict economy, it has lasted beyond my expectations."

Cora smiled, and brought a little chair to sit beside him. Fondly he
stroked her shining hair as she leaned her head against him, and all
sense of sorrow left his breast as this, his treasure, was so near.
Holding one little hand, he watched the arch smile upon those beautiful
lips.

"Tell me, rose-bud, how is your bank now? Have you not also dreaded to
mention its emptiness to your gloomy husband?"

"I have, indeed, Lewis; but there is something yet in the drawer, and I
shall not touch your present supply for a while, as I do not need it."

"You do not need it, Cora! Surely, dearest, you must have used all that
I gave you at first; it was not even sufficient for our wants till now;
for I have often wondered at your ingenuity in providing as you have.
You have not parted with anything you valued, Cora?"

She shook her head--

"Not at all. Do you miss any of my pet china, my silver, or my cherished
books?" asked she, laughingly.

"Then how is it, Cora, that you have managed so well?"

"Oh, I was blessed by the fairies at my birth, and am a successful
mesmerizer, too. I have the power of making you see more than is before
you."

"Let me see your account book, then, queen of spirits. I had no idea
that I had married a banshee. Where is your book?"

"I keep my own accounts, Mr. Lewis, so please you. This is a liberty I
will not allow." And Cora ran to her drawer and turned the key, thus
preventing the discovery of her labor of love.

But she confined herself too closely, and it was not long before her
face began to grow pale and her temples throb through the night. Lewis
was alarmed, and sent a physician. He prescribed exercise, country air,
and quiet; three luxuries of which poor Cora had been deprived for
months, and Lewis was more wretched than ever.

In the morning early, before Cora had risen, Nora went to him and told
all. Her young lady should not work herself to death; hiding it from Mr.
Lewis was a sin, and so she made bold to betray her. Lewis bowed his
head and wept; she had, indeed, been firm in adversity; she had, indeed,
been true to her word, and kept a stout heart. How he loved her! how
willingly he could have knelt before her! The scene that passed between
them I could not think of describing; it must be imagined by the
kind-hearted reader, by the sacrificing wife, and the grateful, devoted
husband. One load was taken from the mind of Lewis, the absence of local
disease in his cherished one, and he thankfully turned his thoughts to
the Great Source of all his joys, blessing him for the trials he sent
that he might be purified. Poor as he was, destitute of expectation as
he felt himself to be, he left home with a light heart. His gem, his
bright, beautiful Cora was not threatened with a loss of health. She had
promised to rest, and now she would find her roses once more.

During all this time, Margaret had watched her brother and sister with
intense anxiety, and, suspecting the cause of their altered looks, set
her little head to work to find out more. On a visit to Laura, she
mentioned Lewis and his appearance of delicate health. Cora's name she
never breathed before her hard-hearted persecutor.

"Oh, they are so poor; no wonder!" cried she, with a look of scorn. "I
suppose they are starving. _I_ wonder they are not begging."

"God forbid!" said Margaret, earnestly. "Have you heard anything?"

"Yes; Phillips told me Lewis did not make a cent, and wondered how they
had lived till now. The other evening, Mr. Layton was here and asked me
about Lewis, saying he could not find his house. He wished to offer him
the situation of head clerk in the establishment of Layton, Finlay &
Co."

"And what did you tell him?" asked Margaret, breathlessly.

"Oh, I told him there was no use in doing anything of the kind, as he
would not be able to keep Lewis long, his habits of negligence were so
irremediable."

"Great God of heaven!" cried Margaret, starting up and standing before
her sister. "You did not tell him _that_, Laura!"

"Indeed, I did! I have no idea of seeing that wife of his benefited in
any way. She married him poor; let her remain so."

Margaret was gone in an instant. She almost flew down the street to her
husband's office, and, fortunately, met him on her way. In a few words,
she related to him what had passed.

His indignation was not less than hers; and, before a quarter of an hour
elapsed, George Seymour was closeted with Mr. Layton, his cheek flushed
and his eye bright with excitement, as, without one word of
circumlocution, he told the plain, unvarnished truth.

Mr. Layton was much shocked, and hastened to make his offer to Lewis
Clavering in "plain black and white." Before night, the note was
received, and Lewis and his inimitable Cora had the prospect of comfort
and happiness with the surely-coming salary of two thousand a year.
Their grateful reception of this intervention in their behalf, their
unmurmuring hearts at past suffering, would form a bright example to
hundreds possessing perfect independence and no cares.

Laura's disappointment knew no bounds. Margaret's joy was complete. How
she and Cora talked over this good fortune, and how silvery and sweet
their merry laughter seemed to Lewis and Seymour, who were listening to
every word these two said. They were now discussing a marriage on the
tapis.

Clara was fortunate enough to secure an offer from a widower with a son
older than his future stepmother. But Mr. Penrose was very rich, and
could be hid, like Tarpeia of old, under jewels and gold. Clara loathed,
and would often turn from him with disgust, as her eye fell upon his
great clumsy form "fitting tight" (as the mantua-makers say) to the
Louis Quatorze, in which he regularly ensconced himself. His false teeth
were unexceptionable; his cheeks round and shiny. He bore one
resemblance to poor Uncle Ned:

    "For he had no hair on the top of his head,
       The place where the hair ought to be;"

and, in case of any danger, Clara could easily screen herself behind him
and never be seen. He was in a melancholy state of extreme health,
though there was a hope of apoplexy in his case; and all that Clara
could rejoice at was his tendency to severe gout, which would prevent
his accompanying her upon many occasions in public.

Margaret ventured a hint upon the disparity of age and disposition, a
sad inequality to bring into married life. But Laura talked so loudly in
favor of wealth and Mr. Penrose's consequence, that she was forced to be
silent. Fanny, too, approved Clara's wisdom and prudence. It was an
excellent match; Clara had shown herself a woman of determination,
superior to the foolish girls who prated of love and cottages. Let a man
be esteemed before he was loved, and there would be no doubt of perfect
harmony afterwards.

"So write your cards for the reception-day, Clara, and we will have a
grand ball in the evening. You shall be married with _eclat_ becoming
your prospects."

"A ball, Laura!" cried Maggie. "Have you forgotten our mourning?"

"No, indeed; I wish I had. But, as we have worn it now nearly a year,
I'm going to take the opportunity of leaving it off on Clara's wedding
day. So will she and Fan."

"But, Clara," said Maggie, turning to her, "our father has not been dead
a year yet! Leave off mourning if you will; but, for mercy's sake, do
not outrage decency by going to a ball, even if you have no feeling on
the subject."

"I agree with Laura, Margaret. We have been in prison long enough. I do
not wish to begin my married life in seclusion. We have had _soirees_
only six or seven times since papa died, and I went to one polka party
at Mrs. Hildreth's. I'm sure I have been dull enough to suit any one."

"You do not pay our father the respect that Cora does, and she is only
our sister-in-law."

"Don't bring up _her_ name," said Laura; "I hate to hear it. Clara may
send her a piece of cake if she likes, but she shall not be asked here;
though I'm willing that Lewis should be invited, to show what I think of
_her_."

"They would not come, depend upon it," said Margaret; "nor shall I; so
do not expect me. You will be much blamed."

"Pshaw!" said Clara. And so she was married, having issued cards to all
her fashionable friends. Her reception-day was very brilliant, the
_fete_ the gayest of the season; and the bride and groom left the next
afternoon for their wedding tour, amid the applause of the waiters, who
regaled themselves on the scraps of the feast and the half bottles of
champagne that were left to evaporate.

A year after, no one would have recognized the gay and elegant-looking
Clara Clavering in the faded Mrs. Penrose. Her elephantine spouse was
not so amiable as before marriage; and the poor wife was heard to say
that, after all, wealth was not the principal thing in marriage; she
would prefer a competency and happiness.

Laura's health was much impaired by her unceasing fretfulness and ill
humor, and eventually her sight became affected. Sitting in a dark room,
unable to read or sew, deprived of every amusement, she wept herself
blind at last! Reduced to this melancholy state, Cora Clavering once
more stepped across the threshold from which she had been so rudely
thrust, and offered her aid to the sufferer. Her gentle hand applied the
cooling compressions to Laura's swollen lids; her noiseless footstep
could cross the room and not disturb her if she slept. That low sweet
voice never grated harshly on the sensitive ear of the invalid, and she
learned to long for her coming as a captive for freedom. Fanny clung to
her as a guardian angel; for from how many heartaches did Cora's
presence save her! Margaret watched with her, and together they
persuaded Laura to submit to an operation; and she requested that it
might not be delayed.

But on Cora she leaned for support in the hour of trial, and, clasping
her hand firmly, said that she was prepared. Faithful and true, that
voice encouraged her through the trying moments. That slender arm
supported her head, and seemed so strong; and until the bandages were
removed from her eyes, still that slight form glided about to supply her
bitter enemy's every want.

But at length Laura could see once more, and light had come, too, upon
her darkened soul. Sitting one evening in Cora's little parlor, she
glanced around with a look of admiration upon its plain furniture, its
absence of luxury, and remembered the perfect content of its happy
mistress. While she, surrounded by all that wealth could afford, had
made herself and everything around her wretched. Fanny had often dreamed
of flying to Cora for shelter from bitter words and reproaches, and
Clara had long since ceased to visit the sister from whose lessons she
had learned to be that misguided thing, a worldly woman.

"You may well love Cora, Lewis," said Laura, as she saw how fondly he
watched her every motion; "she seems to have the secret of exorcising
evil spirits, and replacing them with good ones, besides being the best
nurse, the best wife, and the most sunshiny soul that ever was on
earth."

"Don't flatter me, Laura," said Cora, laughing, and giving Margaret's
baby a toss that made the little creature clap its hands with delight.
"Lewis told me once he thought he _had_ married a banshee."

"He married what is as rare as a banshee," said Margaret, who had been
sitting at Laura's side, knitting a tidy for the arm-chair her skillful
fingers had embroidered to embellish Cora's little Eden. "He has the
brightest jewel in the world, in a wife that can forgive, forget, and
return, without even seeming to be aware of it, 'good for evil.'"




SPRING.

BY FANNY FALES.


          SHE is with us! she is with us!
            For I list her gentle sigh,
          And her music tones of gladness,
            Floating through the branches dry;
          Now the south wind lifts the carpet
            Spread beneath the forest old;
          Waketh up the scented violet
            From her bed of richest mould.

          Softly trills the little sparrow,
            Pecking seeds from out the sod;
          And the robin, o'er me flying,
            Lifts his anthem up to God.
          To the dear old nest returneth,
            Yet again, the bluebird bright--
          To the hollow tree whence, yearly,
            Azure birdlings wing their flight.

          Now the brooklet is unfettered,
            Swollen by the melted snow;
          Shining like a thread of silver--
            Singing through the vale below:
          Tokens of the happy springtime,
            On the hillside by the brook;
          Emerald grasses, velvet mosses,
            Smile from many a sunny nook.

          On the cottage eaves alighting,
            Swallows in the sunlight sing,
          Filling all the air around me
            With their joyous twittering.
          O'er the deep blue upper ocean
            Little white-winged barges fly;
          Melting out, like fairy phantoms,
            'Neath the Day-god's burning eye.

          Sap is welling, leaf-buds swelling,
            Springing towards their shining goal,
          Bursting from their darkened dwelling,
            Like the freed immortal soul.
          Spring is with us! She is with us!
            New life wakes in every vein;
          Fresh hopes in my heart are welling,
            As I welcome her again!




WOMEN OF THE REVOLUTION.

BY MRS. E. F. ELLET.


MRS. LINCOLN.


THE following letter (never before published) from MRS. MERCY WARREN to
MRS. LINCOLN will be found interesting. Mrs. Lincoln was the eldest
sister of Josiah Quincy, Jr., to whom allusion is made in the letter.
Her husband, a brother of General Lincoln, died before the Revolution,
and she resided, during the war, with her father, Josiah Quincy, at
Braintree, now Quincy, in the mansion, now the summer residence, of
President Quincy. One of her letters to her brother, Samuel Quincy, who
left Boston with other loyalists, published in "Curwen's Memoirs" (page
562), is full of eloquence. She afterwards married Ebenezer Storer, of
Boston, and died, at the age of ninety, in 1826, a few weeks after the
decease of her early friend, John Adams. She was for many years a
correspondent of Mrs. Adams, and a life-long friendship subsisted
between them. They were often together at the family mansion at Quincy,
where, in 1824, she welcomed Lafayette to her father's residence. The
present Mrs. Quincy's mother, Mrs. Maria S. Morton, was there on that
occasion. This lady had resided at Baskenridge, New Jersey, during a
seven years exile from New York, where her husband, an eminent merchant,
left part of his property, devoting the profits of the sale of the rest
to the cause of American independence. He died during the war, leaving
Mrs. Morton with six children. Washington and all his officers were
frequent guests at her house, and some of the stirring incidents of the
campaign in New Jersey occurred in her immediate neighborhood. She was
born at Raub, on the banks of the Rhine, and lived to the age of
ninety-three, passing the last twelve years with her daughter. She
retained her powers to the last, and often beguiled the attention of
President Quincy's children with the narrative of the times when, as he
used to say, "the women were all heroines." She died at his residence at
Cambridge.


                                   PLYMOUTH, _June 3, 1775._

          DEAR MRS. LINCOLN: If the tenderest sympathy would
          be any alleviation to your sorrow, when mourning
          the death of a beloved brother, the ready hand of
          friendship should soon wipe the starting tear from
          your eye. Yet, while I wish to console the
          disappointed father, the weeping sister, and the
          still more afflicted wife, I cannot restrain the
          rising sigh within my swollen bosom, nor forbear
          to mix my tears with theirs, when I consider that,
          in your valuable brother, America has lost a warm,
          unshaken friend.[B] Deprived of his assistance
          when, to all human appearance, had his life been
          spared, he might have rendered his country very
          eminent service.

          By these dark dispensations of Providence, one is
          almost led to inquire why the useful, the
          generous, the spirited patriot is cut off in the
          morning of his days, while the base betrayer of
          his country, the incendiary, who blows up the
          flames of civil discord to gratify his own mad
          ambition, and sports with the miseries of
          millions, is suffered to grow gray in iniquity.

          But who shall say to the Great Arbiter of life and
          death, to the righteous Sovereign of the Universe,
          why hast thou done thus?

          Not surely man, whose ideas are so circumscribed,
          and whose understanding can grasp so little of the
          Divine government, that we are lost at the
          threshold, and stand astonished at the displays of
          Almighty power and wisdom. But shall we not rely
          on Infinite goodness, however severe may be our
          chastisement, while in this militant state, not
          doubting that, when the ball of Time is wound up,
          and the final adjustment of the wise economy of
          the universe takes place, virtue, whether public
          or private, will be crowned with the plaudits of
          the best of beings; while the vicious man, immured
          in his cot, or the public plunderer of nations,
          who riots on the spoils of the oppressed and
          tramples on the rights of man, will reap the
          reward of his guilty deeds?

          The painful anxiety expressed in your last letter
          for the complicated distresses of the inhabitants
          of Boston, is experienced, in a greater or less
          degree, by every heart which knows anything of the
          feelings of humanity. But He who is higher than
          the highest, and "seeth when there is oppression
          in the city," I trust will deliver us. He has
          already made a way for the escape of many, and if
          speedy vengeance does not soon overtake the
          wretched authors of their calamities, we must
          consider them as the scourge of God, designed for
          the correction of a favored people, who have been
          too unmindful of his goodness; and when they shall
          be aroused by affliction to a sense of virtue,
          which stimulated their worthy progenitors to brave
          the dangers of the sea, and the still greater
          horrors of traversing a barbarian coast, in quest
          of Freedom denied them on their native shore, the
          modern cankerworms will, with the locusts and
          other devourers which infested the nations of
          old, be swept, with the besom of destruction, from
          the face of the American World.

          I hope my friend will not again be obliged to
          leave her habitation for fear of the ravages of an
          unnatural foe; yet I think we must expect
          continual alarms through the summer, and happy
          will it be for the British Empire, of which
          America is a part, if this contest terminate then.
          But, whether it be a season of war or the sunshine
          of peace, whether in prosperity or affliction, be
          assured Mrs. Lincoln has ever the best wishes of
          her real friend,

                                              MERCY WARREN.


REBECCA WILLIAMS.

One of the early adventurers in the Valley of Ohio River was Isaac
Williams. After he became a resident of the West, he explored its
recesses, traveling along the shores of the Mississippi to the turbid
waters of the Missouri. In 1775, he married a youthful widow, Rebecca
Martin, the daughter of Joseph Tomlinson, of Grave Creek. Her first
husband had been a trader with the Indians, and was killed in 1770. She
was born in 1754, on the banks of the Potomac, in Maryland, and removed
to Grave Creek with her father's family in the first year of her
widowhood. Since that time she had lived with her unmarried brothers,
keeping house for them, and would remain alone in their dwelling while
they were absent on hunting excursions. She was young and sprightly in
disposition, and had little knowledge of fear. In the spring of 1774,
she paid a visit to her sister, who had married a Mr. Baker, and resided
upon the banks of the Ohio, opposite Yellow Creek. It was soon after the
celebrated massacre of Logan's relatives at Baker's station. Rebecca
made her visit, and prepared to return home as she had come, in a canoe
alone, the distance being fifty miles. She left her sister's residence
in the afternoon, and paddled her canoe till dark. Then, knowing that
the moon would rise at a certain hour, she neared the land, leaped on
shore, and fastened her craft to some willows that drooped their boughs
over the water. She sought shelter in a clump of bushes, where she lay
till the moon cleared the tree tops and sent a broad stream of light
over the bosom of the river. Then, unfastening her boat, she stepped a
few paces into the water to get into it. But, as she reached the canoe,
she trod on something cold and soft, and stooping down discovered, to
her horror, that it was a human body. The pale moonlight streamed on the
face of a dead Indian, not long killed, it was evident, for the body had
not become stiff. The young woman recoiled at first, but uttered no
scream, for the instinct of self-preservation taught her that it might
be dangerous. She went round the corpse, which must have been there when
she landed, stepped into her bark, and reached the mouth of Grave Creek,
without further adventure, early the next morning.

In the ensuing summer, one morning while kindling the fire, blowing the
coals on her knees, she heard steps in the apartment, and, turning
round, saw a very tall Indian standing close to her. He shook his
tomahawk at her threateningly, at the same time motioning her to keep
silence. He then looked around the cabin in search of plunder. Seeing
her brother's rifle hanging on hooks over the fireplace, he seized it
and went out. Rebecca showed no fear while he was present; but,
immediately on his departure, left the cabin and hid herself in the
standing corn till her brother came home.

Her second marriage was performed with a simplicity characteristic of
the times. A traveling preacher, who chanced to come into the
settlement, performed the ceremony at short notice, the bridegroom
presenting himself in his hunting-dress, and the bride in short-gown and
petticoat of homespun, the common wear of the country.

This Rebecca Williams afterwards became famous among the borderers of
Ohio River for her medical skill, and the cure of dangerous wounds. She
was with Elizabeth Zane at the siege of Fort Henry, at Wheeling, and
there exercised the healing art for the benefit of the wounded soldiers.
In 1777, the depredations and massacres of the Indians became so
frequent that the settlement at Grave Creek was broken up. It was in a
dangerous locality, being on the frontier, and lower down the river than
any other.

       *       *       *       *       *

In December, 1777, when the British army was in possession of
Philadelphia, and the Americans in winter quarters at Valley Forge,
Major Tallmadge was stationed for some time between the two armies, with
a detachment of cavalry, for the purpose of observation, and to
circumscribe the range of the British foraging parties. The horses of
his squad were seldom unsaddled, nor did they often remain all night in
the same position, for fear of a visit from the enemy.

At one time the major was informed that a country girl had gone into
Philadelphia with eggs, to obtain information. It is supposed she had
been employed for that purpose by Washington himself. Desirous of seeing
her, Tallmadge advanced towards the British lines, and dismounted at a
small tavern called "The Rising Sun," within view of their outposts. In
a short time, the young woman came from the city and entered the tavern.
She communicated the intelligence she had gained to the major; but their
conversation was interrupted by the alarm that the British light horse
were approaching. Stepping to the door, Tallmadge saw them riding at
full speed chasing in his patroles. No time was to be lost, and he threw
himself on his horse. The girl besought him to protect her: he told her
to mount behind him, which she did, and they rode three miles at full
speed to Germantown. There was much firing of pistols during the ride,
and now and then wheeling and charging; but the heroic damsel remained
unmoved, nor uttered one expression of fear after she was on horseback.
Tallmadge mentions her conduct with admiration in his journal.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the approach of winter, when the British army retired from the active
service of the field, they were usually distributed, while in possession
of Long Island, in the dwellings of the inhabitants within the lines. An
officer, at first, visited each house, and, in proportion to its size,
chalked on the door the number of soldiers it must receive. The first
notice the good hostess commonly had of this intrusion was the speech,
"Madam, I am come to take a billet on your house." The best mansion was
always reserved for the quarters of the officers. In this way were women
forced into the society of British officers, and, in order to conciliate
their good will and protection, would often invite them to tea, and show
them other civilities.

       *       *       *       *       *

The "New London Gazette," dated November 20, 1776, states that several
of the most respectable ladies in East Haddam, about thirty in number,
had met at the house of J. Chapman, and, in four or five hours, husked
about two hundred and forty bushels of corn. "A noble example," says the
journal, "and necessary in this bleeding country, while their fathers
and brothers are fighting the battles of the nation."

Lossing records a similar agreement on the part of the Boston women.

       *       *       *       *       *

The "New York Spectator," April 13th, 1803, forty-seven years old,
announces the arrival in New York of Mrs. Deborah Gannett, the "Deborah
Samson" whose memoir appeared in a former number of the "Lady's Book."
It says: "This extraordinary woman served three years in the army of the
United States, and was at the storming of Yorktown under General
Hamilton, serving bravely, and as a good soldier. Her sex was unknown
and unsuspected, until, falling sick, she was sent to the hospital, and
a disclosure became necessary. We understand this lady intends
publishing her memoirs, and one or more orations which she has delivered
in public upon patriotic subjects. She, last year, delivered an oration
in the Theatre at Boston, which excited great curiosity and did her much
credit."

This curious confirmation of the account given of her in the memoir
alluded to should be a sufficient answer to the ill-natured criticism of
the "_London Athenaeum_," which, reviewing "The Women of the American
Revolution," endeavors to throw discredit on the whole story, by
ridiculing it as utterly improbable and romantic, though the critic does
not bring proof to controvert a single statement, nor assign any ground
for his doubt but "we surmise."

FOOTNOTE:

[B] Josiah Quincy, Jr., ob. 26 April, 1775.




HOME; OR, THE COT AND TREE.

BY ROBERT JOHNSON.


          I KNOW a cot, beneath whose eave
            There is a hawthorn tree,
          Where playmates young were wont to weave
            Spring's earliest flowers for me:
          That old familiar cot and tree,
            The oaken bench and shade,
          Are ever present now with me
            As when we met and played.

          Beneath that ancient tree and cot
            We lisped our earliest prayer,
          And ours was then the happiest lot,
            Blest by a mother's care;
          Those gentle looks and tones still live--
            Though time that group has riven--
          As when we said "Father forgive,"
            As we would be forgiven.

          Home is a spot where memory clings,
            As by a spell, through life;
          For there's a voice whose tone still brings
            Joy mid the world's dark strife:
          We launch youth's bark and trim the sail,
            Life's ocean o'er to roam,
          But that same voice, throughout the gale,
            Is whispering still of home.

          Ask him, with sickness sore oppressed,
            Who cheered his hope when dim,
          He'll tell you _she_, in whose loved breast
            Glowed sympathy for him:
          The soothing voice, the gentle tread,
            And ever silent prayer,
          The pillow smoothed to ease the head--
          All tell a mother's care.

          Ask him who, on the ocean dark,
            In unknown seas did roam,
          When first he spied the nearing bark,
            If he thought not of home?
          He'll tell of thoughts that thrilled his heart
            While bounding o'er the wave;
          The joys that none but home impart
            Lent courage to the brave.

          He thought of her, his early choice,
            The parting hour, the sigh,
          The hand that pressed, the trembling voice,
            Sad face, and tearful eye;
          And while he walks the deck at night,
            He ever sees that star
          Whose beam reflects where joys more bright
            Still win him from afar.





[Illustration]




COUNTRY CHARACTERS.

THE LAST OF THE TIE-WIGS.

BY JARED AUSTIN.


ONE of my earliest village reminiscences is a vision of old Captain
Garrow, in his old-fashioned, square-skirted coat, plush shorts, silk
stockings, shoe buckles, and, to crown the whole, his venerable tie-wig.
He was a character, the captain. He was a relic of a past age, an
antique in perfect preservation, a study for a novelist or historian.
Born in Massachusetts before the rebel times, he had taken an active
part in the Revolution; served as commissary, for which his education as
a trader had qualified him; and the rank of captain which was attached
to the office had given him the title he bore in his old age. When the
war was over, his savings (very moderate, indeed, they were, for the
captain was as honest as daylight) were invested in a stock of what used
to be called English goods, but what are now, through the increase of
manufactures in our own country, denominated dry goods; I think it
rather fortunate for our village that the worthy captain pitched upon it
for his residence, and for the sale of his well-selected English goods.
His strict old-fashioned notions of commercial honor and punctuality
gave a tone to the whole trade of the place, which lasted for a long
time. His modest shop was a pattern of neatness and economy. His
punctual attendance at all hours, his old bachelor gallantry to the lady
customers, and his perfect urbanity to all, furnished an example to
younger traders; while his stiff adherence to the "one price" system,
while it saved the labor and vexation of chaffering, gave a stability to
his establishment which made it respectable in the view of all sensible
people.

Worthy Captain Garrow! well do I remember you at the meridian of your
glory, the head "merchant" of our village, the acknowledged _arbiter
elegantiarum_ in all matters of chintz and linen, and lace and ribbons,
and all the _et ceteras_ of ladies' goods. Your opinion was law; for you
were known to be the soul of honor, and your word in all engagements was
reckoned as good as another man's bond.

But, in an evil hour, an invasion of Goths and Vandals came down upon us
in the shape of cheap English goods' merchants. They inundated the place
with gaudy, worthless trash at half price, gave unlimited credit, sold
at almost any price you would offer, and seemed only anxious to have all
the villagers' names in their books, and to double the consumption of
English goods. The consequence was that the thoughtless part of the
population deserted the worthy captain's shop, which henceforward
received the custom only of the old steady-going people. His
ancient-looking wooden tenement, with its weather-beaten sign, was put
out of all countenance by the new brick stores, and flaring gilt signs,
and plate glass windows of his rivals. The captain, however, foreseeing
the result, bore it all with a dignity and quiet worthy of his
character. He "guessed" that the importers in Boston and New York were
destined to suffer at a future day; and so it turned out; for, after
charging many thousand dollars in their books to people who were not
very punctual about payment, his rivals, one by one, all failed; their
stocks were sold out by the sheriff, and their book debts were handed
over to the lawyers by assignees.

After the lapse of a few months, a new swarm of cheap merchants
succeeded them, with precisely the same result. Meantime, the captain
kept the noiseless tenor of his way, and maintained the original
character of his own modest establishment. He had grown rich, but
exhibited none of the airs of a presumptuous millionaire. He was too
dignified to be insolent.

Well do I remember, on a certain day, when the captain, now quite an old
man, was near the close of his career, calling at his shop with my
cousin Caroline, commissioned by her mother to purchase with ready
money a piece of Irish linen. When she had examined the captain's stock,
and was about to make a purchase, she happened casually to remark that
Irish linen was sold sometimes at a lower price.

"O yes, my dear," answered the captain--he always called a lady, old or
young, "my dear"--"O yes; you can buy Irish linen over the way, where
the big sign is, for less money. They will sell it to you, I dare say,
at half price, and cheat you at that. But their goods are not like mine.
They will generally take less than they ask you at first; but I never
have but one price. I was bred a merchant before chaffering came into
fashion. You can go and trade with them if you like, however."

Poor Caroline, who had not been aware of the captain's weak point,
hastened to apologize, concluded her purchase, and was careful in future
to respect the captain's sensitiveness on the subject of cheap goods.

Ere I left my native village to become a wanderer over the wide world,
the captain had been gathered to his fathers. Having no relatives, he
directed the executors of his will to apply his handsome fortune to the
establishment of an asylum for orphans, which still remains a monument
of his sterling goodness and public spirit.




TO A. E. B., OR HER WHO UNDERSTANDS IT

BY ADALIZA CUTTER.


          DEAREST, my sad and lonely breast
            Is full to-night of thoughts of thee,
          And as the tired dove seeks its nest,
            With its dear little ones to be,
          E'en thus my weary spirit turns
          To thee, for whom it fondly yearns,
            And flies unfettered o'er the sea:
          Upon thy breast it folds its wing,
          And there its sweetest song doth sing.

          I am thinking of those twilight hours
            When, hand in hand, we used to rove;
          When little birds in sylvan bowers
            Awoke the echoes of the grove;
          When flowers closed up their dewy eyes,
          And o'er us arched those cloudless skies,
            Smiling upon our mutual love:
          And oh, my heart doth sadly yearn
          For hours that may no more return!

          More and more sadly, day by day,
            I miss thy gentle loving tone,
          And long to soar far, far away,
            To meet once more my loved, my own.
          I sit to-night with tearful eye
          Fixed on that star in yonder sky;
            But oh, it shines on me alone!
          For she who watched its pale soft beam
          With me, has gone like some bright dream.

          I sometimes take my lute to sing
            The simple songs we loved so well;
          But when I touch each quivering string,
            Sad, mournful sounds arise and swell;
          For she whose presence could inspire
          My heart with such poetic fire
            Has kissed her last, her sad farewell
          Upon my cheek, and left me here
          To shed alone the silent tear.

          I take my books; but bard and sage
            Have half their beauty lost for me,
          And tears fall fast upon the page
            That I so oft have read with thee.
          And then I throw those books aside,
          While faster still the tear drops glide,
            That by my side thou canst not be.
          Poor heart, be still, nor sigh in vain
          For joys that may not come again!

          Where, where art thou? Oh, well I know
            What joy my presence would impart!
          What rapture in thine eye would glow
            To clasp me to thy loving heart!
          For in that noble heart of thine
          Beats the same love that throbs in mine;
            Nor time shall bid that love depart.
          Meet me in Heaven! my heart's warm prayer,
          I _love thee here_--I'll _love thee there_!




THE JUDGE; A DRAMA OF AMERICAN LIFE.

BY MRS. SARAH J. HALE.

(Concluded from page 245.)




ACT V.


          SCENE I.--_Rose Hill. The garden before_ PROF.
          OLNEY'S _house_. YOUNG HENRY BOLTON _and_
          ISABELLE; _she is weeping_. TIME _morning_.


HENRY BOLTON (_aside_).

    I cannot leave her in this agony,
                                   (_looks at his watch_,)
    And yet the hour is nearly out. O Time!
    Turn back thy sands! take months from out my life
    For moments spared me now. I cannot leave her.
    (_To her._) Dear Isabelle, be comforted; I'll go
    And tell my father this sad tale you've told me.
    Fear not; he has a soul of nobleness--
    He will consent; and, when you are my wife,
    You'll have a host of friends.


ISABELLE.

                                  No! no! dear Henry;
    This must not, cannot be. I've given my word
    To him who hitherto I deemed my father,
    And who has been a father in his care--
    He's dying now--that I will take his charge,
    Will teach his pupils, and insure a home
    To his poor wife and Alice, whom I love
    As an own sister. They gave me a home,
    Else I had been cast off e'en as the weed
    Is cast to perish. No! I must be firm;
    My duty is made plain; I must stay here.


HENRY BOLTON.

    Oh! say not so, dear Isabelle! be mine.
    Would you waste youth, and health, and loveliness
    In this unthankful and laborious life?
    No! no! It must not be; I will provide
    For these.


ISABELLE.

              Oh, Henry, torture me not thus
    Forcing my heart to strive against my soul.
    Your generous love but humbles me the more.
    Do not mistake me: 'tis not pride, but duty,
    That tells me we must part--and part for ever.


HENRY BOLTON.

    And you say this to me! You never loved me--
    While I have given to you my heart, soul, mind--
    Made you the idol of my earthly hopes,
    My dream of angel-blessedness above!
    You never loved me!


ISABELLE (_weeping_).

                      Ah! it may be best
    That you should thus believe--should doubt my love.
    Tis but another grief for me to bear;
    And I had rather suffer than inflict
    A pang on you. But, Henry, if I were
    An heiress, with a fortune and a name,
    And friends to love and flatter me--I'd speak
    Of my heart's love for you: I cannot now--
    A nameless, homeless, and forsaken child.
    Oh! let me be forgiven if I keep
    The station heaven appointed me--alone!
    Some must be sufferers in this world of care--
    Victims for others, wearing out their lives,
    Like the poor Greenlanders, in night and winter.
    But God will strengthen all to bear their lot,
    If patiently they take the burden up.
                                 (_Weeping bitterly._)


HENRY BOLTON.

    This must not, shall not be, dear Isabelle;
    Hear reason, if you will not love. Last night
    A vile attempt was made to burn this house,
    And carry you away. Dare you live here,
    When there'll be none to guard you? Isabelle,
    You must be mine at once--give me the right
    To keep you, like a jewel, in my bosom,
    Where not an eye but loves you shall behold you.
    Oh! say you will be mine.


ISABELLE.

                            It would be vain:
    Your father never would consent. A year
    You've promised him to wait--and, ere that time
    Is passed, you may forget the nameless girl.


HENRY BOLTON.

    I will not wait a day. My word was passed
    When I believed this home of yours was safe
    Now--not a day. I go to ask my father.
    If he refuses me, I leave his house.
    I am of age to answer for myself.


ISABELLE (_calmly_).

    Oh! not for me and mine must this be done:
    You must not leave your home and friends for me.
    Your future would be marred for ever, Henry
    No! leave me to the care of Providence.


HENRY BOLTON.

    Dear Isabelle, with you I have the world.
    I'll hire two cottages together, love--
    And we'll have one--your friends shall have the other.
    The garden-plots shall join, and you and Alice
    May have the flowers in partnership, as here.
    The flower of love will bloom spontaneously
    Beneath your smiles--and fortune's smiles I win
    In winning yours. Come with me to your father,
    The good and honest Olney. He will consent.
                  [_Exeunt into the house. Scene, closes._


SCENE II.--_The drawing-room at_ JUDGE BOLTON'S.

_Enter_ JUDGE BOLTON.


JUDGE.

    The day of destiny for me has come!
    Strange how the aspect of the outer world
    Changes beneath the changes of the soul!
    This morning is a glorious one to sense!
    But Hope, the sun that lights the inner man,
    And warms the mind to noble energy,
    Giving the will its giant power to sweep
    The clouds of doubt and dark distrust away,
    Even as the risen sun the morning mists--
    Hope comes not to my soul!
          (_Enter_ REV. PAUL GODFREY.)
                               Ah! Godfrey, welcome!
    You look as you had brought her in your heart,
    This truant Hope, to render her to me.
    I never felt the worth of friends till now.
    My life has been one long unclouded day.
    I had almost forgotten my dependence
    On Him who sends the sunshine as the storm.


GODFREY.

    A dangerous state. The Bible tells us, truly,
    That "They who have no changes fear not God."
    And fear is the beginning of our love,
    And love brings trust, and trust true confidence--
    Not in our own deserts, or powers, or wealth,
    But confidence, if we pursue the good
    With firm resolve, that all will work for good.
    This, the true wisdom, man but seldom learns,
    Except 'tis taught him by adversity.
    Thank God that this, your trial, has not come
    As punishment of your misdeeds--but sent,
    As 'twere, like Job's of old, to try your faith
    In truth and justice and God's righteousness!
    Keep your integrity--all will be well.
         _Enter_ DR. MARGRAVE _hastily._


    DR. MARGRAVE

    Joy! joy!--the clue is found!


JUDGE.

    What? Where's the child?


DR. MARGRAVE

    The child! Inquire for the young lady now--
    For such, I trust, you'll find your Isabelle.
    I've seen the nurse who carried her away:
    'Twas she who sent for me--that dying woman.
    Let doctors take encouragement from this,
    That in their duties they will gain rewards.


JUDGE.

    But Isabelle, my ward--where is she now?


DR. MARGRAVE

    I'd leave my bed again to-night to seek her,
    Only it would be groping in the dark.
    Pray, do not look so sad--we'll find her yet;
    I have the clue, here is the deposition--
    I took it from the dying woman's lips.
    She died an hour ago. She hither came
    To find you out and own her crime.


JUDGE.

                                     The child--
    Where did she leave her?


DR. MARGRAVE

                          Have a moment's patience.
    The woman said she did not dare to carry
    The child among her kindred at the West;
    They would have found the imposition out,
    As Isabelle resembled not her daughter.
    And so the woman traveled to Virginia,
    And there, with a kind family, she left
    The orphan to her fate.


JUDGE.

                            With whom?


DR. MARGRAVE

                                   The name
    She has forgotten--but she left a token,
    Half of this severed chain (_takes out half a necklace_),
           with "Isabelle"
    Engraven, as this has "De Vere" upon it.


JUDGE. (_snatching the chain_).

    Ah! this was Isabelle's--her mother's, too!
    This is a clue indeed. I'll go at once
    To seek her out and find the other half.


GODFREY (_taking it out_).

    'Tis here. And thus may Truth be ever found
    By all who seek her earnestly, and wait
    Her advent in the time and way appointed!
    The way is righteousness--the time is God's.


JUDGE.

    I am confounded by these miracles.
    Explain--where did you find this precious token?


GODFREY

    'Twas given me by Professor Olney--he
    It was who took the little Isabelle
    And reared her as his own.


JUDGE.

                              What Isabelle?
    That daughter of the pedagogue my son
    Is seeking for his wife?


GODFREY

                            The very same.
    And Romeo did not love his Juliet more
    Than your son loves this charming Isabelle;
    And she, like Juliet, loves him in return.


JUDGE.

    Thank Heaven for this!
        (_Enter_ HENRY BOLTON.)
                  Ah! here he comes! Now, Henry,
    What says your lady-love? Is she inclined
    To trust your constancy for one long year?


HENRY BOLTON.

    I cannot wait the term; and I have come
    To ask your pardon, and retract my word.
    Isabelle has no home; Professor Olney
    Is not her father.


JUDGE.

                      Ay, I've heard the story.
    And you resign her now?


HENRY BOLTON.

                            Not while I live!
    I mean to marry her at once--to-day;
    Before this only father she has known
    Is dead:--he will die soon.


JUDGE.

                                Wed her! this unknown!
    Ah! Henry, this to me! Why, you are mad!


HENRY BOLTON.

    My father, I have told you my resolve;
    You've heard me own my love for Isabelle;
    To have your approbation of my choice
    Would fill my cup of earthly happiness;
    But I shall marry her e'en though the act
    Bring banishment from you.


JUDGE.

                              You promised, Henry,
    To wait a year.


HENRY BOLTON.

                   And so I would have done.
    To gain your favor, I would suffer this
    Delay and cross of love. But now I feel
    That duty, honor, manly sentiment
    Compel me to the side of Isabelle.
    She is alone; I must and will protect her.


JUDGE.

    She has no name.


HENRY BOLTON.

                    She shall have mine: a name
    My father has made honorable.


JUDGE.

                                 Henry,
    You have no fortune. How support your wife?


HENRY BOLTON.

    I'll work. I have been flattered for my talents,
    But never yet have had an aim or motive
    To test their worth and energy. I'll work.
    The rich man's son may live in idleness,
    The great man's son reflects his father's light,
    And thus their genius and their noblest powers
    Are often unemployed, obscured, and lost.
    'Tis better I should have to make my way;
    And with my guiding angel, Isabelle,
    And the example of my noble father,
    I surely shall succeed.


GODFREY.

            Give me your hand.
    You are God's noblest work, an honest man;
    True to the witness your own spirit bears;
    And so does every man's, would they but hear
    And follow as you do--that worth is won,
    And not inherited. 'Tis circumstance
    That makes the difference in our mortal lot;
    And Providence arranges this at will.
    How kind the lot that gives you Isabelle!


JUDGE.

    My son! my son! may you be worthy of her,
    And love her alway. Know she is the one
    That, in your boyhood, was your "little wife!"
    The Isabelle De Vere we mourned as dead.
    You stand amazed; but all shall be explained.


HENRY BOLTON.

    Oh, let me go and tell her!


GODFREY.

                               I'll go with you:
    And, as we go, will make the mystery plain.


JUDGE.

    And bring her here. Order the carriage, Henry,
    And bring her home with you. Tell her I long
    To fold her to my heart and call her daughter.
                    [_Exit_ YOUNG BOLTON _and_ GODFREY.


DR. MARGRAVE.

    How strangely and how wisely Providence
    Directs the course of life! How oft we see
    That bitter medicine was kindly given.
    Had Isabelle remained your ward, brought up
    With Henry here, they might, indeed, have married;
    But never would have felt such certainty
    Of true, unbribed affection as will be
    The blessing and the memory of their life.

DENNIS _and_ MICHAEL _are heard singing as they enter._


DENNIS _and_ MICHAEL (_song_)

    The rogue and the ruffian love darkness and night,
    But we will go forth when the morning is bright,
    And the joy of the world shall the happiness be
    Of Dennis O'Blarney and Michael Magee.


DENNIS (_seeing the_ JUDGE).

    Bless your honor's house--the rogues are taken.


MICHAEL.

    They've taken Captain Pawlett and another.


DENNIS.

    The other murdering villain entered here.


MICHAEL.

    The officers are coming now to search.

(_As the_ OFFICERS _enter, the report of a pistol is heard._ LUCY BOLTON
_and the maid_ RUTH _rush in._)


JUDGE (_catching_ LUCY _in his arms_).

    What is it, Lucy? What has happened, bird?


LUCY.

    Oh, father, he is killed!


JUDGE.

                              Who? who?


LUCY.

                                        Frederick!
    He's shot himself, and in his mother's room. Oh!

(_Shrieks and faints._)


DR. MARGRAVE.

    I'll go and see what can be done.
         [_Exit_ MARGRAVE _and the_ OFFICERS.


JUDGE.

                                      Lucy!
    She is reviving! Quick, give me the cup.
    Here, drink, my love; the water will revive you.
    Nay, do not speak; be silent and be calm.
    The angels, as they watch this guilty world,
    See every day such sights of wretchedness
    Think of the angels in that world of joy,
    Where Death can never enter. Do not weep.
    Ah, yes! you are a mortal and a woman,
    And tears of pitying grief for other's woes
    Are human offerings Heaven will ne'er reject.
    Weep for Belinda's sorrow; weep for her.

_Re-enter_ DR. MARGRAVE.


DR. MARGRAVE.

    'Tis over! He has gone to his account.


JUDGE.

    Where human judgment never may intrude.
    We'll leave him to the One who reads the heart,
    And knows its wants, and woes, and weaknesses.
    Lord, keep us from temptation!--this should be
    The daily prayer of all--with thankfulness
    For daily blessings given--and here come mine.

_Enter_ GODFREY, _followed by_ YOUNG BOLTON _and_ ISABELLE.


GODFREY (_to the_ JUDGE).

    We bring you the lost pleiad of your heart.


HENRY BOLTON.

    My father, Isabelle.

JUDGE.

                         And yours, my daughter!
                                    (_Embracing her._)
    Come to my arms, my long-lamented child;
    I welcome thee as one restored from death.
    This house and all I've called mine own are yours,
    And now shall be restored.


ISABELLE.

                             Dear father, no
    But take me as your own, and let me live
    Thus in the warmth and light of this dear home:
    I shall be rich, beyond my wildest dreams.
    I only wished for wealth to give away
    To those I loved, and those who were in need.
    And now the world o'erflows with happiness.
    I am so rich in friends and hopes, I feel
    Half fearful it will prove a fairy tale;
    It seems too sweet for earth.

MADAME BELCOUR _rushes in, her hair disheveled, followed by attendants._


MADAME BELCOUR.

    He's dead! he's dead! I've murdered him!
      He's dead!
    My falsehood poisoned him; and so he died.
    He did not kill himself! Say not a word.
    My heart and brain are both on fire! His blood
    Is here, and here! (_Sees_ ISABELLE.) Oh, save me! save me now!
    She's come to witness here against my soul!
    You cannot see her; she is like an angel!
    I know her well! She's there! Begone! begone!

(_Faints exhausted on the stage. Attendants raise her._)


JUDGE.

    Poor broken-hearted mother! Bear her in,
    And tenderly. Her mind is quite o'erthrown.
           [MADAME BELCOUR _carried in by the attendants._


DR. MARGRAVE.

    These alternations make the sum of life:
    Thus sorrow treads upon the steps of joy.
    A bridal here; and from the neighboring door
    Comes forth a funeral tram.


GODFREY.

                               And both are well.
    We live to die, and die to live again;
    And evermore the day succeeds the night.
    And those who see the sunshine on their path
    May walk in soberness and yet be glad.


JUDGE.

    The cloud conceals, but never dims the star;
    And Youth and Happiness will twine their wreath
    Even on Thalia's brow. My children, come;
    It is my birthday; all our friends are here,
    And they return our smile of thankful joy
    That Isabelle is found. Our task is done;
    And, if approved by you, our cause is won.

END OF THE PLAY.




SUSAN CLIFTON OR, THE CITY. AND THE COUNTRY.

BY PROFESSOR AIDEN.

(Continued from page 250.)


CHAPTER XVI.

AFTER a partial recovery from the fatigues of the journey to the
homestead, Mr. Richard Clifton appeared to be much improved in health,
and strong hopes were entertained that his recovery would be complete.
He manifested the proper showings of regret for the loss of his
companion, though he had felt towards her none of that ardor of
affection, and had enjoyed with her none of those felicities which had
mingled in his visions of domestic life before he had become a
prosperous man of the world. It was sad to have death enter his
dwelling; it was sad to be left with no one whom he could call his own.
Some of that loneliness which had long preyed upon him was, perhaps,
unconsciously set to the loss of her who had filled but a small place in
his heart, though she had been the wife of his bosom for a score of
years, and had found in him all she expected in a husband; perhaps it
would be scarce too much to say--all she desired.

In a few days, he was able to leave his chamber and sit with the family,
though his feeble step and sunken eye contrasted strangely with the
proud bearing which he exhibited but a few weeks before.

Susan devoted herself to his care, and his attachment for her seemed to
increase daily. While her father was busy with the labors of the farm,
and her mother was occupied with household cares, she talked with him,
read to him, sung to him, and in every way strove to make the time pass
pleasantly, and to woo back to his veins the tide of health.

For a time there was an encouraging prospect of success, but the
prospect was soon overcast. After the first rallying, he remained
stationary for a time, and then began, almost imperceptibly, to decline.
The cough, that grew more and more distinct and hollow, and profuse
night sweats, awoke the most anxious solicitude on the part of his
loving friends. Susan had, from the first, feared that he would not
recover; but she had given no expression to her fears. Her father had
entertained the most confident hopes, till the symptoms above noticed
forced upon him the conviction that his brother was passing to the tomb.
The faithful physician could not lessen that painful conviction. If the
air of the country and careful nursing could not raise the patient, the
case was hopeless. The soft breezes of autumn, and the ministerings of
pure affection, seemed to be in vain.

"Brother," said Richard, one morning, "I should be glad to have you sit
with me to-day, if your business will permit. If you should suffer a
little loss thereby, it will be abundantly made up to you before long."

This was the first allusion he had made to the probable result of his
disease. A tear stood in every eye, but no word was spoken, except in
reply to his request.

"I will make arrangements in course of half an hour," said Henry, "that
will allow me to be with you."

He did so, and from that hour was seldom absent from his brother's side.

"What has become of Harry Ford?" said Richard as they were sitting in
the warm sunlight in the piazza, where they used to sit together long
years ago. Autumn was creeping on apace, but the air was still bland and
balmy. Harry was one of their early and most intimate playmates--a fine,
cheerful, open-hearted boy, whose parents were the practical advocates
of "the let-alone, do-nothing policy," in regard to education. Still, to
the surprise of many, Harry conducted himself well in boyhood, and gave
promise of becoming a worthy man.

"Harry Ford," replied Henry, "died a few years ago in the poor-house."

"Died in the poor-house! How came that to pass?"

"He became very intemperate, and, of course, very poor; and, in his last
days, he was so abusive to his family, that they were obliged to send
him to the poor-house."

"Whom did he marry?"

"Jane Sullivan. You remember her?"

"Yes, very well; though I do not know that I have thought of her for
twenty years. I remember we used to sit near each other in school, and I
could never whisper to her without causing her to blush."

"She has led a very unhappy life. Harry's prospects were good when she
married him, but he soon joined an infidel club in the next town, and
his course was then rapidly downwards till it ended in the drunkard's
grave."

"Jane was a lovely girl; next to"--. It was in his mind to say--next to
Margaret Gray, she was the finest girl in school. "What has become of
James Rogers?"

"He lives in the southern part of the township. He is poor, and lives by
days' work. He has a large family, and has had a great deal of sickness
in it; but he is one of the happiest men I know. He is poor in this
world's goods, but is rich towards God."

"He appeared to be one of the most promising young men in the place,
when I left it."

"He was; and, for a while, he was very successful in the business in
which he was engaged, but a reverse overtook him, and he lost all. He
paid all his debts, and since then has been very poor."

"A hard case!"

"He has often expressed joy at his failure."

"Is he insane?"

"By no means. This failure was the means of securing a title to a more
enduring inheritance."

"Is Amy Brace living?"

"Yes. She is also poor. Her husband is a well-meaning, but most
inefficient man."

"All my old acquaintances seem to be poor."

"None have been prospered in this world as my brother has. There are
some who are comfortably well off, and a few who have an undoubted title
to the riches of eternity."

The rich man sighed deeply, but made no reply. After a long interval of
silence, he remarked--

"Life has been, to most of us, a very different thing from what we
expected."

"You have realized your expectations as to wealth."

"Yes; but if I had my life to live over again, I would not pay the price
at which I gained it. I have never been happy, but only preparing to be
so. Sickness has come, and death is coming! What has all my life been
worth? The few hours that I have spent with your family this summer have
been almost the only happy ones I have passed for years, and they gave
me almost as much pain as pleasure, by making me feel that I had thrown
away my life."

"It is not too late to repair, in part, your error."

"I cannot live my life over again. Oh that I could!"

The emotion with which these words were uttered so deeply affected
Henry, that, for a moment, he could not speak. Hope sprung up in his
heart that the seed sown in early life, by a pious father's hand, might,
though long buried beneath the cares of the world, spring up and bear
fruit ere the winter of death should come.

"You cannot," said he, "undo what you have done; but you can repent and
receive the pardon of Him before whom we must all shortly stand."

"I am too proud, too hard-hearted, to repent. I have delayed it, or
rather, refused to do it, too long. I feel exhausted, and must retire to
my room."

He rose, and, leaning on the arm of his brother, Went to his apartment.
That brother retired to pour out his heart in prayer for the prodigal
who gave such hopeful indications of coming to himself.


CHAPTER XVII.

FOR a day or two subsequent to the conversation recorded in the last
chapter, the invalid was unable to leave his room. He seemed desirous of
being left alone. Henry was earnest in the hope that he was communing
with his own heart. When he again joined the family, it was with a paler
countenance, and yet there was an expression of peace resting upon it,
that led to the hope that he was beginning to contemplate without dread
the great change that was before him. He listened with attention as his
brother spoke of matters relating to the unseen world, and asked
questions which could be prompted only by an inquiring spirit. Still he
avoided any further expression of his feelings.

One evening, Horace Larned called to see Susan. She compelled him, as it
were, to spend half an hour in the society of her uncle, who scanned his
features with interest, and asked him a few courteous questions, and was
greatly pleased with the directness and manliness of his replies. When
Horace and Susan had withdrawn, he remarked to Henry--

"That young man is engaged to Susan?"

"He is."

"I like him. He appears well. I like him for his mother's sake. I wrote
to her, offering to assist him in his education, but the offer was
declined, and the money returned. Why was it? Does she retain a
prejudice against me?"

"I presume not. She is at peace with all mankind, and with her Maker.
The young man has a very independent, self-relying spirit. Probably he
dictated the letter you received."

"Was that before he was engaged to Susan?"

"When did you write her?"

"Immediately after my return to the city."

"They were not engaged then, at least not in form."

"As things now are, would he refuse to receive aid from me?"

"I do not know. Susan can probably tell."

"I must speak with her on the subject."

The next time he was left alone with Susan, he said--

"Susan, my dear daughter, for so I must call you, though you would not
give me leave to do so, I wish to do something for young Larned."

Susan made no reply, except by a crimson blush.

"Pardon me for speaking so abruptly. I have not a great while to stay
with you, and I must say what I have to say directly and without
preface."

"That is the way in which I would have every one speak to me," said
Susan.

"There is nothing which I can do for your welfare and happiness which I
do not desire to do. My property will soon be of no value to me, for I
shall shortly be in my grave. I wish to know if you cannot devise some
way by which I can assist young Larned in his education. Set your wits
to work, and, having succeeded, inform me. I am growing faint, and shall
require assistance to be enabled to reach my room."

Susan called her father, who was at hand, and, supported by them both,
the invalid succeeded in reaching his room. He then fainted quite away.
Susan was greatly alarmed, as she had never before seen one in a state
of temporary insensibility. So perfect an image of death could not be
witnessed for the first time without agitation and even terror. By a
prompt application of remedies, consciousness was soon restored. He was
feeble and dispirited, and Susan remained by his bedside. Unable or
disinclined to engage in conversation, he pointed to the Bible. She read
to him. He listened with interest, and when she paused would request her
to proceed. She read till the shadows of evening rendered it necessary
for her to lay aside the volume.

"There is much there," said he, "that I do not comprehend."

"Is there not much there that you can comprehend, and much that you can
believe, though it transcend your comprehension? Do you find any
difficulty in understanding this assertion, 'God so loved the world that
he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him might not
perish, but have everlasting life?'"

"I believe it. I do not doubt the truth of any declaration of the Bible;
but there is an air of unreality about the truths which prevents my
acting as I should, if I really felt them to be true. I find that, in
order to believe, one needs to have the heart of a little child. My
heart is soiled, and hardened, and chilled by the devotion of my life to
the world. I would that I could become a child again!"

"That very desire indicates that you are approaching the temper of mind
which will authorize you to rely on the Divine promises."

"Do you think so? Do not encourage me to hope unless you are sure you
are authorized to do so. Do you believe that one who has given himself
for a lifetime to the world, to the pursuit of that which he must leave
behind him when he enters another world--do you believe that one who has
been so unwise and so wicked can recover what he has wilfully, not to
say willingly, lost?"

"I do not think that one can, strictly speaking, recover what he has
lost. That is, he cannot be what he would have been, if he had rightly
employed his time and advantages. The hours that are passed can never be
recalled, nor the particular blessings of which they might have been
ministers. Still, provision is made for those who have pursued the
course you have described--provision whereby they may be made partakers
of the Divine mercy."

"But, in order that one may be a partaker of that mercy, he must have a
peculiar temper of mind. His heart must be delivered from the hardness
induced by a lifetime of neglect of duty. I am far from possessing that
temper."

"Your consciousness of want is a hopeful sign. Let me, my dear uncle,
presume to offer you advice. Do not strive to bring your mind into a
condition which you imagine will render you an appropriate object of the
Divine mercy, but go at once to your Heavenly Father and tell him all
your faults, and all your difficulties, and all your wants. A sense of
need is all the preparation that is necessary for our approach to him.
It was this sense of need that induced the prodigal to arise and go to
his father. The manner in which he was received teaches us in what
manner our Heavenly Father will receive us."

Richard Clifton listened to the words of that young girl with more
interest than he had ever listened to the report of the most successful
voyage. He was not in the least displeased at being compared to the
prodigal son. He determined at once to follow the advice so simply and
affectionately given. He closed his eyes and concentrated the energies
of his soul in mental prayer. The truths of the Bible were no longer to
him dim and unreal. They were distinct realities. He felt that it was no
vague desires and indefinite longings to which he was giving expression
in order to relieve his feelings. He was conscious of offering petitions
to a Being who was near at hand and not afar off.

The effort of mind and heart thus put forth was exhausting to his feeble
frame. It was followed by a quiet slumber. When Susan perceived that he
slept, she stole softly from the room, and hastened to acquaint her
father with her hopes respecting the preparation which her uncle was
making for his last journey.


CHAPTER XVIII.

WHEN Richard Clifton awoke from that slumber, an expression of calmness
rested upon his countenance. It was plain that deep despondency was no
longer pressing upon his heart. His strength slightly increased, so
that, on a very mild day for the season, the brothers once more sat
beneath the walnut which had shaded their sports in childhood. The
direction which was given to their conversation by Richard was most
gratifying to his brother. They spoke of the blessed example and pious
teachings of their sainted father. Henry was astonished to find how
deeply those teachings had been engraven on his brother's memory. The
toils and cares of a life spent in neglect of them had not obliterated
them. The interest with which he dwelt upon them led to the hope that
they had now something more than a place in his memory.

"Is it not too much to believe," said Richard, in the course of their
conversation, "that one whose manner of life has been so different from
his"--alluding to their father--"should leave the world in peace and
meet him in a better one?"

"We are to believe the declarations of Holy Writ--its promises as well
as its denunciations."

"True, that is the only thing that can enable one to look into the
narrow house without a shudder. How mistaken are those who suppose life
is not lost, provided there is peace at its close! I have hope for the
future; but I still feel that I have lost my life."

Henry's heart was too full to allow him to make any reply to his
brother's declaration.

"We have passed many happy days in our youth under the shade of this
tree. We shall never sit together here again."

"We may."

"I am nearer the close of my journey than you are aware. I am warned by
a feeling here," laying his hand on his heart, "to regard every day as
my last."

"It gives me inexpressible joy to hear you speak thus composedly
respecting the trying hour."

"Brother, I should like to see Margaret Gray before I die." A smile was
upon his countenance as he spoke thus, but deep earnestness in his
tones.

"I will go and see her, and make known your request. She will not fail
to grant it, I am sure."

"Tell her I wish to see her as Margaret Gray. Help me now to my room,
when I have taken one more view of this scene, from which I do so
earnestly wish I had never departed."

He gazed for some moments on the landscape which had delighted his
youthful vision, and entered the dwelling with a tear in his eye and a
smile upon his lips. Henry repaired at once to the lone dwelling of the
widow, and made known to her his brother's request.

"I never expected to meet him again in this world. I cannot disoblige
him; nor would I fail to comply with his wishes; and yet I had rather
not meet him."

"He has but a few days to live. You have forgiven him; and I trust He,
to whom we must all look for forgiveness, has done the same."

"If that be the case, I shall be glad to meet him. I supposed he had
chosen his portion, and that it would be said of him, as of the rich man
of old, 'Son, thou hast had thy good things;' and yet I could never
fully believe that the child of so many prayers, the child of so
faithful a father, could perish at last; though I know that to his own
Master must each one stand or fall--that each one must give account of
himself to God. I will go with you at once."

When Mrs. Larned entered the room in which Richard Clifton was lying
upon a sofa, being too feeble to rise, he lifted up his voice and wept.
He extended his hand, which was taken in silence by Mrs. Larned, who sat
down by his side and wept with him.

"Margaret," said he--the word caused her to start as though a sword had
pierced her--"you have come to forgive me?"

"I have nothing to forgive. It is long since I had anything laid up
against any human being. I pitied you, and prayed for you; but I never
had anything laid up against you."

"I have always done you the justice to think so. I knew you were
incapable of cherishing unkindness towards any one, however unkindly you
may have been treated. You have been happy, and I have not. Do you
remember the time we last walked together by the streamlet that flows
from the rock spring?"

"I do."

"I enjoyed more happiness in that walk than I have enjoyed in the
possession of all my wealth."

"I should be ungrateful if I were to say that I have not been happy;
though I have had many trials. I learned long ago not to look for
happiness here, but to prepare for it hereafter."

"You have been what men call poor; but you have been far richer than I
have been. You have had treasures of the heart. You did not marry till
you had a heart which you loved as Margaret Gray was capable of loving;
and you have a noble boy."

"Richard Clifton is still, in part at least, what he once was!"

"You believed me changed into stone, or a bale of goods?"

"I certainly believed you changed. I supposed that you had taught your
heart to love that alone which you had made the chief object of your
pursuit."

"I tried to do so. I tried to persuade myself that I had done so. I
habitually used language which implied I had succeeded. I deceived
others; I could not deceive myself. I felt that I was not happy, despite
all my efforts to persuade myself that I was. I then tried to persuade
myself that I was not less happy than others. I have been acting a part
ever since I left this place. I have been unhappy, and I deserved to be
unhappy."

"God makes abundant provision for the happiness of his creatures."

"For time and for eternity. I have failed to avail myself of that made
for the former; I hope I shall not fail in respect to the latter. And
yet what right have I, who have caused much unhappiness and so little
happiness to others, to expect it hereafter?"

"None of us can enter heaven of right, but through mercy and the merits
of another."

"I wish your son had come with you. I wish to see him and Susan
together, and to charge them to hold the treasures of the heart in
higher estimation than all other treasures. I am sure they will do so.
It is a great comfort to me to know that my beloved Susan is to marry
the son of Margaret Gray."

"Horace will come and see you to-morrow," said she, rising and extending
her trembling hand. "I must not stay longer."

"Do not go yet."

"You are becoming exhausted."

"Read to me," pointing to the book.

She took the book and turned to a suitable portion.

"Sit where I can see your countenance, if you please."

She could not refuse his request. He gazed upon her as she read, in
tones which called vividly to remembrance those of other days, a
consoling portion of the Words of Him who brought life and immortality
to light. She then rose, wiped away a tear, silently pressed his hand,
and withdrew.

Horace called the next morning, but did not receive the expected charge.
During the silence of the night, Richard Clifton had ceased to be an
inhabitant of earth.

          (To be continued.)




[Illustration]




INCIDENTS IN THE LIFE OF AUDUBON.

BY THE AUTHOR OF "TOM OWEN, THE BEE HUNTER."


NO department of natural history presents a more pleasing view than
ornithology. All the associations connected with it are beautiful and
inspiring. It takes its votary into the green fields and dark forests,
leads him to the mountain tops, and furnishes excitement among the quiet
retreats of the sequestered valley. Upon the feathered race have been
expended the richest adornments of nature. There are no precious metals,
no choice gems, no rare flowers, no rainbow tints that cannot find a
rival counterpart in the plumage of birds; and to this transcendent
beauty are added a varied, but always attractive form, a physiognomy
expressive of love, of power, of unshrinking bravery. They have also
voices almost human in their tones; voices that are associated with
every pleasing recollection of innocence and youth because of their
sweetness--and voices that startle because of their ferocity.

The habits of birds present examples of well-regulated, of almost
Christianized society. They are married, and are given _to_ marriage;
they set up a comfortable establishment, which is the result of their
own industry. They provide plentifully for their offspring, and educate
them in the way they should go, and when they are old they never depart
from it. The birds rise early to procure food, and retire with the
setting sun; as husbands they are gallant, as wives loving. All that
they do, or say, or look may be said to interest and form universal
theme for admiration. Birds rejoice in creation. In the solitary
fastnesses and eternal solitudes where the eye of man never penetrates
or his mind worships, the voice of the bird is heard caroling forth
praise. And what in the wide world is so hearty in its nature, or so
guileless, as the singing bird? How often has its innocent voice
awakened conscience in the mind of the depraved or reproved the
complaining spirit! Who can hear the caroling even of the tiny wren
without catching its exultant spirit? We have seen it on a Sabbath sunny
morning mounted upon a bud-crowded limb of the Cherokee rose, giving out
its song as if its heart and body would separate in its enthusiasm; and
when you thought it had soared to its highest note, it would begin
again, and pour forth a torrent of love, gratitude, praise, and prayer,
commingled in such varied and soul-thrilling ecstasy that the little
creature trembled and vibrated as if it were the chosen and valiant
exponent of some rapturous and mighty soul. Such are birds, the
intelligent and ornamental companions of man, the most prominent image
among the associations and pleasing recollections of childhood, and one
of the most admirable and wonderful beauties presented to his maturest
mind.

Scientifically speaking, it would seem that the birds, by their
familiarity, were prophets in their own country, and therefore very much
without honor. The poet mentioned them in his sonnets, and everybody
loved them; the gallant cock and the fierce eagle were honored as the
insignia of mighty nations; but the few who examined their history and
wrote of their habits were more readily satisfied with imperfect
illustrations and meagre descriptions than were those who devoted their
energies to exhibit the habits of animals, vipers, or fishes. It may be
stated as a remarkable fact that, until recently, the ornithologist was
incomparably behind his compeers in science in illustrating his
department, choicest of all though it be in the varied phase of animated
nature.

To Audubon is the world indebted, not only for the most magnificent work
on ornithology ever produced, but also for one of the most magnificent
monuments ever raised by industry and genius. Take his book, examine his
drawings, read his descriptions, ponder upon his reminiscences, and then
turn to the most eminent of those who have preceded him, and all
instantly become tame and commonplace. It is like going from the
primitive forests into the stove-heated library; it is like exchanging
the moving, living, teeming bird, fluttering and flying in its native
haunts, for the imperfectly preserved specimens of the museum; all is
motionless, eyeless--dead.

Of the mind that has accomplished so much it is difficult to speak in
exaggerated praise. It may be safely asserted that Audubon had one of
the most enduring that has left any impress upon the present century. He
is always clear and complete in everything he undertakes. He is profuse
in his originality, and yet boldly, at times, absorbs the labor of
others; yet he so entirely renovates, inspires, and makes their industry
his own, that his indebtedness is unthought of by the world.

The secret of Audubon's success will be found in his close pursuit of
nature; of her mysteries he has been of the truest, and therefore one of
her most favored priests. No labor by him was ever withheld, no toil
evaded. Turning over the pages of his works, you can trace him to the
tropics, where he worships and wonders; anon, he gives the witnessed
history of the solitary feathered life that inhabits those inhospitable
regions where the marble blue of the eternal snow scarcely ever reflects
a ray of sunshine. While you read with delight of the canvass-back duck
that fell beneath his rifle in the placid waters of the Chesapeake, he
is suddenly, upon another page, struggling with the gigantic albatros in
the surge-lashed waters of the Californias. You read on, and become lost
in the green field and gentle sloping hill; you wander beside the gently
running rivulet and inland lake, and rest in the shade of honeysuckle
bowers. Changing still, you are ushered into the miasmatic swamps and
dark fens in which only live the blear-eyed heron and repulsive bittern;
and then, lifted on the wings of imagination, you climb the embattled
rocks and precipices of the Cordilleras, dividing admiration of the
rising sun with the eccentric flights of the mighty vulture as he wheels
downward in his greetings of the god of day. Such is Audubon, who will
ever be remembered as long as mind answers in admiration and sympathy
with mind. He has stamped his memory in a work, and associated his name
with a family that will endure in freshness when the mightiest monuments
now existing will, like the pyramids, become unmeaning heaps; for his
name and immortality will ever be recalled by the fanning pinions of
every feathered inhabitant of the air.

The minute history of Audubon's remarkable work, from its conception to
its completion, would involve the recital of some of the most exalted
and interesting traits of character ever recorded. Audubon has slightly
touched upon one or two incidents of discouragement that would, of
themselves, have been sufficient to dishearten a less energetic being;
but the years of toil and sacrifice he endured, and the ten thousand
obstacles he overcame besides those he alluded to, will never be known.
The fair ladies who have, in the luxurious library, admired the
feathered songsters of our continent, that so gracefully sped their way
over the nature-illuminated page--who have seen so cunningly illustrated
the domestic life of the house wren and the wild home of the eagle--will
not be less interested if they know that to the enlightened assistance
of one of their own sex is the world greatly indebted for Audubon's
ornithology.

The early history of Audubon seems to be this: He grew up unconscious of
his powers, save as they were displayed in a genuine love of nature;
arriving at manhood's estate, he married a lady of rare accomplishments
and liberal fortune. With a growing family, he desired, through active
business, to increase his estate, and in a few years found himself the
victim of profitless mercantile speculations, and, pecuniarily, a ruined
man. At an age when others think of retiring from the active scenes of
life, Audubon started, not only anew, but upon an enterprise of doubtful
success, and one that demanded wealth and years of industry to
accomplish. Misfortune seemed to awaken the latent fire within him, and
his mind suddenly overflowed with spirit-images of the feathered race,
and his then comparatively unskilled fingers grasped the pencil to give
form and shape to the struggling thought--but alas! the possibility.
Where was the patron to cheer the seer upon this dreary pilgrimage? Who
would care for his beloved family through the long years of his
unfinished venture? Let the answer be found in our imperfect story.

Many years since, we were standing at the door of a country post office,
listening, with others, to the reader of the only "latest paper" that
had come to hand. He delivered the news, social and political, with a
loud voice, and finally, under the head of "items," struck upon
something as follows: "The Emperor of Russia, on his recent trip from
England homewards, took extreme pleasure in looking over Audubon's great
work upon the birds of America, and, as a token of his admiration, sent
the author a gold snuff-box studded with diamonds."

"What's that?" inquired an old but plain citizen. "The Emperior Roosia
give Audubon a diamond snuff-box studded with gold! Well, that is a good
one, and comes up to my understanding of these aristocrats. Why, I knew
Audubon for years, and a lazier, good-for-nothing, little bird,
double-bar'l shot-gun shooting fellow I never knew;" and, with another
broadside at the want of appreciation of character displayed by the
Emperor of Russia, and by royal personages generally, our well-meaning
friend walked away.

This familiar allusion to Audubon, for the first time, informed me of
the fact that, in the vicinity of my own home in Louisiana, had Audubon
and his family resided for years; and, as I became better acquainted
with his works, I could readily perceive that the rich and undulating
lands of the Felicianas, their primitive forests, their magnolia groves,
and ever-blooming gardens, suited well the taste and pursuits of the
naturalist; for the merry descendants of many of those immortalized
beauties that grace his book still, in congregated thousands, fill the
air with song and flight.

From few did Audubon attract attention; there was nothing in his seeming
wastefulness of time to command respect. The sportsmen with whom he was
surrounded seldom "sighted" their weapons on anything less than a lordly
buck, and as they saw nothing in Audubon but what appeared before their
eyes, they measured their own ambition with no little sarcasm against
one who "found game in the chickadee and humming-bird." But Audubon
lived in a world of his own; for weeks he slept in the forest, that he
might make himself acquainted with the habits of some, but for him
unknown, bird. For days, he hung like a spectre upon the margin of the
Dismal Swamp, until the flamingo, swan, and wild duck heeded not his
familiar presence. Placing a powerful telescope under the broad,
spreading tree, he drew the laborious and tiny birds, as they built
their nests, within his visual grasp, and counted each stick, and twig,
and moss, and hair, until the little fabric was complete. In time, he
returned to his charge, and, by the same artificial means, watched and
admired the growing family, saw the food that reared the young, admired
the tender endearments of the married birds, and recorded the whole with
the faithfulness of a Pepys, and with the pastoral sweetness of a
Collins or Shenstone.

"I remember, as if it were but yesterday, Audubon's first appearance in
New Orleans," said a now widely-distinguished gentleman to me; "and I
shall never forget," he continued, "his industry and enthusiasm, his
utter devotion to his favorite pursuit. In those days, many Indians
brought game to the city to sell, and Audubon soon had these wild sons
of the forest in his employ. Every farthing that the most
self-sacrificing economy could save went to purchase birds; and it was a
picturesque sight to see the then unknown naturalist surrounded by his
wild confederates, who, by the gratification of their natural habits,
brought him many of the rich-plumaged aquatic birds that first formed
subjects of his pencil. At this time, the courtly language of the
Tuileries was his familiar tongue; and although, with the heartfelt
approbation of the literary world, Audubon has placed himself among the
most pleasing and original of the 'prose writers of America,' yet his
first written descriptions were in a language foreign to that identical
with his fame, and many of these earliest and most happy essays were so
complete, that the finished student easily rendered them into our common
language, and, without effort, retained that freshness and beauty that
have since distinguished the English compositions of Audubon himself."

"In everything," said another of Audubon's most observing friends, "did
Audubon follow nature. If he shot a duck, the grasses and the weeds
among which it was found formed the accessories of his drawing. If he
brought an eagle down from his eyrie, the very deadened limb that last
bore the impress of his talons was secured at any sacrifice, and the
bird reappeared just as he first attracted the eye of the naturalist.
This care extended to the humblest of the feathered tribe; the
apple-tree blossom, the thorn, the ripe fruit, the gigantic caterpillar,
the variegated spider, the interlaced horse-hair, the soft down, the
fragrant woodbine, myrtle, and jasmine, the honeysuckle and sweet pea,
and a thousand other hints of rural life crowd in profusion the drawings
of his birds, until they appear complete pictures, stories perfectly
told."

Audubon, in jotting down his thoughts, has sometimes gone beyond the
office of ornithologist, and given us glimpses of life in the backwoods
that many have deemed exaggerations. Respectable authorities in other
matters have cautioned too ready credence to these strange tales, and
denied the truth of them, because not in the circle of his favorite
pursuit. Let these skeptics come to Louisiana and visit, as we have
done, among those who now remember his habits, and they will admit that
Audubon, by his solitary journeys, his long residence in the forests,
his keen eyes, and his intense industry, would unfold phases of the
great book of creation unrevealed to the less studious mass of mankind.

In the hospitable mansion of W. G. J., in the parish of West Feliciana,
if one will look into the parlor, they will see over the piano a
cabinet-sized portrait, remarkable for a bright eye and intellectual
look. The style of it is free, and there is an individuality about the
whole that gives security of a strong likeness. Opposite hangs "a proof
impression" of "the bird of Washington," a tribute of a grateful heart
to an old friend. The first is a portrait of Audubon, painted by
himself; the other is one of the first engravings that ever reached the
United States of that immortal series that now make up the great work of
the unsurpassed naturalist.

In the family holding these pleasing mementos, the "Audubons" lived for
many years. There were evidences of this constantly occurring from day
to day. It was with no ordinary interest that I examined a number of
rude and unfinished drawings, rough sketches, that formed the practice
that finally produced such perfection. Among the many was a charcoal
likeness of a great horned owl, whose light ashy plumage and socketless
eyes gave it a most ghastly appearance. Masterly as these sketches
were, yet there was an evident want of that strange symmetry and
correctness that mark Audubon's finished works. This I mentioned to J.

"Ah," said he, "I watched his improvement almost day by day; and how
could it be otherwise with one who was so entirely devoted to his
pursuits?" And then were poured forth a hundred reminiscences, alike
characteristic, and in the highest degree honorable to the heads and
hearts of the "family of Audubon."

And now was developed to me, until then unknown, an incident in the
unwritten part of Audubon's history. Here, in the bosom of a refined
family, lived for many years his accomplished wife, devoting her time to
the education of her own sex. Those thus under her charge are now in the
perfection of womanhood, and their superior manners and mental
cultivation speak of the care and devotedness of their instructor and
friend. Here it was that the wife of the great naturalist bid him go
forward with his work, and not only cheered him on, but threw the
acquirements of her own industry into the glory of the future. It was
her example, and her voice of encouragement, and her power to help that
enabled Audubon to triumph; and thus did she identify herself and her
sex "with the most splendid work which art has erected to the honor of
ornithology."




THE YOUNG ENTHUSIASTS.

BY FRANK I. WILSON.


CHAPTER I.

THE western portion of the State of North Carolina is by no means
densely populated even at this day, though much more so than it was half
a century ago, the time at which the principal incidents I am about to
relate occurred.

This part of the State is remarkable for the beauty and grandeur of its
mountain scenery, its fertile soil, and the salubrity of its climate.
The bracing mountain air has brought back the bloom of health to the wan
cheek of many an invalid; and rock, and stream, and waterfall have
filled many a heart with rapturous delight. The wild deer bounds through
the forest, and the hoarse bay of hounds, the encouraging shout of the
huntsman, and the shrill report of the deadly rifle are sounds that
frequently meet the traveler's ear. As in all mountainous regions, the
inhabitants are hospitable and generous almost to a fault. Their doors
are ever open to the stranger, and, in many cases, they take the offer
of payment for their accommodations as an insult. Most of the nobler
virtues are shrined in their honest bosoms; but such is the fertility of
their valleys, that very little labor is sufficient to procure them the
necessaries of life, and, as the quantity of labor is everywhere
proportioned to the necessity for it, we find them, in general, indolent
and careless--rich in that best of Heaven's gifts, contentment. The
facilities of this region for manufactories are, perhaps, unsurpassed by
any portion of the globe, and, with an energetic and industrious
population, it would soon become one of the most flourishing sections of
our Union.

But enough of this. I did not intend to enter into a minute description
of the country, and almost unconsciously penned the above. I proceed
with my story.

Among the mountains, not far from the line which separates North from
South Carolina, but on the side of the former State, stood, at the
period of which I write, a house built after a fashion still prevalent
in that region, and which is called a "double cabin." Two cabins, built
of logs, are erected ten or twelve feet apart, and generally two stories
high, and then connected under one roof, forming pleasant rooms, and
also a cool passage between the cabins, where the members of the family
usually spend their evenings during the summer months. In the house
above mentioned lived Amos Kelford, a hardy mountaineer, with a wife
and several children, of which Daniel, the hero of my tale, was the
eldest.

This Daniel was a strange youth, and, although now only twenty years
old, possessed a maturity of mind and a ripeness of intellect rarely to
be met with in one of his age. Having been reared among mountains, those
master efforts of Nature's handiwork, his ideas, even from childhood,
had ever blended with the beautiful and sublime. A glance at his
countenance, his broad pale forehead, his large and full blue eyes, and
light sandy hair, was sufficient to show to a physiognomist that his
intellectual predominated over his physical powers. His form was slight,
but perfectly symmetrical, and his features, but for a bold and full
developed line here and there, would have been considered feminine.

He had ever been considered an anomaly. From his earliest years, he had
loved to sit upon some gray old rock and gaze upon the towering peaks
around him, and see their summits glittering in the sun or wrapped in
mist that enfolded them like mountain robes. This latter he liked best;
for even then, in the sunny days of childhood, at an age when most
children care for nothing but romp and play, he leaned to the darker
side of Nature, and the blue mist, curling in a thousand fantastic
forms, or settling like a pall around the lofty summits of giant peaks,
had a charm for him which the sunshine failed to impart. He gazed upon
the falling leaves of autumn rather than the bursting buds of spring,
upon the gathering shades of night rather than the blushing beams of the
morning sun.

As he grew up and learned to read, nothing accorded so well with his
disposition as to take a volume and wander off beside some waterfall, or
ascend some peak, or, when the sun was hot, to retire into some cave or
crouch beneath some overhanging rock, and there read and ponder whole
days together. There was a mystery thrown around him, a kind of
indifference and a lack of interest in almost everything in which those
of his age usually feel interested. His own parents looked upon him and
sighed and wondered, but could not fathom the depths of his mind, nor
learn the bent of his eccentric genius. He was ever mild, ever ready to
render any assistance in his power to those in need, and ever obedient
to the commands of his parents and teachers; but he obeyed, as he always
acted, with a calm indifference, and without any show of interest.
Rarely was he seen to smile; but sometimes, when wrapped in his own
reflections and heedless of everything around him, his eyes would
kindle, and a placid, but peculiar smile would play about his thin lips,
indicating that pleasant thoughts were in his mind; but whether of past
scenes or only of future imaginary joys none could tell. And oftentimes
this smile would suddenly vanish as you gazed upon him, and a dark cloud
would settle over his countenance. His brow would become contracted, his
lips compressed, and the expression of his eyes sad and gloomy. Then, as
if to seek solace, or a diversion of his thoughts, he would take up a
book and wander off into some secluded spot and read and meditate,
occasionally noting down with his pencil certain sentences from what he
read, or recording certain ideas suggested thereby.

But there was one being on whom Daniel Kelford looked without his usual
indifference, and for whom he felt a pure and lasting affection. This
was Elinor Manvers, the daughter of one of the wealthier class of
farmers, who resided about four miles from Mr. Kelford's. Elinor was
sixteen years old, and as beautiful as the hour is that visit the
Mussulman's dreams. Her sylph-like form, the classic regularity of her
well-defined features, her large and languishing dark eyes, all bespoke
a mind deeply imbued with the _spirituel_; but still she was a
true-hearted woman, a sprightly and merry mountain lass. She loved to
pour forth her wild gay songs, and hear the echoes of her
finely-modulated voice among the tall cliffs of the mountains. Her step
was as free and agile as that of the untamed deer; and to all except
Daniel Kelford she was a lively companion, and could ring forth her
clear laugh with all the free exuberance of feeling to which her nature
seemed inclined; but when with him she was conscious of a mysterious and
undefined awe settling upon her mind, and depriving her of the power of
appearing gay and frolicsome. Her true nature was as yet undeveloped and
unknown even to herself, and the influence which Daniel exerted over
her, and was destined to exert, was the mould by which her soul was to
be formed. There was something repulsive and yet attractive about him,
and though she shrank from him, she could not deny to herself that she
loved him, and the consciousness of her love was mingled with both pain
and pleasure. Her feelings towards him were of two kinds, directly
opposite to each other, and yet so mingling together that she could not
entertain the one without admitting the other. She shuddered when she
reflected upon the depth of her love, and yet she would not have torn it
from her heart for worlds; for there was a satisfaction and a sense of
bliss always blending, confusedly and unintelligibly, it is true, with
the horror that darkened through her soul. In his presence, she felt ill
at ease, and yet there was a vacuum created by his absence which nothing
but his presence could fill. He had spoken to her of love, of its beauty
and holiness, of its depth and power, but no vows had yet been
interchanged; and although she would have preferred death to the
certainty that he never would declare his love to her, yet she dreaded
the declaration, and could not think with calmness on the moment when it
was to be made. There was something in the earnest flashing of his eyes
when he gazed upon her that startled and almost terrified her; and yet
there was a charm in those looks that thrilled her inmost soul with
pleasure, and she could have wished he might gaze thus for ever. His
words, too, fell with a strange emphasis and a peculiar force upon her
ears; but there was a music in them that sank into her heart and
awakened a sense of joy that nothing else could stir.

The hand of destiny seemed to be guiding her to some awful fate, of
which presentiment made her fully conscious; but the path to which was
strewn with so many charms she willingly, ay anxiously, trod it, and
would not have turned back if she could.


CHAPTER II.

DANIEL KELFORD had fitted him up a little study room, in which he spent
most of his time. Books were his idols, and he worshiped them with more
than a pagan zeal. His table was strewn with antique and curious
volumes, many of them abounding in the wild and marvelous, and in these
his whole soul seemed absorbed. The love-sick and sentimental had no
charm for him; but he sought rather the abstruse and mysterious, bending
all his energies to the comprehension of the one and the unraveling of
the other. Vague dreams, as it were, flitted through his mind, highly
colored by his diseased fancy, and all wearing a supernatural hue.
Metaphysics was his darling study. He maintained that, as every particle
of matter is dependent on those surrounding it, and as all are bound and
held together by attraction, making one whole, and as it is impossible
to conceive of one single particle existing independently and
unconnected with any other, so every idea is linked with others forming
one mind, and a single isolated idea is as impossible as a single and
independent particle of matter; and that as various as are the shapes of
objects constituted by the combination of particles, so various are the
minds formed by the combination of ideas. And as idea linked with idea
rose in his mind, he followed on, weaving a chain as incomprehensible to
most minds as the inextricable windings of the Cretan labyrinth, until,
at length lost in the mazy whirl of his own thoughts, the eye of fancy
grew dim and reason tottered on her throne.

Reader, let me conduct you to that little study-room. We will look in at
the window near which Daniel sits. It is night, a calm moonlit night of
May, and the mingled notes of various night birds and innumerable
insects, together with the chastened scenery of the surrounding
mountains, as rock, and stream, and cliff, and waterfall appear in the
softened beams, are enough to draw the most devoted of ordinary students
from their books to contemplate the mighty book of nature, printed in
the type of God, its sublime capitals rendering it legible to every
observer. But for Daniel Kelford these things now possess no interest.
They are unseen and unthought of; for every power of his soul is
centered upon the contents of a small roll of manuscript which lies
before him. He bends over it, takes up sheet after sheet, his interest
increasing as he reads, until he has but one thought, one desire; and
that is to understand and to reduce to practice the strange things
there taught. Beside him dimly burns his untrimmed lamp, for he does not
think to bestow any attention upon it. He has found embodied in words
thoughts and ideas that have long floated like shapeless visions through
his soul, but which he never could grasp, confine, and reduce to
language.

The night wears on; it is late; he has read every page of that strange
manuscript; but he reads it again and again, unmindful of the flight of
time--a wild light sometimes flashing from his large eyes, and a
mysterious expression gathering over his countenance. Were the aged man
whose hand penned these words now alive, he could fall at his feet and
worship him as a god.

But let us turn for a moment, and see from whence he obtained this
wonderful manuscript.

Just on the line dividing the States of North and South Carolina, is an
eminence called "Caesar's Head." When, how, or why it obtained this name
I have never been able to learn. Over its top now passes a turnpike
road; but, at the period of which I write, all over and around it was
almost an uninterrupted wilderness. The southern, or rather the
southwestern side is nearly perpendicular, and fronts towards the
celebrated Table Rock in Greenville District, S. C. From its summit,
this rock, as well as many other curious and interesting objects, is in
full view. The whole scenery in that direction is, perhaps, unsurpassed
by any in the whole mountain range; and, consequently, "Caesar's Head"
was one of Daniel Kelford's favorite places of resort.

One day he went to visit this spot, and, as he approached it, he
perceived an old man lying at the root of a tree, or rather leaning on
his elbow with his back resting against the tree, and his eyes, over
which the film of death was fast gathering, bent intently on the view
before him. Daniel went up to him with his usual indifferent appearance,
but ready to impart any assistance that might be in his power. As he
drew near, the old man turned to him and said--

"You have come at last: I was expecting you."

"And why were you expecting me?" asked Daniel.

"Because I knew that you were coming here at this hour," was the reply.

"And how knew you that?" asked Daniel.

"The means by which I obtained my information," replied the old man,
"may one day be familiar to you; but I have not time now to explain them
to you. Be content for the present to know that I have, or rather have
had, the power to gain information of future events. My time to leave
this world is now come, and I cannot look beyond the grave except, as
other mortals, by the eye of faith. I have inquired concerning you, and
know you better, perhaps, than you know yourself, though you never met
my eyes until now. I knew that I was to die at this hour, and that you
were to meet me here to see me draw my last breath, and to receive from
me this manuscript, which I have prepared expressly for you; for I know
your nature, your insatiate thirst for knowledge, your perseverance and
enthusiasm, and that you would improve the information herein contained.
I have written it in your own language. Take it, it is yours; but do not
break the seal that binds it until I am buried."

Daniel took the roll which the old man extended to him, and begged that
he might go for assistance.

"No," said the old man; "I want no company but yours. Death is not hard,
and I have but a few moments more to live. You see that I am calm; I,
who have experienced almost every vicissitude of life incident to both
the palace and the mountain cave, can here lay me down and place my hand
upon my heart and call my God to witness that I die in peace with all
men, and without a single fear or dread. I only ask that you will see me
decently interred."

The tears gushed into Daniel's eyes as he gave the promise. The old man
perceived it and said--

"Do not weep for me, my young friend, but rather weep for yourself. My
troubles are over, but yours have scarcely begun. Ignorance loves to
persecute knowledge; but there is one blessing attendant on true wisdom;
for it renders its possessor impervious to the darts that are hurled at
him, and he rises above the petty animosities of earth and feels an
inward satisfaction, a proud consciousness of superiority that the
ignorant can never know."

The eyes of the old man, sunken and dim, were turned upon the young man
as he spoke, and his wrinkled features assumed an expression of joy
rarely seen upon the human countenance, even when in health and
prosperity. He was above the ordinary size of men, and his large frame
stretched along the earth looked like some mountain god taking his rest.
His long white eyebrows arched boldly above his eyes, and his silvery
hair was brushed back, leaving his massive brow bared to the gentle
sunbeams as they streamed through the dense foliage of the overhanging
trees. There was a serenity and an expression of benignity about his
countenance that irresistibly attracted the heart of Daniel Kelford, and
made him reverence him. He seated himself by the old man, and raising
his head leaned it against his bosom.

"Thank you, my young friend," said the aged man; "I shall now die
without a struggle. I am in no pain; and as I yet have a little time
left me, I will talk with you about Elinor Manvers."

"Elinor Manvers!" exclaimed Daniel, with surprise. "Do you know her?"

"I have seen her once," said the old man; "and he who has done that can
never forget the vision of beauty that has blest his eyes. But I know
her well. I know her soul is as pure as her own mountain streams; but it
is unformed, and to you is committed its nurture. You can assimilate it
to your own, or absorb it within your own, and make it soul of your
soul, one and inseparable, imbuing it with the same thirst for
knowledge, the same exalted aspirations. She loves you with an intensity
never excelled; and already the shadow, or rather the light, of your
spirit is upon her; but she can shake off the influence when you are
away from her. Marry her, and be with her all the time, infusing your
soul into hers, making her a fit companion to share your joys on earth
and your perfect bliss in Heaven. Open to her the treasures of
knowledge, and she will twine her affections so firmly about you that
even death cannot sever them."

The old man's voice grew weak and husky, and turning his eyes calmly
upon the face of his young friend, he said--

"I can tell you no more. Read the manuscript, and you will know enough
to enable you to learn all. My time has come, and ALL IS PEACE."

As he spake, he folded his arms upon his breast, closed his eyes, and
yielded his spirit, without a groan or murmur, to his God.

Daniel returned home and told his father of the old man's death, but
said nothing about the manuscript he had received. It he carried to his
own room and locked within his trunk. Mr. Kelford and Daniel, with two
or three of the neighbors, went and brought the old man's body to Mr.
Kelford's house, where it remained until the next day, when they buried
it, wondering who the stranger was and whence he came.

It was night when Daniel returned home, and, after hastily eating a few
mouthfuls, he hurried to his room, brought forth the manuscript, broke
the seal, and read it.




CHAPTER III.


THE manuscript was as follows:--

DON RICARDUS CARLOS TO HIS YOUNG FRIEND DANIEL KELFORD.

It may seem strange to you, my young friend, to be thus familiarly
addressed by one who is a stranger to you, and one whom you have never
even seen as yet; but, although I am unknown to you, you are not unknown
to me, neither shall I die without your seeing me. You will see me but
once, and that will be just as my soul flutters on the verge of
eternity. Yes, you will see me in that blissful moment when I shall
launch my bark from the strand of Time upon the ocean of Eternity, and
be admitted into Heaven, the great temple of perfect knowledge, where I
shall be able to ascend step by step, and endowed with capacity to
understand those things which the mind, while confined within its
corporeal prison house, can never comprehend. Peruse these pages, and
you will know how I know you. Peruse, and be wise as I am, and as few
before me have been, and perhaps fewer after me will be.

My name is Don Ricardus Carlos, and I am one of the once royal family of
Spain. I say the _once_ royal family, for, as you know, the reign of the
Carloses has ceased; and I am glad of it. A new era is dawning upon the
world, when knowledge shall be diffused among the people, and they
shall see and feel that their hereditary rulers are tyrants who oppress
them; and they will rise and hurl them from their thrones. A century
from this hour, and the names of king and emperor, of lord and
sovereign, will only be remembered as titles _once_ applied to certain
men whom the fortune of birth gave an imaginary superiority over their
fellow men in general, and endowed with a privilege of ruling the
temporal destinies of the toiling millions. That era has already dawned
in splendor. This very nation is an example of it, and this nation is
destined to revolutionize the world; not by the sword, though it be
mighty in arms and rich in heroes, but by its example, its peaceful and
prosperous course. Man never was made to be forced into measures. The
Almighty placed in his heart an aversion to coercion as applied to
himself. This is what we call pride; and the same pride which leads him
to hate coercion as applied to himself, leads him to desire to coerce
others. This is one of the curses of God upon mankind for their
disobedience, intended to keep them at strife. Hence arise wars and
bloodshed, and the direst scourges that visit the earth. Man must be led
by persuasion, must be induced by example to embrace even that which is
for his own good; and, as I said, this nation will by its example
revolutionize the world. It has deluged France in blood, for its time
has not yet come; but it will come, and the land of the vine will yet be
free. The throne of England--proud mistress of the sea as she loves to
be styled, but as she cannot much longer be styled--will fall. Ireland,
long crushed beneath the iron tread of despotism, will arise and hurl
her chains from her and take her stand among the republics of the earth.
Even my own beloved, but degraded Spain, and sunny Italy, the land of
the olive, ruled for a thousand years by the usurper of Heaven's
prerogative, will yet be free. The crowns that now, heavy with jewels,
adorn the heads of sovereigns, will yet be trampled into the dust by the
rough feet of those whose necks their wearers now bow down and trample
down. THE PEOPLE is the only sovereign, and when knowledge shall have
opened the eyes of the people to the excesses committed by their rulers,
and to their own rights, they will turn and exercise their power--the
power delegated to them, and to none other, by Heaven. But they must
learn; and they will learn by example sooner than by any other means.
This continent was reserved for such a glorious purpose--the renovation
of society, the upbuilding of the temple of true liberty.

       *       *       *       *       *

I was instructed in all the lore of my country, both ancient and modern.
My eagerness to obtain knowledge, and the facility with which I acquired
it, were noted, and the most skillful teachers were procured for me. I
was surrounded by all the pomp and pageantry of royalty; but these had
no charms for me. Every luxury which wealth could procure was at my
command, but I cared for nothing but knowledge. It was the one
all-absorbing thought of my mind, and in it I lived, moved, and had my
being. I outstripped all my teachers, and they declared themselves
unable to teach me any more. I was pronounced by all the ripest scholar
of my age; but still I was not satisfied. What I had learned only
increased my desire for more, and in vain I sought a teacher more
learned than myself. The extent of my knowledge amazed the wisest and
most profound scholars among my countrymen; but still there was a vacuum
in my soul, a yearning to know more, and I felt miserable because I had
nothing more to learn.

But "fickle fortune," as it is generally, but erroneously termed, turned
her scale. It was not mere fortune or chance, but destiny; and destiny
is the will of God. My family was deposed and forced to flee. Of course,
we fled to America--to these United States; for where else do the weary
find repose and the oppressed an asylum and a home?

With no inconsiderable fortune, I made my way to the mountains, and in a
pleasant valley in the western part of Virginia I built me a cottage,
and there determined to reside, and prosecute my studies and researches.
My desire for knowledge had not abated by my change of fortune, and I
began to cast about me for some new study. Those who had known me in
Spain thought I stood upon the pinnacle of the temple of knowledge; but
I knew there must be something beyond the height to which I had yet
risen, or else my mind would not be so disquiet and so anxious to learn
more. I reasoned thus with myself: The temple of knowledge is founded on
Earth and Time; but the structure reaches into Heaven and Eternity. I
have ascended to the topmost step of the earthly part, and now I must
pierce the dividing line and ascend yet higher. I reflected that Heaven
was purity, and he that would enter into it must be pure, must lay aside
all mere earthly and sensual affections, and become in all his thoughts
and actions uninfluenced by selfish motives--in a word, that he must
separate his soul from his body, and enter with the former, leaving the
latter on earth. This I knew was generally effected by death, and then
came the desire to die; but again I reflected that that was a sinful
desire, and would retard my progress. If I should take my own life, the
very act would debar me from the prize for which I did it.

I commenced schooling my mind and subduing my bodily propensities. I
abstained from all food, except just enough to keep me alive and in
health. I supplied the wants of nature, but nothing more. I practiced
self-denial in almost everything, forcing myself to act directly
opposite to the promptings of my carnal mind. I retired now to the
wildest parts of the mountains, to fill my soul with awe at beholding
the stupendous grandeur of nature; and now to the sunny valleys, the
babbling rills, and murmuring waterfalls, to drink in gladness and joy.
I visited the poor, bestowing gifts upon them, wandering far and near in
search of objects of charity, until my fortune was exhausted, and I was
left with but a scanty pittance for my support. But I gloried in my
poverty, remembering that the Scriptures teach that money is a
hindrance, the love of it an insuperable barrier, to the perfection of
human virtue. Knowledge was all I cared for; wealth sank into less than
nothingness when compared with it.

My great aim was to arrive to an exalted state of purity, in order to
attain to higher knowledge. I would not suffer myself to think of
anything unconnected with the Great Author of its existence. At length I
found myself undergoing a gradual change. The thoughts of earth and
earthly things became irksome to me, and I could banish them from my
mind at pleasure. My thoughts were as much at my command as my actions.
I could think upon a particular subject, or leave off thinking on it at
will, just as I could put my limbs in motion, or leave them at rest, as
I pleased.

One day I seated myself by the side of a little rill, the magnificent
white blossoms of the laurel waving over me, and the wild vines creeping
with serpentine folds around the boughs of the neighboring trees,
forming an arbor above the quiet stream. It was a lovely spot, and might
well have been fancied the favorite resort of the mountain genii, when
they wished to retire to solitude and indulge in reverie.

Here I determined to try the experiment of _willing_ myself a spirit,
separate from my body and independent of it. It required some effort for
me to do this; but gradually I seemed to lose my bodily form, and to
become independent of the laws of gravitation. In a few moments the
change was complete; and no sooner was it so than I heard a voice, mild
and sweet beyond anything which it is in the power of the imagination to
conceive--

"Mortal," said the voice, "behold what the eyes of sinful mortal never
saw!"

I turned, and beheld a form bright as the sun; but it did not dazzle my
eyes. On the contrary, I loved to look upon it; and as I gazed I felt a
joy diffusing itself through my soul never dreamed of before, and so
perfect that I was wholly abandoned to it.

"I am thy good angel," again spake the voice; "and thy mind, subdued to
thy own control, and exerted in a pure and holy direction, has so far
removed the scales with which earthly passions blind the human eyes,
that thou art permitted, though still mortal, to see me, an immortal,
and hear my voice. Thy desire for knowledge shall be gratified, for thou
seekest it not for any evil end. Listen, and I will give thee thy first
lesson in a course of study new to and unheard of by thee."

I listened and heard strange yet sweet words, and drank in with
eagerness the instruction imparted to me. But, as I only learned a
portion at that time, and have continued at different periods since to
learn more, I will not here attempt to set down the words then uttered
to me, or to recount the particular points on which I was enlightened at
the different times; but will throw together a portion of the
information I have acquired during the whole time, selecting such as I
shall think most likely to interest you, and to fire you with a desire
to obtain more from the same source from which I have obtained mine; for
man, even while living on this earth, and consequently mortal, may,
through the attributes of immortality, learn much that is
incomprehensible to the mere mortal mind.

Every human being on this wide world is attended, from his birth to his
death, by two angels, the one good, the other evil. Neither has any
power to prompt its charge to action either bodily or mentally, for the
will is free to choose for itself; but when once a course of acts or
thoughts is commenced, then both have power, and each acts in direct
opposition to the other, causing the mind to waver and alternate between
good and evil, embracing sometimes the one and sometimes the other, as
the respective angels obtain the mastery. If a man's thoughts and
actions be good, his good angel endeavors to encourage him to persevere
in them, while his evil one wars against them; and if his thoughts and
actions be evil, his evil spirit urges him on, while his good one tries
to restrain him. Hence the life of man is one continued warfare, the two
spirits for ever battling against each other, and each in its turn
exulting in victory and mourning over defeat. But, let which may be
vanquished, it does not easily abandon the contest. The human will can
always decide the strife with regard to any particular thing, and cast
the victory on either side it pleases, and, with traitorous fickleness,
it fights sometimes on the one side and sometimes on the other.

Man, in general, is not sunk to that depth of depravity in which he is
frequently represented--a depth so low, so dark, and so wretched as to
be wholly incapable, with his own human nature, unaided and left to
himself, to think a holy thought or perform a righteous act. If this
were the case, the evil angel would ever prove victorious, and the good
one would retire in despair, and leave the poor human being the prey of
the powers of darkness. Men have much to say about the foreknowledge of
God, the predestination and election of the human race, or of a portion
of it, and such like. These are fruitful themes of controversy, as
unavailing as they are absurd. God does not reckon time, for it is
finite and he is infinite. He knows only eternity, in which there is
neither past nor future, but an ever-abiding present, without beginning
or end. Without freedom of will it would be impossible for man to be an
accountable being. If the angels which attend him through life had the
power to prompt him to action, then they would have the entire rule over
him, and they alone would be held accountable for his course. True, it
is possible that either spirit may be subdued, and the mind reduced
entirely under the control of the other; this can only take place where
the mind concurs with the victorious spirit, and continues to concur
with it, and willingly yields to its control, and therefore the mortal
is still the accountable one, and the one with whom God will finally
reckon.

When the good spirit, from a long series of defeats, yields all hope of
ever again obtaining the ascendancy over its dark rival, and flees in
despair from the soul over which it has watched, then the mind and body
of the person become devoted with all their powers to the devil, the
prince of the spirit that presides over him. He then receives a kind of
supernatural power; but it is not of that kind by which good may be
wrought, but seeks to set friends at variance and to array man against
his fellow-man. It even endues him, who is subject to its undisputed
sway, with the power of working a species of miracles; but the effects
of these miracles are always noxious. This is what has usually been
termed witchcraft. The spirit of evil becomes visible and audible to him
who is invested with this fearful power, and he is no longer regarded by
the eye of Heaven as one who may even possibly free himself from the
master he serves, and repent and find forgiveness. His good angel is
gone from him to return no more; for God hath said, "My spirit shall not
always strive with man." Beyond this world his doom is irrevocably
sealed, and his lot cast among the forever damned.

On the other hand, by deeds of charity and love, and by a life of
extraordinary purity, the evil spirit may be expelled, and the soul left
to the undisputed sway of the good one. He who is thus freed from the
power of his evil angel has the power of seeing and hearing his good
one, and of learning things incomprehensible to the generality of his
race. To him the fountains of knowledge are unsealed, and he learns,
while yet on earth, much that is reserved to be learned in Heaven after
we have become a new order of beings, endowed with new intelligence. It
is sin only that blinds our sight and darkens our minds, and,
consequently, the more effectually we can free ourselves from sin the
better are we prepared for the reception of knowledge. Perfect knowledge
can only be attained by perfect purity, and hence perfect knowledge is
perfect bliss; and the highest bliss of heaven is to perfectly
understand all things. On earth, corrupted and polluted as it is by sin,
there can be no perfect knowledge, and, consequently, no perfect bliss.
And although there are different degrees of knowledge in Heaven, yet
every degree is perfect, and affords perfect bliss so far; and, as we
ascend step by step up the heavenly temple of knowledge, perfect bliss
will be added to perfect bliss, and thus will we go on until we reach
the summit and possess ourselves of all the blissful attributes of God
himself. The more knowledge we attain on earth, provided it be applied
to good, the higher will be the grade to which we will be admitted in
Heaven, and consequently the more perfect our bliss there; but if it be
directed towards the attainment of an end transgressing the laws of God
and furthering evil, the more intense will be the sufferings in the
world of punishment.

It is an incontrovertible law of natural philosophy, that not an atom of
matter can be annihilated; and it is a law as applicable to the
immaterial as to the material world. Every act we have ever committed,
every word we have ever spoken, and every thought that has ever flitted
through our minds, remains as indestructible as the throne of
Omnipotence itself. Here on earth we act, speak, and think, and then
forget the deeds we have done, the words we have spoken, and the
thoughts we have harbored; but on the day of the final reckoning, when
our spirits shall re-enter our arisen bodies, every thought, word, and
deed shall recur to us as vividly as though they had taken place at that
very instant. Thus every one has his whole life spread before him, takes
in all at a glance, and becomes his own judge; and as his conscience
approves or condemns him, so is he approved or condemned by God. And
although men are accountable, yet this does not exempt their good angels
from being judged also. Their course is judged, and if they have been
remiss in performing the duties assigned them, and have not watched
diligently over the souls committed to their charge, then they receive
the reward due to their negligence; and as those souls over which they
kept watch are the gainers or losers by their conduct, therefore it is
permitted them to judge them, as St. Paul saith, "Know ye not that the
angels are to be judged by us?"

By our WILL, as I said, we can always cast the victory on the side of
either our good or evil angel, as we choose; and when, by a long series
of victories achieved over our evil angel by the combined powers of our
will and our good angel, we are entirely freed from our evil one, then
the veil of sin and imperfection which obscures our spiritual sight is
so far removed as to enable us to behold and converse with our good
angel, and to learn much, not only of spiritual matters, but also of the
future destinies of nations and individuals. It is thus that I have
learned of thee, and of the influence which this nation is to exert over
the world, dethroning tyrants, extirpating royalty, and making all men
"free and equal." It is thus that I have learned the hour at which I am
to undergo that change which men call death.

Remember that purity is what is required--purity, at no matter what
sacrifice of inclination. As you read this, your good angel stands at
your right side, and your evil one at your left, _nearest your heart_;
but both are invisible to you because you are neither wholly pure nor
wholly polluted. In the former case your good spirit would be visible,
in the latter your evil one. They are striving for you, the one
endeavoring to urge you to purity, the other to drag you down to
degradation. I am convinced, though even my angel does not know, that
you will cast your WILL on the side of virtue, and go on in your high
career of knowledge.

And here I will close. If you avail yourself of the information I have
imparted, I have said enough; if not, all that I have said is in vain,
and but labor lost. You are very dear to me, and, as I write, you grow
still dearer. But I am yet to see you, and to hold converse with you for
a little while: and the reason that I now write nothing concerning
Elinor Manvers is that I shall speak face to face with you about her.
Farewell.

                                                DON RICARDUS CARLOS.
                          _Mountain Cave, Va._, Nov. 20th, 1779.

          (Conclusion next month.)




MORAL COURAGE.

BY ALICE B. NEAL.


PART I.

          "Ah, lonely, very lonely, is the room
             Where love, domestic love, no longer nestles,
           But, smitten by the common stroke of doom,
             The corpse lies on the tressels!"--HOOD.

YES, there was death in the house. The closed windows told it to the
passers-by; and the crape which hung heavily from the door, tied with a
black ribbon, denoted that one in the prime of life was laid low.
Strangers looked at it with a glance of curiosity and hurried past,
forgetting the next moment, in the bright sunshine and busy avocations
of life, that they had received a solemn warning to prepare for a like
mysterious change. Acquaintances walked with a slower step, as it caught
the eye, and thought of the sad scenes that must be passing within that
house of mourning.

Friends said it was "a great blow," and wondered vaguely what would
become of the wife and children; and some knelt at night surrounded by
unclouded happiness in their own homes, but nevertheless praying with a
full heart for those who had so suddenly been left desolate.

The day of the funeral came, and the husband and father was carried from
the home that had been almost an earthly paradise to be laid beneath
"the cold clod of the valley," and the weeping family clung to each
other, and sobbed and prayed as that first dreary night came on, and
they recognized all the vacancy of hearth and heart. Such scenes are
daily passing; yet the world goes on as ever, and some dance to the
music of gay revelry, while others put on the "garments of heaviness"
with breaking hearts.

And then the return to actual life! How harassing it is when our
thoughts are with the dead and the living claim our care! Mrs. Burton
found the sad truth of this as, with well meant, but harsh kindness, she
found her brother waiting one morning, scarce a week from the day that
had made her a widow, to talk over her future prospects. He had an
ungracious task before him; for he was forced to communicate what was
galling to his pride, as well as distressing to those more nearly
interested in the intelligence. Mr. Burton's affairs were left in almost
inextricable confusion; a pittance, a mere pittance, of some two hundred
a year was all that would remain to his family; and what was this when
their annual expenditure had been thousands? He was luxurious in taste,
and had not hesitated to gratify every whim. He was an indulgent father,
and had lavished uncounted sums upon his children. He had not intended
to be unjust to them or his lovely wife; but he was one of those who
seem to think a long life secured to them by present health, and, being
in excellent business, thought it time to "lay by" when the children
were educated and his boys began to "look out for themselves." Besides,
he belonged to one of the oldest, proudest families in the city, and he
was not to be outshone by any of them.

But how did matters stand now that, by an unalterable decree, he had
been suddenly removed from them? Let us see if he had been "a just man,"
as was pompously stated in his epitaph. Lucy, the eldest daughter, was
but nineteen, beautiful, accomplished, and betrothed to the son of an
old friend. She was provided for, said the world, and, of course, their
relatives could take charge of the younger children--Grace, ten, Willie
and George, the one just entered at a classical school, and the other
almost ready for college, although only fifteen. Mrs. Burton would have
enough to maintain her, no doubt, and so the matter was charitably
settled and quietly laid aside for a discussion of the last opera night
by the ladies, or a sudden rise in stocks by the gentlemen, upon whose
feeling, sensitive minds it had obtruded itself.

Such a conversation was passing that very morning, as Mrs. Burton sat
listening to a hurried account of the pressing liabilities that would
sweep away even her own marriage portion when, for the first time in a
shielded, prosperous life, care and business anxiety came upon her. It
is not strange that she was completely bewildered by the new aspect of
affairs. She had thought her domestic loss too great a sorrow to bear up
under, and now all this crushing weight added to it! What was to be
done? Her brother-in-law had but one thing to propose. Lucy would
probably marry soon, and Mrs. Burton would no doubt find a comfortable
home with her, and be of great assistance to the young wife in managing
her domestic concerns The children would be distributed among Mr.
Burton's relatives. He himself would take George into his
counting-house. He was old enough to be of some service.

Mrs. Burton was a devoted mother. With all her thoughtlessness, she was
both fond and proud of her children, and to have them taken from her was
to bereave her of every earthly happiness. And George, with his quick
mind and high ambition, to be tied down in a counting-room, when he had
talent for anything in the profession he already looked forward to, the
law! Willie, proud, spirited, affectionate Willie, and her beautiful
Grace, dependents upon the bounty of relatives! She could not bear the
thought.

But she was not alone in this. Lucy had been summoned to join the
deliberation, and astonished her uncle not a little by the firmness with
which she said--

"That never will do, sir!"

"Well, my dear, perhaps you can propose a more feasible plan. Does Mr.
Allan intend to 'marry the whole family?'"

The ill-concealed irony and coarseness of this remark brought a flush to
the young girl's face, and a fire to her eyes that made her more like
her haughty relative than ever, as she answered--

"I have not consulted with Mr. Allan; for I did not know there was any
need of consultation. No doubt he still thinks as I did an hour ago,
that--my father--that we were still secured a home at least." And her
voice faltered; for she could not yet speak that name without tears, and
the harshness of their situation was forced upon her painfully.

"Well, leave him out of the question. Something must be done. Creditors
are at your very door; harpies that will not be satisfied so long as you
are living on Wilton carpets and dining with silver that has never yet
been paid for."

Mrs. Burton instinctively turned towards her daughter, as if she could
in reality suggest some plan by which everything could readily be
arranged. She felt revived by the quick decision of Lucy's tone and
manner.

"I have no plans. I can scarcely think as yet," she said, passing her
hand hurriedly across her brow; "but to-morrow: at least we can be in
peace until then. Only one thing I am certain of, that, so long as I
have health and strength, my mother and brothers shall not be dependent
on any one."

"Those hands work, indeed!" returned Mr. William Burton, glancing almost
contemptuously on the white fingers locked so resolutely together, on
which sparkled a ring of great value, the betrothed gift of her lover.
"Go to Allan with your resolution, and see what he will say. Come, come
now, don't be obstinate and foolish, Lucy. You are poor George's child,
and as like him as you can be. I mustn't get vexed with you. I know it's
a great shock. I feel it so myself; but we must be brave and put up with
trouble we can't help."

It was with a swelling heart, and oftentimes gushes of bitter tears,
that Lucy trod the floor of her room all that long afternoon, while her
mother received, in the parlor below, visits of condolence from friends
and acquaintances, who came, some because custom required it, and others
because they had suffered and sorrowed, and knew how welcome a kindly
sympathy had been in their affliction. The children, Grace and Willie,
sat reading together with their arms about each other until the twilight
came, and they began to wonder what made sister stay away alone so long,
and finally deputed George to go "very softly" and see if she would not
come down to tea, "as Doctor Howard was still talking to mamma, and they
were very lonely."

"Come in," said Lucy, as she recognized her brother's voice; and then
she made him sit down beside her, and led him to talk of their future
life and what he had intended to accomplish. It had been in the boy's
mind all day, and he spoke very earnestly. He would be so industrious
after this, and study so hard, and be a great lawyer like Uncle Thomas,
and then mamma should come and live with him, when Lucy was married and
the children grown up. Ah, how could she damp such fond anticipations
and throw the shadow of care over that bright young face, from which she
had parted back the clustering locks that she might look steadfastly
into those clear, eloquent eyes! So she gave up her first resolve of
telling him _all_ the truth, but said--

"Dear brother, what if it should be necessary for us to move into a
smaller house, and for you to give up study and go into business for a
few years until we get rich again, and Willie is large enough to help
himself a little?"

The shadow came, after all, and the boy's face lost its eager, hopeful
look.

"I knew it would be hard, and that you do not like business; but we all
have to bear trials. Think of poor mamma; for her sake, George. And
because it would be right," she added, after a moment. "But we will talk
more about this some other day; only think of it, brother, and be brave.
Ask strength from Heaven to do rightly," and she pointed to her
dressing-table, where an open Bible lay, stained with tears.

Ah, how many schemes she revolved in her mind that night, when she could
not sleep, and envied the calm repose of Grace, who shared her room, and
was lying so quietly beside her. And then she rose and turned to her
Bible again, as she had never sought it before, although it had always
been dear to her; for she was of those who had "remembered their Creator
in the days of their youth." One sentence caught her attention; no doubt
she had read it a hundred times before, but she never had known its
meaning until now.

"_In all thy ways acknowledge Him, and He will direct thy paths._"

How full of hope and assurance it was! and something like a smile
quivered about her lips as she knelt and laid her heart open to the
Father of the Fatherless.

But several days passed before anything like a feasible plan suggested
itself. Mrs. Burton was ready to do anything Lucy thought best; but her
mind seemed to be paralyzed by the succession of misfortunes. Yet still
another trial remained for the devoted girl, and harder to bear, that it
came so unexpectedly.

"I cannot do as you wish," she said to her lover, when her resolution
was finally taken. "God only knows how hard the struggle has been, and
still is. But I should despise myself if I turned from one duty to take
up another. How could I expect a blessing upon it? We are both young; I
but nineteen, you twenty-three. Five years from now we shall still have
a long life before us, and then we shall be all the happier for this
self-denial. Is it asking too much of you?--too great a sacrifice,
James?"

"I cannot understand you, Lucy. Don't speak enigmas."

"Well, then, have I not explained it clearly?--that my labor is
necessary to my mother and all of them, until the younger children are
old enough to act for themselves; and, even to be your wife, great
happiness as it would be to me, I cannot desert them."

"You are a noble girl, Lucy," he said, as you would admire anything that
was beautiful in a picture or a statue. And yet she seemed to know that
he did not feel with her--"could not understand her," as he had said.

"And do you not think I am right?"

"I can't say that I do--that is, exactly. I can't see that you are bound
to waste five years, the best years of life, when the family can be
otherwise provided for. You say your uncles have offered to do all that
is necessary; your mother would always be welcome in my house." And
James Allan actually regarded himself, and had done so for some days, a
perfect model of virtuous self-denial in making the proposal, and "going
on" with a match that more worldly friends now advised him against.
There was a difference between the daughter of the prosperous merchant
and the ruined bankrupt.

"You never have had brothers and sisters, James."

"And so shall love you all the better, darling. You will have none to be
jealous of."

"Ah, now listen to me. Do not place obstacles in the path of my duty.
Tell me, am I selfish towards you?"

She did not think he could say "yes," or feel it. She knew that if the
probation had been proposed to her for his sake, she would have
consented joyfully, happy in the power to show how true her love was,
and she would have strengthened and encouraged him in every way.

He was silent for a moment, and then he said, slowly--

"And what do you propose to do? Teach, I suppose." It grated upon his
ear to think that any one who would be hereafter connected with him
should use time or talent in her own support. He would much rather have
given the necessary sum outright; but that Lucy would not listen to.

"No, I shall not teach."

"And what in creation will you do?" he ejaculated, surprised from his
accustomed politeness into an abrupt betrayal of native rudeness.

"I am going to learn a trade and work at it, and have a shop, when I can
manage one."

"Good heavens, Lucy, you are mad! What has put such an insane idea into
your head?"

"Thought, thought--constant, harassing, anxious thought. As a teacher or
governess I could do little more than support myself; and I know I have
taste and enterprise, and George will assist me, and I feel I shall
succeed."

"Never to be my wife afterwards!"

"James!" and she started to her feet, the hot blood mounting to her
face. She could not believe she had heard aright, and came back to him,
laying her hand upon his arm and looking beseechingly into his face. He
was angry now. Pride, and more than pride, vanity, were aroused. What!
his wife to have been behind a counter!--to hear it said, in after
years, "O yes! Mrs. Allan was a shop girl!" It was not that his treasure
would be exposed to rude and unfeeling association; it was not that he
would shield her from toil! He shook her from him--

"As true as I am speaking, if you persist in this, I will never marry
you!"

"_You never shall!_"

She turned quietly, but firmly, and went towards the door. There were no
tears, no expostulations. It was not her nature. Neither was that deep
emphatic tone the voice of passion. But a mask had dropped from the real
character of one she had almost reverenced, who had been invested by the
halo of her love with every high and noble quality.

"Lucy!"

No answer; and then the woman triumphed, and she turned her face so that
he could see how deadly pale she was, as she said, not raising her
eyes--

"God bless you, James, for the happiness of the past!"

He knew that he was forgiven; but he also felt that, outwardly, there
could be no reconciliation. In an instant, all her goodness and purity
came into his mind. He felt all that he had lost when too late to regain
it. But he stifled remorse and regret by pride and fancied injury, as he
left the house never to return again.

There followed a wretched, stormy interview with her uncle, whose anger
knew no bounds when Lucy told him that her engagement with James Allan
was broken, and for what reason. She was called "idiot" and
"ungrateful," her scheme was ridiculed and discouraged, until Mrs.
Burton even began to take her brother's view of the case, and think that
her daughter had acted inexcusably when, with a little forbearance, she
could have retained the care and love of one who had a father's sanction
to call her wife. And finally threats were tried to induce her to use
her influence to reconcile the family to the first plan proposed; for
Mr. William Burton solemnly declared that, if the daughter of his
brother disgraced the family by becoming "a milliner's girl," he would
disown her, and his children should never recognize her again.

This was a great trial, but a harder one had been borne, and Lucy found
a friend to uphold her in her course when she was sorely tempted to
abandon it. Dr. Howard had been for many years their family physician,
and had watched her from earliest childhood with no little interest. His
daughter Mary was Lucy's most intimate friend, and through her he heard
of all that was passing in the family of his deceased friend. His little
carriage was standing at the door as Mr. Burton left the house, the
morning of the last interview, and Lucy, still sitting in the parlor,
her head upon her hands, lost in deep and painful thought, was roused by
his kindly voice and fatherly manner, to be comforted by his sympathy
and strengthened by his approval.

"I know all, my little daughter," said the warm-hearted old gentleman.
"As for that James Allan, you've had a lucky escape, and I'd willingly
see him"--

"Doctor!" interrupted Lucy, for she could not hear that once loved name
spoken of so harshly.

"Well, well, I suppose you were fond of him, or you never could have
promised what you did. But we won't think of that part of the subject.
Now tell me exactly what you want to do, and then we will see if there's
a possibility of accomplishing it."

So Lucy unfolded her plans more fully than she had yet done to any one.
Their milliner was a widow lady who had under her direction one of those
large work-rooms employing twenty or thirty girls. Her customers were
among the wealthiest and most fashionable people in the city, and, as
she was very intelligent and a person of excellent taste, they
frequently consulted her about an entire wardrobe, and in this way Lucy
had often listened to her conversation. Only one month ago, her mother
and herself were taking Mrs. Hill's advice with regard to her own
_trousseau_, a part of which was already purchased; and while Lucy was
waiting for her mother to call for her, she had been much interested in
a history of Mrs. Hill's own business experience, resulting from a
report that she was thinking of retiring before long. Lucy found, to her
amazement, that, in twenty years, she had not only educated her family,
but saved enough to make her entirely comfortable. This conversation
might have been forgotten, had not a necessity for exertion been forced
so suddenly upon her; and knowing, from the salaries of her own
teachers, that she could not hope to do more than maintain herself in
that way, Mrs. Hill's success flashed upon her mind as an encouraging
precedent.

At first, she scarcely counted the cost, it is true. She forgot that it
would make an entire change in her social position, strange as it may
seem in a so-called republican country, and, above all, in a city where
"all men" were first declared to be "equal." She could not judge, from
her own true, affectionate nature, the result such a decision would have
upon her future prospects in domestic life. That was the thought which
cheered her at first, the beacon star that was to guide her through all
toil and self-denial; but it had been quenched, with all else that had
made life bright to her. And as yet she knew nothing of actual physical
fatigue or deprivation; this was yet to break upon her.

Dr. Howard, like a true friend, pointed out all this, kindly, it is
true, but in the strongest colors; and when he found that even then she
did not give up her scheme, he patted her glossy curls as he would have
done Mary's, and said she was "a little heroine," and he did not doubt
that she could succeed.

"Whoever show themselves weak enough to desert you, my child," he said,
"you have always a friend in me, remember that; and you must use me
whenever you want advice or assistance. Don't hesitate to come to me in
all your little trials and troubles, and my house shall be a second home
to you."

Then, to have her mind relieved of all anxiety on this score at once,
for he saw the sad changes the past few weeks had made in her worn face,
he proposed to go at once and consult Mrs. Hill, and see how they could
manage time and terms. It seemed a long hour to Lucy before the sound of
his carriage-wheels was heard again; but he came at last, his face
beaming with pleasure, and told her how heartily Mrs. Hill had entered
into her plans, that she would herself direct the short apprenticeship,
and engage her services when it was completed. There was a little note
from the lady herself, so full of good will and kindliness, that the
young girl's faith in human nature was revived, and her path seemed
indeed "directed" by the God in whom she trusted.

How thankfully she reviewed the events of the day to her mother that
night, with a look more like happiness than she had worn since her
father's death. And Mrs. Burton seemed, for the first time, interested
in it, and was thankful for everything that would keep them all
together.

George was enthusiastic, as he always was in everything he entered into,
and, throwing his arms about her neck, declared she was "the best sister
in the world, and he had no doubt she would make a fortune." The younger
children could not, of course, fully understand the case, but knew that
something pleasant had happened and they were indebted to Lucy for it.
It was the happiest night the Burtons had known since their father's
death.




[Illustration]




TAKING CARE OF NUMBER ONE.

BY T. S. ARTHUR.


"EVERY one for himself." This was one of Lawrence Tilghman's favorite
modes of expression. And it will do him no injustice to say that he
usually acted up to the sentiment in his business transactions and
social intercourse; though guardedly, whenever a too manifest exhibition
of selfishness was likely to affect him in the estimation of certain
parties with whom he wished to stand particularly fair. In all his
dealings, this maxim was alone regarded; and he was never satisfied
unless, in bargaining, he secured the greater advantage, a thing that
pretty generally occurred.

There resided in the same town with Tilghman--a western town--a certain
young lady, whose father owned a large amount of property. She was his
only child, and would fall heir, at his death, to all his wealth. Of
course, this young lady had attractions that were felt to be of a most
weighty character by certain young men in the town, who made themselves
as agreeable to her as possible. Among these was Lawrence Tilghman.

"Larry," said a friend to him one day--they had been talking about the
young lady--"it's no use for you to play the agreeable to Helen Walcot."

"And why not, pray?" returned Tilghman.

"They say she's engaged."

"To whom?"

"To a young man in Columbus."

"Who says so?"

"I can't mention my authority; but it's good."

"Engaged, ha! Well, I'll break that engagement, if there's any virtue in
trying."

"You will?"

"Certainly. Helen will be worth a plum when the old man, her father,
dies; and I've made up my mind to handle some of his thousands."

"But certainly, Larry, you would not attempt to interfere with a
marriage contract?"

"I don't believe any contract exists," replied the young man. "Anyhow,
while a lady is single I regard her as in the market, and to be won by
the boldest."

"Still, we should have some respect for the rights of others."

"Every one for himself in this world," replied Tilghman. "That is my
motto. If you don't take care of yourself, you'll be shoved to the wall
in double quick time. Long ago, I resolved to put some forty or fifty
thousand dollars between myself and the world by marriage, and you may
be sure that I will not let this opportunity slip for any consideration.
Helen must be mine."

Additional evidence of the fact that the young lady was under engagement
of marriage soon came to the ears of Tilghman. The effect was to produce
a closer attention on his part to Helen, who, greatly to his
uneasiness, did not seem to give him much encouragement, although she
always treated him with politeness and attention whenever he called to
see her. But it was not true, as Tilghman had heard, that Helen was
engaged to a young man in Columbus; though it was true that she was in
correspondence with a gentleman there named Walker, and that their
acquaintance was intimate, and fast approaching a love-like character.

Still, she was not indifferent to the former, and, as he showed so
strong a preference for her, began, gradually, to feel an awakening
interest. Tilghman was quick to perceive this, and it greatly elated
him. In the exultation of his feelings, he said to himself--

"I'll show this Columbus man that I'm worth a dozen of him. The boldest
wins the fair. I wouldn't give much for his engagement."

Tilghman was a merchant, and visited the east twice every year for the
purpose of buying goods. Last August, he crossed the mountains as usual.
Some men, when they leave home and go among strangers, leave all the
little good breeding they may happen to have had behind them. Such a man
was Tilghman. The moment he stepped into a steamboat, stage, or railroad
car, the every-one-for-himself principle by which he was governed
manifested itself in all its naked deformity, and it was at once
concluded by all with whom he came in contact that, let him be who he
would, he was no gentleman.

On going up the river, on the occasion referred to, our gentleman went
on the free and easy principle, as was usual with him when in public
conveyances; consulting his own inclinations and tastes alone, and
running his elbows into any and everybody's ribs that happened to come
in his way. He was generally first at the table when the bell rang; and,
as he had a good appetite, managed, while there, to secure a full share
of the delicacies provided for the company.

"Every one for himself," was the thought in his mind on these occasions;
and his actions fully agreed with his thoughts.

On crossing the mountains in stages as far as Cumberland, his greedy,
selfish, and sometimes downright boorish propensities annoyed his
fellow-passengers, and particularly a young man of quiet, refined, and
gentlemanly deportment, who could not, at times, help showing the
disgust he felt. Because he paid his half dollar for meals at the
taverns on the way, Tilghman seemed to feel himself licensed to
gormandize at a beastly rate. The moment he sat down to the table, he
would seize eagerly upon the most desirable dish near him, and
appropriate at least a half, if not two-thirds, of what it contained,
regardless utterly of his fellow-passengers. Then he would call for the
next most desirable dish, if he could not reach it, and help himself
after a like liberal fashion. In eating, he seemed more like a hungry
dog, in his eagerness, than a man possessing a grain of decency. When
the time came to part company with him, his fellow-travelers rejoiced
at being rid of one whose utter selfishness filled them with disgust.

In Philadelphia and New York, where Tilghman felt that he was altogether
unknown, he indulged his uncivilized propensities to their full extent.
At one of the hotels, just before leaving New York to return to
Baltimore, and there take the cars for the West again, he met the young
man referred to as a traveling companion, and remarked the fact that he
recognized and frequently observed him. Under this observation, as it
seemed to have something sinister in it, Tilghman felt, at times, a
little uneasy, and, at the hotel table, rather curbed his greediness
when this individual was present.

Finally, he left New York in the twelve o'clock boat, intending to pass
on to Baltimore in the night train from Philadelphia, and experienced a
sense of relief in getting rid of the presence of one who appeared to
know him and to have taken a prejudice against him. As the boat swept
down the bay, Tilghman amused himself first with a cigar on the forward
deck, and then with a promenade on the upper deck. He had already
secured his dinner ticket. When the fumes of roast turkey came to his
eager sense, he felt "sharp set" enough to have devoured a whole
gobbler! This indication of the approaching meal caused him to dive down
below, where the servants were busy in preparing the table. Here he
walked backwards and forwards for about half an hour in company with a
dozen others, who, like himself, meant to take care of number one. Then,
as the dishes of meat began to come in, he thought it time to secure a
good place. So, after taking careful observation, he assumed a position,
with folded arms, opposite a desirable dish, and awaited the completion
of arrangements. At length all was ready, and a waiter struck the bell.
Instantly, Tilghman drew forth a chair, and had the glory of being first
at the table. He had lifted his plate and just cried, as he turned
partly around--"Here, waiter! Bring me some of that roast turkey. A side
bone and piece of the breast"--when a hand was laid on his shoulder, and
the clerk of the boat said, in a voice of authority--

"Further down, sir! Further down! We want these seats for ladies."

Tilghman hesitated.

"Quick! quick!" urged the clerk.

There was a rustling behind him of ladies' dresses, and our gentleman
felt that he must move. In his eagerness to secure another place, he
stumbled over a chair and came near falling prostrate. At length he
brought up at the lower end of the table.

"Waiter!" he cried, as soon as he had found a new position--"waiter, I
want some of that roast turkey!"

The waiter did not hear, or was too busy with some one else to hear.

"Waiter, I say! Here! This way!"

So loudly and earnestly was this uttered, that the observation of every
one at that end of the table was attracted towards the young man. But
he thought of nothing but securing his provender. At length he received
his turkey, when he ordered certain vegetables, and then began eating
greedily, while his eyes were every moment glancing along the table to
see what else there was to tempt his palate.

"Waiter!" he called, ere the first mouthful was fairly swallowed.

The waiter came.

"Have you any oyster sauce?"

"No, sir."

"Great cooks! Turkey without oyster sauce! Bring me a slice of ham."

"Bottle of ale, waiter," soon after issued from his lips.

The ale was brought, the cork drawn, and the bottle set beside Tilghman,
who, in his haste, poured his tumbler two-thirds full ere the contact of
air had produced effervescence. The consequence was that the liquor
flowed, suddenly, over the glass, and spread its creamy foam for the
space of four or five inches around. Several persons sitting near by had
taken more interest in our young gentleman who was looking after number
one than in the dinner before them; and, when this little incident
occurred, could not suppress a titter.

Hearing this, Tilghman became suddenly conscious of the ludicrous figure
he made, and glanced quickly from face to face. The first countenance
his eyes rested upon was that of the young man who had been his stage
companion; near him was a lady who had thrown back her veil, and whom
he instantly recognized as Helen Walcot! She it was who stood behind
him when the clerk ejected him from his chair, and she had been both an
ear and eye-witness of his sayings and doings since he dropped into his
present place at the table. So much had his conduct affected her with a
sense of the ridiculous, that she could not suppress the smile that
curled her lips; a smile that was felt by Tilghman as the death-blow to
all his hopes of winning her for his bride. With the subsidence of these
hopes went his appetite; and with that he went also--that is, from the
table, without so much as waiting for the dessert. On the forward deck
he ensconced himself until the boat reached South Amboy, and then he
took good care not to push his way into the ladies' car, a species of
self-denial to which he was not accustomed.

Six months afterwards--he did not venture to call again on Miss
Walcot--Tilghman read the announcement of the young lady's marriage to a
Mr. Walker, and not long afterwards met her in company with her husband.
He proved to be the traveling companion who had been so disgusted with
his boorish conduct when on his last trip to the east.

Our young gentleman has behaved himself rather better since when from
home; and we trust that some other young gentlemen who are too much in
the habit of "taking care of number one" when they are among strangers,
will be warned by his mortification, and cease to expose themselves to
the ridicule of well-bred people.




A HINDOO BELLE.

BY J. E. P.


          COME, see Ro Appo, my sweet Hindoo belle;
            On Burra deen, a holiday, full dressed,
          Glittering with gems, she shineth in the sun,
            Superior far to maidens of the west.

          Her Dahka veil, light as the fleecy cloud,
            Enshrines her form in fairy-like attire
          Her every move is made with Eastern grace,
            She walks a queen of beauty with her lyre

          O'er the Midan, or in the cooler shade
            Of scented shrubs or spreading banian grove,
          Touching the strings where music sleeps till when
            She wakes all into song of joy and love.

          See her maunteeka,[C] with its splendid star,
            Throws radiating beauty from her brow,
          Where diamond amethyst and emerald beams
            Blend with the pride that sparkles from her now.

          Her champank necklace, glittering round her neck,
            Loose dangles down low on her glowing breast,
          Whose rise and fall, as inward passion stirs
            Oft, like the Ganges, drown its zealous guest.

          See, as she raises slow her tiny hand,
            How rich her fingers are in jewels rare!
          Her thumb she nears, for in her inah[D] glass
            She loves to see her beauty shining there

          Music is in her step, for, as she stirs,
            Listen to Paunjcho merry, tinkling bell,
          Betaking well the native cheerfulness
            Of my sweet-tempered Hindostanee belle.

          I love to see thee in thy pride of show;
            Thy sable face, illum'd with Eastern smile,
          Wins o'er my soul, in spite thy Pagan creed,
            To court thy heart and worship thee awhile.

          Doff off thy dark idolatry, and come,
            Be one with me; be married, and deride
          Thy parents' wrath, thy Bramin's deadliest curse;
            Join Europe and Asia, bridegroom and the bride.

FOOTNOTES:

[C] Ornament for the forehead.

[D] Small looking-glass worn on the thumb.




DEVELOUR.

A SEQUEL TO "THE NIEBELUNGEN."

BY PROFESSOR CHARLES E. BLUMENTHAL.

(Continued from page 261.)


CHAPTER IX.

DEVELOUR and his associates left the little house in the Ruelle des
Jardiniers and marched down the Rue de Charenton, in order to avoid
being seen by any sentinel which the revelers of the Rue Montgallet
might have had the precaution to place before the door. Caleb and
Develour walked at the head of the troop, followed by Bertram and Filmot
with the _pere_ between them. When they reached the _barriere_, they met
with an unexpected interruption from a small body of municipal guards,
who stood like statues in the gloomy shade of a temporary guard-house.
Their sudden appearance, and the quick and decisive _qui vive_ of their
brave young Captain St. Leger, disconcerted Develour for a moment; but
Caleb whispered to him--

"Halt the men, while I give this young fire-eater the watchword, which
he begins to suspect is not in our possession."

Then advancing a few steps, he, in a low tone, but loud enough for the
officer to hear, spoke the word "_Philippe and Amelia_;" then
immediately resumed his former position, while he said "Pass, guard of
the throne." Develour's band then turned into the Ruelle de Quatre
Chemins, and marched up the Rue de Trois Chandelles until they came to
an alley, into which they went. About the middle of the alley, they
halted before a massive gate, which opened into the garden of Madame
Georgiana's _pied a terre_. Here a whispered conversation took place as
to the best mode of gaining entrance into the garden They had expected
to find it open; for so their spy had reported it to have been at an
early hour of the evening. Disappointed, some proposed to break it down;
but this was rejected, on account of the noise which would attend such
an effort, and might give the alarm to the revelers. Others proposed to
send for a locksmith; but this was considered as consuming too much
time, when every moment was of the greatest value. At last Bertram, who,
with Caleb, had taken no part in the discussion, said--

"If the _grille_ is not surmounted with spikes too large to cross, I
will soon have it open. At any rate, I will try. Come, Pere Tranchard,
let us have your ladder."

The silken cords were soon uncoiled, and Bertram, with one dextrous
throw, fastened the hooks around the cross-bars between the spikes. He
then mounted the ladder, and bade the pere follow him. Poor Pere
Tranchard, notwithstanding his many excuses, was compelled to share the
perilous ascent When the two had reached the top, Bertram ordered his
frightened companion to crawl along the _grille_ to the wall, and there,
perched in a very uneasy position, remain a sentinel in the avenues from
the house; he then coolly surveyed the ground on the other side of the
gate, and, after a few seconds of deliberation, drew the ladder after
him, and lowered it into the garden. Not the slightest noise betrayed
the presence of a living being, and he congratulated himself already
upon his success while descending the lowest rounds, when his progress
was suddenly arrested by some one who seized the collar of his coat,
without any warning except an inarticulate grumbling noise. The rain and
the thick darkness prevented him from seeing his assailant; but, when he
turned in order to lay hold of him, he found a shaggy head coming in
contact with his face. As soon as he felt the hair brush against his
cheek, he gave a low laugh, and said--

"Down, Carlo, down! It is Bertram."

His four-footed assailant, a large dog of the African lion breed,
immediately relinquished his hold, and crouched at the feet of his old
master.

"Just so," muttered Bertram. "I thought Jacquelin would not like to go
the rounds to-night, and would confide his post to thee, Carlo. Come,
let us go and hunt for thy new master."

He then walked cautiously towards the house, the lower windows of which
opened into the garden, and showed a brilliantly illuminated apartment,
in which a table, covered with all the appurtenances of an epicurean
supper, was set out. The room was filled with a number of gentlemen in
every variety of dress. Bertram, in his approach to the house, took
advantage of every tree to conceal his person, in order to get as near
as possible without being observed. When he had come near enough to
distinguish the persons in the room, he stopped, and surveyed the scene
and the ground with the eye of a soldier, and, after a few moments,
muttered--

"A precious set of scoundrels, indeed, we have here. Grandan--I suppose
come to make converts to socialism; no need of that here; Malin, Sotard,
Egal, and Letour, who have no property of their own, are already too
willing to divide that of other people. There, too, are Longchamp,
Bouchon, and Labotte, and not a woman with them: that is strange, were
it not for the wine, which accounts for their presence here. But I must
hasten to obtain the key. I wonder where that scoundrel Jacquelin has
gone to."

He then gave a low and prolonged whistle. It was answered, after a few
seconds, by another from an upper window, and soon afterwards a man came
out of the house and looked around in the garden; but the darkness
prevented him from distinguishing anything. Bertram repeated, in the
mean time, his signal, while he drew off from the house towards a thick
clump of trees, to which the man followed, guided by the signal whistle.
As soon as they had reached the trees, Bertram seized him in his
powerful arms, and, after he had put his handkerchief over his mouth,
told him to give up the key of the garden gate. The terrified gardener
placed the keys in his hands. Bertram then tied him to a tree, and left
the poor wretch, almost frightened to death, exposed to the drizzling
rain which now began to fall.

When he returned to the gate, he found his companions impatient to gain
admittance, and poor Pere Tranchard begging in whispers to be released
from his elevated situation, assuring them that it was too dark to see
anything or anybody from his post, and that the place was too narrow for
him to continue there any longer. Bertram laughed, and told him to come
down; that they had no need any longer for his valuable services as a
look-out.

When Develour and his companions entered the garden, Caleb, who had
hitherto remained inactive, took the command of the little party, and
every one obeyed at once, as if it had been expected that he would lead
the attack. He divided them into two divisions, one to be led by
Develour and Bertram, and the other by himself and Filmot, but told them
that they were to separate only when the servants and followers should
have been secured in the hall of the domestics. He then ordered them all
to cover their faces with the masks, and advance. A few minutes brought
them to the very door of the hall in which the domestics and others in
the pay of the conspirators were already carousing, and were so
completely absorbed in political disputes and drinking wine, filched
from the supply for the supper-room, that they did not observe the
intruders until they were surrounded. Before they had time to recover
from the surprise, they were seized, disarmed, and tied, and instant
death was threatened to everyone in case of any attempt at an alarm.
After the servants and guards had been thus disposed of, Caleb said to
Develour--

"Thou and Bertram must now secure the masters. Let Bertram speak; it is
better that thy voice be not recognized. Endeavor, above all things, to
gain the lower part of the room, and lock the small door thou wilt see
there. Here we separate. I leave the men with thee, if thy friend will
volunteer to be my companion."

"Willingly," replied Filmot. "Lead the way."

When the two had passed out of the room, Bertram said to Tranchard--

"Now, worthy pere, can you tell us how many doors lead out of that
supper-room into some of the secret recesses of this rat-trap?"

"Your companion with the broad-brimmed hat seems to know; for he has
told you to take care of the lower door."

"Is there no other, worthy pere? For, remember, if any of these men
escape into a secret hiding-place, I will provide you with a higher
perch than yonder wall, and will secure you to it by a rope around the
neck."

Tranchard turned pale at these words, and replied, with a trembling
voice--

"There is another; but promise me that you yourself will not enter it,
and I will point it out to you. Otherwise," he continued, with a firmer
voice, heaving a deep sigh, "you may hang before I'll tell you."

"Never fear," said Bertram, with a laugh; "we have no idea--at least not
to-night--to trust our heads into any of the traps which this she-devil
may have contrived here."

"Well, then, if you touch the golden rose by the side of the large
mirror over the Cupid, it will slide aside, and you may enter by a
stairs into the cellar underneath the room."

"We will take care of it, but you must now remain by my side, worthy
pere, till I have tested your veracity."

Then turning to his men, he dispatched two squads to different parts of
the house, with directions to secure the two regular places of egress
from the room.


CHAPTER X.

THE conspirators, in the mean time, unconscious of the danger which
threatened them, were discussing with one another the various topics
which were uppermost in their minds. Joubart, who had just joined the
party, after listening for a few moments to some remarks from Egal,
exclaimed--

"Gentlemen, our situations, our precedents are very different, and our
parts are very singular. You are all republicans at all hazards. I am
not a republican of that school. And yet at this moment I am going to be
more republican than you are. The fact that I am now here is itself a
decisive declaration of it. Let us understand one another. Like you, I
regard a republican government as the only instrument for the
advancement of the general truth which a nation should incorporate in
its laws. But I have just come from the chamber, and I fear we are not
strong enough, not prepared as yet to accomplish this. I have still
misgivings. I am not therefore an absolute republican like yourselves;
but I am a politician, and a politician of the highest cast." At these
words, smiles were exchanged among the conspirators. "Well, as a
politician, I now think it is my duty to refuse the support you are
willing to offer me at this hour."

"Well, refuse and play the part of a coward, if you will; that of a
traitor you dare not play," exclaimed Bouchon, in his brutal manner.

"There is no need of falling out by the way," said Grandan. "We need
Joubart, and he needs us. That little speech will do very well for the
chamber; there it would tell. Here we understand one another. Not one of
us will risk his head without a probability of success. Joubart has not
seen Delevert; else he would know that the mine is well dug, and will
and _must_ explode before to-morrow evening. The chiefs of the _Cabet_,
_St. Simon_, _Lebout_, _Carac_, _Tuvir_, and five others, whose names I
must not mention now, have drawn their followers together to act under
the orders of the secret council. The council has decreed a permanent
sitting until its object is accomplished; and accomplished it will be at
all hazards."

"What can keep Madame Georgiana so long?" whispered Labotte to
Longchamp. "She promised to be with us by ten o'clock, and bring with
her the fair Louise. It is past ten now, and I told the coachman to draw
up before the little door in the wall on the Ruelle des Trois
Chandelles."

"I am afraid," replied Longchamp, "that you and Bouchon will get into
trouble by your intrigues, and draw your friends also into difficulties.
_Diable!_ are there no pretty girls in France besides this Louise? and
what possessed Bouchon to fall in love with the picture of this American
half savage?"

"Hist! hist! Bouchon will hear you. As to his affair, all I can say
there is no accounting for taste. Mine is of a different nature. Louise
has charms besides those of her person. The happy possessor of that fair
devotee will also be entitled to receive an annual revenue of one
hundred thousand francs; no trifling consideration. But the girl is not
aware that she is heir to such wealth; and, if she were, would not be
able to establish her claim without the aid of certain papers, which I
alone know where to find."

"Well, there maybe some reason in your passion, but I see none in that
of Bouchon. However, let us go in quest of our fair hostess. We can do
so without any one being aware of our object."

Before they had time to rise from their seats the door flew open, and
Bertram, with Develour and his followers, all armed to the teeth,
entered the room. Not a word was spoken by either party for a few
seconds. The conspirators were speechless from surprise and momentary
fear; while the others executed their movements rapidly and in silence,
according to Bertram's orders, who wished to surround them before they
would have time to alarm the house. M. Trouvier was the first who
recovered from his surprise, and, seizing his pistols, was about to rise
from his chair; when Bertram, who had now placed himself behind Malin's
chair, with his back to the large mirror, leveled a short rifle at his
head, while he said, with his deep guttural voice--

"Down, sir! down to your seat! Let not a man stir from his place, if he
wishes to keep his life!"

"What is the reason of this attack?" inquired Trouvier. "Do you come to
rob us? If so, we will give you our purses, and free us from the
intrusion."

"Your purses," exclaimed Bertram, with a mocking laugh, "would not be
heavy to carry. Joubart's poetry and purse are chaff, easily carried
away by a breath. Grandan and Egal might furnish better stores, if they
had sufficiently gulled the people to entrust them with their money for
a common stock. And you, M. Trouvier, with Sotard and Malin, have enough
to do to keep your seditious paper afloat; you certainly have nothing to
offer except empty promises to pay."

"Betrayed!" groaned Joubart, as he threw himself back in his chair.

"What, then, is your object in coming here?" inquired Trouvier. "Why are
we surrounded by armed men hiding their faces beneath masks?"

"To compel you not to leave this room for two hours from this time; and,
to this end, to tie your hands and feet and fasten you to the chairs
which you now occupy," replied Bertram, with the utmost nonchalance,
when he saw that the men had by this time managed to place themselves
behind nearly every chair around the table.

"Never!" exclaimed Bouchon, who was a large and powerful man--"never
will I submit to such disgrace while I can defend myself!"

And, with one bound, he sprang across his chair towards Bertram, but
dropped almost on his knees when he felt the iron grasp of the veteran
upon his shoulders. And that grasp continued until the burly form was
bent like that of a child by a man.

Labotte had risen during the confusion which this scene created, and
endeavored to escape by the lower door, while others had sought to leave
by the ordinary entrances; but Develour stood a fierce sentinel before
the only safe passage for escape, and repulsed the miscreant with a
bitterness which would have led him to kill the mercenary wretch, if
higher obligations had not interposed.

The other conspirators were also met everywhere by leveled pistols and
drawn swords. They finally submitted to their fate, and were bound one
by one by Bertram and his attendants. When Pere Tranchard pretended to
assist in tying Letour, he managed to whisper to him--

"In two hours you will be freed. Take care to remove the deposits from
the secret chamber underneath; the secret is betrayed."

As soon as they had secured the prisoners. Bertram and Develour locked
the outer doors, and then passed through that over which Develour had
stood guard into a smaller chamber without any apparent outlet. Bertram
ordered Tranchard to show them the means of egress from that room.

"There are two," replied the pere, who had managed to lay hold of a
bottle of wine before he left the supper-room, and with which he had
fortified his inner man. "One, here to the right, leads into the
garden, and the other, to the left, opens on a staircase which brings
you into Mademoiselle Develour's boudoir."

"Open the one to the left. Quick, quick! Caleb may need help!" exclaimed
Bertram.

The pere obeyed by touching a spring, which caused one of the panels to
slide aside. They all then rushed up the stairs into the room, into
which the reader has been introduced in a previous chapter. But the room
was now vacant, the windows open, and not a sign of a human being
anywhere. Develour, who had hitherto acted in silence, absorbed in his
anxiety for the safety of Louise, now broke forth in bitter reproaches
to Bertram--

"This, then, is your boasted wisdom! this the end of all your promises
of success! Caleb assured me that in this room I should find her, and
receive her safely into my arms. Where is she now? Where is Caleb, and
what has become of Filmot? Have I lost both Louise and my friend? But
here is another door; let us see what it conceals."

Turning the key, he beheld Madame Georgiana lying upon a sofa reading
"Indiana," and making notes to it with a pencil. When Bertram saw who
the occupant of the room was, he whispered--

"Speak not; she knows your voice. I will interrogate her."

But, before he had time to say a word, she rose and inquired if they had
come to release her?

"Release you from what?"

"From the confinement to which a burly savage, a friend of yours, I
suppose, has condemned me." She then began to relate what had taken
place in that room a few minutes before their entrance.

"And whither have they gone? and how long ago?"

"They left about ten minutes before you entered; as to whither, I do not
know. If you have not met them, they must have left either by the window
or through the green panel-door, which opens on a passage by which one
can reach the Ruelle."

Bertram then compelled the lady to open the panel-door, and after
ordering his men to remain for one hour in the house, and to suffer no
one to enter or leave it, he accompanied Develour down to the street.
When they reached the pavement, they saw a carriage just turn the Rue
des Trois Labres, and a few loiterers looking after it. Bertram inquired
of one of them if that carriage had passed the house? He replied that it
had halted there for more than an hour; but that, a few minutes ago, two
gentlemen came out with a lady and entered the carriage; that the elder
of the two had shown a card to the coachman, and told him to drive
_ventre a terre_ to the Rue des Terres Fortes.

When Develour heard this, he said, hurriedly, to Bertram--

"I must leave you; my work here is accomplished; though I have but half
succeeded. I must now fulfil another duty. Before morning dawns, I shall
know where Louise is. Farewell, Bertram, but not for ever. When we meet
again, I shall be better able to thank you."

"Nay, nay, we may meet again before to-morrow night. Fear not; all is
well which Arabacca counsels; all ends well which he undertakes."

With these words, he turned and went into the house, and Develour
hastened to the Rue de Burgoigne.

          (To be continued.)




A SPRING CAROL.

BY MRS. A. A. BARNES.


          BRIGHT, balmy Spring! I greet thee now
          With a hounding pulse and joyous brow;
          Thy dewy breath, pure, soft, and bland,
          Seems like a dream of a fairy land;
          And open I throw the casement wide,
          To inhale the dewy, delicious tide:
          The fragrance soft of the budding trees
          Is borne to me on the morning breeze;
          The emerald turf is gemmed with dew,
          That gleams like stars in the vault of blue;
          The clouds are tinged with a rosy stain,
          As the rising sun illumes the plain.
          The early flowers, in their brightest bloom,
          Have waked from their dark and cheerless tomb:
          Sweet flowers! a halo and grace ye fling
          Over the brow of the smiling spring;
          Ye gladden the hearts in cottage homes
          As freely as those in stateliest domes.
          And the birds, the truants I watched for long,
          Are greeting me now with carol and song;
          From the "sunny south" they breathe to me,
          In joyous chirp and wild song free,
          The sweetest lays of a summer sky,
          Where birds of glossiest plumage fly;
          Where flowers are seen of the loveliest hue,
          And the bending skies are softly blue;
          Where the rippling waves of the dancing stream
          Are kissed by the golden sunlight's gleam,
          Whose banks are bright with the sheen of flowers
          That rarely bloom in this clime of ours--
          Blooms gorgeous enough to grace, I ween,
          The brow of Oberon's fairy queen.

          Sweet friend, I marvel, with skies like these,
          Thou e'er shouldst tempt our northern breeze;
          Yet welcome thou art as Spring's first green,
          Pleasant to me as a bright "day-dream,"
          That illumes for a while the sober sky,
          And yet, like thee, too soon dost fly.




UNDERSLEEVES AND CAPS.


[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]


UNDERSLEEVES.

OPEN sleeves are still in vogue, and being more than ever worn for light
summer materials, we continue our cuts in illustration of various
favorite styles.

Fig. 1 is of embroidered muslin, intended to come just above the elbow,
where it is fastened by a small gum-elastic bracelet, which will be
found the neatest support for a demi-sleeve. The wrist has three rows of
rich cambric edging, made to fall over the hand. This is more suitable
for a spring silk than a lighter dress.

Fig. 2. of plain cambric, with embroidered cuff and band. The edging in
this case is made to fall back towards the elbow. It will be noticed
that undersleeves are worn as full as ever, and make the most elegant
finish to a tasteful toilet.

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]


CAPS.

Fig. 3 is a breakfast cap of spotted muslin, with double rows of
quilling, arranged in a very graceful roll, extending around the crown.
The broad strings are of the muslin, with a delicate edging of
Valenciennes lace. Pale violet ribbon may be used instead, and also for
the bow on the cap.

Fig. 4, also a breakfast cap, is in a similar, though more tasteful
style, the bow of rose-colored ribbon in the centre being a novelty, and
the square crown preferred by many. The border is closely quilled, as in
Fig. 3. Many ladies prefer to quill for themselves, which may easily be
done, an iron intended for the purpose being easily procured at a small
expense.




ETRUSCAN LACE CUFF.


[Illustration]

_Use crochet thread Nos. 8 and 9._

Make a chain of 106 loops with thread No. 80; turn back and work in
double crochet, always working on one side, commencing at the right-hand
side of foundation.

_1st row._--Single open crochet, with thread No. 90.

_2d row._--Double crochet.

_3d row._--5 chain, 7 long; repeat.

_4th row._--7 chain, 5 long; repeat.

_5th row._--7 chain, 3 long; repeat.

_6th row._--5 chain, 5 long; repeat.

_7th row._--3 chain, 7 long; repeat.

_8th row._--3 chain, 9 long; repeat.

_9th row._--3 stitches of 3 chain crochet, 7 long; repeat.

_10th row._--4 stitches of 3 chain crochet, 5 long; repeat.

_11th row._--5 stitches of 3 chain crochet, 5 long; repeat.

_12th row._--5 stitches of 3 chain crochet, 3 long; repeat.

Crochet the ends with double crochet.

_13th row._--12 chain, 2 long; repeat. Work this row round each end of
the cuff, and work the band in double crochet with thread No. 80,
missing every fourth stitch of foundation.

          NOTE.--Our pattern has been reduced in size from
          the original, but by working as above directed the
          true size will be given.




KNITTED FLOWERS.


PERIWINKLE

CAST on ten stitches with white split Berlin wool.

_1st row._--Make one stitch, knit two through the row.

_2d row._--Purled.

Fasten on a pale and delicate shade of lavender.

_3d row._--Make one stitch, knit three, turn back, purl the same
stitches (take a deeper shade of lavender), and continue to work in
alternate plain and purled rows (increasing only in the plain rows),
until you have seven stitches on the needle.

Now fasten on a still darker shade of lavender in the ninth purled row,
and knit and purl alternately six more rows, making one stitch at the
beginning of the plain row, and taking two stitches together at the
beginning of the purled rows. Cast off the seven stitches, which
completes one petal. Break the wool about a yard and a half from the
work, thread a rug needle with it, and bring the wool along the left
edge of the petal first made to the next stitches on the needle. Make
one stitch, knit three, turn back, and continue exactly as for the first
petal. When you have thus worked all the stitches into five petals,
cover a wire, by twisting one thread of split lavender wool round it,
and sew it round the edges of the petals. Mount the flower on a piece of
wire to form a stem, having first placed five short yellow stamens in
the centre of the corolla; twist all the wires together, and cover the
stem with green wool.

LEAVES.--Cast on one stitch with a pretty bright shade of green split
wool.

_1st row._--Make one stitch, knit one.

_2d row._--Make one, purl two.

_3d row._--Make one, knit three.

_4th row._--Make one, purl the row.

_5th row._--Make one, knit one, make one, knit two.

_6th row._--Make one, purl the row.

_7th row._--Knit the row, increasing one before and one stitch after the
middle stitch.

_8th row._--Purl the row.

Knit and purl alternately four rows without, and begin decreasing one
stitch at the beginning of every row, both knitted and purled, till you
come to the last two stitches, which knit as one. Sew a wire round the
edge of each leaf. These leaves must be made in pairs, two of each size;
but as several different sizes will be required, this will be easily
effected by increasing the second size to nine stitches instead of
seven; the third to eleven stitches; and, if a still larger leaf be
required, the fourth to thirteen stitches. The leaves must be placed two
by two along the stem, opposite to each other, each pair crossing the
preceding one. There must be no spring wire for the stem, as the
periwinkle is a running plant.




COTTAGE FURNITURE.


[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]

[Illustration: Fig. 5.]

[Illustration: Fig. 6.]

Fig. 1 is a small cupboard-sideboard for a neatly furnished cottage
parlor, in which there is not much room.

Figs. 2 and 3 are plain Grecian chairs for the parlor.

Figs. 4 and 5 are parlor elbow-chairs, in the Grecian style.

Fig. 6 is an elbow-chair for the work-room. It has a work-box drawer
underneath the seat.




EDITORS' TABLE.


THE high-toned chivalry of American men towards the female sex is
remarkable, and therefore we were astonished, as well as pained, when a
friend brought to our notice the following remarks, inserted in a
literary work[E] of much merit, where we should not have looked for such
a violation of truth and manly sentiment as is manifested in this
outrageous attack on the character of Madame de Stael. We quote the
article:--

"George Sand has written her 'Confessions' in the style of Rousseau, and
a Paris bookseller has contracted to give her a fortune for them. The
three greatest--intellectually greatest--women of modern times have
lived in France, and it is remarkable that they have been three of the
most shamelessly profligate in all history. The worst of these,
probably, Madame de Stael, left us no record of her long-continued,
disgusting, and almost incredible licentiousness, so remarkable, that
Chateaubriand deemed her the most abandoned person in France, at a
period when modesty was publicly derided in the Assembly as a mere
'system of refined voluptuousness.' Few who have lately resided in Paris
are ignorant of the gross sensualism of the astonishing Rachel, whose
genius, though displayed in no permanent forms, is not less than that of
the Shakspeare of her sex, the forever-to-be-famous Madame Dudevant,
whose immoralities of conduct have perhaps been overdrawn, while those
of De Stael and Rachel have rarely been spoken of save where they
challenged direct observation. We perceive that Rachel is to be in New
York next autumn with a company of French actors."

"'Tis a pity when charming women talk of things that they don't
understand," is as true as if it had been promulgated by a _man_, and
the author of the above extraordinary statements will perhaps allow
that, in a few cases, the same may be predicated of the other sex. Some
aspirants for literary fame, before attaining much knowledge of life or
of books, are fond of attempting to startle by deviating from received
opinions; they advance monstrous paradoxes in morals, and strive to
produce a sensation by differing from the good and the wise. They have
heard the vulgar adage that genius and common sense seldom go together,
and they begin by rejecting common sense as a part of genius. Common
sense would suggest the advantage of knowing something of the history of
an illustrious person before describing his or her character; and, as we
feel assured no man who has an American heart would wish to advance or
maintain falsehoods against a woman, and one over whom the tomb has
closed, we take pleasure in giving the writer in the "International"
some information about Madame de Stael.

In the first place, he has been grossly imposed upon concerning
Chateaubriand. We have lately read the "Memoires d'outre Tombe," a work
we recommend to the author of the article, in which he will find much
information, and, what perhaps he values more, amusement; and, what is
to our present purpose, he will find that Chateaubriand entertained the
most sincere friendship and the highest respect for this lady, whom he
constantly calls "the illustrious," "the admirable." Madame de Stael was
the intimate friend of his sister, the charming Lucille; and also she
was, as _almost_ every one knows, the friend, mentor, and protector of
Madame Recamier. Chateaubriand gives a very pathetic description of the
last days of Madame de Stael, to whose dying chamber he was admitted;
her name is constantly recurring through his journals, and _never
mentioned but in honorable terms_. In one place he describes her thus:--

"The personal appearance of Madame de Stael has been much discussed; but
a noble countenance, a pleasing smile, an habitual expression of
goodness, the absence of all trifling affectation or stiff reserve,
gracious manners, an inexhaustible variety of conversation, astonished,
attracted, and conciliated almost all who approached her. I know no
woman--I may say no man--who, with the perfect consciousness of immense
superiority, can so entirely prevent this superiority from weighing on
or offending the self-love of others."

Madame de Beaumont, a valued friend of the family of Chateaubriand, was
taken by some of its members to Italy, where she died of consumption.
Madame de Stael wrote to condole with Chateaubriand on this occasion;
here are the reflections upon her letter made in his Journal: "This
hasty letter, so affectionate and hurried, written by this illustrious
woman, affected me extremely. If Heaven had permitted our friend to look
back upon this earth, such a testimony of affection would surely have
been grateful to her."

If Chateaubriand were "permitted to look back upon earth," what would he
think of the vile aspersions upon the character of "this illustrious
woman" attributed to him?

There have been many biographies written of Madame de Stael (none of
which ever allude to what the writer in the "International" calls her
"disgusting and almost incredible licentiousness"). We will advert here
to two; one by Madame Necker de Saussure, well known in America for
writings of a moral and religious nature; the other by the Duchess
D'Abrantes, who thus begins her memoirs: "For a French woman to write
the life of Madame de Stael is certainly a happy privilege, since France
boasts the honor of her birth, though she is among those minds that
belong to the entire world, and her whole sex should call her sister
with a noble pride, which they may cherish with perfect safety. Madame
de Stael descends to posterity with merits so great and so various, that
few besides herself you claim a part of her title. _Her fame is
spotless_, a true child of genius, but free from its aberrations. The
love of right, the _abhorrence of falsehood_, a rare combination of
generous affections, constituted the womanly heart to which nature, in a
happy mood, lavished all the virtues of one sex and all the powers of
the other."

It is very well known that M. Rocca, the second husband of Madame de
Stael, "a man of high honor and of great intelligence" (Chateaubriand
_really_ says so), was unable to survive her loss, and died shortly
after her, it was admitted, through grief. The Duchess D'Abrantes says,
upon this: "He was of an age when life still offered pleasure, the world
glory; but, being hopeless of ever again finding so perfect a being to
occupy his heart, he formed no other wish, after closing her eyes, than
that of rejoining her. A woman thus loved must have been truly
excellent." And, we will add, this love was entirely founded upon and
maintained by her moral qualities, as she was then fifty years old and
in failing health.

Madame Necker de Saussure observes, "Madame de Stael's goodness was
thorough; her noble, generous heart rose to heroism when the interest of
her friends, or even of her foes, demanded energy." This was proved by
the numbers she saved and concealed during the terrors of the
Revolution. In every part of Europe she was courted and esteemed by the
best society, and, if time and our pages permitted, we could quote
tributes to her merits from a long list of eminent men, whose
superiority places them above the petty aim of depressing female genius
by slandering the woman who has well won its laurels. To advert to a few
of these memorials: Schlegel, who knew her intimately, said she was
"Femme grande et magnanime jusque dans les replis de son ame," which is
curiously echoed by the well-known verse, that might serve as a
translation--

          "Pure in the deep recesses of the soul."

At the time of Madame de Stael's death, Lord Byron commented at length
on the event in one of his notes to "Childe Harold." After expatiating
on her merits as an author, he goes on--

"But the individual will gradually disappear as the author is more
distinctly seen: some one, therefore, of all those whom the charms of
involuntary wit, and of easy hospitality, attracted within the friendly
circles of Coppet, should rescue from oblivion those virtues which,
although they are said to love the shade, are, in fact, more frequently
chilled than excited by the domestic cares of private life. Some one
should be found to portray the unaffected graces with which she adorned
those dearer relationships, the performance of whose duties is rather
discovered amongst the interior secrets, than seen in the outward
management, of family intercourse; and which, indeed, it requires the
delicacy of genuine affection to qualify for the eye of an indifferent
spectator. Some one should be found, not to celebrate, but to describe,
the amiable mistress of an open mansion, the centre of a society, ever
varied, and always pleased, the creator of which, divested of the
ambition and the arts of public rivalry, shone forth only to give fresh
animation to those around her. The mother tenderly affectionate and
tenderly beloved, the friend unboundedly generous, but still esteemed,
the charitable patroness of all distress, cannot be forgotten by those
whom she cherished, and protected, and fed. Her loss will be mourned the
most where she was known the best; and, to the sorrows of very many
friends and more dependents, may be offered the disinterested regret of
a stranger, who, amidst the sublimer scenes of the Leman Lake, received
his chief satisfaction from contemplating the engaging qualities of the
incomparable Corinna."

In "Modern French Literature," M. de Vericour, the learned and excellent
author, gives an exalted place to the works of Madame de Stael, and to
the extraordinary and beneficial influence she had exercised by her
literary supremacy in overpowering the baneful influence of what he
calls "the mocking spirit" of French writings, which had injured
_morals_ as well as good taste. He does not, of course, allude to her
private character, because no question of its purity had ever been
raised. Who, in describing the excellence of Mrs. Hemans' writings,
would think of adding that she was a virtuous woman? But, if Mary
Wollstonecraft were named, who would not express their regret, at least,
that she had sinned? Thus, M. Vericour does when describing the genius
of George Sand. The absence of any shadow of reproach in connection with
Madame de Stael is proof that no shadow of reproach existed.

To return to the writer in the "International" (we are loth to believe
it was written by either of the editors); as he appears, by the place he
gives to "George Sand" and "Rachel," to be profoundly ignorant on the
subject of the "intellectually greatest women of modern times," we will
intimate to him two or three about whom it might be well for him to gain
some information, were it only to avoid blunders. We will not be so
exacting as to perplex him with Mrs. Somerville, for we are aware it is
not every one who can invent a slander whose mind could appreciate "The
Connection of the Physical Sciences;" neither will we refer him to Mrs.
Barrett Browning, whose "genius," as pronounced by grave and reverend
critics, "is of the highest order, strong, deep-seeing, enthusiastic,
and loving," because such divine poetry and deep science would be
evidently out of his line; but Miss Edgeworth, the author of "Frank" and
"Harry and Lucy;" surely he might understand her lessons, if he would
read them: these lessons always inculcate _truth_, are sound, improving,
and elevating, and the intellect must have been great that could see
moral truths so clearly.

The author of the paragraph appears to consider stage-playing as
wonderfully intellectual, and his pattern of this greatness in "modern
times" is Rachel. Was there not a certain Mrs. Siddons, whose genius in
the histrionic art was superior to that of any living actress, and whose
character was unimpeachable? According to the best French critics, men
of taste and literary fame, who do not write anonymously, but subscribe
their articles with their names, Rachel is only good in one line, which
is passion or violence. In tender heroines, they say, she fails, and
they seem to consider her powers altogether limited; for these opinions
we refer the writer in the "International" to the "Revue des Deux
Mondes." Were Rachel the intellectual prodigy he pronounces her to be,
still the poor despised child, who sang in the streets and was brought
up without law or Gospel, must have fallen into vice rather from the sad
want of training than from having a good understanding, as he, in Irish
parlance, intimates.

A similar remark is also true of Madame Dudevant: her intellectual
greatness did not plunge her into licentiousness; she fell before she
ever wrote a book; and though we do not wish to screen her from the
odium her reckless course has deserved, yet it should be recorded in
pity that her fine powers of mind were misdirected by a false and
frivolous education, that the examples and flatteries of the most
fascinating but corrupt society on earth have led her on and sustained
her; yet she, by the light which her own high intellectuality has
developed, is changing her course, if the examples furnished by her
writings are true. Her later works are greatly improved in their moral
tone; yet there is no diminution, but an increase of mental power.

Among the very extensive catalogue of French women justly famed, the
selection by the writer in the "International" proves that he takes his
views from what he hears;--if he would but read more, and gossip less,
he would be amazed as "knowledge unrolled its ample page before him." We
will not trouble him with the Reformers of Port-Royal, who certainly did
some things greater than acting plays, for, to appreciate these ladies,
requires an acquaintance with the theological and political history of
their era. We will pass over the exalted patriot and gifted woman,
Madame Roland, whose intellectual greatness, unsurpassed by that of any
man of her times, or by any woman now living in France, was based on
moral virtue; but it seems a pity he should not know of Madame de
Sevigne, because even schoolboys have really heard of her. The wit,
learning, true sentiment, and graceful style of Madame de Sevigne have
won the approval of critics and moralists; intellectually great, she was
a model of domestic virtue. In one of her celebrated letters, she says
we must distinguish between "_un ane et un ignorant_"--one is "ignorant"
from want of instruction, _ane_ from want of brains. Would it not be
well for the writer in the "International" to heed this distinction?
AEsop has a very pertinent fable on the living ass kicking the dead lion.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO CORRESPONDENTS.--The following articles are accepted: "My Flowers, my
Gem, and my Star," "To Susan," "Halcyon Day," "My Book," "The Coronal,"
"Perseverance," "My Summer Window," "Reaping," "Sonnet," "The Country
Grave-Yard," "To Oliver Perry Allen, U.S.N.," "To Nina," "To Helen at
the South."

"A Tale of the Backwoods" would be accepted, were it not for the
condition annexed. We should not be able to publish it at present. Will
the author inform us if he is willing to wait? The like reason--want of
room--compels us to decline a very large number of MSS. this month.

"F. H." is informed that we have returned her MSS. through "Adams'
Express." We sincerely hope we may not be again troubled from that
source. If any definite direction had been given, it would have been
returned long since.

       *       *       *       *       *

MUSIC ACCEPTED: "The Gondola Waltz," by a lady of Georgia; "A Spring
Song," by C. T. P., of Chambersburg. Although accepted, the above cannot
appear for some months, as we have many previously accepted musical
compositions on hand.

FOOTNOTE:

[E] The "International Monthly Magazine," &c. New York, Stringer &
Townsend, August number, page 71.




EDITOR'S BOOK TABLE


From GEORGE S. APPLETON, 164 Chestnut Street, Philadelphia:--

LETTERS FROM THREE CONTINENTS. By M., the Arkansas Correspondent of the
"Louisville Journal." These letters will be found highly interesting to
the American reader; the views and reflections of the author, sustained
by lifelike and graphic sketches, being in unison with our republican
feelings, and illustrative of our free institutions.

       *       *       *       *       *

From LEA & BLANCHARD, Philadelphia:--

A SCHOOL DICTIONARY OF THE LATIN LANGUAGE. By Dr. J. H. Kaltschmidt. In
two parts. I. Latin--English. This work has been highly recommended by
the best classical teachers in the United States.

       *       *       *       *       *

From JAMES K. SIMON, Philadelphia:--

SCENES AT HOME; OR, THE ADVENTURES OF A FIRE SCREEN. By Mrs. Anna Bache.
This little work contains nine familiarly written stories on practical
moral duties, which the author has very properly dedicated to the young
ladies of this country. We hope her dedication will not be overlooked by
those to whom it has been made, and that they will duly profit by the
good sense and amiable qualities of her book.

       *       *       *       *       *

From HARPER & BROTHERS, New York, through LINDSAY & BLAKISTON,
Philadelphia:--

MELVILLE. _A Franconia Story._ By the author of the "Rolla Books." A
most agreeable and instructive book for the perusal of youthful readers,
appealing to the highest and purest sympathies of the heart.

FOREIGN REMINISCENCES. By Henry Richard Lord Holland. Edited by his son,
Henry Edward Lord Holland. This is neither a work of history nor a work
of romance; but, nevertheless, it is a work which will have its effect
on the nerves of retired politicians and superannuated diplomatists. It
is made up of such gossip and scandals as were ripe in Europe from the
commencement of the French Revolution to the period of the Restoration.
They are presented by an English nobleman, who assures his readers that
he can only vouch for the anecdotes he has recorded by assuring said
readers that he believes them himself. To all such as are willing to
receive the author's "impressions" as vouchers, this work will therefore
prove very interesting.

THE HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, FROM THE ADOPTION OF THE
FEDERAL CONSTITUTION TO THE END OF THE SIXTEENTH CONGRESS. By Richard
Hildreth. In three volumes. Vol. I. Administration of Washington. The
American public have already been placed under obligations to Mr.
Hildreth for the colonial and revolutionary history of this country, and
here we have the first volume of a work which promises, as a correct
record and review of important events, to be equally interesting to the
political, philosophical, and commercial student.

JANE BOUVERIE; OR, PROSPERITY AND ADVERSITY. By Catherine Sinclair,
author of "Sir Edward Graham," etc. The intention of the author of this
excellent little volume, as she declares herself, was to develop,
through the more attractive medium of a story, the trials, the duties,
and the pleasures of domestic life. Her laudable intentions have been
crowned with a success which will commend her work to the consideration
of judicious readers of every class.

From R. P. PUTNAM, New York, through A. HART, Philadelphia:--

THE PRAIRIE. _A Tale._ By the author of "The Deerslayer," etc. This is
the fifth volume of Mr. Cooper's revised edition of the "Leather
Stocking Tales."

SALANDER AND THE DRAGON. _A Romance of Hartz Prison._ By Frederic
William Shelton, M. A., of St. John's Church, Huntington, N. J. A very
interesting little allegory, in which the author has admirably succeeded
in his design of illustrating the danger of uttering, or of lending a
willing ear to, unkind words and insinuations against the reputations of
neighbors and acquaintances. It is peculiarly adapted for the younger
classes of readers, and will doubtless have a tendency to establish in
their minds the importance of a strict adherence to the principles of
justice and charity.

LAVANGRO; _the Scholar, the Gipsy, the Priest_. By George Borrow, author
of "The Bible in Spain," and "The Gipseys of Spain." Same agent.

       *       *       *       *       *

From ADRIANNE, SHERMAN & CO., Astor House, New York:--

PARNASSUS IN PILLORY. _A Satire._ By Motley Manners, Esq. We were
greatly alarmed, not on our own account, but on account of the "Poets of
America," when we read the author's first six lines, addressed to an
ancient satirist:--

    "O thou who, whilome, with unsparing jibe
     And scorching satire, lashed the scribbling tribe;
     Thou who, on Roman pimp and parasite,
     Didst pour the vials of thy righteous spite--
     Imperial Horace! let thy task be mine--
     Let truth and justice sanctify my line!"

But, after all, the work is by no means so severe as we had anticipated
from the threatening apostrophe to the Roman poet. We have read it with
pleasure, and greatly admire some of the author's admirable hits.
Instead of finding themselves in a "pillory," we imagine that many of
the poets named will be obliged to the author for placing them in
company with so many excellent writers, against whom and their
productions his satire is amusingly harmless.

       *       *       *       *       *

From GOULD & LINCOLN, Boston:--

THE OLD RED SANDSTONE: _New Walks in an Old Field._ By Hugh Miller.
Designed, like that sterling work of his, "Foot-prints of the Creator,"
to elucidate the connection between geological science and Revealed
religion. This "Old Red Sandstone" has passed through fourteen editions
in England, and will doubtless be as popular in America. It is just the
book for the people--for mothers to study and talk over to their
children.

PRINCIPLES OF ZOOLOGY. By Louis Agassiz and A. A. Gould. This is an
excellent text-book for students and schools.

       *       *       *       *       *

From WALKER & RICHARDS, Charleston, S. C.:--

THE POETICAL REMAINS OF THE LATE MARY ELIZABETH LEE. _With a
Biographical Memoir._ By S. Gilmer, D. D. The work is worthy of the
eminent clergyman, who has given us the delineation of one of the
loveliest characters among the good and gifted of the gentle sex. We
commend the book to the young and lovely.

THE CITY OF THE SILENT. _A Poem._ By W. Gilmore Simms. Delivered at the
consecration of the "Magnolia Cemetery." A production of much merit,
which does credit to the taste and genius of its distinguished author.

       *       *       *       *       *

From W. B. ZIEBER, Philadelphia:--

A ROMANCE OF THE SEA-SERPENT. A work which, if not more wonderful than
the romances of Dumas, has a better claim to public favor. It contains
some truth in the authenticated memoranda about sea-serpents which
ancient and modern lore furnishes. We should observe that the work is
written in the _rhymed style_ of D'Israeli's "Contarini Fleming."

       *       *       *       *       *

From DUNIGAN & BROTHERS, New York:--

LYRA CATHOLICA. This work is beautifully bound, and printed in the best
style.

       *       *       *       *       *

LITTELL'S LIVING AGE: Boston.

MRS. WHITTLESEY'S MAGAZINE FOR MOTHERS AND DAUGHTERS: New York.

The above are excellent works of their kind. The first named, a weekly,
contains admirable selections from foreign journals; the second, a small
monthly, intended for the religious instruction of the family circle.
Its editor is a lady worthy of high esteem.

       *       *       *       *       *

SERIALS, PAMPHLETS, &C.--"The History of Pendennis: his Fortunes and
Misfortunes, his Friends and his greatest Enemy." By W. M. Thackeray.
Harper & Brothers, New York. For sale by Lindsay & Blakiston,
Philadelphia. Price 25 cents. This number completes the
work.--"Pictorial Field Book of the Revolution." No 11. Harper &
Brothers, New York. For sale by Lindsay & Blakiston, Philadelphia. Price
25 cents.--"The Queen's Necklace; or, the Secret History of Louis the
Sixteenth." By Alexander Dumas. Translated by Thomas Williams, Esq.
Complete in two volumes. Price 50 cents. Published and for sale by T. B.
Peterson. 98 Chestnut Street.--"The City Merchant; or, the Mysterious
Failure." With numerous illustrations. Published and for sale by
Lippincott, Grambo & Co. (successors to Grigg & Elliot),
Philadelphia.--"Cruising in the Last War." By Charles J. Peterson,
author of "Arnold at Saratoga," etc. Complete in one volume. Price 50
cents. T. B. Peterson, publisher, 98 Chestnut Street.--"The Mentor." A
Magazine for Youth. Rev. Hastings Weld, editor. Is sustained with great
zeal and ability.--"Stanfield Hall." An Historical Romance. By J. P.
Smith, Esq., author of "The Jesuits," etc. W. F. Burgess, New York, T.
B. Peterson, Philadelphia.--"Pictorial Life and Adventures of Guy
Fawkes, the Chief of the Gunpowder Treason." By William Harrison
Ainsworth. With twenty-four illustrations. T. B. Peterson,
Philadelphia.--"Wacousta; or, the Prophecy." An Indian Tale. By Major
Richardson, author of "Ecarte," &c. Revised edition. Dewitt & Davenport,
New York.--"Life's Discipline." A Tale of the Annals of Hungary. By
Talvi, author of "Helois," etc. For sale by G. S. Appleton,
Philadelphia.--No. 34 of "Shakspeare's Dramatic Works." Titus
Andronicus. Boston edition. For sale by T. B. Peterson.--"Life and
Adventures of Valentine Vox, the Ventriloquist." By Henry Cockton,
author of "Silver Sound," etc. Complete in one volume. Price 50 cents.
T. B. Peterson, Philadelphia.--"The Howards." A Tale founded on facts. By
D. H. Barlow, A. M. Philadelphia: published by Getz & Buck. This is a
very interesting story, intended to enforce the benefits of life
insurance.[F]--"Report of the Pennsylvania Hospital for the Insane for
the Year 1850." By Thomas S. Kirkbride, M. D., Physician of the
institution--"Reveries of an Old Maid, embracing Important Hints to
Young Men intending to Marry, illustrative of that celebrated
Establishment, Capsicum House, for Furnishing Young Ladies." Forty-five
engravings. Wm. H. Graham & Co., 120 Fulton Street, New York.--"The
British and Foreign Medico-Chirurgical Review, or Quarterly Journal of
Practical Medicine and Surgery." Number thirteen of this valuable work
has been received from Daniels & Smith, 36 North Sixth Street.--"Oregon
and California; or, Sights in the Gold Region and Scenes by the Way." By
Theodore T. Johnson. With a map and illustrations. Third edition. With
an appendix, containing full instructions to emigrants by the overland
route to Oregon. By Hon. Samuel R. Thurston, Delegate to Congress from
that territory. Also the particulars of the march of the Regiment of U.
S. Riflemen in 1849, together with the Oregon Land Bill. Lippincott,
Grambo & Co., Philadelphia.--"The Initials." A Story of Modern Life.
Three volumes of the London edition complete in one. Same publishers.

       *       *       *       *       *

MUSIC.--From Lee & Walker, 162 Chestnut Street: "To One in Heaven. Now
Thou art Gone." Words by Thomas I. Diehl. Music by R. S. Hambridge. The
plaintiveness of the music of this piece is admirably adapted to the
deep sensibility which pervades every line of the poetry.

       *       *       *       *       *

DRAWING.--The publisher, G. S. Appleton, 164 Chestnut Street,
Philadelphia, has furnished us with a set of "Easy Lessons in
Landscape," by F. N. Otis. These primary lessons in pencil drawing are
accompanied by copious instructions, which will be found of the greatest
use to beginners in this agreeable accomplishment.




Publisher's Department.


OUR PERFECT MAY NUMBER.--"May-Day Morning," a plate prepared expressly
for our cover--it is worthy of a better place; "The Language of
Flowers;" "Spring," beautifully colored; and a splendid and truthful
"Fashion Plate."

       *       *       *       *       *

We think our present issue will convince our subscribers that we intend
to give them not only the ornamental, but the useful. In this number may
be found everything calculated to interest a lady, from the superb
fashion plate to the building of cottages, and cottage furniture. An
eminent publisher of this city observed to us, "You have been of great
advantage to our country in one respect, for the publication of your
model cottages has greatly tended to beautify our suburbs and those of
other large towns."

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR MODEL COTTAGES.--Nothing could have given us more pleasure than to
find that this original feature of the "Lady's Book" has been duly
appreciated by our numerous readers and correspondents. From every
section of our country, we have received the most flattering
testimonials, as well in relation to the beauty of our designs, as to
their great utility in establishing a taste for the erection of
convenient and comfortable homes in the rural districts, or even in the
forests that abound in our favored land. We are truly gratified to see
the change that has come over the spirit of our designers and builders
in our own vicinity, on the shores of the Delaware, since we began to
publish _our_ designs, and to suggest plans as well of convenience as of
elegant embellishment. This, then, is one of the original features of
the "Book," of which we think we may be justly proud; but our readers
will readily confess that it is only _one_ of the numerous original
features which have rendered the "Book" the _precedent_ in literature,
in the arts, and in the cultivation of the useful sciences.

       *       *       *       *       *

WE commend the following sentiment, from the "Michigan Sentinel," to all
true Americans:--

"The duty of every American is to support his own country's interest, in
every respect, _first_. Our American Magazines have called out and
supported an array of talent, in a particular line, of which we are
proud, and which we are bound by patriotism to reward."

Here is another from the "Kentucky News Letter:"--

"'Godey' is on our table. Beautiful! Do you wish to see it? Well, once
for all--we will not lend it. Its price is three dollars a year. The
copy sent us is reserved for binding, and we cannot afford to have it
defaced by lending."

       *       *       *       *       *

We knew that the January number of "Godey" was a decided "_hit_;" but
our Georgia correspondent seems to have got the tallest kind of a
"smite" from one of our fair poetesses. If _one_ can do such execution,
what may be expected of a broadside from a whole solid column of such
charming contributors as the "Lady's Book" can boast? Hear him:--

"MR GODEY--DEAR SIR: I did not think to trouble you so soon again, but
the singular beauty of the 'sylphs' and the 'sonnets' inspired my muse
to utter the following:--


"THE 'SYLPHS' AND THE 'SONNETS.'

    "As the sylphs of the seasons tripped their round,
       In a sacred grove of laurel trees
     Another fair sylph of the season they found,
       And they crowned her 'Mary Spenser Pease.'

    "So wild, so sweet was her sylvan song,
       They, listening, delayed the passing years
     Till, floating away, they bore her along,
       To sing her sonnets in brighter spheres.

          "_La Fayette, Walker Co., Ga._, January 22d, 1851."

       *       *       *       *       *

WE are happy to find that the ladies have their husbands' _interest_ so
much at heart. Several orders have been received since our last for
"Breban's Interest Tables," the advertisement of which appears on our
cover.

       *       *       *       *       *

WE have been favored with an engraving representing the "Family Seat of
George C. Sibley, Esq.," at Linden Wood, near St. Charles, Mo. It must
be a place of exceeding beauty.

       *       *       *       *       *

CAMEOS.--We have on several occasions called the attention of our
readers to the perfect likenesses produced in cameo by Mr. Peabody,
whose room is in Chestnut Street near Fifth. One of the most perfect
specimens of his cutting, which we recently had the pleasure to examine,
is the likeness of GENERAL PATTERSON, our well-known fellow-citizen.
Heretofore, we fear our friends have not paid sufficient attention to
this beautiful art, or given it that encouragement it so richly merits.
We hope, however, that the time is at hand when the able and persevering
artist will be fully appreciated and rewarded for all his skill and
labor in the introduction of these accurate and beautiful memorials of
love and friendship.

       *       *       *       *       *

IMPURE MILK.--A lawsuit was recently brought, in New York, against our
friend Howard, of the Irving House, to recover the sum of two hundred
dollars, alleged to be due for milk delivered for the use of said
establishment. On the trial, it was proved that the milk contracted for
was to have been from cows fed upon grass, hay, and grain, and that the
milk furnished was from cows fed upon swill, the offal, or remains of
the distillery, and that they were tied up in stalls until they died of
a loathsome disease. It gives us pleasure to state that the trial
resulted in a verdict for Mr. Howard, the judge remarking, in his
charge, that the proprietor of the Irving House was "entitled to the
thanks of the community for exposing the base fraud." We will merely add
that he is deserving also of the confidence of the traveling community
for his efforts to minister for the preservation of their health, as
well as for their pleasure and convenience.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CRYSTAL PALACE OF CONCORD.--In this number of the "Book" we present
our readers with a view of the largest and most magnificent building in
the world, erected in Hyde Park, London, to contain the contributions of
all nations for the great exhibition shortly to take place. It is 1848
feet long by 408 broad, covering about eighteen acres of ground. Number
of columns, 3230. The total cubic contents will be 33,000,000 feet,
giving room for eight miles of exhibition tables. There are 282 miles of
sash bars and 900,000 superficial feet of glass. The cost has been
estimated at L150,000, or about $750,000. Mr. Hardinge, of Cincinnati,
had proposed to cover the iron columns, etc., with a kind of porcelain
or variegated enamel, giving them the richness and beauty of the
choicest polished marble, and of the most precious stones, such as
agate, jasper, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

PRISONER'S FRIEND.--Charles Spear, the active and benevolent editor of
this paper, has called the attention of big friends and the public to
the volume which will commence in September. Mr. Spear's efforts in
behalf of suffering humanity have long since entitled him to the
consideration and the support of every generous and feeling heart. The
journal which he publishes under the title of "Prisoner's Friend," is
conducted with great earnestness, but with great propriety, and is
calculated, by its peaceful and Christian tone, to elicit the patronage
of all parties and all denominations.

       *       *       *       *       *

LACES, EMBROIDERIES, ETC.--Kimmey's, No. 177 Arch Street, through the
industry and attention of its proprietors, has become a favorite store
with many of the ladies of our city. The extensive choice and elegant
assortment of cambric open work collars and cuffs, cambric rufflings,
lace sleeves, embroidered collars and cuffs, elegant style of infants'
waists, superior kid gloves, etc. etc., which they have always on hand,
have attracted the attention and the patronage of numerous tasty and
fashionable purchasers.


VARIOUS USEFUL RECEIPTS, &c., OF OUR OWN GATHERING.

TO MAKE PRUNE TART.--Scald the prunes, take out the stones, and break
them; put the kernels into a little cranberry juice with the prunes and
some sugar; simmer, and when cold make a tart of the sweetmeat, or eat
it in any other way.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO MAKE ASPIC JELLY.--Put a knuckle of veal into a small stock-pot, with
a knuckle of ham, two calves' feet, and the trimmings of poultry; season
this with onions, carrots, and a bunch of sweet herbs; pour into it half
a bottle of white wine and a ladleful of good broth; set it over the
stove till it is reduced to a light glaze, then cover the meat with good
broth, throw in two glasses of isinglass, and let it boil for three
hours; then strain, and clear the jelly with white of eggs. When used,
it must be melted, and poured just warm over the chicken or tongue.

       *       *       *       *       *

IMITATION CURRY POWDER.--An admirable imitation of the oriental
stimulant, curry powder, can be made by reducing to powder the following
materials, mixing them well together, and keeping them in a
tightly-corked bottle: Three ounces of turmeric, the same of coriander
seed, one ounce of ground ginger, the like quantity of ground black
pepper, a quarter of an ounce of cinnamon, the same weight of cumin seed
and of cayenne, and half an ounce of cardamoms.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO CLEAN WOODSTOCK GLOVES.--Wash them in soap and water till the dirt is
out, then stretch them on wooden hands, or pull them out in their proper
shape. Do not wring them, as that puts them out of form, and makes them
shrink; put them one upon another and press the water out. Then rub the
following mixture over the outside of the gloves: If wanted quite
yellow, take yellow ochre; if quite white, pipe clay; if between the
two, mix a little of each together. Mix the color with beer or vinegar.
Let them dry gradually, not too near the fire, nor in too hot a sun;
when about half dried, rub them well, and stretch them out to keep them
from shrinking and to soften them. When they are well rubbed and dried,
take a small cane and beat them; then brush them; when this is done,
iron them rather warm with a piece of paper over them, but do not let
the iron be too hot.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO DRESS COLD TURKEY OR FOWL.--Cut them in sizeable pieces, beat up an
egg with a little grated nutmeg, pepper, and salt, some parsley minced
fine, and a few crumbs of bread; mix these well together, and cover the
turkey with this batter; then broil, or warm them in a Dutch oven.
Thicken a little gravy with some flour, put a spoonful of catsup or
other sauce, lay the meat in a dish, and pour the sauce round it;
garnish with slices of lemon.

       *       *       *       *       *

HUNTER'S BEEF, as it is called, is a round of beef into which a quarter
of a pound of saltpetre finely powdered is well rubbed. Next day, mix
half an ounce of cloves, an ounce of black pepper, the same quantity of
ground allspice, with half a pound of salt; wash and rub the beef in the
brine for a fortnight, adding every other day a tablespoonful of salt.
Have ready an earthen pan deep enough to hold the joint, and lay suet an
inch deep at the bottom; rub the beef in coarse cloths till perfectly
free from the salt and spice, put it in the pan with a quart of water,
some more suet on the top, and cover it with a thick coarse crust. Bake
for seven hours, pour off the gravy, and place the meat upon a proper
dish; do not cut it till cold.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO CLEAN BLACK SATIN.--Boil three pounds of potatoes to a pulp in a
quart of water; strain through a sieve, and brush the satin with it on a
board or table. The satin must not be wrung, but folded down in cloths
for three hours, and then ironed on the wrong side.


Fashions.

DESCRIPTION OF STEEL FASHION PLATE.

EVENING COSTUMES.--_Fig. 1._ Dinner-dress or robe of richly-embroidered
Mantua silk, of delicate rose color, the flowers in white, of a regular
and tasteful pattern. A scarf of the same, with broad flowing ends, is
knotted a little to the right, and hangs gracefully to the knee. A
_jupe_ of fine embroidered muslin is worn below this, and a chemisette
of the same completes the corsage. The sleeves very loose and flowing,
with undersleeves clasped by heavy gold bracelets. The head-dress is of
lace, with bouquets of moss-rose buds.

_Fig. 2._--Ball-dress of rich white silk, with a deep flounce of French
lace, put on with a heading of narrow satin ribbon. The upper flounce,
also of black lace, though narrower, is fastened on each side with
bouquets of natural flowers. The corsage is plain, with a berthe to
match the flounces, also fastened by bouquets. A narrow undersleeve of
white lace comes a trifle below the berthe. It will be noticed that the
hair is dressed plainly, slightly puffed behind the ear, and in a twist
roll at the back of the head. A most graceful style for young ladies.


BRIDAL DRESSES.

As there are always a quota of weddings in the spring, following the
Washington campaign, we give an elaborate bridal costume, more as a
suggestion than a model, it must be confessed, for those who like
novelties.

_Fig. 1_ presents an evening costume for a bride, the head-dress a
wreath of white roses mingled with orange blossoms. The dress itself is
white crape over white satin, and the front of the skirt may be
ornamented with bouquets to match the wreath. The berthe of the corsage
is composed of folds of white tulle.

_Fig. 2._--Bridal-dress of rich white satin, with side trimmings for the
skirt of lace, headed by narrow satin ribbon. The corsage is high at the
back, but sloped somewhat lower in front, over which there is a lace
pelerine, which is brought down to a point in front. Sleeves demi-long,
and edged with white satin ribbon, undersleeves of rich lace, and
bracelets to be worn at taste and discretion. The bridal wreath is of
jasmine and orange flowers, and confines a tulle veil very full and
long.


CHIT-CHAT UPON PHILADELPHIA FASHIONS FOR MAY.

Early as it is, our ladies are already commencing to think of
preparations for the Springs, and of bathing-dresses, in which to enjoy
the cool surf of Cape May or Newport. The exquisite gossamer fabrics of
Levy's, Beck's, and Stewart's are now in the hands of the mantuamaker,
and very soon we shall hear that the town is deserted. The sidewalks
will cease to blush with the delicate colors of an outdoor spring
costume, and the plain ginghams of those of the fair sex who are _not_
like the lilies of the field in the matter of daily toil, take the place
of rainbow silks and soft mousselines. At present, Chestnut Street is a
scene of enchantment. Not more beautiful the fresh spring foliage of
neighboring woods than the delicate emerald tinting of dresses and
ribbons that adorn our ladies; and then the pale violet, so suggestive
of wood flowers; the blue, as ethereal as the cloudless sky; and, above
all, the rose color shading the cheek of the dangerous brunette, who
knows perfectly well that it is the most becoming shade she can wear.
There is a flutter of scarfs and a rustling of mantillas that call to
mind the swaying of the aforementioned foliage, and those dainty straw
bonnets, the little brims filled with lace and violets, only too real,
of the floating sprays of lily of the valley and the jasmine. We like
the cottage bonnet when it is in fashion. There is something marvelously
winning in the close shape, teazing you by its very coyness into an
admiration; but when they are laid aside, and the brims, like certain
stocks, have a tendency to look upwards, we wonder we ever could have
admired any other than the coquetish little shape one meets at every
turn. It is a fact worth observing and recording that, in proportion to
the tendency of gentlemen's hats to narrow, the ladies' bonnets expand;
the crown of the one becomes, season by season, more retreating, while
the other flares an open defiance. We might moralize were we not sober
chroniclers of the court of fashion, and were we not admonished by the
envoy from his serene highness, "the printer," now waiting at our elbow,
that "the form is almost completed."

So we must leave our gossip for the few hints we are able to gather for
our lady readers on the matter of "making up." Loose sleeves, and they
vary from a quarter to half a yard in width, as suits the wearer's
fancy, are still in vogue. In-doors, no undersleeves are needed for the
summer, particularly for young ladies, but for a street costume there is
every variety of undersleeves. We refer the ladies to our cuts of two
that are especially in favor, and would recommend another for those who
like them open at the wrist, composed of alternate rows of rich
embroidered insertion (muslin) and Valenciennes lace, quilled closely,
the last row facing the edge which falls just at the wrist. An
undersleeve for the evening may be made in this manner, but should have
only one row of insertion and edging.

Bodices are still worn, and belts and buckles seem going out. The back
of the corsage has also a point, which many wear quite deep. We would
commend the present fashion of lacing the corsage of an evening-dress,
as it gives the figure much more to advantage than the compression of
hooks and eyes, but it is too troublesome for a walking-dress.

The hair is dressed quite plainly, although there has been an attempt to
revive the tiers of puffs so fashionable some twenty years since. There
are few faces which will bear the test, and Grecian braids and bandeaux
are much more universally becoming.

Gaiters are worn as ever, and black satin slippers are preferred at
evening parties. However, as these are not just at present, we reserve
our hints upon evening dress until a future number.

                                                            FASHION.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: THE CRYSTAL PALACE LONDON.]

FOOTNOTE:

[F] A more extended notice of this work next month.





HOPE ON, HOPE EVER.

WORDS BY J. T. FRELIGH, OF ST. LOUIS. MUSIC BY E. C. DAVIS.

COMPOSED EXPRESSLY FOR GODEY'S LADY'S BOOK.


Music:

          When the sun light of gladness
            Has passed from the soul,
          And the dark clouds of sadness unceasingly roll,
            When the past appears only
          A dim vale of tears,
            And the future a lonely
          And wide waste of years.

          2

          The star of hope streaming
            Through tempest and night,
          Is kindly left beaming
            Our pathway to light
          Inspiring and cheering
            The lone and oppress'd,
          To the weary appearing
            A haven of rest.

          3

          Whose calm light reposes
            'Mid sadness and gloom,
          On the lilies and roses
            That bend o'er the tomb;
          Like a seraph sweet smiling,
            'Mid blight and decay,
          Through the cold world beguiling
            Our wearisome way.


          4

          In ills all-sustaining
            To mortals below,
          And shining and reigning
            Wherever we go,
          Forsaking us, never,
            Companions and friend,
          Then "hope on, hope ever,"
            And to trust to the end.

[Illustration: Evening Dresses.--See Description.]

[Illustration: NOW, BE CAREFUL!

Engraved expressly for Godey's Lady's Book by J.I. Pease.]

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

The table of contents was taken from the June issue. Only the items
relevant to this issue were retained. Images of the complete index may
be found at the end of the May HTML edition.

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Page 329, "stiches" changed to "stitches" (to eleven stitches)

Page 329, "an eatly" changed to "a neatly" (for a neatly)

Page 331, "Wolstoncraft" changed to "Wollstonecraft" (if Mary
Wollstonecraft)






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Godey's Lady's Book, Vol. XLII., May
1851, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GODEY'S LADY'S BOOK, MAY 1851 ***

***** This file should be named 33983.txt or 33983.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/9/8/33983/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Rose Koven, Emmy and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
Music by Linda Cantoni


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
