The Project Gutenberg EBook of Spun-yarn and Spindrift, by Norah M. Holland

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Spun-yarn and Spindrift

Author: Norah M. Holland

Release Date: November 7, 2010 [EBook #34235]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SPUN-YARN AND SPINDRIFT ***




Produced by Al Haines









SPUN-YARN

AND

SPINDRIFT



BY

NORAH M. HOLLAND




1918

LONDON & TORONTO

J. M. DENT & SONS LTD.

NEW YORK: E. P. DUTTON & CO.




_All rights reserved_




CONTENTS


  The Little Dog-Angel
  Shule Aroon
  A Song Of Erin
  The Road Across Slieve Rue
  To W. B. Yeats
  A Fairy Tale
  The King of Erin's Daughter
  Kitty O'Neil
  Spring in the City
  The Wild Geese
  A Song of Memory
  In Memory of a Failure
  The Unchristened Child
  To Audrey, Aged Four
  A Lullaby
  O Littlest Hands and Dearest
  A Love Song
  A Song of Love
  Dead Love
  The Wife from the Sea
  A Storm at Night
  Kitty's Feet
  The Port o' Missing Ships
  The Ride of the Shadows
  Ghosts
  Our Lady of Darkness
  Daluan
  Dead--and Living
  The Master of Shadows
  Diane au Bois
  The Red Horse
  The Adventurers
  The Watcher of the Threshold
  The Grey Rider
  Joan the Maid
  Newbury Town
  A Christmas Hymn
  The Shepherds' Song
  A Christmas Carol
  De Profundis
  The Cry of the Damned
  Our Lady of Remembrance
  Maid Mary
  The Two Crowns
  A Sparrow in Church
  Sea-Gulls
  My Dog and I
  Snowdrops
  Spring
  October Wind
  October
  In Arcadie
  James Whitcomb Riley
  The Sandman
  The Remittance Men
  The Last Voyage
  Ballade of Dreams
  Ships of Old Renown
  Sea-Song
  The Sea-Wind
  My Philosophy
  Easter, 1917
  "Home Thoughts from Abroad"
  The Kaiser
  Captains Adventurous
  Drake's Drum
  Our Dead
  New Year's Eve, 1916
  To Ireland's Dead
  A Song Of Exile
  The Air-Men
  The Defeated
  The Gentlemen of Oxford




  SPUN-YARN AND SPINDRIFT




  THE LITTLE DOG-ANGEL

  High up in the courts of Heaven to-day
    A little dog-angel waits,
  With the other angels he will not play,
    But he sits alone at the gates;
  "For I know that my master will come," says he:
  "And when he comes, he will call for me."

  He sees the spirits that pass him by
    As they hasten towards the throne,
  And he watches them with a wistful eye
    As he sits at the gates alone;
  "But I know if I just wait patiently
  That some day my master will come," says he.

  And his master, far on the earth below,
    As he sits in his easy chair,
  Forgets sometimes, and he whistles low
    For the dog that is not there;
  And the little dog-angel cocks his ears,
  And dreams that his master's call he hears.

  And I know, when at length his master waits
    Outside in the dark and cold
  For the hand of Death to ope the gates
    That lead to those courts of gold,
  The little dog-angel's eager bark
  Will comfort his soul in the shivering dark.




  SHULE AROON

  Fair are the fields of Canada, and broad her rivers flow,
    But my heart's away from Canada to seek the hills I know,
  Far, far away o'er billows grey, where western breezes sweep,
    And--it's not the songs of Canada go sounding through my sleep.

            Shule, shule, shule, aroon,
              Shule go soccair, agus shule go cuain,
            Shule, shule, shule, aroon,
              Sgo Dhae tu, mavourneen, slan.

  Along the sides of old Slieve Dhu again my footstep falls,
    Again the turf smoke rises blue, again the cuckoo calls,
  Once more adown the mountain brown the brown bog-waters leap--
    Oh how the croon of "Shule aroon" goes sounding through my sleep!

            Shule, shule, shule, aroon,
              Shule go soccair, agus shule go cuain,
            Shule, shule, shule, aroon,
              Sgo Dhae tu, mavourneen, slan.

  Oh 'tis I am here in Canada, far, far across the foam,
    And many years and many tears divide me from my home;
  But still above the Irish hills the stars their watches keep,
    And--it's not the songs of Canada go sounding through my sleep.

            Shule, shule, shule, aroon,
              Shule go soccair, agus shule go cuain,
            Shule, shule, shule, aroon,
              Sgo Dhae tu, mavourneen, slan.




  A SONG OF ERIN

  Far to westward in the sunset tall and bare her cliffs arise,
  Mother Erin, with the tender love and laughter in her eyes,
  Looking out across the waters, dreaming of her argosies.

  Argosies that sail forever, laden down with hopes and fears,
  Ships of dream, returning never, though she waits throughout the years,
  Waits, with eyes wherein the laughter grows more sorrowful than tears.

  One by one her children leave her--stalwart sons and daughters fair,
  Straining eyes grown dim with anguish as her hilltops melt in air;
  Bending from her cliffs she watches, drinking deep of their despair.

  Yet she showers her gifts upon them--gifts of laughter and of tears;
  Gives their eyes the Vision Splendid, fairy music to their ears,
  Weaves around their feet her magic--spells that strengthen through
      the years,

  So her children, unforgetting, howsoe'er their footsteps roam,
  Turn their hearts forever westward, longing for the day to come
  When once more they see her stooping from her heights to call them home.




  THE ROAD ACROSS SLIEVE RUE

  As I went down to Dublin town
    The road across Slieve Rue,
  I met a maid in crimson gown;
  Her little feet were bare and brown,
  She looked at me, she laughed at me
    With eyes of watchet blue.

  No mortal maid was half so fair,
    Or half so dainty sweet;
  The sun was tangled in her hair,
  And O her feet were brown and bare;
  I laid the very heart of me
    Before those dancing feet.

  "O go you down to Dublin quay
    To sail upon the Bay?
  I pray you, gentle sir," said she,
  "To turn and walk a mile with me."
  So witching were the eyes of her
    I could not say her nay.

  She gave to me a ring of gold,
    And kisses, two and three;
  She sang me elfin songs of old,
  She lured my heart into her hold,
  Then turned and left me lonely there--
    A wicked witch was she.

  As I went down to Dublin quay
    By darkling ways alone,
  My fairy maid was gone from me,
  For O a wicked witch was she,
  And all my heart within me lay
    As heavy as a stone.




  TO W. B. YEATS

  A wind of dreams comes singing over sea
    From where the white waves kiss the shores of home,
  Bringing upon its rainbow wings to me
            Glimpses of days gone by--
  Of wastes of water, where the sea-gulls cry
            Above the sounding foam.

  Or through the mists do Finn and Usheen ride,
    With all their men, along some faery shore,
  While Bran and Sgeolan follow at their side
            Adown the shadowy track,
  Till in the sunset Caoilte's hair blows back
            And Niamh calls once more.

  Or the brown bees hum through the livelong day
    In glades of Inisfree, where sunlight gleams,
  The bean flower scents again the dear old way,
            Once more the turf-fire burns;
  The memory of the long dead past returns
            Borne on that wind of dreams.




  A FAIRY TALE

  With sword at side, on his charger good,
    The King's son of Erin
  Into the depths of the dark, green wood
    Forward was faring;
  Golden-armoured and golden-curled,
  Faith, the sweetest song in the world
    His heart was hearing!

  Onward he rode, with heart elate;
    Gaily he sought her--
  She, the Princess to be his mate,
    The great King's daughter,
  Jewelled fingers and golden crown,
  Slim young body and eyes as brown
    As the brown bog-water.

  On he rode through a laughing land:
    The ways grew wider,
  There stood a cottage close at hand,
    And there he spied her--
  O but her feet were brown and bare,
  And brown were her curls, as she stood there
    With her geese beside her.

  Alas! for the Princess, proud and slim,
    The great King's daughter;
  We'll trust she wasted no thought on him,
    For he straight forgot her,
  Forgot her jewels and golden crown,
  For the goose-girl's laughing eyes were brown
    As the brown bog-water.

  Then straightway down from his steed he sprang
    And bent above her;
  O sweet were the songs the breezes sang
    Across the clover;
  But what the words he said in her ear,
  Since none but her geese were by to hear,
    I can't discover.

  And what of the Princess, proud and high?
    Good luck upon her!
  Sure, another Prince came riding by,
    And he wooed and won her.
  Now I tell the tale as 'twas told to me
  By a fairy lad, across the sea
    In County Connor.




  THE KING OF ERIN'S DAUGHTER

  The King of Erin's daughter had wind-blown hair and bright,
    The King of Erin's daughter, her eyes were like the sea.
  (O Rose of all the roses, have you forgotten quite
    The story of the days of old that once you told to me?)

  The King of Erin's daughter went up the mountain side,
    And who but she was singing as she went upon her way?
  "O somewhere waits a King's son, and I shall be his bride;
    And tall he is, and fair he is, and none shall say him nay."

  The King of Erin's daughter (O fair was she and sweet)
    Went laughing up the mountain without a look behind,
  Till on the lofty summit that lay beneath her feet
    She found a King's son waiting there, his brows with poppies twined.

  O tall was he and fair was he.  He looked upon her face
    And whispered in her ear a word unnamed of mortal breath,
  And very still she rested, clasped close in his embrace,
    The King of Erin's daughter, for the bridegroom's name was Death.




  KITTY O'NEIL

  O a bit of a dance in an Irish street--
    Hogan was there, and Hennessy,
  Many a colleen fair and sweet,
    And Kitty O'Neil she danced with me;
  Kitty O'Neil, with eyes of brown,
    And feet as light as the flakes o' snow.
  Was it last year, O Kitty aroon,
    Or was it a hundred years ago?

  Hogan is out on a Texan plain,
    Hennessy fell in Manila fight,
  And I--I am back in New York again
    In my old arm-chair at the Club to-night;
  And Kitty O'Neil--the snow lies white
    On the turf above her across the sea,
  And stranger colleens are dancing light
    Where Kitty O'Neil once danced with me.

  O the Antrim glens and the thrushes' song,
    And the hedges white with blossoming may,
  Many a colleen tripping along,
    But none so fair as the one away:
  "Musha, God save you!" I to them say,
    "God save you kindly!" they answer me;
  I shiver and wake, in the dawning grey,
    And Kitty O'Neil lies over the sea.

  O a bit of a dance in an Irish street--
    Hogan was there, and Hennessy,
  Many a colleen fair and sweet,
    And Kitty O'Neil she danced with me;
  Kitty O'Neil, with eyes of brown,
    And feet as light as the flakes of snow.
  Was it last year, O Kitty aroon,
    Or was it a hundred years ago?




  SPRING IN THE CITY

  Outside my garret window, set
    Amid the city's dust and blare,
  One bit of green is growing yet--
    A gnarled old hawthorn tree stands there

  A little bird sings in its bough,
    Where may-buds break as white as foam;
  It breaks my heart to hear him now,
    For O, he sings the songs of home.

  His wings are of the hodden grey,
    A little lilting thing is he;
  He pipes a carol blythe and gay;
    But sad the thoughts he brings to me.

  Once more the Irish hills rise green,
    The lark springs to the sun once more,
  Once more I tread the old boreen
    And see you at the cabin door.

  The young May moon her cresset burns
    In misty skies of Irish blue,
  And for an hour my spirit turns
    From dreary streets to dream of you

  O little, lilting birdeen, cease!
    You stab my heart with every strain
  Bringing me back old memories
    Of days that will not come again.




  THE WILD GEESE

  O pleasant are the fields of France, her vine-clad hills aglow,
  And broad and smooth her rivers are, as singing on they go,--
  Durance and Seine and Loire and Rhone--but not for us they flow.

  And sweetly on a Frenchman's ear the songs of France may ring,
  But not for us their melody who still amid their swing
  The sobbing beat alone can hear of songs we used to sing.

  For, as the streams of Babylon, though broad and fair they swept,
  Were waters of captivity, whereby the Hebrews wept,
  Dreaming of dear Jerusalem, where their forefathers slept--

  So dreaming by the waves of France we think on Sion too,
  Heartsick with longing for the streams we and our fathers knew--
  Liffey and Lee and Avonmore and tawny Avondhu.

  And turning homeward yearning eyes that ne'er shall see her strand,
  We tune our harps and strike once more the chords with faltering hand,
  And sing again the song of home, far in a lonely land.

  "If we forget Jerusalem!"  Ah, well we know the song--
  Our waters of captivity, bitter their waves and strong,
  And faint our hearts for weariness, how long, O Lord, how long?




  A SONG OF MEMORY

  Here as I sit in the dark and ponder,
    Watching the firelight dance and gleam,
  What brings them back to my mind, I wonder?
    Those old days of laughter and dream.
  Dear old days, when we roamed together
    All the pathways that cross Slieve Rue,
  Caring for naught in the sunny weather,
    Laughing together, I and you.

  Voice of the west wind, calling, calling,
    Sobbing beat of the Irish rain,
  Whispering leaves and waters falling,
    Ay, and you by my side again;
  Out of the past I hear them ringing--
    All the songs of the days of old;
  Hear the lark on the hillside singing,
    See the gleam of the gorse's gold.

  Till, as I sit in the firelight dreaming,
    Watching the shadows grow apace,
  Out of the long dead years comes gleaming
    There in the flames your laughing face;
  All the days that are past and over
    Gone in the turf smoke, curling blue,
  And from their wreckage I recover
    Song and sunshine and youth and you.




  IN MEMORY OF A FAILURE

  O Kathaleen ni Houlihan, in blood and ashes lie
  The dreams we dreamed, the faith we held, the hopes we builded high;
  Once more the path that Emmet trod our bleeding feet must press,
  Once more our hearts must bear the load of failure and distress;
  But though the dream in ruin fell, yet this much still is true--
  O Kathaleen ni Houlihan, at least we died for you.

  O Kathaleen ni Houlihan, the hills with Spring are fair,
  And fragrant blows the daffodil and violets scent the air,
  Once more from out the morning sky the lark's gay challenge rings,
  Mounting the blue to Heaven's gate, but not for us he sings,
  And summer comes, and autumn tints with bronze and gold the fern,
  And bees hum in the heather bloom, but we shall not return.

  O Kathaleen ni Houlihan, give us nor praise nor blame,
  Only a little Irish dust to cover up our shame;
  Only a sod of Irish ground our broken dream to hide,
  Where some may pause and say a prayer and "'Twas for her they died;"
  For though we brought you grief and pain, yet this much still is true--
  O Kathaleen ni Houlihan, at least we died for you.




  THE UNCHRISTENED CHILD

  Alanna!  Alanna! within the churchyard's round
  There's many graves of childer' there, they lie in holy ground;
  But yours is on the mountain side beneath the hawthorn tree--
  O fleet one, my sweet one, that's gone so far from me.

  Alanna!  Alanna!  When that small mound was made,
  No mass was sung, no bell was rung, no priest above it prayed;
  Unchristened childer's souls, they say, may ne'er see Heaven's light--
  O lone one, my own one, where strays your soul to-night?

  Alanna!  Alanna!  This life's a weary one,
  And there's little time for thinking when the hours of work are done,
  And the others have forgotten, but there's times I sit apart,
  O fair one, my dear one, and hold you in my heart.

  Alanna!  Alanna!  If I were Mary mild,
  And heard outside the gates of Heaven a little crying child,
  What though its brow the chrisom lacked, I'd lift the golden pin,
  O bright one, my white one, and bid you enter in.

  Alanna!  Alanna!  The mountain side is bare,
  And the winds they do be blowing and the snows be lying there,
  And unchristened childer's souls, they say, may ne'er see
      Heaven's light--
  O lone one, my own one, where strays your soul to-night?




  TO AUDREY, AGED FOUR

  Light feet, white feet, dancing down the ways,
    Spilling out the honey from the flowery days,
  May your paths forever flowery be and sweet,
    Stony roads of sorrow wait not for your feet.

  Light feet, white feet, as you older grow,
    Fain are we to keep you from all care and woe;
  But if thorn and brier in your roadway be,
    Light feet, white feet, meet them merrily.

  Light feet, white feet, as you dance along,
    God, Who made you, keep you free from stain of wrong,
  Give you song and sunshine, laughter, love and praise,
    Light feet, white feet, dancing down the ways.




  A LULLABY

  Little brown feet, that have grown so weary,
    Plodding on through the heat of day,
  Mother will hold you, mother will fold you
  Safe to her breast; little feet, rest;
    Now is the time to cease from play.

  Little brown hands, that through day's long hours
    Never rested, be still at last;
  Mother will rest you; come, then, and nest you
  Here by her side, nestle and hide;
    Creep to her heart and hold it fast.

  Little brown head, on my shoulder lying,
    Night is coming and day is dead;
  Mother will sing you songs, that shall bring you
  Childhood's soft sleep, quiet and deep;
    Sweet be your dreams, O dear brown head.




  O LITTLEST HANDS AND DEAREST

  O littlest hands and dearest,
    O golden heads and bright,
  From out what dear dream country
    Come you to me to-night?
  For through the shadows falling
  I hear your voices calling
  Out of the magic spaces
    Of infinite delight.

  I see your curls a-glimmer,
    I see your dear eyes shine,
  I feel the childish fingers
    Slipped softly into mine;
  You bring me back the May-time,
  The old, delightful play-time
  When all the world was laughter
    And life seemed half divine.

  Thus, from the shades that gather
    Around my path to-night
  Your glad child-hands have drawn me
    Back to your lands of light,
  Giving me for my sadness
  The medicine of your gladness,
  O littlest hands and dearest,
    O golden heads and bright.




  A LOVE SONG

  Love came to me once more,
    His wings all drenched with rain;
  Silent his singing lips,
    His eyes were dark with pain.

  Dead roses in his hands--
    Gone were the flowers of yore;
  Only a poor, grey ghost,
    Love lingered at my door.

  Wasted his rounded limbs
    And grey his golden hair--
  Poor, shadowy, silent God,
    Who once had been so fair.

  "O Love, great Love," I cried,
    "Why come you thus to me?"
  "I am Love's ghost," he said;
    "Men name me Memory."




  A SONG OF LOVE

  Love came loitering down the way,
    (Heart, but we two were young!)
  Laughter light in his eyes there lay,
    Music was on his tongue;
  "Stay, Love, stay--walk with us, pray!
    (Sweet were the songs he sung.)

  Love with us goes wandering still,
    (Heart, but his songs are sweet!)
  Suns may shine, or the rains beat chill,
    What matter cold or heat?
  Blue or grey, Love goes our way;
    (Summer follows his feet.)

  Love, he has been a comrade true,
    (Heart, how the seasons fly!)
  Joy and Sorrow have found us too,
    Greeted and passed us by;
  So Love stay, they may go their way;
    (And Love can never die.)




  DEAD LOVE

  Fold the hands, grown still and cold;
            Lay ye by
  The broken bow that shall feel his hold
    Nevermore, while the seasons fly.
  Draw the shroud above his eyes,
    Love, that laughs an hour and dies.

  Seek no more to entrance win
            At his gate;
  Silent now are the song and din,
    Jest and dance, that were there of late.
  Never more shall he arise,
    Love, that laughs an hour and dies.

  Listen not, for ye shall catch
            Nevermore
  The sound of his finger on the latch,
    Nor see him stand in the open door;
  Ne'er shall see, in any guise,
    Love, that laughs an hour and dies.




  THE WIFE FROM THE SEA

  I snatched her from her home away--
    From her great waters, cool and free,
  My sea-maid, in whose eyes there lay
    The depths and dangers of the sea.

  I brought her where faint breezes sweep
    Through lanes walled in with hedges high,
  And sown with luscious grass and deep
    At ease the fatted pastures lie.

  I gave her my poor cottage home,
    The tame face of the countryside--
  Who knew the waves' withdrawing foam,
    The thunder of the bursting tide.

  And day by day did I rejoice
    To see her sit beside my door,
  Nor knew that in her heart the voice
    Of ocean called forever more.

  Until the grace I would not give
    Death gave.  His mighty hand set free
  My wild sea-maid, that could not live
    Without her waters' liberty.

  And I?--To me the fields are dear;
    The steadfast earth is home to me.
  Yet night by night in dreams I hear
    Her spirit call me from the sea.




  A STORM AT NIGHT

  All night the waves broke in upon the shore
    Beneath my window, and I heard the rain
  With querulous, weak fingers, evermore
    Beating against the pane.

  And through the darkness saw--was it the sweep
    Of some white sea-bird's wing above the foam,
  That fain would cross those waters, wild and deep,
    And find its mate and home?

  Or was it--oh, dear feet, why should you leave
    The halls of Heaven, with all their warmth and light,
  To come where winds wail and where waters grieve,
    Seeking my door last night?

  Surely you came not; 'twas some bird's white breast
    Flashed through the night, and not your waving hand,
  Some sea-gull, weary of the waves' unrest,
    That sought the steadfast land.

  And yet, amid the sobbing of the rain,
    Outside my window in the dark and chill,
  I heard your voice, that ever and again
    Called, and would not be still--

  Until the morning came, sullen and red,
    With waves that beat still foaming on the shore,
  The wind and rain had ceased, and lo! my dead
    Had gone from me once more.




  KITTY'S FEET

  Sure, I'm sitting here this evening, while the firelight flickers low,
  And I'm looking through the shadows into eyes I used to know,
  Through the years that lie between us, into tender eyes and sweet,
  And I'm listening in the darkness for the sound of Kitty's feet--
  Kitty's feet, whose tripping faltered into silence long ago.

  Ah, 'tis well I mind those evenings, gathering shades about my chair,
  And the sound of Kitty's footsteps dancing gaily down the stair
  Through the hall and past the doorway, till I'd turn, her eyes to meet,
  Well my heart it knew the measure that was danced by Kitty's feet--
  Kitty's feet that dance no longer, lying in the silence there.

  Yet to-night as I sit dreaming, while the shadows longer grow,
  I can almost think I hear them, the dear steps I long for so;
  Through the years that lie between us comes again the vision sweet,
  And my heart once more is beating to the tune of Kitty's feet--
  Kitty's feet, that tripped so lightly past Death's portals long ago.




  THE PORT O' MISSING SHIPS

  She lies across the western main,
    Beyond the sunset's rim;
  Her quays are packed with reeling mists--
    A city strange and dim:
  And silent o'er her harbour bar
    The ghostly waters brim.

  No sound of life is in her streets,
    No creak of rope or spar
  Comes ever from the water's edge
    Where the great vessels are;
  Yet ship by ship steals through the mists
    Across her harbour bar.

  There many a good galleon
    Has made her anchor fast,
  And many a tall caravel
    Her journeyings ends at last;
  But no living eye may look upon
    That harbour dim and vast.

  For one went down in tropic seas,
    And one put fearless forth
  To find her death in loneliness
    'Mid icebergs of the north;
  Thus ship by ship and crew by crew
    The ocean tried their worth.

  She lies across the western main
    Beyond the sunset's rim,
  Her quays are packed with reeling mists--
    A city strange and dim;
  And silent o'er her harbour bar
    The ghostly waters brim.




  THE RIDE OF THE SHADOWS

  Behind the pines, when sunset gleams,
  The white gates of the Land of Dreams
            Stand open wide,
  And all adown the golden road
  That leads from that most blest abode
            The shadows ride,
  Who in the light of common day
            May now no more abide.

  They leave their meads of asphodel,
  The starry spaces where they dwell,
            Where quiet lies:
  They leave their windless, glassy sea,
  The angel songs and melody
            Of Paradise,
  To walk again the old-time way
            Once dear to mortal eyes.

  With beating heart I watch them ride
  Across the gathering shades that hide
            That country bright;
  The faces that I loved of yore,
  Eyes that shall smile on me no more
            With mortal light;
  Shadows of all good things and fair
            Come from the past to-night.

  So, when the dying sunset gleams
  Behind the hills, the Gate of Dreams
            Stands open wide;
  And all along the golden road
  From those fair mansions of their God
            Where they abide--
  Dear memories of the days that were--
            I see the shadows ride.




  GHOSTS

  The sky is overcast,
    The wind wails loud;
  Grey ghosts go driving past
    In driving cloud;
  And, in the beating rain
  Against the window-pane
  Dead fingers beat again,
    Dead faces crowd.

  O, grey ghosts, waiting still,
    My fire burns bright;
  Without is cold and chill,
    Here, warm and light.
  And would you have me creep
  Outside to you, and sweep
  With you along the steep
    Of the grey night?

  Nay, once I held you dear,
    Before you fled
  Adown the shadowy, drear
    Paths of the dead;
  But now the churchyard mould
  Has left you all too cold,
  Your hands I cannot hold,
    Your touch I dread.

  Yet linger patiently,
    Ghosts of the past,
  Soon there shall come to me
    That morn's chill blast
  That calls me too to tread
  Those ways of doubt and dread,
  And numbered with the dead
    To lie at last.




  OUR LADY OF DARKNESS

  When the toils of the day are over and the sun has sunk in the west,
  And my lips are tired of laughter, and my heart is heavy for rest,
  I will sit awhile in the shadows, till Our Lady of Darkness shall shed
  The healing balms of her silence and her dreams upon my head.

  Ye seek in vain in your temples--she dwells not in aisles of stone;
  Apart, and at peace, and silent, she waits in the night alone.
  Her eyes are as moonlit waters, her brows with the stars are bound,
  And her footsteps move to music, but no man has heard the sound.

  No incense burns at her altar--at her shrine no lamplight gleams,
  But she guards the Fountains of Quiet, and she keeps the key of Dreams,
  And I will sit in the shadows and pray her, of her grace,
  To open her guarded visions and grant me to dream of your face.

  I ask not to break the silence, but only that you shall stand,
  As oft you stood in the old-time, with your hand upon my hand;
  So I will sit very quiet, that Our Lady of Darkness may shed
  Her balms of healing and silence and of dreams upon my head.




  DALUAN

  Daluan, the Shepherd,
    When winter winds blow chill,
  Goes piping o'er the upland,
    Goes piping by the rill;
  And whoso hears his music
    Must follow where he will.

  Daluan, the Shepherd,
    (So the old story saith)
  He pipes the tunes of laughter,
    The songs of sighing breath;
  He pipes the souls of mortals
    Through the dark gates of Death.

  Daluan, the Shepherd,
    Who listens to his strain
  Shall look no more on laughter,
    Shall taste no more of pain,
  Shall know no more the longing
    That eats at heart and brain.

  Daluan, the Shepherd--
    Beside the sobbing rill,
  And through the dripping woodlands,
    And up the gusty hill,
  I hear the pipes of Daluan
    Crying and calling still.




  DEAD--AND LIVING

  _The Question_

  If we should tap on your pane to-night, dear,
    Standing here in the dark outside,
  As in the far-off days and bright, dear,
    Say, would you fling the window wide?

  Nay, you would turn to the firelight's gold, dear,
    Saying, "'Tis but a dream that fled;"
  Deep we lie in the churchyard mould, dear,
    Who shall remember to love the dead?

  (Ah, the dead, who shall come no more, dear,
    Gone and forgotten, so you say--
  Standing here in the dark at your door, dear,--
    Dead and forgotten and gone for aye.)

  Your hours pass with laughter and song, dear,
    Do we blame you that you forget?
  All our years are empty and long, dear,
    We, in our graves, remember yet.

  We remember, and ofttimes rise, dear,
    From our beds 'neath the churchyard sod,
  Walking ever, with wistful eyes, dear,
    Old-time ways that in life we trod.

  We remember, who are forgot, dear--
    Do we blame you that you forget?
  How should we live in your lightest thought, dear?
    Only--the dead remember yet.


  _The Reply_

  Do we forget?--We cannot hear your call;
    Your tap upon the pane
  Sounds to our ears but as the leaves that fall,
    Or beat of sobbing rain.

  We cannot see you standing at the door,
    Or passing through the gloom;
  We strain our ears, yet hear your step no more
    In the familiar room.

  And seeing not--but waiting, with a numb,
    Bewildered heart and brain,
  And hearing not--but only winds that come
    And wail against the pane,

  And dreaming of you in some brighter sphere,
    We--we, too--grieve and fret
  That you, whom still we hold so dear, so dear,
    Should all so soon forget.




  THE MASTER OF SHADOWS

  Into the western waters
    Slow sinks the sunset light,
  And the voice of the Wind of Shadows
    Calls to my heart to-night--

  Calls from the magic countries,
    The lost and the lovely lands
  Where stands the Master of Shadows,
    Holding the dreams in his hands.

  All the dreams of the ages
    Gather around him there,
  Visions of things forgotten
    And of things that never were.

  Birds in the swaying woodlands,
    Creatures furry and small,
  Turn to the Master of Shadows
    And he gives of his dreams to all.

  Lo!  I am worn and weary,
    Sick of the garish light;
  Blow, thou Wind of the Shadows,
    Into my heart to-night.

  Out of the magic countries,
    The lost and the lovely lands,
  Where he, the Master of Shadows,
    Waits, with the dreams in his hands.




  _DIANE AU BOIS_

  Through the sere woods she walks alone,
    With bow unstrung and empty quiver;
  Her hounds are dead, her maidens gone,
    She walks alone forever;
  Watching the while with wistful eyes
  Her crescent shining in the skies.

  The flutes of Pan are silent now,
    Hushed is the sound of Faunus' singing;
  Through winds that shake the withering bough
    No dryad's voice is ringing.
  Syrinx has left her river deep,
  E'en old Silenus sound doth sleep.

  The startled deer before her flee,
    The nightingales with music meet her;
  Yet never mortal eye shall see
    Or mortal voices greet her.
  Her shrines with weeds are overgrown,
  Their fires are out; their worship done.

  Yet sometimes, so 'twas told to me,
    The children playing in the meadows
  May hear her song, that mournfully
    Comes floating through the shadows,
  And sometimes see, through boughs grown bare,
  The moonlit brightness of her hair.

  And, it may be, her weary feet,
    White gleaming through those dusky spaces,
  May, after many wanderings, meet
    The dear, familiar places;
  And find, beyond the sunset's gold,
  Ghosts of the Gods she knew of old.




  THE RED HORSE

  He came and whinnied at my door,
    The wild red horse, with flowing mane;
  And I--I crossed the threshold o'er,
    Leaving behind my wonted life,
    And hope of joy, and fear of pain,
    And clasp of friend, and kiss of wife,
  And clinging touch of childish hands,
    And love and laughter, grief and glee,
  And rode him out across the sands
    Beside a dark, mysterious sea.

  Across my face his mane was blown,
    I saw the eddying stars grow dim,
  And suddenly the past had grown
    A dream of weariness gone by,
    And I was fain to ride with him
    Forever up a darkening sky,
  And hear the far, thin, fairy tune
    That through the darkness seemed to beat,
  Until at length the crescent moon
    Was lying underneath our feet.

  And there the unknown beaches lay
    With stars for silvery pebbles strown,
  And thin and faint and far away
    Came all the noises of the world,
    And up those glimmering reaches blown
    The whispering waves of darkness curled.
  And there my wild steed paused at last,
    And there, wrapped round in dreams, I lie,
  And in the wind that whistles past
    I hear a far, faint, fairy cry.




  THE ADVENTURERS

  We rode from the north, a valiant band,
    With shining armour and swords aflame,
  Till we came at length to a silent land--
    To a sunless, shadowy land we came,
    A desolate land, without a name.

  No songs of birds in that land were known,
    No voices of human joy or pain,
  But mists on the silent winds were blown,
    And shadows clung to our bridle rein,
    Dim forms that no answer gave again.

  Then some grew tired of those weary ways
    And hied them back to a happier coast,
  And many followed some phantom face
    Down one of the winding ways that crossed
    That shadowy land, and so were lost.

  And the rust grew red on our harness bright,
    And dull grew our swords, and a dream the Quest,
  And ever wearier grew the fight
    With thronging phantoms that round us pressed,
    And ever our hearts grew sick for rest.

  Till, few and feeble who were so strong,
    Weary, who dreamed we could never tire,
  We won at last through those ways so long,
    And, bathed in the sunset, dome and spire,
    We saw the City of Heart's Desire.




  THE WATCHER OF THE THRESHOLD

  Silent amid the shadows
    Outside my door,
  The Watcher of the Threshold
    Waits evermore.

  One day the door will open,
    And I shall see
  The Watcher of the Threshold
    Beckon to me.

  And I must leave the firelight,
    And seek the gloom
  Where stands that shadowy figure
    Outside my room.

  In vain it is to question
    Of how, or why,
  The Watcher of the Threshold
    Makes no reply.

  Only amid the shadows
    Silent he stands,
  With eyes that hold a secret,
    And folded hands.

  Still standing in the darkness
    Outside my door,
  The Watcher of the Threshold
    Waits evermore.




  THE GREY RIDER

  Why ride so fast through the wind and rain,
            Grey Rider of the Shee?
  Lest a soul should call for me in vain
            To-night, O Vanathee.

  Now, whose is the soul shall seek thine aid,
            Grey Rider of the Shee?
  The soul of one that is sore afraid
            To-night, O Vanathee.

  O fears he the flurry of wind and rain,
            Grey Rider of the Shee?
  More deep is the dread that sears his brain
            To-night, O Vanathee.

  Does he fear the tumult of clanging blows,
            Grey Rider of the Shee?
  Nay, darker still is the fear he knows
            To-night, O Vanathee.

  Does he fear the loss of wife or child,
            Grey Rider of the Shee?
  Nay, a terror holds him that's still more wild
            To-night, O Vanathee.

  O what should make him so sore afraid,
            Grey Rider of the Shee?
  He fears a wraith that himself has made
            To-night, O Vanathee.

  Then how shall you cleanse from fear his mind,
            Grey Rider of the Shee?
  I will touch his eyes, and they shall be blind
            To-night, O Vanathee.

  Yet still may he know the voice of fear,
            Grey Rider of the Shee?
  I will touch his ears that he shall not hear
            To-night, O Vanathee.

  Yet that wraith may linger around his bed,
            Grey Rider of the Shee?
  No terror shall touch the quiet dead
            To-night, O Vanathee.


  _Shee, Sidhe_--Fairies.

  _Vanathee, Bean-an-Tighe_--Woman of the house.




  JOAN THE MAID

  Still, they say, she moves through the old-time places,
    Joan the Maid, with her great sword girt at her side;
  Sheen of wings and shimmer of angel faces
    Gather around her as she on doth ride.

  Rheims or Orleans may see her thus in splendour,
    Never the old Domremy streets she knew,
  Here she walks as a maiden, shy and slender,
    Brushing with bare brown feet the evening dew.

  Oft do the children, playing in the meadows,
    See her watching them, white and very fair,
  Smiling lips and eyes that dream in the shadows,
    Lilies of France she loved so in her hair.

  So she comes, through those quiet roadways stealing,
    Where in the grey church still her people bend,
  Unto the Maiden, their own saint, appealing;
    Hears them name her saviour of France and friend.

  She has forgotten now the mocking faces,
    Prison, and wounds, and torture of the flame;
  Still, they say, she moves through the old-time places,
    Joan the Maid, whence once, long since, she came.




  NEWBURY TOWN

  Rupert's soldiers came riding, riding,
    All in the sunshine riding down,
  Scented curls on the breezes flowing,
  Banners dancing and bugles blowing,
  Gaily the troops came riding, riding,
    Through the streets of Newbury town.

  Bells in the church towers all were swinging,
    Flags were waving and flowers were strown;
  Roses lay in the road before them,
  Roses rained from the casements o'er them,
  All in the streets, with shout and singing,
    Prayed that the King might win his own.

  Rupert's soldiers came riding, riding,
    All in the darkness riding down;
  Never a church-bell chimed to greet them,
  Never a maid came forth to meet them;
  Broken, defeated, they came riding
    Through the streets of Newbury town.

  Never more while the bells are calling
    Rupert's soldiers come riding down;
  They have ridden, with bugles blowing
  Into a land beyond our knowing,
  Never more shall their footsteps falling
    Haunt the streets of Newbury town.

  Yet, as I sit here, idly dreaming,
    Watching the water onward flow,
  Still I see, in the sun or shadow,
  Rupert's soldiers across the meadow,
  Banners blowing and lovelocks streaming,
    Riding back from the long ago.

  And in my dreams they still are riding,
    Victor or vanquished, riding down;
  Now with the roses strewn before them--
  Now with the darkness gathering o'er them--
  Rupert's soldiers, forever riding
    Through the streets of Newbury town.




  A CHRISTMAS HYMN

  No room for Thee, O Baby Jesukin,
            No room within the inn;
  Only the stable door is standing wide,
            And there inside
  The ox and ass their patient foreheads bow
            Before Thee now.

  No room for Thee, O little Lord of all,
            In cottage or in hall;
  Yet o'er Thy stable angel voices sound
            Telling around
  To the wide world a Prince is born to them
            In Bethlehem.

  No room for Thee--yet the wise Kings have sped
            To kneel beside Thy bed,
  Offering their gifts, myrrh, frankincense, and gold,
            To Thee to hold;
  And all the angel armies of the air
            Are gathered there.

  No room for Thee--yet the wide earth is Thine,
            And this poor heart of mine;
  Though oft Thy Hand has tried its doors in vain,
            Yet come again;
  Wide open now it stands--O Light of Light,
            Enter to-night.




  THE SHEPHERDS' SONG

  We be silly shepherds,
    Men of no renown,
  Guarding well our sheepfolds
    Hard by Bethlehem town;
  Baby Jesus, guard us all,
  Cot and sheepfold, bower and stall.

  Wild the wind was blowing,
    Sudden all was still,
  Laughter soft of angels
    Rang from hill to hill.
  Baby Jesus, Thou wast born
  Ere that midnight paled to morn.

  Seek we now Thy presence
    With our gifts of love;
  Felix brings a lambkin,
    I will give a dove.
  Baby Jesus, small and sweet,
  Lo, we lay them at Thy feet.




  A CHRISTMAS CAROL

  Just a little baby lying in a manger,
    God of Gods and Light of Lights, the mighty King of Kings,
  Hark! the choiring angels chant their glad evangels,
    All the air is pulsing with the music of their wings.

  Just a little baby on Mary's breast that bore Him,
    Helpless feet, and clinging hands, and lips that knew no word,
  And the darkness ringing with the angels' singing,
    Sounding through the solemn night, "All glory to the Lord."

  Just a little baby wrapped in swaddling clothing--
    All the earth forever thrills rejoicing in that birth,
  Through the centuries flying still hears those angels crying,
    "Glory be to God on high, and peace, goodwill to earth."




  _DE PROFUNDIS_

  Lord, from this prison-house that we have built,
    This dark abode of pain and misery,
            Failure and guilt,
  We stretch our hands, we stretch our hands to Thee,
            Lord, set us free.

  O Lord, Thou knowest all--Thou knowest well
    The groping hands, the eyes that would not see,
            The feet that fell;
  Yet are we fain--are fain to come to Thee,
            Lord, set us free.

  Bitter the chains that we have borne so long,
    The chains of sin we wove so heedlessly;
            Lo, Thou art strong,
  Out of the deeps we cry--we cry to Thee,
            Lord, set us free.




  THE CRY OF THE DAMNED

  Have you no pity for us?--You, who stand
    Within that Heaven that we may never win,
  Who know the golden streets of that fair land
    Our weary feet are fain to be within.
  Have you no ruth for us, who must abide
  In the great horror of the night outside?

  We, too, once knew of laughter and delight,
    Who now must walk these weary roads of pain;
  Our hearts were pure as yours, our faces bright,
    In that glad life we may not know again;
  We might have gained your Heaven too--even we
  Who dwell with madness and with memory.

  Within the pleasant pastures where your feet
    Stray, comes there never thought of our distress?
  Do our wails never mar your music sweet?
    Our parched throats change your draught to bitterness?
  Your chance was ours--we lost it; yes, we know
  Ours was the fault--but, is it easier so?

  Yet was it ours?--The dazzled eyes and blind,
    The wills that knew, but could not hold the good,
  The groping feet, that failed the path to find,
    The wild desires that filled the tainted blood?
  Have you no ruth, who those bright barriers crossed,
  For us, who saw them open--and are lost?




  OUR LADY OF REMEMBRANCE

  She stoops to us from her dim recess
    With weary and wistful eyes;
  She has grown so tired of the censer's swing,
  Of the white-robed choir and the songs they sing,
  Of the priest's pale hand, upraised to bless,
    And the feast and the sacrifice.

  They bow to her as the Mother blest
    Of the great and awful God;
  But her heart holds dearest His early years,
  The childish laughter, the childish tears,
  Ere His feet had the road of sorrows pressed,
    Or the way to the cross had trod.

  Her thoughts go back to the days of yore--
    Away from the garish light,
  And the organ's droning melody,
  To the starry shores of Galilee,
  To the vines that shaded her cottage door,
    And the hush of the Eastern night.

  So she bends to us from her dim recess
    With weary and wistful eyes,
  And turns away from the tapers' light
  To dream of the cool and the hush of night,
  From the priest's pale hand, upraised to bless,
    To the starry Eastern skies.




  MAID MARY

  Maid Mary sat at her cottage door
    By the Lake of Galilee;
  Tall and stately her lilies were,
  But never was lily one-half so fair
    Or half so pure as she.
  (O Mary, Maid and Mother of God,
    I pray you, pray for me.)

  The shadows darkened along the shore
    Of the Lake of Galilee;
  What steps were those, as the twilight fell?
  Lo, God's great angel, Gabriel:
    "Hail, blessed of God!" spake he.
  (O Gabriel, Prince of the hosts of God,
    I pray you, pray for me.)

  Maid Mary knelt on her cottage floor
    By the Lake of Galilee;
  And kneeling, dreamed strange dreams and sweet
  Of baby fingers and dimpled feet,
    And a Holy Thing to be:
  (O Christ, the Virgin-born Son of God,
    I pray You, pray for me.)

  But she did not dream, as the night passed o'er
    By the Lake of Galilee,
  Of the weary ways that the feet should tread,
  Of a thorny crown for a baby head,
    Or a cross on Calvary.
  (O Son of Mary, O thorn-crowned God,
    I pray You, pray for me.)




  THE TWO CROWNS

  The young King rode through the City street,
    So gallant, gay and bold;
  There were roses strewn 'neath his horse's feet,
    His brows were bound with gold,
  And his heart was glad for his people's cheers
    Along his pathway rolled.

  Glad was his heart and bright his face,
    For life and youth were fair;
  And he rode through many a pleasant place--
    Broad street and sunny square--
  Till he came to the market-place and saw
    A crucifix stand there.

  Hushed were the crowd's exultant cries,
    To awe-struck silence grown;
  For they saw the young King's laughing eyes
    Grow grave beneath his crown,
  As the crowned King looked up, for lo!
    A crowned King looked down.

  Grave were the eyes above, and sad;
    The face with pain was lined,
  And the pierced hands no sceptre had;
    Both brows a crown did bind.
  But the earthly King was crowned with gold--
    The Christ with thorns entwined.

  Slowly the young King homeward rode
    In awe and wondering;
  He had looked that day on the face of God,
    And learned that for a king
  The lordliest crown his brows can bear
    Is the crown of suffering.




  A SPARROW IN CHURCH

  Thou, Who hast said no sparrow e'er shall fall
    Without Thy knowledge, lend me now Thine aid.
  I cry to Thee, O mighty Lord of all,
    Thy little living creature, sore afraid.

  All my short life these fluttering wings have known
    Only the freedom of Thy sun and rain,
  And now they beat against these walls of stone--
    Lord of the sparrows, shall they beat in vain?

  The terrors of Thine House encompass me,
    Upon Thine altar I myself have laid;
  Hearken, O Lord, Thy sparrow calls to Thee,
    Thy little living creature, sore afraid.




  SEA-GULLS

  Where the dark green hollows lift
    Into crests of snow,
  Wheeling, flashing, floating by,
  White against the stormy sky,
  With exultant call and cry
    Swift the sea-gulls go.

  Fearless, vagabond and free,
    Children of the spray,
  Spirits of old mariners
  Drifting down the restless years--
  Drake's and Hawkins' buccaneers,
    So do sea-men say.

  Watching, guarding, sailing still
    Round the shores they knew,
  Where the cliffs of Devon rise
  Red against the sullen skies,
  (Dearer far than Paradise)
    'Mid the tossing blue.

  Not for them the heavenly song;
    Sweeter still they find
  Than those angels, row on row,
  Thunder of the bursting snow
  Seething on the rocks below,
    Singing of the wind.

  Fairer than the streets of gold
    Those wild fields of foam,
  Where the horses of the sea
  Stamp and whinny ceaselessly,
  Warding from all enemy
    Shores they once called home.

  So the sea-gulls call and cry
    'Neath the cliffs to-day,
  Spirits of old mariners
  Drifting down the restless years--
  Drake's and Hawkins' buccaneers--
    So do sea-men say.




  MY DOG AND I

  My dog and I, the hills we know
  Where the first faint wild roses blow,
  We know the shadowy paths and cool
    That wind across the woodland dim,
    And where the water beetles swim
  Upon the surface of the pool.

  My dog and I, our feet brush through
  Full oft, the fragrant morning dew,
  Or, when the summer sun is high,
    We linger where the river flows
    Chattering and chuckling as it goes--
  Two happy tramps, my dog and I.

  Or, when the winter snows are deep,
  Into some fire-lit nook we creep,
  And, while the north wind howls outside,
    See castles in the dancing blaze,
    Or, dozing, dream of summer days
  And woodland stretches, wild and wide.

  My dog and I are friends till death,
  And when the chill, dark angel's breath
  Shall call him from me, still I know,
    Somewhere within the shadowy land
    Waiting his master he will stand
  Until my summons comes to go.

  And, in that life so strange and new,
  We'll tramp the fields of heaven through,
  Loiter the crystal river by;
    Together walk the hills of God
    As when the hills of earth we trod,
  Forever friends, my dog and I.




  SNOWDROPS

  February fair maids,
    All along the lane,
  Dancing with the breezes,
    Nodding to the rain,
  Whispering tales of Springtime
    Through the snow and sleet,
  February fair maids,
    Brave and bright and sweet.

  February fair maids,
    Soon you'll disappear,
  Soon the swallow's twitter
    Tells that Spring is here.
  Soon the rose and lily
    Laugh 'neath skies of blue--
  February fair maids,
    None so brave as you.

  February fair maids,
    Dancing down the lane,
  Bowing to the breezes,
    Smiling at the rain,
  Lifting laughing faces
    Through the snow and sleet--
  February fair maids,
    Brave and bright and sweet.




  SPRING

  Lo, the spring has come again!
        Down the lane
  Silent, first, the snowdrop came;
  Green each bursting leaf-bud swells
        In the dells
  Where the crocus breaks in flame.

  Spring, with all the daffodils
        On her hills,
  Comes and wakes the world to mirth:
  List with what reverberant glee
        Streams set free
  Tell their triumph to the earth.

  Hark!  Once more the cuckoo's call,
        Musical, magical,
  Over all the land doth ring;
  Little waves upon the beach,
        Each to each
  Laughing, whisper, "'Tis the Spring."




  OCTOBER WIND

  The piper wind goes straying
    Into the morning skies,
  With fern seed in his pocket,
    And laughter in his eyes,
  And the swift clouds break, and follow
    His magic melodies.

  The piper wind goes playing
    His music, sweet and shrill,
  And, brave in red and yellow,
    The leaves dance on the hill;
  And the purple plumes of aster
    Nod gaily by the rill.

  The piper wind goes roaming
    O'er upland, glade and plain,
  He whispers to the sunshine,
    He whistles through the rain,
  He dreams among the pine trees
    And wakes, and laughs again.

  The piper wind goes homing
    Adown the sunset skies,
  With fern seed in his pocket,
    And laughter in his eyes;
  And our hearts are fain to follow
    His magic melodies.




  OCTOBER

  Now, when the summer flowers are past and dead,
    And, from the earth's wild bosom, brown and bare,
            No trillium lifts its head;
  When, in the hollows where the violets were
    Purple and white and fair,
  Only a few brown leaves are falling now,
    The wind shakes from the bough:

  Now, when the tiger-lily's flame no more
    Burns in the long, lush grasses on the hill,
            And, by the river shore,
  The smoky trail of asters, lingering still,
    Thins, and the air grows chill
  With the first feathery snowflakes, that anon
    Fall softly and are gone:

  O let us leave this dull and dusty street,
    The noise and heat and turmoil of the town
            For country waysides sweet,
  Lanes where the nuts are clustering, plump and brown,
    Hedges blackberries crown;
  Come, ere the shivering blasts of winter blow,
    Let us make haste and go.




  IN ARCADIE

  Heart of my heart, the long road lies
    A streak of white across the down
  To where the hill-tops touch the skies;
    Then let us seek the mountain's crown
    And cross its summit, bare and brown,
  Heart of my heart, O come with me
  To walk the ways of Arcadie.

  Heart of my heart, right merrily
    The little winds of Springtime blow,
  The air is full of melody,
    The birds are singing, soft and low;
    Heart of my heart, then let us go
  Across the hills, and wander free
  The pleasant paths of Arcadie.

  There sunny land and sunny sea
    Lie drowsing in the noontide heat,
  There song of bird and hum of bee
    Mix in a music wild and sweet,
    And in the thyme beneath our feet
  Cicalas chirp their melody,
  Across the hills in Arcadie.

  Or, when the twilight shadows steep
    The hill-tops with a misty light,
  And stars their quiet watches keep
    Through the short hours of summer night,
    And glow-worms burn their lanterns bright,
  The streams still murmur sleepily
  Across the hills in Arcadie.

  Heart of my heart, O let us leave
    The toil and turmoil of the town,
  And men that work and men that grieve,
    And take the road across the down
    And climb the hill-top, bare and brown;
  Heart of my heart, O come with me
  To walk the ways of Arcadie.




  JAMES WHITCOMB RILEY

  Wave your hand to him!  Let him go
    Back from the dusty paths we stray,
  To the land where his boyhood's rivers flow;
    He is not dead--he is just away,
  Gone to laugh at 'Lizabuth Ann,
  And swap old yarns with the Raggedy Man.

  Hush!  Do you hear, in the distance dim,
    Faint and sweet as an elfin tune,
  Orphant Annie is calling him,
    Counting him in with the old-time rune--
  Intry, mintry, eatery, corn,
  Apple blossom and apple thorn.

  Wave your hand to him--call good-bye!
    Faintly his answer echoes back;
  Voices of children eagerly
    Lure him on by the fairy track
  To the wonder-world, where all hearts are gay;
  He is not dead, he is just--away.




  THE SANDMAN

  When the long, hot day is over,
    And the sun drops down the west,
  And the childish hands are weary,
    And the childish feet must rest,
  The Sandman steals through the portals
    Where the dying sunlight gleams,
  And touches the tired eyelids
    And lulls them into dreams.

  Even so, when life is over,
    And the long day's march is past,
  We wait in gathering shadows
    Till the Sandman comes at last.
  Sad are our hearts and weary,
    And long the waiting seems;
  Lord, we are tired children;
    Touch Thou our eyes with dreams.

  Take from the slackened fingers
    The toys so heavy grown,
  Give to Thy tired children
    Visions of Thee alone;
  Then, when at length the shadows
    Darken adown the west,
  Send to us Death, Thy Sandman,
    To call Thine own to rest.




  THE REMITTANCE MEN

  She stands in peace by her waters,
    Our Mother, fair and wise,
  And ever amid our dreaming
    We see her hills arise;
  We, who have sold our birthright,
    Sons, who have failed at need,
  Outcast, lost and dishonoured,
    We know her fair indeed.

  Yes, we have sold our birthright--
    Well have we learned the cost--
  Drink-sodden, hateful bodies,
    And souls forever lost;
  We see the heights above us,
    The depths into which we fall,
  And we turn from that sight in horror,
    Drinking to drown it all.

  Lo, we have lost her forever!
    Exiled, unclean, alone;
  Yet she was once our Mother,
    Once we were sons of her own;
  We--who have failed her and shamed her,
    Cast from her shores so long,
  Still in our dreams we see her,
    Noble and wise and strong.

  Once in a far-off country
    We named her great and fair,
  They mocked us with scornful laughter,
    "Lo, these are the sons she bare!"
  Do we not feel our bondage,
    We, who have owned her name,
  When we dare not whisper her praises
    Lest we whelm her in our shame?

  Yet do the outcasts love her,
    Who once were bone of her bone,
  Pray for her life and honour
    Who dare not pray for their own;
  Out of the hell we have chosen
    Watch her, with longing eyes--
  She, who was once our Mother,
    Excellent, just and wise.




  THE LAST VOYAGE

  When I loose my vessel's moorings, and put out to sea once more
  On the last and longest voyage that shall never reach the shore,
  O Thou Master of the Ocean, send no tranquil tides to me,
  But 'mid all Thy floods and thunders let my vessel put to sea.

  Let her lie within no tropic sea, dead rotten to the bone,
  Till the lisping, sluggish waters claim my vessel for their own;
  Till the sun shall scar her timbers, and the slimy weed shall crawl
  O'er her planks that gape and widen, and the slow sea swallow all.

  Let her not go down in darkness, where the smoking mist-wreaths hide
  The white signal of the breakers, dimly guessed at, overside;
  While her decks are in confusion, and the wreck drops momently,
  And she drifts in dark and panic to the death she cannot see.

  But out in the open ocean, where the great waves call and cry,
  Leap and thunder at her taffrail, while the scud blows stinging by,
  With the life still strong within her, struggling onward through
      the blast,
  Till one last long wave shall whelm her, and our voyaging is past.




  BALLADE OF DREAMS

  We dreamed our dreams in full many lands,
    By mount and forest, by stream and lea,
  Dreams of the touch of old-time hands,
    Dreams of a future destiny,
    Dreams of battle and victory,
  Laughter and love and wealth and fame;
    Dreamers of dreams, indeed, were we--
  Have the lichens yet o'ergrown our name?

  Our rivers of dream had golden sands,
    Our forests of Dream waved fair to see,
  Our Dreamland Isles were enchanted strands
    With shores of magic and mystery;
    How should we dream of misery
  With the blood of youth at our hearts aflame?
    Dreamers of dreams, indeed, were we--
  Have the lichens yet o'ergrown our name?

  If a mortal now our fate demands
    (We who so long forgotten be),
  He shall seek in vain, for our wandering bands
    Now wait here, all so dreamlessly;
    O the restless hearts rest quietly,
  And the fire is quenched that no frost could tame;
    Dreamers of dreams, indeed, were we--
  Have the lichens yet o'ergrown our name?


  _L'Envoi_

  Prince, this world is all vanity,
    And dream and deed, they are still the same;
  Dreamers of dreams, indeed, were we--
    Have the lichens yet o'ergrown our name?




  SHIPS OF OLD RENOWN

  Triremes of the Roman, cruising down to Antioch,
    Longships of the Northmen, galleons of Spain,
  Tall, gleaming caravels, swinging in the tideway,
    Never shall the sunlight gild their sails again.

  Never shall those white sails, lifting on the sea-line,
    Swoop like a swallow across the blinding blue,
  Caracque and caravel, lying 'neath the waters,
    Wait till the bugles shall call the last review.

  There in the darkness lie friend and foe together,
    Drake's English pinnaces, the great Armada's host;
  Quiet they lie in the silence of the sea-depths,
    Waiting the call that shall sound from coast to coast.

  War-ship and merchantmen, lying in the slime there,
    Galleys of the Algerine, and traders of Almayne,
  Hoys of the Dutchman, and haughty ships of Venice,
    Never shall the sunlight gild their sails again.




  SEA-SONG

  I will go down to my sea again--to the waste of waters, wild and wide;
  I am tired--so tired--of hill and plain and the dull tame face
      of the country side.

  I will go out across the bar, with a swoop like the flight of a
      sea-bird's wings,
  To where the winds and the waters are, with their multitudinous
      thunderings.

  My prows shall furrow the whitening sea, out into the teeth of the
      lashing wind,
  Where a thousand billows snarl and flee and break in a smother of
      foam behind.

  O strong and terrible Mother Sea, let me lie once more on your cool
      white breast,
  Your winds have blown through the heart of me and called me back from
      the land's dull rest.

  For night by night they blow through my sleep; the voice of waves
      through my slumber rings;
  I feel the spell of the steadfast deep; I hear its tramplings and
      triumphings.

  And at last, when my hours of life are sped, let them make me no
      grave by hill or plain--
  Thy waves, O Mother, shall guard my head.  I will go down to my sea
      again.




  THE SEA-WIND

  I am weary of this country, with its hedges and its walls,
  And all night I do be dreaming how the water calls and calls;
  Of the booming of the breakers as they dash against the shore,
  And the salt wind, the sea-wind, the wind I'll hear no more.

  I am weary of these meadows, where the sun comes scorching down
  Till the ways are dry and dusty, and the grass is burnt and brown;
  And forever through my dreaming come the great waves' lash and leap,
  And the salt wind, the sea-wind, the wind upon the deep.

  Should I die here in this country, and its stifling turf be pressed
  Hot and heavy o'er my bosom, O 'tis never I could rest;
  Let me lie beneath the washing of the green and silent wave,
  With the salt wind, the sea-wind, to sing above my grave.




  MY PHILOSOPHY

  Life is a game that all must play;
  Though you win or lose, though you gain or pay,
  Whatever the cards you hold, I say,
            Throw back your head and laugh.

  Keep Youth's fire at your heart aglow,
  A clasp for a friend and a fist for a foe,
  And then let come or joy or woe,
            Throw back your head and laugh.

  Laugh, though the world upon you frown,
  Laugh, though the deeps your soul shall drown,
  Many a better man goes down--
            Throw back your head and laugh.

  And when Death's hand on your shoulder lies
  And the world grows dim to your failing eyes,
  Let him not say: "A coward dies."
            Throw back your head and laugh.




  EASTER, 1917

  _I. M. Thomas MacDonagh_

  He died for thee, O mournful Mother Erin!
    A year ago he turned his face away
  From the glad Spring, in her young green appearing;
    He lingered not to listen to the lay
  Of thrush or blackbird; turned him not aside
    To watch the glory of the daffodils
    That shone and fluttered on a hundred hills,
  But where the mists had gathered, chill and grey,
    He chose his path--and died.

  And now another Spring makes green the meadows,
    The daffodils are golden once again,
  The little winds are dancing with the shadows
    The young leaves make; once more the world is fain
  Of life and laughter--but he shall not see
    The leaf-strewn hollows where the violets grow,
    Or watch the hawthorn buds foam into snow,
  No more shall feel the warm, soft, springtime rain,
    For he has died for thee.

  And yet this year, 'mid all the Spring's rejoicing,
    There sounds at times, I think, a sadder note;
  This Spring no longer is the blackbird voicing
    Such jubilation from his golden throat;
  The winds, grown older, dance with feet of lead,
    The daffodils are nodding listlessly,
    The violet has no perfume for the bee,
  The grasshopper has donned his dullest coat,
    Remembering he is dead.

  Yet once again, O thrush, break into singing;
    Laugh, daffodils, to feel the falling rain;
  Winter is past, and the young earth is springing
    Joyous to greet her risen Lord again:
  And he who loved you--deem not that he lies
    Unheeding of your grief beneath his mound,
    No more the sleep of Death enwraps him round;
  Rejoice, O Erin, Death to-day is slain,
    But Valour never dies.




  "HOME THOUGHTS FROM ABROAD"

  April in England!  Daffodils are growing
    'Neath every hedgerow, golden, tall and fair;
  April! and all the little winds are blowing
    The scents of Springtime through the sunny air;
  April in England!  God! that we were there!

  April in England!  And her sons are lying
    On these red fields, and dreaming of her shore;
  April!  We hear the thrushes' songs replying
    Each unto each, above the cannons' roar.
  April in England!  Shall we see it more?

  April in England!  There's the cuckoo calling
    Down in her meadows, where the cowslip gleams;
  April!  And little showers are softly falling,
    Dimpling the surface of her babbling streams.
  April in England!  How the shrapnel screams!

  April in England!  Blood and dust and smother,
    Screaming of horses, moans of agony;
  April!  Full many of thy sons, O Mother,
    Never again those dewy dawns shall see.
  April in England!  God, keep England free.




  THE KAISER

  "I am the Lord of War," he said, and bared
    His blade.  "Dominion shall be mine alone."
  East, south, west, north, his clamorous bugles blared,
    His battle lines were thrown.

  Then lo! the leopards of England woke from sleep,
    Roaring their challenge forth across the sea,
  And France's voice was heard in thunders deep,
    Calling on Liberty.

  And Belgium sprang, alert, to meet the foe,
    And from her mountains Serbia sent her bands,
  And the great bear of Russia, growling low,
    Turned from his northern lands.

  Far over land and sea the summons swept,
    And Canada, among her fields of grain,
  Threw down the sickle, caught the sword, and leapt,
    Shouting, across the main.

  Australia, hasting from the southward, came;
    Africa, India sprang into the fight.
  "Lo, Kaiser! here our answer to thy claim;
    Now God shall show the right."

  Then he who drew the blade looked forth, and saw
    That ring of steel and fire about his throne,
  And knew himself at last, with trembling awe,
    The Lord of Death alone.




  CAPTAINS ADVENTUROUS

  Captains adventurous, from your ports of quiet,
    From the ghostly harbours where your sea-beat galleons lie,
  Say, do your dreams go back across the sea-line
    Where cliffs of England rise grey against the sky?

  Say, do you dream of the pleasant ports of old-time,
    Orchards of old Devon, all afoam with snowy bloom?
  Or have the mists that veil the Sea of Shadows
    Closed from your eyes all the memories of home?

  Feet of the Captains hurry through the stillness,
    Ghostly sails of galleons are drifting to and fro,
  Voices of mariners sound across the shadows,
    Waiting the word that shall bid them up and go.

  "Lo now," they say, "for the grey old Mother calls us,"
    (Listening to the thunder of the guns about her shore)
  "Death shall not hold us, nor years that lie between us,
    Sail we to England, to strike for her once more."

  Captains adventurous, rest ye in your havens,
    Pipe your ghostly mariners to keep their watch below;
  Sons of your sons are here to strike for England,
    Heirs of your glory--Beatty, Jellicoe.

  Yet shall your names ring on in England's story,
    You, who were the prophets of the mighty years to be;
  Drake, Blake, and Nelson, thundering down the ages,
    Captains adventurous, the Masters of the Sea.




  DRAKE'S DRUM

  Drake's drum is beating along the coasts of Devon:
    "Mariners, O Mariners, who warred so well with Spain,
  Lo, the foe is here once more!  Leave the ports of Heaven,
    Haste across the jasper sea, and drive them home again."

  All the streets of Paradise echo to its rattle--
    Golden roads a-tremble to the chime of tramping feet;
  Hawkins, Drake and Frobisher are marching forth to battle:
    "Peter, open wide the gates.  We're out to join the fleet."

  Pinnace, caravel, caracque--many a galleon drifting--
    Shadowy sails of old renown upon the shadowy sea;
  Ghostly voices through the mists; "Lo, the white cliffs lifting;
    Heaven's streets for those who will, but Devon's shores for me."

  Drake's drum is beating along the coasts of Devon,
    Calling, as in days of old it called to vanquish Spain;
  Drake and Blake and Raleigh, they have left the ports of Heaven,
    Homing back across the stars to England's cliffs again.




  OUR DEAD

  Not where the English turf grows green we laid them,
    Where their forefathers lie;
  O'er the rude trench and rough-built mound we made them
    Arches an alien sky.

  No chime of bells from old-time towers above them;
    No sound of English streams,
  Calling of rooks, or voice of those who love them,
    Ever shall break their dreams.

  What matters it?  The earth that o'er them closes
    Its flowers as softly sheds
  As English winds could bring the English roses
    To rain upon their heads.

  And though an alien land their dust is keeping,
    Still in their hearts with pride
  They say: "Though England may not guard our sleeping,
    Yet 'tis for her we died."

  And with each wind across the waves that sever
    Them from the land they knew,
  Shall blow this message through their hearts forever:
    "England remembers too."




  NEW YEAR'S EVE, 1916

  Gregory fell beside the Marne,
    And John where flows the Aisne;
  But here to-night, ere midnight chime,
    We three shall meet again.

  Though land and sea lie wide between,
    Their ghosts this way shall win,
  For, three true men, we made a bond
    To watch the New Year in.

  We made it on a Flanders field
    Where white the shell-smoke ran;
  And who is Death to break the faith
    That man has pledged to man?

  Then draw their chairs beside the fire
    And brim their cups with wine;
  For ere the bells of midnight swing
    Their hands shall clasp with mine.

  Though Gregory lies where Marne runs down,
    And John beside the Aisne,
  Living and dead, ere midnight chime,
    We three shall meet again.




  TO IRELAND'S DEAD

  Ah, golden youths! who leave for evermore
    Your ports of quiet breath,
  Turning your prows from Life's familiar shore
    Forth with adventurous Death.

  With that great comrade sailing, side by side,
    To meet your warrior peers,
  Whose names have starred the roll of Erin's pride
    Down all the echoing years.

  Your sunlit sails flash for a moment's space,
    Fade, waver and are gone;
  But, straining through the mists, our spirits trace
    A glory lingering on.

  Farewell, great fellowship!  Sail on, nor mourn
    Your ports of quiet breath;
  Your prows with singing and with laughter turn
    Forth with adventurous Death.




  A SONG OF EXILE

  What is the news of England?
    The April breezes blow,
  Bringing to us faint odours
    From lanes we used to know--
  Lanes, where the hawthorn hedges
    Foam into blossoms white;
  What is the news of England
    For England's sons to-night?

  What is the news of England?
    'Neath her white cliffs the sea
  Croons its soft song of summer,
    The golden days to be.
  Her hills are fair with promise,
    Her woods with voices ring,
  From every copse the cuckoo
    Shouts to the jocund Spring.

  What is the news of England?
    Once more the cowslip gleams
  Gold in her misty meadows,
    Gold by her murmuring streams.
  Once more the April breezes
    Blow secrets of delight
  From the great heart of England
    To England's sons to-night.




  THE AIR-MEN

  We brought great ships to birth,
    We builded towns and towers--
  Lords of the sea and earth,
    Soon shall the sky be ours.

  Soon shall our navies drift
    Like swallows down the wind,
  Shall wheel and swoop and lift,
    Leaving the clouds behind.

  The stars our keels shall know,
    The eagle, as it flies,
  Shall scream to see us go
    Swift moving through the skies.

  High o'er the mountain-steep
    Our winged fleets shall sail,
  The serried squadrons sweep,
    White-pinioned down the gale.

  We are the lords of the land,
    We built us towns and towers,
  The sea has felt our hand--
    Soon shall the sky be ours.




  THE DEFEATED

  Cheer if you will the brave deed done, with laurels the victor crown,
  But keep one leaf of your wreath of bay for the men who lost and are
      down--
  For the fight in vain, for the cankered grain that in blood and tears
      was sown.

  Honour the strong of heart and hand, the sure of will and of sight,
  But what of the stumbling feet, the eyes that strain in vain for light?
  Is there no gain for the tears and pain of the men who fell in the fight?

  Beaten--baffled--with standards lost--knowing no rallying cry,
  Struggling still, but with failing strength, while stronger men
      pass by:--
  Keep ye your bays; I give my praise to the men who lose and die.




  THE GENTLEMEN OF OXFORD

  The sunny streets of Oxford
    Are lying still and bare,
  No sound of voice or laughter
    Rings through the golden air;
  And, chiming from her belfry,
    No longer Christchurch calls
  The eager, boyish faces
    To gather in her halls.

  The colleges are empty,
    Only the sun and wind
  Make merry in the places
    The lads have left behind.
  But, when the trooping shadows
    Have put the day to flight,
  The Gentlemen of Oxford
    Come homing through the night.

  From France they come, and Flanders,
    From Mons, and Marne and Aisne,
  From Greece and from Gallipoli
    They come to her again;
  From the North Sea's grey waters,
    From many a grave unknown,
  The Gentlemen of Oxford
    Come back to claim their own.

  The dark is full of laughter,
    Boy laughter, glad and young,
  They tell the old-time stories,
    The old-time songs are sung;
  They linger in her cloisters,
    They throng her dewy meads,
  Till Isis hears their calling
    And laughs among her reeds.

  But, when the east is whitening
    To greet the rising sun,
  And slowly, over Carfax,
    The stars fade, one by one,
  Then, when the dawn-wind whispers
    Along the Isis shore,
  The Gentlemen of Oxford
    Must seek their graves once more.





  The Temple Press, Letchworth, England











End of Project Gutenberg's Spun-yarn and Spindrift, by Norah M. Holland

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SPUN-YARN AND SPINDRIFT ***

***** This file should be named 34235.txt or 34235.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/2/3/34235/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
