The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Lonely Flute, by Odell Shepard

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Lonely Flute

Author: Odell Shepard

Release Date: November 7, 2010 [EBook #34234]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LONELY FLUTE ***




Produced by Al Haines








A LONELY FLUTE


BY

ODELL SHEPARD




BOSTON AND NEW YORK

HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY

_The Riverside Press Cambridge_

1917




COPYRIGHT, 1917, BY ODELL SHEPARD

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED


_Published April 1917_




TO

M. F. S.




  _And now 't was like all instruments,
  Now like a lonely flute;
  And now it is an angel's song
  That makes the Heavens be mute._

          COLERIDGE.




CONTENTS


  PROEM
  LAUS MARIAE
  RECOLLECTION
  NIGHTFALL
  A BALLAD OF LOVE AND DEATH
  BIRDS OF PASSAGE
  WASTE
  THE WATCHER IN THE SKY
  HOUSEMATES
  POMP AND CIRCUMSTANCE
  THE HIDDEN WEAVER
  VANITAS
  SPENSER'S "FAERIE QUEENE"
  MORNING ROAD SONG
  EVENING ROAD SONG
  WINDY MORNING
  THE GRAVE OF THOREAU
  EARTH-BORN
  "WHENCE COMETH MY HELP"
  UNITY
  VISTAS
  A NUN
  LOVE AMONG THE CLOVER
  CERTAIN AMERICAN POETS
  THE SINGER'S QUEST
  DEAD MAGDALEN
  THE ADVENTURER
  THE GOLDFINCH
  ORIOLES
  BY A MOUNTAIN STREAM
  APRIL
  A CHAPEL BY THE SEA
  EPHEMEROS
  WANDERLUST
  THE IDEAL
  THE FIRST CHRISTIAN




  A LONELY FLUTE




  PROEM

  Beyond the pearly portal,
    Beyond the last dim star,
  Pale, perfect, and immortal,
    The eternal visions are,
  That never any rapture
    Of sorrow or of mirth
  Of any song shall capture
    To dwell with men on earth.

  Many a strange and tragic
    Old sorrow still is mute
  And melodies of magic
    Still slumber in the flute,
  Many a mighty vision
    Has caught my yearning eye
  And swept with calm derision
    In robes of splendor by.

  The rushing susurration
    Of some eternal wing
  Beats mighty variation
    Through all the song I sing;
  The vague, deep-mouthed commotion
    From its ancestral home
  Booms like the shout of ocean
    Across the crumbling foam;
  And these low lyric whispers
    Make answer wistfully
  As sea-shells ... dreaming lispers
    Beside the eternal sea.




  LAUS MARIAE

  There is a name like some deep melody
  Hallowed by sundown, delicate as the plash
  Of lonely waves on solitary lakes
  And rounded as the sudden-bursting bloom
  Of bold, deep-throated notes in a midnight cloud
  When shadowy belfries far away roll out
  Across the dark their avalanche of sound.

  It is a wild voice lost in the wail of the wind;
  The silvery-twinkling plectrum of the rain
  Plays in the poplar tree no other tune
  And pines intone it softly as a prayer
  In leafy litanies.
            The name is raised
  Even to God's ear from ancient arches dim
  With caverned twilight and dull altar smoke
  Where tapers weave athwart the azure haze
  Innumerable pageantries of dusk.

  Low-voiced and soft-eyed women must they live
  Who bear that holy name.  And now for one
  Time has no other honor than to be
  The meaning of an unremembered rhyme,
  The breath of a forgotten singer's song.

  (_October_, 1903)




  RECOLLECTION

  I must forget awhile the mellow flutes
  And all the lyric wizardry of strings;
    The fragile clarinet,
  Tremulous over meadows rich with dawn,
    Must knock against my vagrant heart
    And throb and cry no more.

  For I am shaken by the loveliness
  And lights and laughter and beguiling song
    Of all this siren world;
  The regal beauty of women, round on round,
    The swift, lithe slenderness of girls,
    And children's loyal eyes,

  Hill rivers and the lilac fringe of seas
  Lazily plunging, glow of city nights
    And faces in the glow--
  These things have stolen my heart away, I lie
    Parcelled abroad in sound and hue,
    Dispersed through all I love.

  I must go far away to a still place
  And draw the shadows down across my eyes
    And wait and listen there
  For wings vibrating from beyond the stars,
    Wide-ranging, swiftly winnowing wings
    Bearing me back mine own.

  So soon, now, I shall lie deep hidden away
  From sound or sight, with hearing strangely dull
    And heavy-lidded eyes,--
  'T is time, O passionate soul, for me to go
    Some far, hill-folded road apart
    And learn the ways of peace.




  NIGHTFALL

  In a crumbling glory sets
    The unhastening sun;
  The fishers draw their shining nets;
    The day is done.

  Across the ruddy wine
    That brims the sea
  Black boats drag shoreward through the brine
    Dreamily,

  And dark against the glow
    Firing the west,
  By three and two the great gulls go
    Seaward to rest.

  Beneath the gradual host
    Of heaven, pale
  And glimmering, rides a dim sea-ghost,
    A large slow sail.

  Slowly she cometh on
    Day's last faint breath,
  Drifting across the water, wan
    And gray as death.

  From what far-lying land
    Swimmeth thy keel,
  Dim ship?  And what mysterious hand
    Is at thy wheel?

  What far-borne news for me?
    What vast release?
  Quiet is in my heart, and on the sea
    Peace.

  (_Balboa, California_)




  A BALLAD OF LOVE AND DEATH

  She winded on the castle horn,
    She clamored long and bold,
  For she was way-spent and forlorn
    And she was sore a-cold.

  And she stood lonely in the snow.
    Vague quiet filled the air....
  From heaven's roof looked down aloof
    The stars, with steady stare.

  She heard the droning drift of snow
    And the wolf-wind on the hill....
  No other sound....  For leagues around
    The night was very still.

  She cried aloud in sudden fright,
    "Open!  Warder ho!
  Here is a pilgrim guest to-night
    Who can no farther go."

  The steady beat of mailed feet
    In angry answer rang
  Along the floor.  The castle door
    Gave in with iron clang

  And the warder strode into his tower
    And saw her standing there
  Weary, like a storm-tossed flower,
    And, like an angel, fair.

  "Here is no lodging for the night,
    No bread and wine for thee,
  No ingle bright, no warm firelight,
    No cheerful company.

  "Here is no inn nor any kin
    Of thine to harbor guest,
  Nor thee to house will any rouse
    Out of his ancient rest."

  Unearthly, dark, nocturnal things
    With faint and furtive stir
  Hovered on feather-muffled wings
    Round the fair face of her

  As she made answer wearily:
    "Ah! open now the gate.
  Though I was fleet with willing feet,
    I have come very late.

  "Yea, though I came through flood and flame,
    Through tempest, flood, and fire,
  And left the wind to trail behind
    The wings of my desire,

  "And though I prayed the stars for aid
    And seas for wind and tide,
  And though God gave me goodly pave
    And ran, Himself, beside...

  "Aye, though my feet have been thus fleet,
    Unto one heart, I know,
  Whose sleep is still beneath the hill,
    My coming has been slow."

  And he bent gently down above,
    A soft light in his eye...
  "Is not the holy name of Love
    The name men call thee by?

  "Ah, Love, I know thee, for thy face
    Is other-worldly fair;
  A great light of some heavenly place
    Is on thy shining hair.

  "But thou, Love, who canst tread the stars,
    Whose seat is by God's throne,
  Why wilt thou bend thee to the dust
    And walk the dark alone?

  "Thy ways are not our mortal ways.
    Hast thou nought else to do
  Than wander with thy dream-lit face
    Our glimmering darkness through?"

  But Love made answer, and her voice
    Was as God's voice to him;
  As tall and fair she towered there
    As heavenly seraphim...

  "Open the gate! for Love shall dwell
    Even among the dead
  And in the darkest deeps of hell!
    Open!  For God hath said!"




  BIRDS OF PASSAGE

  Dropping round and clear across the still miles,
    Ringing down the midnight's marble stair,
  A bird's cry is falling through the darkness,
    Falling from the fields of upper air.

  Through the rainy fragrance of the April night
    Slow it falls, circling in the fall,
  And all the sheeted lake of sleeping silences
    Is troubled by the solitary call.

  Each human heart awake knows the loneliness
    Of that strange voice clear and far,
  That lost voice searching through the midnight,
    That lonely star calling to a star.

  Old memories are thronging through the darkness...
    Slow tears are blinding sleepless eyes...
  O lonely hearts remembering in the midnight!
    O dark and empty skies!




  WASTE

  Reluctant, groping fog crept gray and cold
  Up from the fields where now the guns were still;
  Far off the thundering surge of battle rolled
  And darkness brooded on the quiet hill;
  Clearly, across the listening night, the shrill
  And rhythmic cry of a lonely cricket fell
  On ears long deafened by the scream of shot and shell.

  And there were two who listened wistfully
  To that glad voice, that sad last voice of all,
  Who on the morrow after reveille
  Would make no answer to the muster call;
  Others would eat their mess, others would fall
  When the lines formed again into their places,
  And soon their marching comrades would forget their faces.

  One moaned a little and the other turned
  Painfully sidewise, peering up the bare
  Shell-furrowed slope.  Then, while his deep wound burned,
  He crawled, slow inch by weary inch, to where
  The boy lay,--young, he thought, and strangely fair.
  "You see, I came," he said.  "It was a wrench.
  I thought I'd die.  Let's have a light here.  What!  You're French!

  "No matter ... we'll be going pretty soon...
  Dying 's a lonesome business at the best,
  And when there's nothing but a ghastly moon
  And fog for company, I lose my zest.
  There's a girl somewhere ... well... you know the rest.
  I'm glad I came.  It's hand in hand now, brother.
  I think I laid you here.  I wish 't had been another.

  "I never meant it, and you did n't mean
  For me this ugly gash along my side.
  Something has pushed us on.  Our slate is clean.
  And long and long after we two have died
  Some learnedest of doctors will decide
  What thing it was.  But we ... we'll never know.
  Our business now 's to help make next year's harvest grow.

  "You've been at school?  College de France!  You know
  Next year I should have heard your Bergson there,--
  Greatest since Hegel.  Think of Haeckel, though,
  At my own Jena!  Mighty men they were.
  Not mighty enough for what they had to bear.
  They read and wrote and taught, but you and I,
  How have we profited at last?  Well, here we lie.

  "If I had known you by the silver Rhine,
  That dreamy country where I had my birth,
  The land of golden corn and golden wine
  And surely, I think, the world's most lovely earth,--
  I should have loved you, brother, and known your worth.
  But you were born beside the racing Rhone.
  Ah, yes, that made the difference.  That thing alone.

  "We might have fronted this world's stormy weather
  Hand clasped in hand and seeing eye to eye.
  What was there we could not have done together?
  Who dares to say we should have feared to die,
  Shoulder to shoulder standing, you and I?
  But now you are slain by me, your unknown friend.
  I die by your unknowing hand.  This ... this is the end!

  "And all the love that might have been is blown
  Far off like clouds that fade across the blue;
  The game is over and the night shuts down,
  Blotting the little dreams of me and you
  And all our hope of all we longed to do.
  But courage, comrade!  It's not hard to die.
  It's not so lonely now.  If only we know why!"

  The fog-damp folded closer round the hill
  And stillness deepened, but the cricket's song
  Tore at the heavy hem of silence still--
  One small voice left of love in a world of wrong.
  A few dim stars looked down.  The yelling throng
  Of guns had passed beyond the mountain's brow
  When once again he spoke, but slowly, faintlier now.

  "Something discovered that it didn't need us--
  Me in the Fatherland and you in France.
  We were less worth than what it took to feed us,
  And so life gave us only a little glance.
  It's true to say we never had a chance.
  It's like this fog, around, above, below.
  Reach out your hand to me.  Good-night.  We'll never know."

  And then they lay so still they seemed asleep,
  For death was near and they had little pain.
  The midnight did not hear them moan or weep
  For life and love and gladness lost in vain
  And faces they would never see again,--
  Old friends, old lovers.  All seemed at a distance.
  The minutes crept and crept.  They made no strong resistance.

  They only lay and looked up at the stars,
  Feeling they had not known how fair they were.
  I think their hearts were far from those loud wars
  As they lay listening to the cricket's chirr
  Until it faded to a drowsy blur,
  Dwindled, and died, lost in the distant roar
  Of waves that plunged and broke on some eternal shore.




  THE WATCHER IN THE SKY

  She has grown pale and spectral with our wounds
  And she is worn with memories of woe
  Older than Karnak.  Multitudinous feet
  Of all the phantom armies of the world
  Resounding down the hollow halls of time,
  Have kept their far-off rumor in her ear.
  For she was old when Nineveh and Tyre
  And Baalbec of the waste went down in blood;
  Pompey and Tamburlaine and Genghis Khan
  Are dreams of only yesternight to her.
  And still she keeps, chained to a loathsome thing,
  Her straining, distant paces up and down
  The vaulted cell, but wistful of an end
  When all our swarm of shuddering life shall drop
  Like some dead cooling cinder down the void,
  Leaving her clean, in blessed barrenness.

  (_August_, 1914)




  HOUSEMATES

  This little flickering planet
    Is such a lonely spark
  Among the million mighty fires
    That blaze in the outer dark,

  The homeless waste about us
    Leaves such a narrow span
  To this dim lodging for a night,
    This bivouac of man,

  That all the heavens wonder
    In all their alien stars
  To see us wreck our fellowship
    In mad fraternal wars.




  POMP AND CIRCUMSTANCE

  With a shout of trumpets and roll of drums,
  Down the road the music comes
  And all my heart leaps up to greet
  The steady tread of the marching feet.

  Blare of bugle and shriek of fife...
  This is the triumphing wine of life!
  My senses reel and my glad heart sings,
  My spirit soars on jubilant wings.

  Fluttering banners and gonfalons
  Cover with beauty the murderous guns;
  'T is sweet to live, 't were great to die
  With this vast music marching by.

  For all my heart leaps up to greet
  The steady tread of the marching feet
  When down the road the music comes
  With a shout of trumpets and roll of drums.




  THE HIDDEN WEAVER

  There where he sits in the cold, in the gloom,
  Of his far-away place by his thundering loom,
  He weaves on the shuttles of day and of night
  The shades of our sorrow and shapes of delight.
  He has wrought him a glimmering garment to fling
  Over the sweet swift limbs of the Spring,
  He has woven a fabric of wonder to be
  For a blue and a billowy robe to the sea,
  He has fashioned in sombre funereal dyes
  A tissue of gold for the midnight skies.

  But sudden the woof turns all to red.
  Has he lost his craft?  Has he snapped his thread?
  Sudden the web all sanguine runs.
  Does he hear the yell of the thirsting guns?
  While the scarlet crimes and the crimson sins
  Grow from the dizzying outs and ins
  Of the shuttle that spins, does he see it and feel?
  Or is he the slave of a tyrannous wheel?

  Inscrutable faces, mysterious eyes,
  Are watching him out of the drifting skies;
  Exiles of chaos crowd through the gloom
  Of the uttermost cold to that thundering room
  And whisper and peer through the dusk to mark
  What thing he is weaving there in the dark.
  Will he leave the loom that he won from them
  And rend his fabric from hem to hem?
  Is he weaving with daring and skill sublime
  A wonderful winding-sheet for time?

  Ah, but he sits in a darkling place,
  Hiding his hands, hiding his face,
  Hiding his art behind the shine
  Of the web that he weaves so long and fine.
  Loudly the great wheel hums and rings
  And we hear not even the song that he sings.
  Over the whirr of the shuttles and all
  The roar and the rush, does he hear when we call?

  Only the colors that grow and glow
  Swift as the hurrying shuttles go,
  Only the figures vivid or dim
  That flow from the hastening hands of him,
  Only the fugitive shapes are we,
  Wrought in the web of eternity.




  VANITAS

      Three queens of old in Yemen
        Beside forgotten streams,
      Three tall and stately women,
        Dreamt three great stately dreams
  Of love and power and pleasure and conquering quinqueremes.

      They dreamt of love that squandered
        All Egypt for a kiss,
      They dreamt of fame and pondered
        On proud Persepolis,
  But most they yearned for the wild delights of pale Semiramis.

      They had for lords and lovers
        Dark kings of Araby,
      Corsairs and wild sea-rovers
        From many an alien lea,--
  Black-bearded men who loved and fought and won them cruelly.

      They reared a dreamlike palace
        Stately and white and tall
      As a lily's ivory chalice
        Where every echoing hall
  Was rumorous with rustling leaves and plashing water's fall.

      There to the tinkling zither
        And passionate guitars
      They footed hence and hither
        Beneath the breathless stars,
  From bare round breast and shoulder waved their glimmering cymars.

      Theirs was an empire's treasure
        Of gems and rich attire,
      Love had they beyond measure
        And wine that burnt like fire;
  Each stately queen in Yemen found verily her desire.

      But beauty waned and smouldered,
        Love languished into lust,
      The centuries have mouldered
        Their raven hair to rust,
  The desert sand is over them, their darkling eyes are dust.

      Their bosoms' pride is sunken
        Beneath the purple pall,
      Their smooth round limbs are shrunken,
        Through clasp and anklet crawl
  Lithe little snakes, upon their tombs lean lizards twitch and sprawl.




  SPENSER'S "FAERIE QUEENE"

  Like some clear well of water in the waste,
  Some magic well beside the weary miles,
  This beauty is.  I turn aside and taste
  The cool Lethean drink.  Suddenly smiles
  A leafy world upon me,--peristyles
  Of flickering shade!  The hush is only stirred
  Where silver runlets brighten down the aisles,
  From pool to pool rehearsing one low word
  Answered at drowsy intervals by a lonely bird.

  Along the rustling arches and through vast
  Dim caverns of green solitude are rolled
  The wintry leaves of all the withered past,
  One confraternity of common mould.
  From summers perished, autumn's tarnished gold
  Long blown to dust in many a fallen glade
  Is reared this rumorous temple million-boled,
  This shrine of peace, this whispering colonnade
  Trembling from court to court with restless sun and shade.

  And here a while may weary Fancy turn
  And loiter by the rote of guttural streams.
  Brushing the skirts of silence, the stirred fern
  Breathes softly "hush" and "hush"--a sound that seems
  Only the fluttering sigh of deepest dreams.
  Here comes no sound or sight of fevered things...
  No sight or sound.  Green-gold the daylight beams,
  And deep in the heart of dusk a far bird sings
  Faint as the feathered beat of her own wavering wings.

        *      *      *      *      *

  Calm singer in the chambers of the dawn,
  Our hearts are weary singing in the heat
  When all thy dewy matin hopes are gone
  And all thy raptures, prophesyings sweet,
  And fair, false dreams are flying in defeat.
  O thou, the poet's poet, from thy sky
  Of ancient morning look thou down and greet
  Thy brothers of the noon with gentle eye.
  Lift them from out the dust.  Forlorn and low they lie!

  Heart-easing poet, sing to us like bells
  Across wide waters paven by the stains
  Of sunset; like a vagrant breeze that swells
  And rises lingering, fails and grows and wanes
  Along a listening wood; like April rains
  In which the anemones of dream are born.
  And though you cannot save us from the pains
  Of life,--the heat, the insensate noise, the scorn,--
  Here may we find our rose, forget a while the thorn.




  MORNING ROAD SONG

  Let me have my fill of the wide blue air
    And the emerald cup of the sea
  And a wandering road blown bright and bare
    And it is enough for me.

  The love of a man is a goodly thing
    And the love of a woman is true,
  But give me a rollicking song to sing
    And a love that is always new.

  For I am a rover and cannot stay
    And blithe at heart am I
  When free and afoot on a winding way
    Beneath the great blue sky.




  EVENING ROAD SONG

  It's a long road and a steep road
    And a weary road to climb.
  The air bites chill on the windy hill.
    At home it is firelight time.

  The sunset pales ... along the vales
    The cottage candles shine
  And twinkle through the early dew.
    Thank God that one is mine!

  And dark and late she'll watch and wait
    Beyond the last long mile
  For the weary beat of homing feet
    With her wise and patient smile.




  WINDY MORNING

  Dawn with a jubilant shout
    Leaps on the shivering sea
  And puffs the last pale planet out
  And scatters the flame-bright clouds about
    Like the leaves of a frost-bitten tree.

  Does a gold seed split the rosy husk?
    Nay, a sword ... a shield ... a spear!
      The kindler of all fires that burn
      Deep in the day's cerulean urn
    Rides up across the clear
  And tramples down the cowering dusk
    Like a strong-browed charioteer.

  Blow out and far away
    The dim, the dull, the dun;
  Prosper the crimson, blight the gray,
  And blow us clean of yesterday,
    Stern morning fair begun,
    Till the earth is an opal bathed in dew,
    Flashing with emerald, gold, and blue,
    Held where the skies wash through and through
  High up against the sun.

  (_Catalina Island_, 1913)




  THE GRAVE OF THOREAU

  Brown earth, blue sky, and solitude,--
  Three things he loved, three things he wooed
  Lifelong; and now no rhyme can tell
  How ultimately all is well
  With his wild heart that worshipped God's
  Epiphany in crumbling sods
  And like an oak brought all its worth
  Back to the kindly mother earth.

  But something starry, something bold,
  Eludes the clutch of dark and mould,--
  Something that will not wholly die
  Out of the old familiar sky.
  No spell in all the lore of graves
  Can still the plash of Walden waves
  Or wash away the azure stain
  Of Concord skies from heart and brain.
  Clear psalteries and faint citoles
  Only recall the orioles
  Fluting reveille to the morn
  Across the acres of the corn
  He wanders somewhere lonely still
  Along a solitary hill
  And sits by ever lonelier fires
  Remote from heaven's bright rampires,
  A hermit in the blue Beyond
  Beside some dim celestial pond
  With beans to hoe and wood to hew
  And halcyon days to loiter through
  And angel visitors, no doubt,
  Who shut the air and sunlight out.
  But he who scoffed at human ways
  And, finding us unworthy of praise,
  Sang misanthropic paeans to
  The muskrat and the feverfew,
  Will droop those archangelic wings
  With praise of how we manage things,
  Prefer his Walden tupelo
  To even the Tree of Life, and grow
  A little wistful looking down
  Across the fields of Concord town.




  EARTH-BORN

  No lapidary's heaven, no brazier's hell for me,
  For I am made of dust and dew and stream and plant and tree;
  I'm close akin to boulders, I am cousin to the mud,
  And all the winds of all the skies make music in my blood.

  I want a brook and pine trees, I want a storm to blow
  Loud-lunged across the looming hills with rain and sleet and snow;
  Don't put me off with diadems and thrones of chrysoprase,--
  I want the winds of northern nights and wild March days.

  My blood runs red with sunset, my body is white with rain,
  And on my heart auroral skies have set their scarlet stain,
  My thoughts are green with spring time, among the meadow rue
  I think my very soul is growing green and gold and blue.

  What will be left, I wonder, when Death has washed me clean
  Of dust and dew and sundown and April's virgin green?
  If there's enough to make a ghost, I'll bring it back again
  To the little lovely earth that bore me, body, soul, and brain.




  "WHENCE COMETH MY HELP"

  Let me sleep among the shadows of the mountains when I die,
    In the murmur of the pines and sliding streams,
  Where the long day loiters by
  Like a cloud across the sky
    And the moon-drenched night is musical with dreams.

  Lay me down within a canyon of the mountains, far away,
    In a valley filled with dim and rosy light,
  Where the flashing rivers play
  Out across the golden day
    And a noise of many waters brims the night.

  Let me lie where glinting rivers ramble down the slanted glade
    Under bending alders garrulous and cool,
  Where they gather in the shade
  To the dazzling, sheer cascade,
    Where they plunge and sleep within the pebbled pool.

  All the wisdom, all the beauty, I have lived for unaware
    Came upon me by the rote of highland rills;
  I have seen God walking there
  In the solemn soundless air
    When the morning wakened wonder in the hills.

  I am what the mountains made me of their green and gold and gray,
    Of the dawnlight and the moonlight and the foam.
  Mighty mothers far away,
  Ye who washed my soul in spray,
    I am coming, mother mountains, coming home.

  When I draw my dreams about me, when I leave the darkling plain
    Where my soul forgets to soar and learns to plod,
  I shall go back home again
  To the kingdoms of the rain,
    To the blue purlieus of heaven, nearer God.

  Where the rose of dawn blooms earlier across the miles of mist,
    Between the tides of sundown and moonrise,
  I shall keep a lover's tryst
  With the gold and amethyst,
    With the stars for my companions in the skies.




  UNITY

  Where the long valley slopes away
  Five miles across the dreaming day
  A maple sends a scarlet prayer
  Into the still autumnal air,
  Three golden-smouldering hickories
  Are fanned to flame beneath the breeze
  And one great crimson oak tree fires
  The sky-line over the Concord spires.

  In worship mystically sweet
  The rimy asters at my feet
  And spiring gentian bells that burn
  Blue incense in an azure urn
  Breathe softly from the aspiring sod:
  "This is our utmost.  Take it, God,--
  This chant of green, this prayer of blue.
  This is the best thy clay can do."

        *      *      *      *      *

  O lonely heart and widowed brain
  Sick with philosophies that strain
  Body from spirit, flesh from soul,--
  Worship with asters and be whole;
  Live simply as still water flows
  Till soul shall border brain so close
  No blade of wit can thrust between
  And hearts are pure as grass is green;
  Pray with the maple tree and trust
  The ancient ritual of the dust.




  VISTAS

  As I walked through the rumorous streets
  Of the wind-rustled, elm-shaded city
  Where all of the houses were friends
    And the trees were all lovers of her,
  The spell of its old enchantment
  Was woven again to subdue me
  With magic of flickering shadows,
    Blown branches and leafy stir.

  Street after street, as I passed,
  Lured me and beckoned me onward
  With memories frail as the odor
    Of lilac adrift on the air.
  At the end of each breeze-blurred vista
  She seemed to be watching and waiting,
  With leaf shadows over her gown
    And sunshine gilding her hair.

  For there was a dream that the kind God
  Withheld, while granting us many--
  But surely, I think, we shall come
    Sometime, at the end, she and I,
  To the heaven He keeps for all tired souls,
  The quiet suburban gardens
  Where He Himself walks in the evening
    Beneath the rose-dropping sky
  And watches the balancing elm trees
  Sway in the early starshine
  When high in their murmurous arches
    The night breeze ruffles by.




  A NUN

  One glance and I had lost her in the riot
      Of tangled cries.
  She trod the clamor with a cloistral quiet
      Deep in her eyes
  As though she heard the muted music only
      That silence makes
  Among dim mountain summits and on lonely
      Deserted lakes.

  There is some broken song her heart remembers
      From long ago,
  Some love lies buried deep, some passion's embers
      Smothered in snow,
  Far voices of a joy that sought and missed her
      Fail now, and cease....
  And this has given the deep eyes of God's sister
      Their dreadful peace.




  LOVE AMONG THE CLOVER

  "If you dare," she said,
  And oh, her breath was clover-sweet!
  Clover nodded over her,
  Her lips were clover red.
  Blackbirds fluted down the wind,
  The bobolinks were mad with joy,
  The wind was playing in her hair,
  And "If you dare," she said.

  Clover billowed down the wind
  Far across the happy fields,
  Clover on the breezy hills
  Leaned along the skies
  And all the nodding clover heads
  And little clouds with silver sails
  And all the heaven's dreamy blue
  Were mirrored in her eyes.

  Her laughing lips were clover-red
  When long ago I kissed her there
  And made for one swift moment all
  My heaven and earth complete.
  I've loved among the roses since
  And love among the lilies now,
  But love among the clover...
  Her breath was clover-sweet.

  O wise, wise-hearted boy and girl
  Who played among the clover bloom!
  I think I was far wiser then
  Than now I dare to be.
  For I have lost that Eden now,
  I cannot find my Eden now,
  And even should I find it now,
  I've thrown away the key.




  CERTAIN AMERICAN POETS

  They cowered inert before the study fire
  While mighty winds were ranging wide and free,
  Urging their torpid fancies to aspire
  With "Euhoe!  Bacchus!  Have a cup of tea."

  They tripped demure from church to lecture-hall,
  Shunning the snare of farthingales and curls.
  Woman they thought half angel and half doll,
  The Muses' temple a boarding-school for girls.

  Quaffing Pierian draughts from Boston pump,
  They toiled to prove their homiletic art
  Could match with nasal twang and pulpit thump
  In maxims glib of meeting-house and mart.

  Serenely their ovine admirers graze.
  Apollo wears frock-coats, the Muses stays.




  THE SINGER'S QUEST

  I've been wandering, listening for a song,
  Dreaming of a melody, all my life long ...
  The lilting tune that God sang to rock the tides asleep
  And crooned above the cradled stars before they learned to creep.

  O, there was laughter in it and many a merry chime
  Before He had turned moralist, grown old before His time,
  And He was happy, trolling out His great blithe-hearted tune,
  Before He slung the little earth beneath the sun and moon.

  But I know that somewhere that song is rolling on,
  Like flutes along the midnight, like trumpets in the dawn;
  It throbs across the sunset and stirs the poplar tree
  And rumbles in the long low thunder of the sea.

        *      *      *      *      *

  First-love sang me one note and heart-break taught me two,
  A child has told me three notes, and soon I'll know it through;
  And when I stand before the Throne I'll hum it low and sly,
  Watching for a great light of welcome in His eye...

  "Put a white raiment on him and a harp into his hand
  And golden sandals on his feet and tell the saints to stand
  A little farther off unless they wish to hear the truth,
  For this blessed lucky sinner is going to sing about my youth!"




  DEAD MAGDALEN

  Cover her over with pallid white roses,
    Her who had none but red roses to wear;
  All that her last grim lover bestows is
    Virginal white for her bosom and hair.
  Cover the folds of the glimmering sheet
  Clear from her eyelids weary and sweet
  Down to her nevermore wayward feet.
    Then They may find her fair.

  Lovingly, tenderly, let us array her
    Fair as a bride for the way she must go,
  Leaving no lingering stain to betray her,
    Letting them see we have sullied her so.
  Over the curve of the fair young breast
  Leave we this maidenly lily to rest
  White as the snow in its snow-soft nest.
    Now They will never know.




  THE ADVENTURER

  He came not in the red dawn
    Nor in the blaze of noon,
  And all the long bright highway
    Lay lonely to the moon,

  And nevermore, we know now,
    Will he come wandering down
  The breezy hollows of the hills
    That gird the quiet town.

  For he has heard a voice cry
    A starry-faint "Ahoy!"
  Far up the wind, and followed
    Unquestioning after joy.

  But we are long forgetting
    The quiet way he went,
  With looks of love and gentle scorn
    So sweetly, subtly blent.

  We cannot cease to wonder,
    We who have loved him, how
  He fares along the windy ways
    His feet must travel now.

  But we must draw the curtain
    And fasten bolts and bars
  And talk here in the firelight
    Of him beneath the stars.




  THE GOLDFINCH

  Down from the sky on a sudden he drops
  Into the mullein and juniper tops,
  Flushed from his bath in the midsummer shine
  Flooding the meadowland, drunk with the wine
  Spilled from the urns of the blue, like a bold
  Sky-buccaneer in his sable and gold.

  Lightly he sways on the pendulous stem,
  Vividly restless, a fluttering gem,
  Then with a flash of bewildering wings
  Dazzles away up and down, and he sings
  Clear as a bell at each dip as he flies
  Bounding along on the wave of the skies.

  Sunlight and laughter, a winged desire,
  Motion and melody married to fire,
  Lighter than thistle-tuft borne on the wind,
  Frailer than violets, how shall we find
  Words that will match him, discover a name
  Meet for this marvel, this lyrical flame?

  How shall we fashion a rhythm to wing with him,
  Find us a wonderful music to sing with him
  Fine as his rapture is, free as the rollicking
  Song that the harlequin drops in his frolicking
  Dance through the summer sky, singing so merrily
  High in the burning blue, winging so airily?

  (_ Mount Vernon, New Hampshire_)




  ORIOLES

  Wings in a blur of gold
  High in the elm trees,
  Looping like tawny flame
    Through the green shadows,
  Now at an airy height
  Pausing a heart beat
  Quite at the twig's tip,
    Pendulous, bending.

  Golden against the blue,
  Gold in an azure cup,
  Golden wine bubbling
    Out of blue goblets...
  Cool, smooth and reedy notes
  Fly low across the noon
  While through the drowsy heat
    Drums the cicada.

  Tropical wing and song
  Bound from Bolivia...
  All the blue Amazon
    Sings to New England....
  Flute-noted orioles,
  Flame-coated orioles,
  Gold-throated orioles,
    Spirits of summer.




  BY A MOUNTAIN STREAM

  Where the rivulet swept by a sycamore root
  With a turbulent voice and a hurrying foot,
  I bent by the water and spoke in my dream
  To the wavering, restless, unlingering stream:
  "Oh, turbulent rivulet hastening past,
  For what wonderful goal do you hope at the last
  That never you pause in the shimmering green
  Of the undulant shade where the sycamores lean
  Or rest in the moss-curtained, cool dripping halls
  Hidden under the veils of your musical falls
  Or loiter at peace by the tremulous fern--
  White wandering waters that never return?"

  And I dreamed by the rivulet's wavering side
  That a myriad ripple of voices replied:
  "Aloft on the mountain, afar on the steep,
  A voice that we knew cried aloud in our sleep,
  'Come, hasten ye down to the vale and to me,
  Your begetter, destroyer, preserver, the Sea!'
  We must carry our feebleness down to the Strong,
  We must mingle us deep in the Whole, and ere long
  All the numberless host of the heaven shall ride
  With the pale Lady Moon on our slumbering tide."

  The voices swept out and away through the door
  Of the canyon, and on to the infinite shore.

  Oh, vast in thy destiny, slender of span,
  Wild rivulet, how thou art like to a man!

  (_Cold Brook, California_, 1912)




  APRIL

  (_To Bliss Carman_)

  There's a murmur in the patient forest alleys,
    There's an elfin echo whispering through the trees,
  Lonely pipes are lifted softly in the valleys...
    All the air is filled with waking melodies.

  From the crucibles of Erebus and Endor,
    Flame of emerald has fallen by the rills,
  And it flashes up the slope and sits in splendor
    In the glory of the beauty of the hills.

  Now my heart will yearn again to voice its wonder
    And my song must sing again between the words
  With a mutter of unutterable thunder
    And a twitter of inimitable birds.

  (_April_, 1903)




  A CHAPEL BY THE SEA

  (_To Paul Dowling_)

  There's a mouldering mountain chapel gazing out across the sea
  From beneath the lisping shelter of a eucalyptus tree
  That has drawn the ancient silence from the mountain's heart and fills
  And subdues a fevered spirit with the quiet of the hills.

  For silvery in the morning the chimes go dropping down
  Across the vales of purple mist that gird the island town
  And golden in the evening the vesper bells again
  Call back the weary fishing folk along the leafy lane.

  I'd like to be the father priest and call the folk to prayer
  Up through the winding dewy ways that climb the morning air,
  And send them down at even-song with all the silent sky
  Of early starshine teaching them far deeper truth than I.

  I'd like to lie at rest there beneath a mossy stone
  Above the crooning sea's low distant monotone,
  Lulled by the lisping whisper of the eucalyptus tree
  That shades my mountain chapel gazing out across the sea.

  (_Avalon, Christmas Day_, 1913)




  EPHEMEROS

  A firefly cried across the night:
  "O lofty star, O streaming light,
  Clear eye of heaven, immortal lamp
  Set high above the dew and damp,
  Thou great high-priest to heaven's King
  And chief of all the choirs that sing
  Their golden, endless antiphons
  Of praise before the eternal thrones--
  Hear thou my prayer of worship!  Thine
  The glory, all the dimness mine.
  I am a feeble glimmering spark
  Vagrant along the lower dark."

  The star called down from heaven's roof
  With a humble heart and mild reproof:
  "The Power that made, the Breath that blew
  My fire aglow has kindled you
  With equal love and equal pain
  And equal toil of heart and brain.
  For I am only a wandering light,
  Your elder comrade in the night.
  We are two sisters, you and I,
  And when we two burn out and die
  It will be hardly known from far
  Which was the firefly, which the star."




  WANDERLUST

  (_To Willard_)

  The birds were beating north again with faint and starry cries
  Along their ancient highway that spans the midnight skies,
  And out across the rush of wings my heart went crying too,
  Straight for the morning's windy walls and lakes of misted blue.

  They gave me place among them, for well they understood
  The magic wine of April working madness in my blood,
  And we were kin in thought and dream as league by league together
  We kept that pace of straining wings across the starry weather.

  The dim blue tides of Fundy, green slopes of Labrador
  Slid under us ... our course was set for earth's remotest shore;
  But tingling through the ether and searching star by star
  A lonely voice went crying that drew me down from far.

  Farewell, farewell, my brothers!  I see you far away
  Go drifting down the sunset across the last green bay,
  But I have found the haven of this lonely heart and wild--
  My falconer has called me--I am prisoned by a child.

  (_Easter Day_, 1916)




  THE IDEAL

  Serenely, from her mountain height sublime,
  She mocks my hopeless labor as I creep
  Each day a day's strength farther from the deep
  And nearer to her side for which I climb.
  So may she mock when for the sad last time
  I fall, my face still upward, upon sleep,
  With faithful hands still yearning up the steep
  In patient and pathetic pantomime.

  I am content, O ancient, young-eyed child
  Of love and longing.  Pity not our wars
  Of frail-spun flesh, and keep thee undefiled
  By all our strife that only breaks and mars.
  But let us see from far thy footing, wild
  And wayward still against the eternal stars!




  THE FIRST CHRISTIAN

  A little wandering wind went up the hill.
  It had a lonely voice as though it knew
  What it should find before it came to where
  The broken body of him that had been Christ
  Hung in the ruddy glow.  A bowshot down
  The bleak rock-shouldered hill the soldiery
  Had piled a fire, and when the searching wind
  Came stronger from the distant sea and dashed
  The shadows and the gleam together, songs
  Of battle and lust were blown along the slope
  Mingled with clash of swords on cuisse and shield.
  But of the women sitting by the cross
  Even she whose life had been as gravely sweet
  And sheltered as a lily's did not flinch.
  Her face was buried in her shrouding cloak.
  And she who knew too sorrowfully well
  The cruelty and bitterness of life
  Heard not.  She sat erect, her shadowy hair
  Blown back along the darkness and her eyes
  That searched the distant spaces of the night
  Splendid and glowing with an inward joy.
  And at the darkest hour came three or four
  From round the fire and would have driven them thence;
  But one who knew them, gazing in their eyes,
  Said: "Nay.  It is his mother and his love,
  The scarlet Magdalena.  Let them be."
  So, in the gloom beside that glimmering cross,
  Beneath the broken body of him they loved,
  They wept and watched--the lily and the rose.

  At last the deep, low voice of Magdalen,
  Toned like a distant bell, broke on the hush:
  "We are so weak!  What can poor women do?
  So pitifully frail!  God pity us!
  How he did pity us!  He understood...
  Out of his own great strength he understood
  How it might feel to be so very weak...
  To be a tender lily of the field,
  To be a lamb lost in the windy hills
  Far from the fold and from the shepherd's voice,
  To be a child with no strength, only love.
  And ah, he knew, if ever a man can know,
  What 't is to be a woman and to live,
  Strive how she may to out-soar and overcome,
  Tied to this too frail body of too fair earth!

  "Oh, had I been a man to shield him then
  In his great need with loving strong right arm!
  One of the twelve--ha!--of that noble twelve
  That ran away, and two made mock of him
  Or else betrayed him ere they ran?  Ah no!
  And yet, a man's strength with a woman's love...
  That might have served him somewhat ere the end."

  Then with a weary voice the mother said:
  "What can we do but only watch and weep,
  Sit with weak hands and watch while strong men rend
  And break and ruin, bringing all to nought
  The beauty we have nearly died to make?

  "It is not true to say that he was strong.
  He did not claim the kingdom that was his,
  He did not even seek for wealth and power,
  He did not win a woman's love and get
  Strong children to live after him, and all
  That strong men strive for he passed heedless by.
  Because that he was weak I loved him so...
  For that and for his soft and gentle ways,
  The tender patient calling of his voice
  And that dear trick of smiling with his eyes.
  Ah no!  I have had dreams--a mother's dreams--
  But now I cannot dream them any more.

  "I sorrowed little as the happy days
  Sped by and by that still the fair-haired lad
  Who lay at first beside me in the stall,
  The cattle stall outside Jerusalem,
  Found no great throne to dazzle his mother's eye.
  He was so good a workman ... axe and saw
  Did surely suit him better than a sword.
  I was content if only he would wed
  Some village girl of little Nazareth
  And get me children with his own slow smile,
  Deep thoughtful eyes and golden kingly brow.

  "It seems but yesterday he played among
  The shavings strewn on Joseph's work-shop floor.
  The sunlight of the morning slanted through
  The window--'t was in springtime--and across
  The bench where Joseph sat, and then it lay
  In golden glory on the boy's bright hair
  And on the shavings that were golden too.
  I saw him through the open door.  I thought,
  'My little king has found his golden crown.'
  But unto Joseph I said nought at all.

  "But now, ah me! he won no woman's love,
  Nor loved one either as most men call love,
  And so he had no child and he is gone
  And I am left without him and alone."

  So by her son's pale broken body mourned
  The mother, dreaming on departed days.
  And as with one who looks into the west,
  Watching the embers of the outburned day
  Crumble and cool and slowly droop and fade,
  And will not take the darkling eastward path
  Where lies his way until the last faint glow
  Has left the sky and the early stars shine forth,
  So did her dream cling to the ruined past
  And all the joy they had in Nazareth
  Before the years of doubt and trouble came.
  Then, while loud laughter sounded up the hill
  Where yet that ribald crew sang o'er the wine,
  She bowed her head above her cradling arms
  And softly sang, as to herself, the songs
  Of Israel that once had served her well
  To soothe the wakeful child.

                But Magdalen
  Arose upon her feet and tossed her cloak
  Back from the midnight of her wind-blown hair
  And lifted up her eyes into the dark
  As though, beyond this circle of all our woe,
  To read a hidden meaning in the stars.

  "Aye, it is dark," she said.  "The night comes on.
  He was the sunshine of our little day.
  The clouds unsettled softly and we saw
  Ladders of glory climbing into light
  Unspeakable, with dazzling interchange
  Of Majesties and Powers.  But suddenly
  The tides of darkness whelm us round again
  And this drear dwindled earth becomes once more
  What it has ever been--a core of shade
  And steaming vapor spinning in the dark,
  A deeper clot of blackness in the void!

  "The night comes on.  'T is hard to pierce the dark.
  And if to me who loved him, whom he loved--
  Though well thou sayest, 'Not as most men call love'--
  Far harder will it be for those who hold
  In memory no gesture of his hand,
  No haunting echo of his patient voice,
  Nor that dear trick of smiling with his eyes.

  "O ceaseless tramp of armies down the years!
  O maddened cries of 'Christ' and 'Son of Mary!'
  While o'er the crying screams the hurtling death....
  Thou gentle shepherd of the quiet fold,
  Mild man of sorrows, hast thou done this thing,
  Who camest not to bring peace but a sword?
  Ah no, not thou, but only our childishness,
  The pitifully childish heart of man
  That cannot learn and know beyond a little.

  "The priests and captains and the little kings
  Will tear each other at the throat and cry:
  'Thus said he, lived he; swear it or thou diest!'
  But these shall pass and perish in the dark
  While the lorn strays and outcasts of the world,
  The souls whose pain has seared their pride to dust
  And burned a way for love to enter in--
  These only know his meaning and shall live.

  "So is it as with one whose feet have trod
  The valley of the shadow, who has seen
  His dearest lowered into endless night.
  All music holds for him a deeper strain
  Of nobler meaning, and the flush of dawn,
  High wind at noonday, crumbling sunset gold,
  And the dear pathetic look of children's eyes--
  All beauty pierces closer to his heart.

  "Yea, thou thyself, pale youth upon the cross--
  The godlike strength of thee was rooted deep
  In human weakness.  Even she who bore thee,
  Seeing the man too nearly, missed the God,
  Erring as fits the mother.  Some will say
  In coming years, I feel it in my heart,
  That thou didst face thy death a conscious God,
  Knowing almighty hands were stretched to snatch
  And lift thee from the greedy clutching grave.
  Falsely!  Forgetting dark Gethsemane,--
  Not knowing, as I know, what doubt assailed
  Thy human heart until the latest breath.
  Ah, what a trumpery death, what mockery
  And mere theatric mimicry of pain,
  If thou didst surely know thou couldst not die!
  Thou didst not know.  And whether even now
  Thy straying ghost, like some great moth of night
  Blown seaward through the shadow, flies and drifts
  Along dim coasts and headlands of the dark,
  A homeless wanderer up and down the void,
  Or whether indeed thou art enthroned above
  In light and life, I know not.  This I know--
  That in the moment of sheer certainty
  My soul will die.

                "No!  On thy spirit lay
  All the dark weight and mystery of pain
  And all our human doubt and flickering hope,
  Deathless despairs and treasuries of tears,
  Gropings of spirit blindfold by the flesh
  And grapplings with the fiend.  Else were thy death
  Less like a God's than even mine may be.

  "Thou broken mother who canst see in him
  Only the quiet man, the needful child,
  And most of all the Babe of Bethlehem,
  Let it suffice thee.  Thy reward is great.
  Who loveth God that never hath loved man?
  Who knoweth man but cometh to know God?
  Thou sacred, sorrowing mother, canst thou learn--
  Thou who hast gone so softly in God's sight--
  Of me, the scarlet woman of old days?
  Come, let us talk together, thou and I.
  Apart, we see him darkly, through a glass;
  Together, we shall surely see aright.
  Bring thou thine innocence, thy stainless soul,
  And I will bring deep lore of suffering,
  My dear-bought wisdom of defeat and pain.
  For out of these may come, believe it thou,
  Sanctities not like thine, but fit to bear
  The bitter storms and whirlwinds of this world.
  Aye, out of evil often springeth good,
  And sweetest honey from the lion's mouth.
  And that he knew.  That very thing he meant
  When he withdrew me from the pits of shame.
  'T is I who see God shining through the man.
  I see the deity, the godlike strength
  In his supreme capacity for pain.
  Nor have I known the cruel love of men
  These many years to err when now I say
  This man loved not like men but like a God.
  Thou broken mother, weep not for the child,
  Mourn not the man.  Acclaim the risen Christ!"

  She turned and touched the other lovingly,
  Then stooped and peered into her darkened face.
  The mother slept, forspent and overborne
  By weariness and woe too great to bear.

  She gently smiled.  "So it is best," she said.

  Tall and elate she stood, her shadowy hair
  Blown back along the darkness and her eyes
  That searched the distant spaces of the night
  Splendid and glowing with an inward joy.
  And over that dark hill of tragedy
  And triumph, victory and dull despair,
  Over the sleeping Roman soldiery,
  Over the three stark crosses and the two
  Who loved Him most, the lily and the rose,
  Shone still and clear the great compassionate stars.




  THE END




NOTE

Some of these poems have been published before in _The Sunset Magazine,
The Smart Set, Munsey's Magazine, The Bellman, The International, The
Overland Monthly, The Youth's Companion, Poetry--A Magazine of Verse,
The Harvard Graduates' Magazine, The Book News Monthly, Current
Opinion, The Literary Digest, The Boston Transcript_, and the
_Anthologies of Magazine Verse_ for 1915 and 1916.  I wish to thank the
editors of those publications in which they originally appeared for
permission to reprint.




The Riverside Press

CAMBRIDGE . MASSACHUSETTS

U . S . A









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Lonely Flute, by Odell Shepard

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LONELY FLUTE ***

***** This file should be named 34234.txt or 34234.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/2/3/34234/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
