The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Chariot of Fire, by Elizabeth Stuart Phelps

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Chariot of Fire

Author: Elizabeth Stuart Phelps

Release Date: November 8, 2010 [EBook #34254]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A CHARIOT OF FIRE ***




Produced by Al Haines









[Illustration: Cover art]





[Frontispiece: "I'VE GOT TO GET TO GLOUCESTER, SIR!"]





A CHARIOT OF FIRE


BY

ELIZABETH STUART PHELPS



ILLUSTRATED




HARPER & BROTHERS PUBLISHERS

NEW YORK AND LONDON

MCMX




Copyright, 1905, 1910, by HARPER & BROTHERS

Published October, 1910.

_Printed in the United States of America_




ILLUSTRATIONS


"I've Got to Get to Gloucester, Sir!" . . . _Frontispiece_

The Flowers in the Front Yard were Knee-Deep in Snow




_A CHARIOT OF FIRE_


When the White Mountain express to Boston stopped at Beverly, it slowed
op reluctantly, crashed off the baggage, and dashed on with the
nervousness of a train that is unmercifully and unpardonably late.

It was a September night, and the channel of home-bound summer travel
was clogged and heaving.

A middle-aged man--a plain fellow, who was one of the Beverly
passengers--stood for a moment staring at the tracks.  The danger-light
from the rear of the onrushing train wavered before his eyes, and
looked like a splash of blood that was slowly wiped out by the night.
It was foggy, and the atmosphere clung like a sponge.

"No," he muttered, "it's the other way.  Batty's the other way."

He turned, facing towards the branch road which carries the great
current of North Shore life.

"How soon can I get to Gloucester?" he demanded of one who brushed
against him heavily.  He who answered proved to be of the baggage
staff, and was at that moment skilfully combining a frown and a whistle
behind a towering truck; from this two trunks and a dress-suit case
threatened to tumble on a bull-terrier leashed to something invisible,
and yelping in the darkness behind.

"Lord!  This makes 'leven dogs, cats to burn, twenty-one
baby-carriages, and a guinea-pig travellin' over this blamed road since
yesterday--What's that?  _Gloucester?_--6.45 to-morrow morning."

"Oh, but look here!" cried the plain passenger, "that won't do.  I have
got to get to Gloucester _to-night_."

"So's this bull-terrier," groaned the baggage-handler.  "He got
switched off without his folks--and I've got a pet lamb in the
baggage-room bleatin' at the corporation since dinner-time.  Some
galoot forgot the crittur.  There's a lost parrot settin' alongside
that swears in several foreign languages.  I wish to Moses I could!"

The passenger experienced the dull surprise of one in acute calamity
who wonders that another man can jest.  He turned without remark, and
went to the waiting-room; he limped a little, for he was slightly lame.
The ticket-master was locking the door of the office, and looked sleepy
and fagged.

"Where's the train to Gloucester?"

"Gone."

"'Tain't _gone_?"

"Gone half an hour ago."

The official pointed to the clock, on whose face an ominous expression
seemed to rest, and whose hands marked the hour of half-past twelve.

"But I have got to get to Gloucester!" answered the White Mountain
passenger.  "We had an accident.  We're late.  I ain't much used to
travellin'--I supposed they'd wait for us.  I tell you I've got to get
there!"

In his agitation he gripped the arm of the other, who threw the grasp
off instinctively.

"You'll have to walk, then.  You can't get anything now till the
newspaper train."

"God!" gasped the belated passenger.  "I've got a little boy.  He's
dying."

"Sho!" said the ticket-master.  "That's too bad.  Can you afford a
team?  You might try the stables.  There's one or two around here."

The ticket-master locked the doors of the station and walked away, but
did not go far.  A humane uneasiness disturbed him, and he returned to
see if he could be of any use to the afflicted passenger.

"I'll show you the way to the nearest," he began, kindly.

But the man had gone.

In the now dimly lighted town square he was, in fact, zigzagging about
alone, with the loping gait of a lame man in a feverish hurry.

"There must be hosses," he muttered, "and places.  Why, yes.  Here's
one, first thing."

Into the livery-stable he entered so heavily that he seemed to fall in.
His cheap straw hat was pushed back from his head; he was flushed, and
his eyes were too bright; his hair, which was red and coarse, lay
matted on his forehead.

"I want a team," he began, on a high, sharp key.  "I've got to get to
Gloucester.  The train's gone."

A sleepy groom, who scowled at him, turned on a suspicious heel.
"You're drunk.  It's fourteen miles.  It would cost you more'n you're
worth."

"I've got a little boy," repeated the lame man.  "He's dying."

The groom wheeled back.  "That so?  Why, that's a pity.  I'd like to
'commodate you.  See?  I'm here alone--see?  I darsen't go so far
without orders.  Boss is home and abed."

"He got hurt in an accident," pleaded the father.  "I come from up to
Conway.  I went to bury my uncle.  They sent me a telegraph about my
little boy.  I ain't drunk.  They sent me the telegraph.  I've got to
get home."

"I'll let you sleep here along of me," suggested the groom, "but I
daresn't leave.  I'm responsible to the boss.  There's other places you
might get one.  I'll show you.  See?  I'd try 'em all if I was you."

But again the man was gone.

By the time he had found another stable his manner had changed; he had
become deprecating, servile.  He entreated, he trembled; he flung his
emergency at the feet of the watchman; he reiterated his phrase:

"I've got a little boy, if you please.  He's dying.  I've got to get to
Gloucester--I live in Squam."

"I don't like to refuse you," protested the night-watchman, "but two of
my horses are lame, and one is plumb used up carrying summer folks.
I'm dreadful short.  I haven't a team to my name I could put on the
road to Gloucester.  It's--why, to Squam it's seventeen
miles--thirty-four the round trip.  It would cost you--"

"I'll pay!" cried the lame man; "I'll pay.  I ain't beggin'."

"I'm sorry I haven't got a horse," apologized the watchman.  "It would
cost you ten dollars if I had.  But I hain't."

"Ten _doll_ars?"  The traveller echoed the words stupidly.

"I'm sorry; fact, I am," urged the watchman.  "Won't you set 'n' rest a
spell?"

But the visitor had vanished from the office.


Twenty minutes after, the door-bell of a home in the old residence
portion of the town rang violently and pealed through the sleeping
house.

It was a comfortable, not a new-fashioned, house, sometimes leased to
summer citizens, and modernized in a measure for their convenience; one
of the few of its kind within reach of the station, and by no means
near.

When the master of the family had turned on all the burglar electricity
and could get the screen up, he put his head out of the window, and so
perceived on his door-step a huddled figure with a white, uplifted face.

A shaking voice came up:

"Sir?  Be you a gentleman?"

"I hope so," went down the quiet reply.  "But I can't remember that I
was ever asked that question at this time of morning before."

"Be you a Christian?" insisted the voice from below.

"Sometimes--perhaps," went down the voice from above.

The voice from below came up: "Sir!  Sir!  I'm in great trouble.  For
the love of Christ, sir, come down, quick!"

"Why, of course," said the voice from above.

The man stood quite still when the great bolts of the door shot through
their grooves.  Against a background of electric brilliance he saw a
gentleman in pajamas and bathrobe, with slippers as soft as a lady's on
his white feet.  The face of the gentleman was somewhat fixed and
guarded; his features were carefully cut, behind their heavy coat of
seaside tan.

"Well," he said, "that was a pretty solemn adjuration.  What is it?"

"I want to get a team," stammered the figure on the steps.  Suddenly,
somehow, his courage had begun to falter.  He felt the enormity of his
intrusion.  He came up against the mystery of social distinctions; his
great human emergency seemed to be distanced by the little thing men
call difference of class.

"You want--to get--a team?" repeated the gentleman; he spoke slowly,
without irritation.  "You have made a mistake.  This is not a
livery-stable."

"Livery-stable!" cried the intruder, with a swift and painful passion.
"I've tried three!  Fust one hadn't any boss.  Next one hadn't any
hoss.  It was ten dollars if he had.  Last one wanted 'leven dollars,
pay in advance.  I've got four dollars 'n' sixteen cents in my pocket.
I've been up to Conway to bury my uncle.  My folks sent me a telegraph.
My little boy--he's had an accident.  My train was late.  I've got to
get to Gloucester, sir.  So I thought," added the traveller, simply,
"I'd ask one of the neighbors.  Neighbors is most gener'lly kind.  Up
our way they be.  Sir--could you let me have a team to see my little
boy before--in case--he dies?"

"Come inside a minute," replied the gentleman.

The words, which had began shortly, ended softly.  "Perfectly sober,"
he thought.  His fingers stole to the button of a bell as the stranger
stepped into the hall.

"Yes--I'll send you over.  What's your name?"

"Dryver, sir.  Jacob Dryver."

"Where do you live?"

"Squam."

"Annisquam?  That is several miles beyond Gloucester.  Your trouble is
too swift for horses.  I have rung for my chauffeur.  I'll send you in
the automobile.  Be so good as to step around to the stables, Mr.
Dryver.  I'll join you outside."

Now the voice of a sleepy child could be heard overhead; it seemed to
be trying to say "Popper!  Popper!"  A woman's figure drifted to the
top of the padded stairs.  The intruder caught a gleam of delicate
white drapery floating with laces, closely gathered at the throat, and
held with one ringed hand--as if it had been hastily thrown on.  The
door shut, and the bolts shot again.  Jacob Dryver felt that he was at
once trusted and distrusted; he could not have said why he did not go
to the stables, but sat down on the broad granite steps.  His knees
hung apart; his elbows dropped to them; his face fell into his hands.

The child above continued to call: "Popper!  Popper!"  Then the little
voice trailed away.

"It's smaller 'n Batty," Jacob said.

When he lifted his head from his hands, up the curving avenue an
automobile was sweeping upon him.  Its acetylene lanterns blazed like
the eyes of some prehistoric thing; but this simple fellow knew nothing
about prehistoric things.  The lanterns reminded him of the living
creatures that Ezekiel saw.  Such imagination as he had was Biblically
trained, and leaped from Ezekiel to Elijah easily.

"It's a chariot of fire," thought Jacob Dryver, "comin' for to carry me
home."

As he gathered himself and went to meet the miracle, a dark figure,
encased in rubber armor from foot to head, brought the carriage to a
swift and artistic stop.

"Are you the shove-her?" asked Jacob, timidly.

"I am not the shove-her," replied the figure at the brake, "and I hope
I sha'n't have to be.  I am Mr. Chester.  My chauffeur is not at home,
I find.  I shall drive you to Annisquam myself."

"You're takin' some trouble, sir," said Jacob, slowly.  His head
reeled.  He felt that he was growing stupid under the whirlwind of
events.  He went down the long steps like a lame blind man.  As he did
so the bolts of the door behind him leaped back again, and the lady ran
down and slid into the automobile.  The fog glittered on the laces of
her white woollen garment.  Her husband thought of it as a negligee,
but Jacob called it a wrapper.  She was a dainty lady, and fair to look
upon; her hair lay in long, bright braids upon her shoulders; she had
caught up an automobile coat and cap, which she flung across her arm.
Dryver heard her say: "I shall be--a little anxious.  After all, you
know nothing about him.  Mayn't I go?"

"And leave Bert?  I don't think I would, Mary.  I've told James to sit
up and watch.  Draw the big bolt on top, and keep the lights all on.
If I have good luck I shall be back in less than two hours.  Good-bye,
Mary--dear."

The last word lingered with the caressing accent which only long-tried
marriage love ever puts into it.  The lips of the two met silently,
and, drooping, the lady melted away.  Jacob Dryver found himself in the
automobile, speeding down the avenue to the silent street.  He looked
back once at the house.  Every pane of glass was blazing as if the
building were on fire.

"You'll find it colder than you expect," observed Mr. Chester.  "I
brought along Thomas's coat.  Put it on--and hold on.  Never in one of
these before, were you?"

"N-no, sir," chattered Jacob Dryver.  "Thank you, sir.  I n-never was."

He clung to the side of the seat desperately.  In fact, he was very
much frightened.  But he would have gone under the heavy wheels before
he would have owned it.  Spinning through the deserted Beverly streets
the automobile took what seemed to him a startling pace.

"I'm going slowly till we get out of town," remarked Mr. Chester.
"Once on the Manchester road I'll let her out a bit."

Jacob made no reply.  What had seemed to be fog drenched and drowned
him now like driving rain.  There had been no wind, but now the powers
and principalities of the air were let loose.  He gasped for breath,
which was driven down his throat.  That made him think of Batty, whom,
for the moment, he had actually forgotten.  When people died--they
could not--  Had Batty--by this time--it was so long--should he find
that Batty--

"What ails your boy?" asked the half-invisible figure from the depths
of its rubber armor.

"I had a telegraph," said Jacob, monotonously.  "I never was away from
home so far--I ain't used to travellin'.  I supposed the train would
wait for the accident.  The telegraph said he was hurt bad.  I got it
just as the fun'ril was leavin' the house.  I had to quit it, corpse
'n' all--for Batty.  I ran all the way to the depot.  I just got
aboard, and here I be becalmed all night--and there is Batty.--His name
is Batwing," added the father.  "He was named after the uncle I went to
bury.  But we call him Batty."

"Any more children?" inquired Mr. Chester, in the cultivated,
compassionate voice which at once attracted and estranged the breaking
heart of Jacob Dryver.

"We haven't only Batty, sir," he choked.

The hand on the lever tightened; the throttle opened; the dark figure
in the rubber coat bent, and its muscles turned to iron.  The
automobile began to rock and fly.  It was now whirling out upon the
silent, sleeping road that goes by the great houses of the North Shore.

"I'll let her out a little," said Mr. Chester, quietly.  "Don't worry.
We'll get there before you know it."

The car took on a considerable pace.  Jacob's best straw hat flew off,
but he did not mention it.  His red hair stood endwise, all ways, on
his head; his eyes started; his hands gripped--one at the rail, one at
the knee of his companion.  The wind raised by the motion of the car
became a gale and forced itself into his lungs.  Jacob gasped:

"It's--on account--of Batty."

"I have a little boy of my own," observed Mr. Chester.  Plainly
thinking to divert the attention of the anguished father, he continued:
"_He_ had an accident this summer--he was hurt by a scythe; he slipped
away from his nurse.  He was pretty badly hurt.  I was away--I hurried
from Bar Harbor to get to him.  I think I know how you feel."

"Did you have a telegraph, sir?" asked Dryver, rousing to the throb of
the common human poise.

"Yes, there was a telegram.  But I was a good while getting it.  I
understand your position."

"Did he ever get over it--your little boy?  Oh, I see; that was him I
heard.  'Popper,' he says--'Popper.'"

Above the whir of the automobile, above the chatter of the exhaust,
above the voice of the wind, the sound of a man's muffled groan came
distinctly to the ear that was fine enough to hear it.

"Trust me," said Chester, gently.  "I'll get you there.  I'll get you
to your boy."

The gentleman's face was almost as white now as Jacob Dryver's.  The
fog glistened upon his mustache and made him look a gray-haired man, as
he emerged from gulfs of darkness and shot by widely scattered dim
street lamps.  Both men had acquired something of the same
expression--the rude face and the finished one; both wore the solemn,
elemental look of fatherhood.

The heart of one repeated piteously: "It's Batty."

But the other thought: "What if it were Bert?"

"I'll let her out a little more," repeated Chester.  The car throbbed
and rocked to the words.

"How do you like my machine?" he added, in a comfortable voice.  He
felt that the mercury of emotion had mounted too far.  "Mrs. Chester
has named her," he proceeded.  "We call her Aurora."

"Hey?"

"We've named the machine Aurora, I said."

"'Roarer,' sir?"

"Oh, well, that will do--'Roarer,' if you like.  That isn't bad.  It's
an improvement, perhaps.  By-the-way, how did you happen on my place
to-night?  There are a good many nearer the station; you had quite a
walk."

"I see a little pair o' reins an' bells in the grass alongside--such as
little boys play horse with.  We had one once for Batty, sir."

"_Ah_!  Was that it?  What's your business, Dryver?  You haven't told
me.  Do you fish?"

"Winters, I make paving-stones.  Summers, I raise vegetables," replied
Jacob Dryver.  "I'm a kind of a quarry-farmer.  My woman she plants
flowers for the summer folks, and Batty bunches 'em up and delivers
'em.  Batty--he--God!  My God!  Mebbe there _ain't any Batty_--"

The sentence broke.  In truth, it would have been hard to find its
remnants in the sudden onset of sound made by the motion of the machine.

The car was freed now to the limit of her mighty strength.  She took
great leaps like those of a living heart that is overexcited.
Powerfully, perfectly, without let or hindrance, without flaw or
accident, the chariot of fire bounded through the night.  A trail of
smoke like the tail of a comet followed her.  The dark scenery of the
guarded shore flew by; Montserrat was behind; Prides' was gone; the
Farms blew past.

They were now well out upon the beautiful, silent Manchester road,
where the woods, solemn at noonday, are sinister at dead of night.  The
automobile, flying through them, encountered no answering sign of life.
Both men had ceased to speak.  Awe fell upon them, as if in the
presence of more than natural things.  Once it seemed to Dryver as if
he saw a boy running beside the machine--a little fellow, white, like a
spirit, and, like a spirit, silent.  Chester's hands had stiffened to
the throttle; his face had the stern rigidity of those on whom life or
human souls absolutely depend.  Neither man spoke now aloud.

To himself Jacob Dryver repeated: "It's Batty!  It's my Batty!"

And Hurlburt Chester thought: "What if it were Bert?"

Now the great arms of the sea began to open visibly before them.  The
fog on their lips grew salter, and they seemed to have entered the Cave
of the Winds.  Slender beach and sturdy headland slid by.  West
Manchester, Manchester, Magnolia rushed past.  In the Magnolia woods
they lost the sea again; but the bell-buoy called from Norman's Woe,
and they could hear the moan of the whistling-buoy off Eastern Point.
In the Cape Ann Light the fog bell was tolling.

At the pace which the car was taking there was an element of danger in
the situation which Jacob Dryver could not measure, since he feared
safety ignorantly and met peril with composure.  Chester reduced the
speed a little, and yet a little more, but pushed on steadily.  Once
Jacob spoke.

"I'll bet your shove-her couldn't drive like you do," he said, proudly.

Fresh Water Cove slipped by; Old Stage Fort was behind; the Aurora
bumped over the pavement of the Cut, and reeled through the rough and
narrow streets of Gloucester.  He of Beverly was familiar with the
route, and asked no questions.  The car, now tangled among electric
tracks, swung around the angle from Main Street carefully, jarred
across the railroad, and took the winding, dim road to Annisquam.

Bay View flew behind--the bridge--the village--the pretty arcade known
as Squam Willows.  The automobile dashed into it and out of it as if it
were a tunnel.  Then Dryver gripped the other's arm and, without a
word, pointed.

The car followed the guidance of his shaking finger, and, like a
conscious creature, swung to a startling stop.

There were lights in the quarryman's cottage, and shadows stirred
against drawn shades.  Jacob Dryver tumbled out and ran.  He did not
speak, nor by a gesture thank his Beverly "neighbor."  Chester slowly
unbuttoned his rubber coat and got at his watch.  The Aurora had
covered the distance--in dark and fog, over seventeen miles--in
fifty-six minutes.  Now, Jacob, dashing in, had left the door open, and
Chester, as he put his watch back into its pocket, heard that which
sent the blood driving through his arteries as the power had driven the
pumps of the car.  The sound that he heard was the fretful moan of a
hurt child.

As he had admitted, he was a Christian--sometimes; and he said, "Oh,
thank God!" with all his generous heart.  Indeed, as he did so, he took
off his heavy cap and bared his head.

Then he heard the sobbing of a shaken man close beside him.

"Sir!  Oh, sir!  The God of Everlastin' bless you, sir.  Won't you come
and look at him?"


Batty lay quietly; he had put his little fingers in his father's hand;
he did not notice the stranger.  The boy's mother, painfully poised on
one elbow in the position that mothers take when they watch sick
children, lay upon the other side of the bed.  She was a large woman,
with a plain, good face.  She had on a polka-dotted, blue cotton
wrapper which nobody called a negligee.  Her mute, maternal eyes went
to the face of the visitor and reverted to the child.

There was a physician in the room--a very young, to the trained eye an
inexperienced, man; in fact, the medical situation was unpromising and
complicated.  It took Chester but a few moments to gauge it, and to
perceive that his mission to this afflicted household had not ended
with a lost night's sleep and an automobile record.

The local doctor, it seemed, was away from home when Batty's accident
befell; the Gloucester surgeon was ill; some one had proposed the
hospital, but the mother had the prejudices of her class.  A neighbor
had suggested this young man--a new-comer to the town--one of the
flotsam practitioners who drift and disappear.  Recommended upon the
ground that he had successfully prescribed headache pills to a Swedish
cook, this stranger had received into his unskilled hands the emergency
of a dangerously wounded lad.  The accident, in fact, was more serious
than Chester had supposed.  He had now been told that the child was
crushed by an automobile racing through Annisquam Willows the day
before.

The boy, it was plain, was sorely hurt, and ignorant suffering lay at
the mercy of ignorant treatment, in the hopeless and helpless
subjection to medical etiquette which costs so many lives.

"Dryver," said Chester, quietly, "you need a surgeon here at once.
Your physician is quite willing to consult with any one you may call."
He shot one stern glance at the young doctor, who quavered a frightened
assent.  "I know a distinguished surgeon--he is a friend of mine; it
was he who saved my boy in that accident I told you of, this summer.
He is not far away; he is at a hotel on Eastern Point.  I can have him
here in twenty--well, say twenty-five minutes.  Of course, we must wait
for him to dress."

The woman raised her head and stared upon the gentleman.  One swift,
brilliant gleam shot from her heavy eyes.  She had read of angels in
the Bible.  She had noticed, indeed, that they were men angels.  But
she had never heard of one in a rubber touring-coat, drenched from head
to foot with fog, spattered from foot to head with mud, and with a
wedding-ring upon his fine hand.

Jacob Dryver began: "Sir!  The God of Everlastin'--" but he sobbed so
that he could not finish what he would have said.  So Chester went out
and oiled the Aurora, opened the throttle, and started off again, and
dashed through the rude streets of Gloucester to her summer shore.

Dawn was rose-gray over Eastern Point, and the tide had turned upon the
harbor, when the "Roarer" curved up quietly to the piazza of the hotel.

It was rose-gray upon Annisquam, and the tide was rising up the river,
when the great surgeon went into the little place where the lad lay
fighting for his mangled life.  There had been some delay in rousing
the sleeper--it was a trip of six rough miles twice taken--and it was
thirty-five minutes before his "merciless merciful" hands went to work
upon the mortal need of the boy.

The child had been crushed across the hips and body, and only an
experienced or only an eminent skill could have saved the little fellow.


In the blossoming day Jacob Dryver limped out and stood in the front
yard among his wife's flowers that Batty "bunched up" and sold to
summer people.  He could not perceive the scent of the flowers--only
that of the ether.  His big boot caught in a sweet-pea vine and tore
it.  One of the famous carmine dahlias of Cape Ann seemed to turn its
large face and gaze at him.

An old neighbor--a cross-eyed lobsterer, going to his traps--came by,
cast a shrewd look, and asked how the boy was.  Jacob did not reply to
the lobsterer; he lifted his wet eyes to the sky, then they fell to a
bed of blazing nasturtiums, which seemed to smoke before them.  His
lips tried to form the words which close like a strangling hand upon
the throat of the poor in all the emergencies of life.  Till he has
answered this question a poor man may not love a woman or rear a child;
he may not bury his dead or save his living.

"_What will it cost?_" asked Jacob Dryver.  He looked piteously at the
great surgeon, whose lips parted to speak.  But Hurlburt Chester raised
an imperious hand.

"That," he said, "is my affair."


It was broad, bright day when the Aurora came whirring home.  Chester
nodded to his wife at the window, but went directly to the stables.  It
was a little longer than she expected before he returned.  She waited
at the head of the stairs, then hurried half-way down to meet him.  Her
white robe was ungirdled and flowing; it fell apart--the laces above
from the laces below--and the tired man's kiss fell upon her soft
throat.

She was naturally a worrier in a sweet-natured way, but he had always
been patient with her little weakness; some men are, with anxious women.

"No," he smiled, but rather feebly; "you've missed it again.  The boy
is saved.  St. Clair's got hold of him.  I'll talk presently, Mary--not
just now."

In fact, he would say no more till he had bathed and taken food.  He
looked so exhausted that she brought his breakfast to his bed, serving
it with her own hands, and asking no questions at all; for, although
she worried, she was wise.  She sent for the baby, too--a big baby,
three years old--and Chester enfolded the chin of the child in his
slender brown hand silently.

Then he said: "Lock the door, Mary.  I've something to tell you."

When she had drawn the brass bolt and returned, somewhat pale herself
with wonder and alarm, to the side of the bed, her husband spoke
abruptly:

"Mary, you've got to know it--may as well have it over.  I found this
pinned on the stable wall.  It was the Aurora that ran over
the--that--that poor little fellow."

His hand shook as he laid the piece of paper in her own.  And while she
read it he covered his face; for he was greatly over-worn, and the
strain which he had undergone seemed now to have leaped again with the
spring of a creature that one supposes one has left lifeless behind.

Mrs. Chester read the writing and laid it down.  It ran like this:


MR. CHESTER:

Sir,--Ime goin away while I can.  It was me run over that boy while you
was in town.  I took Her out for a spin.  I let Her out some racin with
another one in the Willows an he got under Her someways.  I see it in
the papers so I was afraid of manslorter.  Ime awful cut up about it so
Ime goin to lite out while I can.

Your obedient servant,
  THOMAS.


The eyes of the husband and wife met silently.  She was the first to
speak.

"Do they know?"

Chester shook his head.

"You'll tell them, of course?"

"I haven't made up my mind."

The baby was jabbering loudly on the bed--he was very noisy; it was not
easy for her to hear what was said.

"I'm sure you ought to tell them!" she cried, passionately.

"Perhaps so.  But I'd like to think it over."

A subtle terror slid over her face.  "What can they do to you?  I don't
know about such things.  Is there any--law?"

"Laws enough--laws in plenty.  But I'm not answerable for the crimes of
my chauffeur.  It's only a question of damages."

The wife of the rich man drew a long breath.  "Oh, if it's nothing but
_money_!"

"Not that it would make any difference if they _could_ touch me," he
continued, with a proud motion of his tired head.  "It's purely a
question of feeling--it's a question of right within a right, Mary.
It's to do what is really kind by these people--  Why, Mary, if you
could have seen it!  From beginning to end it was the most beautiful,
the most wonderful thing.  Nothing of the kind ever happened to me
before.  Mary, if an angel from the throne of God had done it--they
couldn't have felt--they couldn't have treated me--it was enough to
make a fellow a better man the rest of his days.  Why, it was worth
_living_ for, I tell you! ... And now to let them know..."

Hurlburt Chester was very tired, as we say.  He choked, and hid his
pale face in his pillow.  And his wife laid hers beside it and
cried--as women do--without pretending that she didn't.  But the baby
laughed aloud.  And then there drove through the father's mind the
repeated phrase which followed the race of the "Roarer" all the way
from Beverly to Annisquam:

"What if it were Bert?"

Chester's head whirled yet from the fatigue and jar of the trip, and
the words seemed to take leaps through his brain as the car leaped when
she was at the top of her great speed.  So he kissed the child, and
dashed a drop from his cheek quite openly--since only Mary saw.


A constraint unusual to their candid relations breathed like a fog
between the husband and the wife; indeed, it did not lift altogether as
the autumn opened and closed.

Chester's visits to Annisquam (in which she once or twice accompanied
him) were many and merciful; and the distinguished surgeon took the
responsibility of the case till the boy was quite convalescent.  The
lad recovered slowly, but St. Clair promised that the cure would be
complete.

The touching gratitude of Jacob Dryver amounted to an idealization such
as the comfortable, undramatic life of Chester had never experienced.
He seemed to swim in it as an imaginative person dreams of swimming in
the air, tree-high above the heads of the crowd on the earth.  The
situation had become to him a fine intoxicant--but it had its
reactions, as intoxicants must.

September and October burned to ashes upon the North Shore.  Fire of
maple, flash of sumac, torch of elder, flare of ivy, faded into brown
November, and the breakers off the Beverly coast took on the greens and
blues of north-wind weather below the line of silver surf.

The Chesters closed "their own hired house" and moved to town.  The
Aurora remained in her stable, nor had she left it since the morning
when she came wearily back from Annisquam.

His wife had noticed, but had not seemed to notice, that Chester rode
no more that fall.  She noted too, but did not seem to note, that he
continued his visits to the injured lad after they had returned to the
city.

On all the great holidays he made a point of going down--Thanksgiving,
Christmas, and New-Year's Day.  Mrs. Chester had wished to duplicate
for the quarryman's boy the Christmas gifts of her own child (such had
been her pretty fancy), but Batty was quite a lad--ten years old; and
Bert, like a spoiled collie, was yet a baby, and likely to remain so
for some time to come.  So the mother contented herself, perforce, with
less intimate remembrances.  Once, when she had packed a box of
miracles--toys and books, clothes and candy--she thrust it from her
with a cry: "They would never touch these--if they knew!  Hurlburt!
Hurlburt! don't you think they ought to know?"

"Do what you think best, Mary," he said, wearily.  "I have never been
able to decide that question.  But you are free to do so if you prefer."

He regarded her with an expression that went to her heart.  She flung
herself into his arms and tried to kiss it away.

Now, Mary Chester, as we have said, was a worrier, and the worrier
never lets a subject go.  As the winter set in, her mind closed about
the matter which had troubled her, and it began to become unbearable,
like a foreign substance in the flesh.

On a January afternoon--it was one of those dark days when souls cloud
over--she flung on her furs, and leaving a pencilled line to her
husband saying what she had done, she took the train to Gloucester, and
a dreary electric-car to Annisquam.

The flowers in the front yard were knee-deep in snow, and Batty sat in
the window busy with a Sorrento wood-saw of her providing.  He laughed
outright when he saw her, and his mother flung open the door as if she
had flung open her heart.

[Illustration: THE FLOWERS IN THE FRONT YARD WERE KNEE-DEEP IN SNOW]

"Land!" she cried.  "In all this snow!"

She finished tying a fresh white apron over her polka-dotted blue
wrapper, and joyously led the lady in.

Batty was a freckled little fellow, with red hair like his father's; he
had the pretty imperiousness of a sick and only child who has by all
the sorceries contrived to escape petulance.  When he had greeted the
visitor, he ran back to his jig-saw.  He was carving camwood, which
stained his fingers crimson.

"I want to see you--alone," began Mrs. Chester, nervously.  It had been
one of Chester's pleasures to warm the entire house for the
convalescent lad, and big coal fires were purring in Batty's bedroom
and in the ten-foot "parlor," whither his mother conducted her guest.
The doors were left open.  The scent of the camwood came across,
pungent and sickening.  The fret of the jig-saw went on steadily.

"He's makin' a paper-cutter--for Mr. Chester," observed Batty's mother.
"He made a watch-case last week--for Mr. Chester."

Mary Chester paled, and she plunged at once:

"There's something I've come to tell--I've _got_ to tell you.  We can't
keep it to ourselves any longer.  I have come to tell you how it
happened--that Batty--  We thought you'd rather not know--"

"Lord! my dear," said the quarryman's wife, "we've known it all the
while."

The visitor's head swam.  She laid it down upon her gloved hands on
Mrs. Dryver's centre-table.  This had a marble top, and felt as the
quarries look in winter on Cape Ann.  What were tears that they should
warm it?  The sound of the jig-saw grew uneven and stopped.

"Hush!" said the boy's mother.  "_Batty_ don't know; he's the only one
that don't."

She tiptoed and shut the doors.

"You never seen Peter Trawl, did you?  He's a
neighbor--cross-eyed--sells lobsters--well, it was him picked Batty up
to the Willows that day.  So he seen the number runnin' away, an' so he
told.  We've known it from fust to last, my dear."

"And never spoke!" said Mary Chester.  "And never spoke!"

"What's the use of jabberin'?" asked Batty's mother.  "We thought Mr.
Chester 'd feel so bad," she added.  "We thought he didn't know."

The worrier began to laugh, then cry--first this, then that; for her
nerves gave way beneath her.  She sat humbly in her rich furs before
the quarryman's wife.  She felt that these plain people had outdone her
in nobility, as they had rivalled her in delicacy--her, and Hurlburt,
too.

"Oh, come and see my baby!" she cried.  It was the only thing that
occurred to her to say.

Now at that moment Batty gave a little yelp of ecstasy, threw down his
jig-saw, and got to the front door.  His father was there, stamping off
the snow, and the lad's idol, his ideal, his man angel, stood upon the
threshold--nervous, for an angel, and with an anxious look.

But when the two men saw the women crying together upon the quarry-cold
centre-table, they clasped hands and said nothing at all.




THE END










End of Project Gutenberg's A Chariot of Fire, by Elizabeth Stuart Phelps

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A CHARIOT OF FIRE ***

***** This file should be named 34254.txt or 34254.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/2/5/34254/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
