The Project Gutenberg EBook of Hocus Pocus Junior: The Anatomie of
Legerdemain, by Unknown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Hocus Pocus Junior: The Anatomie of Legerdemain
       The art of jugling set forth in his proper colours, fully,
       plainly, and exactly, so that an ignorant person may thereby
       learn the full perfection of the same, after a little
       practise.

Author: Unknown

Release Date: November 20, 2010 [EBook #34375]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOCUS POCUS JUNIOR: LEGERDEMAIN ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by the Library of Congress)









[Illustration]




                             HOCVS
                             POCVS
                            IVNIOR.

                       _The Anatomie of_
                          LEGERDEMAIN.

                             _OR_,

    The Art of Iugling set forth in his proper colours, fully,
    plainly, and exactly, so that an ignorant person may thereby
    learn the full perfection of the same, after a little practise.

    Vnto each Tricke is added the figure, where it is needfull for
    instruction.

            _The second Edition, with many additions._

                 Prestat nihili quam nihil facere.

                          [Illustration]

                             _LONDON_,

                Printed by _T. H._ for _R. M._ 1635.




[Illustration]


To the Reader.


_COurteous Reader, doe you not wonder? if you doe not, well you may, to
see so slight a Pamphlet so quickly spent; but lightly come, and lightly
goe; it's a Iuglers terme, and it well befits the subiect. Would you
know whence it first came? why, from =Bartholomew= Fayre: would you know
whither it's bent? for the Fayre againe; it's a stragler, a wanderer,
and as I said, as it lightly comes, so it lightly goes; for it meanes to
see not onely =Bartholomew= Fayre, but all the Fayres in the Kingdome
also, and therefore in the front, =Hiccius Doccius= is the Post-master,
and what he wants there, I'le give him here, a word or two of command, a
terme of art, not so much substantiall as circumstantiall, =Celeriter,
vade=, over hedges and ditches, thorow thicke and thin, to come to your
Fayres. Rome for a Iugler: all in post, yet with a desire to give you
full satisfaction. If you like it, then buy it and reade it, if
otherwise, leave it for them that list._

Farewell.




[Illustration]




    _The Art of_
    LEGERDEMAINE
    Discovered.


_The originall of =Legerdemaine=, and how it came first into this
Kingdome._

IT came first into the Kingdome by certain AEgyptians, that were
transported hither, who growing to numerous multitudes, dispersed
themselues thorow most parts of the Kingdome: who being most expert in
this art, and in Palmestrie, cousened the people in all parts
wheresoeuer they came. Now diuers vagrant English joyning with them in
time learnt both their language and cousening delusions, whereby at
length they were discovered, and thereupon the next ensuing Parliament,
there was a statute enacted: that whosoeuer should transport an
Egyptian, should have a Fine imposed upon him; Moreouer, that whosoever
should assume unto themselves the names of AEgyptians, it should be
imputed unto them as fellonie, in so high a degree, that they might not
haue their Booke granted unto them, which statute was put in execution,
and since that time our Kingdome hath beene well disburdened of those
AEgyptian Iuglers.


_The Definition of the Art of =Legerdemain=, with its principall parts._

_LEgerdemaine_ is an operation, whereby one may seeme to worke
wonderfull, impossible, and incredible things by agility, nimblenesse,
and slightnesse of hand. The parts of this Art are principally two. The
first is in the conveyance of Balls, Cards, Dice, Money, &c. The second
is in Confederacie.


_The end of the Art of =Legerdemaine=._

THe end of this Art is either good or bad, accordingly as it is used:
Good, and lawfull when it is used at Festivals, and merry meetings to
procure mirth: especially if it be done without desire of estimation
above what we are. Bad, and altogether unlawfull when it is used on
purpose, to cozen, deceive, or for vaine glory to esteemed above what is
meet and honest.


_The Definition, or description of the Operator._

FIrst, hee must be one of an impudent and audacious spirit, so that hee
may set a good face upon the matter.

Secondly, he must have a nimble and cleanly conveance.

Thirdly, he must have strange termes, and emphaticall words, to grace
and adorne his actions, and the more to astonish the beholders.

Fourthly, and lastly, such gesture of body as may leade away the
spectators eyes from a strict and diligent beholding his manner of
conveyance.


_Of the Play of the Balls._

THe Operator thus qualified must have his Implements of purpose to play
withall: and first he must have three Cups, made of brasse, or Crooked
lane plate:

[Illustration]

These Cups must be all of one sise, and the bottome of each
of them must bee set a little within the cup; marke the following
figure, for thereby they are truely represented, both in forme and
bignesse: it is noted with the letter B. Also he must have foure Bals,
made of Corke about the bignesse of small Nutmegs. First, he must
practise to hold these Cork balls, two or three of them at once in one
hand. The best place, and the readiest to hold one ball is betweene the
ball of the thumbe, and the palme of the hand; but if you hold more than
one at one time, betweene your fingers towards the bottoms. The place to
hold a great ball is betweene your two middle fingers. Remember in your
play alwaies to keep the palme of your hand downeward: After you have
once learned to hold these balls handsomely, you may worke divers
strange, and delightfull feats.

[Sidenote: Some I have seene sit with their Codpiece open, others play
standing with a budget hanging before them, but all comes to one end.

Some feats may with more grace be performed stading then sitting. The
manner of holding the cups will conceale the ball that you retein in
your hand.]

But whether you seeme to cast your ball in the ayre, or into your mouth,
or into your other hand, yet still retaine it in the same hand, still
remembring to keepe the palme of your hand downeward, and out of sight.
Now to begin:

He that is to play must sit on the farther side of a Table, which must
be covered with a carpet: partly to keepe the balls from rolling away,
and partly to keepe them from ratling: likewise hee must set his hat in
his lap, or sit in such manner as that hee may receive any thing into
his lap, and let him cause all his spectators to sit downe: Then let him
draw his foure balls, and lay three of them upon the table, (and retain
the fourth in his right hand) and say, Gentlemen, here are three bals
you see, 1. _Meredin_, 2. _Benedic_, and 3. _Presto Iohn_, then let him
draw his cups and hold them all three in his right hand also, saying,
Here are also three Cups, saying, See there's nothing in them, neither
have they any false bottoms:

[Illustration]

Then say, See I will set them all on a row, and clap them all on a row,
& in clapping them downe, convey the ball that you reteined under the
middlemost cup, saying as you set them downe, Nothing there, there, nor
there. Then shew your hands, and say, Gentlemen, you see here is nothing
in my hands, and say, Now to begin, and take up with your right hand one
of the three bals that you layed downe, and say this is the first, and
with that seeme to put it into your left hand, and presently shut your
left hand, and being shut, clap it unto your eare, saying, This is for
the purging of the braine, _Presto_ bee gone, then move both the utmost
cups (noted with A, and B.) with both your hands, saying, And there is
nothing there nor there, and in the clapping them downe, conveigh the
ball in your right hand under the Cup noted B.

[Illustration]

Then with your right hand take up the second ball, and seeme to put it
into the left hand (but reteine it) shutting your left hand in due time:
then clap your left hand unto your mouth, seeme to suppe the ball out of
your hand, and make a face as if you swallowed it, then say, _Presto_,
and that's gone you see, and with your right hand move the cup noted A,
saying, And there is nothing, and in clapping it downe convey the ball
you reteined, under it, so have you conveyed into each cup a ball.

[Illustration]

Then with your right hand take up the third Ball, and seeme to put it
into your left hand, shutting it in due time, and then reach it out from
you saying, _vade_, _couragious_, and open your hand, and blow a blast,
looking up as if you saw it flying away, and say _passa couragious_, and
that's gone: then take up the cups one after another, and say,
neverthelesse Gentlemen, there is one, there is two, and there is all
three againe: Then cover them and say, see you Gentlemen, I will cover
them all againe. Then say now for the first, then with your right hand
take up the first cup, & with your left hand take up the ball that is
under it, saying, see, I take him out, and in setting downe the cup
againe, convey the ball in your right hand under it, then with your
right hand take the ball out of your left hand, seeme to put it into
your pocket (but retaine it) saying, _vade_, that's gone into my pocket
you see, then take up with your right hand the second cup, and with your
left hand take the ball from under it, and say, see, I take this out
fairely also, and in setting downe the cup, convey the ball that you
retained under it, and then with your right hand take the ball out of
your left, and seeme to put it into your pocket, (but retaine it)
saying, _Iubeo_, and that's gone into my pocket: then with your right
hand take up the third and last cup, and with your left hand take the
ball from under it, and say, here I take my last out, and in setting
downe the cup, convey the ball that is in your right hand under it, and
then with your right hand take the ball out of your left hand, and seeme
to put it into your pocket (but retaine it) and say _vade_, 'tis gone
into my pocket;

[Illustration]

then take up your cups orderly, saying, Gentlemen, here is one you see,
here is two, and here is all three again; and in setting downe the last
cup noted _A_ convey the ball that you retained in your hand under it.

[Illustration]

Then take up one of the three bals with your right hand, and seeme to
put it under the cup _B_, but retaine it, and then say by the powder of
experience, _Iubeo_, come away when I bid you under this cup _A_, then
take up _B_, and say, see you sirs, hee scornes to tarry under this cup,
but is crept under here: then take the cup _A_. and they will wonder how
it came thither. Then say Gentlemen, and you see here is but one, and in
setting it downe, convey that in your right hand under it, then with
your right hand take up the second Ball, and seeme to put it into your
left hand, shutting your left hand in due time:

[Illustration]

then hold your said left hand from off you, and pronounce these words
with a _Revoca stivoca_ (open your hand tossing it up) that's gone, then
take up the cup A, and say, see here they are got both together; Then
say here are but two, and in setting it down, convey the ball you
retained in your right hand under it.

[Illustration]

Then with your right hand take up the third ball, and seeme to put it
into your left hand, and shutting it in due time, saying, this is my
last Ball, _vade passa couragious_, (open your hand then, tossing it up,
and staring after it) and that's gone you see, then take up the cup A,
and say, here they are all three againe.

Set your cups then all on a row againe, and under one of them, as D,
conveigh your fourth ball which you retained in your hand, and lay the
other three balls by.

[Illustration]

Then with your right hand take up the first ball, and seeme to put it
into your left hand, shutting your said left hand in due time, then as
if you were at dice, cast your left hand at the cup D, and blow after
it, saying, _vade pas_, and 'tis gone, then take up the cup noted A, and
clap it upon the cup D, and in clapping it on, convey the ball you
retained in your right hand upon the top of the cup D.

[Illustration]

Then take up the second ball with your right hand, and seeme to put it
into your left, shutting it in due time, and as you did before: now in
like manner seeme to make the same to vanish with a word of command,
then take up the cup C, and clap it upon the cup A, and in clapping it
on, convey the ball you retained in your right hand, upon the top of the
cup noted A,

[Illustration]

So then you have conveyed under each cup a ball, then take up the third
ball, seeming to vanish it as the two former, but retaine it, then shew
them under each cup one, which will be very strange.

Then take one cup in your right hand, and clap it upon another, saying,
see Gentlemen I will set you one cup upon another, and in clapping it
on, convey the ball you retained in your right hand upon the top of the
lowermost cup: marke the figure following.

[Illustration]

Then take up one ball, and seeme to cast it in the ayre, and staring
after it, say, _vade_, that's gone, then with your right hand take up
the uppermost cup, say, see here he is crept betweene my cups, and in
clapping it downe againe, convey the ball that you retained under it.

[Illustration]

Then with your right hand take up the second ball, and seeme to put it
into your left hand, shutting it in due time: then open your left hand,
tossing it, say, _vade_, and that's gone, then with your right hand take
up the uppermost cup, and say, doe you see Gentlemen, they are snug'd
like a yong man and a Maid in bed together, and in setting it down,
convey the ball that you retain.

[Illustration]

Then with your right hand take up the third ball, and seeme to put it in
your left hand, but retain it, shutting your left hand in due time: then
hold it from you, and then open your hand, tossing it up, and gaping
after it, say, _Mountifilede_, mount, thats gone, and then take up the
cup and say, here are all three againe. Then cover them againe, and say
single is nothing, then clap the third cup upon them, saying, but double
is somewhat.

[Illustration]

Then may you seeme to pull all the three corks out of the top of the
upper cup, causing them to vanish one after another, as I have
sufficiently taught you before, which may be performed by that one ball
that you reteine in your right hand.

And lastly, take the uppermost cup, and set it down first by it selfe,
then with both hands nimbly hosting the two other cups, shuffle them one
upon another, and the bals will not fall out, and so it will be thought
that you have pulled the three bals out of the bottomes of the two
uppermost cups. I could teach you to vary these feats a hundred wayes,
but I leave that to those that intend to follow the trade.


_How to make a great Ball seeme to come through a Table into a Cup._

SEt one of your cups upon a Table, and take a good big stoole-ball out
of your pocket, and say, clapping your hand with the ball in it under
the Table, My masters would you not think it a pretty trick that I
should make this ball come thorow the table into the cup:

[Illustration]

Then some one or other will take up the cup to see if it be so; then
holding the ball betweene your two middle fingers of your right hand,
stare him in the face, and say nay but you must not move my cup out of
its place, while I have said my words of command: with that set your cup
in its former place, and in setting it downe nimbly, convey the ball
under it, and say, _Hei Fortuna nunquam credo, vade couragious_: Now see
(say) if it be there or not, which when they see they will imagine was
conjured into it by vertue of your words.


_Other very pretty tricks with Bals._

REtaine one small ball in your hand, and lay three other small bals upon
the table: then with your right hand take up one of the three bals, and
put into your left hand, saying, There is one, then take up the second,
and put that into your left hand also, and therewith likewise put the
ball you retained in your right hand, saying, And there is two (yet you
know there is three already) and shut your hand in due time: then take
up the third ball in your right hand, and clap your right hand unto the
upper part of your left arme, retaining the ball firmely pronounce these
words: _Iubeo celeriter_, come all into my hand when I bid you. Then
withdraw your right hand (holding the palm thereof downward) saying,
That's gone Gentlemen: then open your left hand, and say, Here are all
three together, and lay them downe on the Table.


_Another._

TAke up one of the bals in your right hand, & put it into your left,
holding it firmely between your forefinger and thumbe of your said left
hand. Then with your forefinger and thumbe of your right hand (but be
nimble) seeme to pull one ball out of another, which you may doe by
slipping the ball that you retained in your right hand betweene the
forefinger and thumb of the said hand, saying, Thus by activity have I
learn'd to do, out of one little ball for to make two: and all of a
bignesse, then lay all foure balls upon the table.


_Another._

VVIth your right hand take up one of the balls, and seeme to put it into
the left, but retain it, shutting your left hand in due time, and say,
There is one: then hold your hand from you. Then with your right hand
take up another, saying, Here I take another. Then pronounce these
words, _Mercus mercurius_ by the powder of experience, _Iubeo_; then
open your left hand, saying, That's gone, and then open your right hand
and shew them both together.


_How to make a stone seeme to vanish out of your hand._

YOu must have a stone of a reasonable bignesse, such as you may well
hide in your hand, sitting in such manner as I have formerly said, that
you may receive any thing into your lappe, take this stone out of your
pocket, saying, You see, Gentlemen, here is a stone, a miraculous stone:
Will you have it vanish, _vade_, or go away invisible; which being said,
withdraw your hand to the side of the table letting the stone slip down
into your lap, in which time stare about you, saying, chuse you whether.
Then reach out your hand and say: _Fortuna variabilis, lapis
inestimabilis Iubeo, vade, vade, couragius_. Open your hand then tossing
it up, and blow a blast, and look up, saying, Do you see it is gone.
Your looking up will make them to looke up, in which time you may take
the stone againe in the other hand, and slip it into your pocket.


_Another._

TAke your stone againe out of your pocket, saying, here it is once
againe, and I will give it unto any of you to hold, and reach your hand
out unto them, and opening your hand, say Loe here it is. Then when any
one is about to take it, withdraw your hand to the side of the table,
and make your conveyance as before, in which time say, But you must
promise mee to take it quickly:

[Sidenote: By agility and nimblenesse of hand you may make a piece of a
Hares skin to stir and run about you as a live creature, and at last to
vanish away, which will bee imagined to be some Familiar that you deale
withall.]

Then will hee say, I will, then reach your hand being shut, out unto him
againe, and while hee striveth, thinking to take it quickly, hold fast
and say, _Vade couragious, celeriter vade_: in which time you may take
up the stone in the other hand, and hold it from you. Then open your
hand and say, loe, If you can hold a pretty Lasse no faster, when you
have her, I will not give a pin for your skill.


_How to make a Card vanish, and finde it againe in a Nut._

TAke what card you will, pill the printed paper from off it, and roll it
hard up, and make a hole in a nut, and take out the kernell, and then
thrust in the card, afterwards stop the hole of the Nut neatly with
waxe, this Nut you must have in readinesse about you, and when you are
in your play, call for such a card as you inclosed in your Nut, or else
haue one in a readinesse, and say, You see Gentlemen, here is such a
card: then wet it, and pill off the printed side, roll it up, and the
usuall manner conuey it away: Then take your Nut out of your pocket, and
giue it unto one, and say, Cracke that Nut, and tell mee if you can
finde the card there, which being found, will bee thought very strange.

Then haue another such like Nut, but filled with Inke, and stopped after
the same manner that your other Nut was, and giue that unto another, and
bid him cracke it, and see what he can finde in that, and so soone as he
hath cracked it, all the inke will run about his mouth, which will move
more mirth and laughter than the former.


_How to seeme to eate a Knife._

DEsire any one of your spectators to accommodate you with a Knife, which
when you haue gotten, hold it in such manner as that you may cover the
whole knife with both your hands, the end of the haft excepted, and set
the point of it unto your eye, and say, some body strike it in with his
fist, but no body will, because it is so dangerous a thing: then set
your hands upon the edge of the Table, and looking about you, say, why
what will no body strike it in, in which time let the knife slip downe
into your lap. Then nimbly make as if you chopt it hastily into your
mouth, or to hold it in one hand, and strike it in with the other (but
nimbly) then make two or three sowre faces, saying, some drinke, some
drinke: or else you may say, now some one put his finger in my mouth,
and pull it out againe; some will say haply you will bite me, say, no I
will assure you. Then when he hath put his finger into your mouth, he
will pull it out, & say, here is nothing, (this time is sufficient to
conuey the Knife out of your lap into your pocket) say againe, why, you
have your finger out againe, did you thinke to pull the knife out? if
that should be in my mouth, it would kill mee. The knife is here in my
pocket, and with that take it out, and deliver it againe.


_How to rap a Wag on the knuckles._

TAke a ball and lay it on the Table, and holding a knife in one hand by
the blade, desire some body to take the Ball that is upon the Table, &
lay it upon the haft of the knife, pretending that you will blow it
thence invisibly, and when he is laying it on, take him a good rap on
the knuckles.


_How to seeme to swallow a long pudding made of Tinne._

THis Pudding must be made of Tin, it consisteth of twelve little hoops
made Tape-wise, so that they may almost fall one thorow another, and
have a piece of Canvas tyed over the biggest end thereof, to the end it
may not hurt your teeth by hastily clapping it into your mouth. The
figure whereof followeth, and is marked with the letters A A.

[Illustration]

hold this Pudding (for so it is called) privately in your left hand with
the Canvas end uppermost, and with your right hand take a Ball out of
your pocket, and say, _If there be any Mayd that hath lost her
maiden-head or old woman that's halfe out of conceit with her selfe,
because her neighbours deeme her not so yong as she would willingly
seeme to be, let her come unto mee, for this ball is present remedy_;
then seeme to put the Ball into your left hand, but let it flip into
your lap, and clap your pudding into your mouth, which will bee thought
to be the Ball you shewed them: Then incline your head, and open your
mouth, and the pudding will slip downe at its full length, which with
your right hand you may strike up into your mouth again: do thus three
or foure times one after another, and the last time you may discharge
your mouth of it into your hand, and clap it into your lap without any
suspition, so that you make two or three sowre faces after it, as if it
stucke in your throat, and if you practise to smite easily with your
fist on each side of your throat, the Pudding will seeme to chinke as if
it were lying in your throat. Then say thus, they swallow puddings in
high Dutch land, they slip downe their throats before their teeth can
take possession of them.


_How to seeme to cut ones nose halfe off._

FOr the effecting of this feate, you must have a knife for the nonce,
made with a gap in the midst of the blade, as it is demonstrated in the
following figure noted with the letter A.

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: Note that in such feats as this, it were necessarie to have a
piece of spunge with some sheepes bloud in it to be retained privately.]

You must conceale the notch with your finger, and then wring it over the
fleshie part of your nose, and your nose will seeme as it were halfe cut
off with the knife.


_How to seeme to pull a rope through your nose._

YOu must have likewise for the effecting of this delusion, an Implement
on purpose. The figure wherof followeth. It may bee made of two elder
sticks, thrusting out the pith, and afterward glued together, the ends
whereof must have a piece of corke cut hollow and glued over them: then
must there be a little whipcord put thorow them, the ends whereof must
come out at two holes made on the outward side of each elder sticke.

[Illustration]

Put this Trinket over the fleshie part of your nose, then pul one end of
the rope, and afterwards the other, and it will be thought that the rope
commeth quite thorow your nose.


_How to make a pile of Counters seeme to vanish thorow a Table._

YOu must have for the performing of this feate, divers counters having
holes cut out of the midst of them, then they must be glued together so
many of them as they may make a case sufficient to containe a Die: then
glue one whole counter upon the top of them, and have a boxe made of
white Tinne to fit them, but let it be deeper than the glued pile of
Counters; also make a cover for this boxe. First, put into the boxe
three loose counters, then put in the glued pile of counters with the
hole upper-most, then put into the hole a Die, and lastly three other
loose whole Counters, and cover it. Draw this boxe of Counters, and say,
Gentlemen, here is a boxe of Barbarie gold, it was left me as a Legacie
by a deceased friend, upon condition I should employ it well and
honestly. Now sirs it was my fortune as I was travelling, to be
benighted, and so forced to seeke for lodging, and as it happened, I
tooke into an house of entertainment, where calling for my Ostesse, I
drew my stocke, and said, what must I give you mine Ostesse for my meat,
drinke, and lodging this night? My friend, quoth she, you must give me
three French Crownes; with that I uncovered my boxe and set it upon the
Table (it must be done with the mouth of the box downward) tooke my boxe
from off the counters, and delivered her three from the top, saying,
there they are; and casting my eye aside, I spyed a pretty lasse coming
downe the staires; Sweet heart, said I to her, what shall I give thee to
lie with thee this night? she replied, sir, for three French Crownes you
shall: then I thrust my boxe forward, and delivered her three from the
bottome, saying, there they are.

[Sidenote: If you lift the Boxe a little from the Table bearing it from
you, the three loose counters will come forth.]

But now said I to my Ostesse, Ostesse, what will you say if with a
tricke I have, I make these six Crownes to fetch all the rest thorow the
Table? Sir, quoth my Ostesse, you shall have your meat, drink, and
lodging for nothing, and said the Lasse, thou shalt lie with me for
nothing. Then I uncovered them, saying, but first let us see whether
they be here or no, and shew them, covering them againe. Then (taking to
those six Counters in my hand, other loose Counters I have readie in my
lap) I knocke my hand under the Table, saying _Virtute lapidis,
miraculosi lapidis, jubeo vade, celeritate vade_. Then I mingle my
Counters as if they came tumbling thorow the Table into my hand,
afterward throw them on the Table, saying, there be the Counters, then I
take the boxe up, pressing the sides of it with my fore finger and
thumbe (which will keep the glued pile of Counters from slipping out)
and let slip the glued Counters into my lap, and say there is none but a
Die, casting the emptie box unto them, who shall have all now, my
Ostesse or I?

[Illustration]

A, the figure of the Box, BB the lid of the Box, C the pile of Counters
glued together, E the hole for the Die, D the Die.


_How to seeme to put a ring through ones cheeke._

YOu must have two rings made of brasse, silver, or what you will, of one
bignesse, colour, and likenesse saving that one must have a notch cut
through it as it is represented by the figure following noted with X

[Illustration]

The other must be whole without a notch; shew the whole Ring, and
conceale that which hath the notch, and say, now I will put this ring
thorow my cheeke, and privily slip the notch one over one side of your
mouth, and nimbly convey the whole Ring into your sleeve, or conceale it
in your right hand: then take a small sticke which you may have in
readinesse, and slip the whole Ring over it, holding your hand over it
about the middle thereof, and bid somebody hold both the ends of the
sticke fast, and say, see this Ring here in my cheeke, it turnes round,
and indeed it will seeme to turn round if you stroake it nimbly with
your fingers: and while you perceive them to fasten their eies
intentively upon that Ring, upon a sudden whip it out, and smite upon
the sticke therewith instantly, concealing it, and whirling the other
Ring, you hold your hand over round about the sticke, and it wil be
thought that you have brought that Ring upon the stick which was before
upon your cheeke.


_How to seeme to thrust a bodkin into your forehead._

YOu must have two bodkins, the one made like unto the other to outward
appearance, but let the blade of the one be made to slip up into the
haft: let the other be a true Bodkin: Conceale the false one, and shew
the true, after that you have shewed it, convey it into your lap. Then
take up the false one, and reclining your head, make as if you thrust it
very stifly, making an ill favoured face all the while. If you hold a
peece of spunge in your hand filled with some sheeps bloud, pressing it
out, the bodkin being in your forehead as it were up to the hilt, it
will cause the more astonishment and admiration among the beholders.
Instantly put up your bodkin, and take your handkercher, and wipe off
the bloud, and say, _Iubeo vade vulnus a fronte_.


_How to put a Locke upon ones mouth._

YOu must have a Locke made for the nonce, the figure whereof followeth,
the one side of its bow must be immoveable, as that marked with A: the
other side is noted with B, and must be pinned to the bodie of the
locke, as may appeare at E, I say it must be so pinned that it may play
to and againe with ease. This side of the bow must have a legge as C,
and then turn into the Locke; this bending must have two notches filed
on the inner side, which must be so ordered that the one may locke or
hold the two sides of the bow as close together at the top as may be,
the other notch to hold the said parts of the bows a proportionable
distance asunder, that being lockt upon the cheeke, it may neither
pinch too hard, nor yet hold it so sleightly that it may be drawne off;

[Illustration]

let there be then a key fitted unto it to unlocke it, as may appeare at
B. And lastly, let the bows have divers notches filed in them, so the
place of the partition when the locke is shut home will be least of all
suspected. By this figure and directions you may fit your selfe of such
a Locke if so be you are desirous of it.


_The use of it._

YOu may cause someone to hold one tester edgelong betweene his teeth:
Take also another tester and with your left hand proffer to set it
edgelong betweene a second mans teeth, pretending that your intent is to
turne both into whether of their mouthes they shall desire, and that by
vertue of your words and circumstances which he shall no sooner essay
to do, but you holding your locke privately in your right hand with your
fore finger over the legge C, may presently slip it over the left side
his cheeke, and single locke it, which you may do by pressing your said
finger a little downe after some store of intreaties: the Locke having
hung on a while, produce your key by some device (as by a confederate or
some carelesse person) and unlocke it, but immediately double locke it,
for it will seeme a true locke, nor after sight be suspected for other.


_How to make it freeze by the fire side._

THis feate cannot be performed at every time, but onely in Winter, and
at such times as snow may be had, and he that will shew it must have in
readinesse an handfull of salt. The time serving, and the partie
provided, let him call for a Ioynt-stoole, a quart pot, an handfull of
snow, a little water, and a short staffe or sticke, first let him powre
a little water upon the top of the stoole, and upon it let him see the
quart pot, and put the snow into the pot, the salt also, but privately,
then let him hold the pot fast with his left hand, and take the short
sticke in his right, and therewith churne the snow and salt in the pot
as if one should churme for butter, and in halfe a quarter of an houre
the pot will freeze so hard to the stoole, that you can scarcely with
both hands pull it off from the stoole: there's a naturall reason may be
given for this, which he thats a scholler need not be told, and for a
common Iugler I would not have so wise as to know, therefore I omit it.


_How to breath fire out of your mouth._

THe performance of this tricke consisteth in the rowling up of the towe.
After you have made a rowle in readinesse, call for a pipe of Tobacco,
light it, and take a whiffe or two, you may stop it downe with the one
end of your rowle of tow, retaining it priuately in your hand: then
deliuer the Pipe to some body else, and conuey the tow into your mouth:
then blow gently, and smoake and fire will come forth of your mouth,
which you may continue as long as you please by putting in more tow as
it consumeth.


_How to draw ribbins of any colour out of your mouth, and to deliver it
by the yard._

YOu must prouide you diuers sorts of Ribbins, some blacke, some blew,
some greene, some yellow: measure it, and at the end of euery yard make
a slip knot, then rowle each coloured ribben into a ball by it selfe,
and dispose them about you, that you may know readily which to take in
an instant. When you are called upon for so many yards of such a colour,
conuey a ball of the same into your mouth, and draw it out, remembring
how many knots haue slipped at your teeth, then cut it off and deliuer
it.


_How to make two bels come into one hand, having put into each hand
one._

THis feate must be performed with three bels, you must put one bell into
your left sleeue, then put one Bell into one hand, and another Bell into
the other hand (they must be little morris bels) withdraw your hands,
and privily conuey the bell in your left hand, into your right hand:
Then stretch both your hands abroad, and bid two folkes hold your hands
fast, but first shake your hands and say, doe you heare them. The bell
that is in your sleeve will not be knowne by the ratling, but that it is
in your hand: Then say, hee now that is the arrantest Whoremaster or
Cuckold of you both, shall have both the bels, and the other shall have
none at all: open your hands then, and shew them, and it will be thought
that you deale by art magicke.


_How to make a Iugling booke, or a booke for Waggery._

YOu must provide a paper book in octavo, of what thicknesse you please;
first turne over seaven leaves of it, and then upon both the open sides,
draw or paint the pictures of flowers, then turne over seaven leaves
more, and paint the very same; do thus untill you have turned the book
once quite over: Then unto the farther painted leafes, past a little
stay of paper or parchment one directly over another: Then turne over
the booke againe, and having turned every sixt leafe, draw the picture
of flower de luces, and then paste stayes of parchment upon them as you
did upon the first; but these stayes must all of them be a little lower
than the former. Then turne over the booke againe, and after the fift
leafe, thorowout the booke is turned, paint horns, do thus untill you
have painted the book full of pictures, onely let there be one part of
the leaves faire paper: having thus finished the booke, when you use it,
hold it in your left hand, and with your right hand, your thumb set upon
the parchment stayes, shew them orderly and nimbly, but with a bold and
audacious countenance, for that must be the grace of all your trickes:
say, this booke is not painted thus as some of you may suppose, but it
is of such a property, that whosoever bloweth on it, it wil give the
representation of whatsoever he is naturally addicted unto, and then
turne the booke, and say, see it's all faire paper.


_Bonus Genius =or= Nuntius invisibilis, =or= Hiccius Doccius as my
senior cals it._

YOu must have the figure of a man made of wood, about the bignesse of
your little finger, as may appeare by the figure noted C D, the head
whereof noted with A, must bee made to take off and put on at pleasure,
by meanes of a wyer that is in the necke, marked with B: also you must
have a cloth cap with a little hole in the crowne of it, as F: This cap
must have a little bagge within to convey the head into. The bag must be
neatly made, that it may not easily be perceived; shew your man unto the
company, saying, see you here gentlemen, this I call my _Bonus Genius_,
then shew his cap, saying, and this is his coat, say moreover, look now
as stedfastly on him as you can, neuerthelesse I wil cousin you, for
therefore am I come.

[Illustration]

Then hold your cap aboue your face, and take your man in your right
hand, and put his head thorow the hole of the cap, as you may see at F,
saying, now hee is ready to goe of any message I have to send him; to
_Spain_, _Italy_, or whither I will: but he must haue somewhat to beare
his charges, with that pul out your right hand from under the cap, and
therwith the body, (but privately) putting your right hand into your
pocket, as it you fet for money, where you must leaue the bodie, and
take out your hand, & say, there is three crowns: Now be gone then, turn
the head about, and say, but he will looke about him before he goes.
Then say (setting your forefinger upon his crowne) iust as I thrust my
finger downe, so he shall vanish, and therewith by the assistance of
your left hand that is under the cap, conuey his head into the little
bag within the cap: then turne your cap about, and say, see here he is
gone: then take your cap, and hold it up againe, drawing the head out of
the little bag, & say, _hei genius meus velocissimus, ubi_, & whistle.
Then thrust the head up thorow the hole of the cap, and holding the head
by the wyer, turne it about; then presently put head and cap into your
pocket.


_Boxes to change Graine._

MAke one boxe of Wood, Tinne, or Brasse: let the bottome fall a quarter
of an inch into the boxe, and glue thereon a laying of Barlie or such
like graine: draw the boxe with the bottome downewards, and say,
Gentlemen, I met a Countrie man going to buy Barlie, and I told him I
would sell him a penniworth, also I would multiplie one graine into so
many bushels as hee should need, then cast a barlie corne into your
boxe, and cover it with a hat, and in the covering it, turne the bottom
upside down: then cause some bodie to blow on the hat, then uncover it,
and they will think strangely of it. You may make another boxe of wood
like unto a bell to hold so much just as your former box will, and make
a bottome unto this boxe of shooe sole leather, to thrust into the
bottome of the bell: then fill it with barlie, and thrust up the leather
bottome, for it will keepe the barlie from falling out take this box out
of your pocket, and set it down gently upon the table, and say, I will
now cause all the barlie to goe out of my measure into my bell, then
with a hat cover the boxe that hath the barlie glewed unto it, and in
covering it, turne it with the barlie downeward: then say, first let us
see whether there be nothing under the bell, and clap it hard downe upon
the table, so the weight of the barlie will thrust the bottome downe;
then bid some one blow hard on the hat, then take it up, where they will
see nothing but an emptie measure, then take up the bell, and all the
barlie will poure out. Sweep it then presently into your hat or lap,
lest their busie prying may chance to discover your leather bottome.


_How to vanish a glasse full of Beere._

[Sidenote: Your finger tops must be rubd a little with some greene soft
waxe, and so you may doe it cleanlily.]

TAke a low glasse, fill it reasonable full of Beere, and take a sixpence
and lay it downe upon the table, and set the glasse of Beere upon it,
and dipping your finger into the Beere, say, whether is the sixpence in,
or under the glasse. Some will say perhaps, it is under: then say, let's
see, and take up at once both sixe pence and glasse (hold the glasse so
that both your hands may quite hide it) and let the glass slip plum
downe into your lap, then make as if you threw it away, looking up after
it. Then seeme to blow your nose, and let fall the sixpence upon the
table, saying, I am glad I have got my mony againe: but now (say) what's
become of the glasse? Then seeme to take it out of your pocket, saying,
I am a good fellow, and would not willingly lose my liquor, then drinke
it up. This is an excellent tricke if it be swiftly and neatly
performed. Though you spill a part of the Beere, it is no matter,
neither is it any disgrace unto it, besides you may put it off very
well.


_How to seeme to cut off a mans head, it is called the decollation of
=Iohn Baptist=._

YOu must have a table with two good wide holes towards one end, also a
cloth on purpose to cover the table with, so that the said covering may
hang to the ground round about the table; also this covering must have
two holes made in it even with the holes of the table, you must also
have a platter of wood for the purpose, having a hole in the bottom to
fit also unto the holes of the table, and it must, as also the table, be
made to take in two pieces: having these in readinesse, you must have
two boyes; the one must lie along upon the table with his backe upward,
and he must put his head thorow the one hole of the table, cloth and
all; the other must sit under the table and put his head thorow the
other hole of the table, then put the platter about his neck, to make
the sight more dreadfull to behold, you may forme some loome about the
neckes of them, making small holes in them as it were veins, and
besmeare it over with sheepes bloud, putting some bloud also and little
bits of liver into the platter, and set a chafing-dish of coales before
the head, strewing some brimstone upon the coales; for this will make
the head seem so pale and wan, as if in very deed it were separated from
the body.

[Illustration]

The head may fetch a gaspe or two, and it will be better. Let no body
bee present while you doe this, neither when you have given entrance,
permit any to be medling, nor let them tarry long.


_How to make the face of a Childe to appeare in a pot of water._

YOu must get a ball made of wood, and upon one halfe or side of it,
there must the face of a childe be artificially carued: on the backe
side of this face there must bee made a hole, but not very deepe; this
hole must be filled with Lead, to the end that it may (the ball being
cast into the water) sway the face uppermost: then paint it livelie with
oyle colours, and it is done. Note that it ought not to be full so big
as a tenis ball. Call for a wine quart pot filled with faire water up to
the necke, having your face in a readinesse, concealed in your right
hand, take the pot in your left hand, and set it on the Table, and say,
see you Gentlemen, here is nothing in the pot but water, with that clap
down the pot lid with your right hand, and in clapping it down, slip the
face into the pot, this you may doe without any the lest suspition. Then
cause them all to stand off, and if they please, to marke you as
narrowly as they can: with that put your hand into your pocket, and
seeme to take out a handfull of powder, and to strew it over the pot,
saying, _Surge celeriter_, by the powder of Experience, _surge_, then
bid them look what is there. After the same manner may you make a Toade
to appeare, which will cause no small admiration.


_Advice whereby you may drinke a Tunnell full of drink, and afterwards
seeme to poure the same all out of your sleeve againe._

YOu must get a double Tunnell, that is, two Tunnels sodered one within
the other, so that you may at the little end poure a quantitie of wine,
water, or any liquor. This Tunnell you must have readie filled before
hand with whatsoever liquor you please: call for some of the same kinde:
then draw your Tunnell, and setting your middle finger unto the bottome
of it, bid some body, or else do you your selfe poure it full, and
drinke it up before them, and turne the broad end of the Tunnell
downeward, saying, Gentlemen, all is gone, and in a trice turne your
selfe about, and in turning, pronounce some tearmes of art, withdraw
your finger from the narrow end, and let all the liquor out that was
betweene the Tunnels, and it will be thought to be that which you drunke
out of the Tunnell, and so you may perswade them that it is the very
same.


_How to seeme to make a tooth drop out with a touch._

YOu must have some great tooth in a readinesse, as the tooth of a Hog, a
Calfe, or of an Horse; this you must retain privately in your right
hand, and with the same hand take out of your pocket a small corke bal,
and having used some Rhetorick to perswade them that it is of some
excellent property, incline your head, and therewith touch some one of
your farther teeth, and immediately let the tooth that you held in your
hand drop downe, saying, and this is the fashion of Mountebanks, Touch
and take.


_Another conceit to procure laughter._

TAke your ball in one hand, and the tooth in the other, and stretch your
hands as farre as you can one from the other, and if any will, lay a
quart of wine with him that you will not withdraw your hands, and yet
will make both of them come into either hand which they please: It is no
more to do, than to lay one downe upon the Table, and turne your selfe
round, and take it up with the other hand, and your wager is won, and it
will move no small laughter to see a foole so lose his money.


_How to make two or three egges dance upon a staffe._

PRovide a good thick staffe about two yards long, three parts wherof
ought to be made scoope-wise, or halfe hollow, like a basting ladle, the
fourth part must serue for the handle. At the end of the scoope must be
made a hole, and therein put a broad pin about the length of an egge,
and it is done. Rest the handle of this staffe against your right thigh,
and hold it with your right hand neere to the beginning of the scoope;
lay an egge then into the scoope of the staffe, and turne your selfe
round, bearing the staffe now up, and anon downe, with the scoope side
of it alwayes upward, so the eg will tumble from one end of the scoop
unto the other, and not fall out. After the same manner may you make two
or three egges by a little practice to wamble one after another.


_A merry conceit_

DEliver one peece of money with your left hand unto one and to a second
person another, and offer a third to another, for he seeing the other
receive money, will not lightly refuse it: when he offereth to take it,
you may rap him on the fingers with a knife, or somewhat else held in
your right hand, saying that you knew by vertue of your _bonus genius_,
that hee meant to have kept it from you.


_How to knit an hard knot upon a handkercher, and to seeme to undo the
same with words._

MAke one plaine loose knot, with the two corner ends of a handkercher,
and seeming to draw the same very hard, hold fast the body of the said
handkercher (neere to the knot) with your right hand, pulling the
contrary end with the left hand, which is the corner of that which you
hold. Then cloze up handsomely the knot, which will bee yet somewhat
loose, and pull the handkercher so with your right hand, as the left
hand end may be neere to the knot: then will it seeme to be a true and
firme knot. And to make it appeare more assuredly to be so indeed, let a
stranger pull at the end which you hold in your left hand, whilest you
hold fast the other in your right hand; and then holding the knot with
your fore-finger and thumbe, and the nether part of your handkercher
with your other fingers, as you hold a bridle when you would with one
hand slip up the knot and lengthen your reines. This done, turne your
handkercher over the knot with the left hand, in doing whereof, you must
suddenly slip out the end or corner, putting up the knot of your
handkercher with your fore-finger and thumbe, as you would put up the
foresaid knot of your bridle. Then deliver the same (covered and wrapt
within the midst of your handkercher) to one to hold fast, and after the
pronunciation of some words of Art, and wagers laid, take the
handkercher and shake it, and it will be loose.


_A notable feat of Fast and Loose; namely, to pull three beadstones from
off a Cord, while you hold fast the ends thereof, without removing of
your hands._

TAke two litle whipcords of two foot long a piece, double them equally,
so as there may appeare foure ends. Then take three great beadstones,
the hole of the one of them being bigger than the rest; and put one
beadstone upon the eye or bought of the one cord, and another on the
other cord: then take the stone with the greatest hole, and let both the
bowts be hidden therein: which may be the better done, if you put the
eye of the one into the eye of the other. Then pull the middle bead upon
the same, being doubled over his fellow, and so will the beads seeme to
be put over the two cords without partition, for holding fast in each
hand the two ends of the two cords, you may tosse them as you lift, and
make it seeme manifest to the beholders, which may not see how you have
done it, that the beadstones are put upon the cord without fraud: Then
must you seeme to adde more effectuall binding of those beadstones to
the string, and make one halfe of a knot with one of the ends of each
side, which is for no other purpose, but that when the Bead stones be
taken away, the cords may be seene in the case which the beholders
suppose them to be in before. For when you have made your halfe knot
(which in any wise you may not double to make a perfect knot) you must
deliver into the hands of some stander by, those two cords, namely, two
ends evenly set in one hand, and two in the other, and then with a wager
and tearmes of Art, begin to pull off your Bead-stones, which if you
handle nimbly, and in the end cause him to pull his two ends, the two
cords will shew to be placed plainly, and the Bead-stones to have come
thorow the cords.


_To burne a threed, and to make it whole againe with the ashes thereof._

TAke two Threeds or small Laces, of one foot in length a piece: rowle up
one of them round, which will be then of the quantity of a pease, bestow
the same betweene your left fore-finger and your thumb. Then take the
other threed and hold it forth at length, betwixt the fore-finger and
thumb of each hand, holding all your fingers daintily, as yong
Gentlewomen are taught to take up a morsel of meat. Then let one cut
asunder the same threed in the middle; when that is done, put the tops
of your two thumbs together, and so shall you with lesse suspition
receive the piece of threed which you hold in your right hand unto your
left, without opening your left finger and thumb, then holding these two
pieces as you did the same before it was cut, let these two be cut also
asunder in the midst, and they conveyed as before, untill they be cut
verie short, and then rowle all those ends together, and keep that ball
of short threeds before the other in your left hand, & with a knife
thrust out the same into a candle, where you may hold it untill the said
ball of short threeds be burnt to ashes. Then pull backe the knife with
your right hand, and leave the ashes with the other ball betwixt the
fore finger and thumbe of your left hand, and with the two thumbs and
two fore-fingers together, seeming to take paines to rub the ashes,
untill your threed be renued, and draw out that threed at length, which
you kept all this while betwixt your fore-finger and thumbe. If you have
Legerdemain to bestow the same ball of threed, and to change it from
place to place betwixt your two fingers (as may be easily done) then
will it seeme very strange.


_To cut a Lace asunder in the midst, and to make it whole againe._

PRovide a piece of the Lace which you meane to cut, or at the least a
patterne like the same, one inch and a halfe long, and keeping it double
privily in your left hand, betwixt some of your fingers neare to the
tops thereof take the other Lace which you meane to cut, which you may
hang about ones necke, & draw downe your said left hand to the bought
thereof: and putting your owne piece a little before the other (the end
or rather the middle whereof, you must hide betwixt your fore-finger and
thumb) making the eye or bought which shall be seene of your patterne,
let some stander by cut the same asunder, and it will be surely thought
that the other Lace is cut; which with words and rubbing and chafing it,
you shall seeme to renew and make whole againe. This, if it be wel
handled, will seeme miraculous.


_How to seeme suddenly to melt a piece of Coyne with words._

YOu must have a boxe made of brasse or Crooked Lane plate, a double
boxe, and not above five quarters of an inch deepe: in the midst must be
the bottome, and both ends must have covers to come over them. This boxe
might be so neatly made, that each lid might have a small bolt
artificially contrived (which though I could make my selfe neither by
words nor figures I can describe) whereby the lids of the boxe might be
lockt fast on, that none but master Iugler himselfe knows readily to
open. In one end of this boxe have alwayes in readinesse a resemblance
of moulten silver which you may easily make by mixing an equall
quantitie of linfoyl and quicksilver together, which you shall thus do:
First put your linfoyl in a crucible or Goldsmiths melting pot, melt it,
and then take it from the fire, and put in your quicksilver, and stirre
both well together, and it is done. Now the one end of your box being
readie furnished herewith, borrow a piece of coine of some one in the
companie, willing him to give it some private marke whereby he may know
it againe to be his owne, then put it into the other end of the box, in
the bottome whereof you may have a little waxe to keepe it from ratling.
Thus you may seeme by vertue of words to melt his monie, and afterwards
to give it againe to the partie whole as you received it from him.


_A device whereby you may draw sundrie liquors out of one seeming
vessell, all which shall be put in at one hole, and all drawne out of
another._

YOu must cause a vessell of an indifferent bignesse to be made in forme
of a Tunne, having two partitions, so there will be three severall
parts: A B signifieth the first, C D the second, and E F the third, upon
the top of this Tunne must bee fast nailed a piece of wood turned round
as G H, in the center whereof must be erected a stile, whose top must be
made into a screw, in this wood must also be made three holes towards
the circumpherence, each hole having a pipe inserted into it, which may
extend themselues one of either into each vessell, as you may see by the
figure. I K signifieth the first pipe which reacheth into the first part
A B, L M, the second pipe that extendeth it selfe into the second part
noted C D. N O the third pipe that extendeth it selfe into the third
part E F, each part also must have his vent, else you can neither fill
nor emptie it, these are marked with the letters P Q R, upon the top of
the aforesaid wood must be fastned a piece of liquored leather having
three holes in it answerable unto the holes of the wood, then upon the
wood must be scrued another snout whereby to fill each vessell with a
severall liquor, V the snouts S T a brasse plate whereunto the snout is
sodered, W the scrue that scrueth this snout upon the stile in the
turned wood G H.

[Illustration]

Lastly, each vessell must have its pipe whereout you may draw the
conteined liquor which you may see in the figure, and then must there be
scrued over them another plate with a taper vessell, so by turning it
about from one hole to another you may deliver each liquor apart
whether of them you please.


_A very strange tricke whereby you may seeme to cut a piece of Tape into
foure parts, and make it whole againe with words._

TAke a piece of narrow white tape about two or three yards long; first
present it to view to any that may desire it, then tie both the ends of
it together, and take one side of it in one hand, and the other in the
other hand, so that the knot may be about the midst of one side, and
using some circumstantiall words to beguile your spectators, turn one
hand about towards your selfe, and the other from you, so shall you
twist the tape once, then clap the ends together, and then if you slip
your fore-finger and thumbe of every hand betweene the tape almost as
one would hold a skeine of threed to be wound, this will make one fold
or twist as may appeare in the first figure, where A signifieth the
twist or fold. B the knot, then in like manner make a second fold about
the line DC, as you may see by the second figure, where B signifieth the
knot, C the first fold, A the second fold. Hold then your fore-finger
and thumbe of your left hand upon the second twist, and upon the knot
also, and the fore-finger and thumbe of your right hand upon the first
fold C, and desire some one of your spectators to cut all asunder with a
sharpe knife at the crosse line ED. When it is cut, hold still your left
hand, and let all the ends fall you hold in your right hand, for there
will be a shew of eight ends, foure aboue and foure below, and so the
string will be thought to be cut into foure parts, as may be seene by
the third figure; then gather up the ends that you let fall into your
left hand, and deliver two of the ends (seeming to take them at
randome) unto two severall persons, bidding them to hold them fast,
still, keeping your left hand fingers upon the twists or folds:

[Illustration]

then with your right and left hand seeme to tumble and whaf all the ends
together that you had in your left hand, twist out all the slips or
pieces which are three, as you may see at A and B in the third figure;
twist them all, I say, into a little ball, and conceale it betweene some
of your fingers of your left hand, and crumble thereof on another
confused heape: and after some words said, with your right hand deliver
this confused heape unto one of the company, bidding him to hold it
fast, saying, _Hulla passa quicke couragious fiat coniunctio_: Then bid
them looke on it, who while they are greedily looking after the event,
you may with ease convey the ball or roll of ends into your pocket, so
will it be thought you have made it whole by vertue of your words. An
excellent tricke if it be gracefully handled and a tricke that cost mee
more trouble to finde than all the rest; this I have gone purposely to
obserue, but returned as wise as I went.


_A device how to multiply one face, and make it seeme to be an hundred
or a thousand._

THis feate must be performed by a looking-glasse made for the nonce, the
figure whereof I have fully described, with the manner of making it,
which is thus: First make an hoope or phillet of wood, horn, or such
like, about the widenesse of an halfe-crowne piece, in the
circumference; the thicknesse of this hoope or phillet let be about a
quarter of an inch. In the middle of this hoope fasten a bottome of wood
or brasse, and bore in a decent order divers small holes about the
bignesse of small pease, or phitches, then upon the one side of this
bottome let in a piece of Christall glasse, and fasten it in the hoope
close to the bottome; then take a quantitie of quicksilver, and prepare
it after this manner: Take, I say, a quantitie as an ounce or two of
quicksilver, and put to it a little salt, and stirre them well together,
then put to them some whitewine vineger, and wash or stirre all together
with a woodden slice, then powre away the vineger, and wash away the
salt with faire water made warme, then powre away the water, and put the
quicksilver into a piece of white leather, and binde it up hard, and so
twist or straine it out into an earthen panne and it will be very bright
and pure, then put so much of this prepared quicksilver into the philet
or foresaid hoope as will cover the bottome; then let into the hoope
another piece of christal glasse fitted thereto, and sement the sides,
that the quicksilver may not runne out, and it is done. The figure
whereof I have here under set; A representeth the one side that giveth
the forme of one face to the beholders B the other side that multiplieth
the beholders face, so oft as there are holes in the middle bottome, the
use hereof I shall not insist upon, since he that is verst in the former
feats will better conceive of himselfe to use it, then my words can
either direct or assist him.

[Illustration]


_Of divers pretty iugling knacks._

THere are many feats able to beguile the simple, as to deliver meale,
pepper, ginger, or any powder out of your mouth after the eating of
bread, which is done by retaining any of these things stuffed in a
little paper or bladder, conveyed into your mouth, and grinding the same
with your teeth. _Item_, a rush thorow a piece of a trencher, having
three holes, and at the one side the rush appearing out in the second,
at the other side in the third hole, by reason of an hollow place made
betwixt them both, so as the slight consisteth in the turning of the
piece of trencher.


_Feats by conveyance of money:_

THe best place to dispose of a piece of money, is in the palme of the
hand, and the best piece for conveyance is a tester, but with practice
all will be alike.


_A notable tricke to transforme a Counter into a Groat._

TAke a Groat, or some lesse peece of money, and grinde it very thinne at
the one side, and take two Counters and grind them, the one on the one
side, the other on the other side; glew the smooth side of the Groat to
the smooth side of one of the Counters, ioyning them so close together
as may be, specially at the edges, which may be so filed, as they shall
seeme to be but one piece; to wit, one side a counter, the other side a
groat. Then take a little greene waxe, and lay it upon the smooth side
of the one counter, as it do not much discolour the groat; and so will
that counter with the groat cleave together, as though they were
glewed, and being filed even with the groat and the other counter, it
will seem so like a perfect entire counter, that though a stranger
handle it, he shall not bewray it; then having a little touched your
forefinger and the thumb of your right hand with soft wax, take
therewith this counterfeit counter, and lay it downe openly upon the
palme of your left hand, in such sort as an Auditor layeth downe his
counters, wringing the same hard, so as you may leave the glewed counter
with the groat apparantly in the palme of your left hand, and the smooth
side of the waxed counter will sticke fast upon your thumb, by reason of
the waxe wherewith it is smeared, and so may you hide it at your
pleasure, provided alwayes that you lay the waxed side downward, and the
glewed side upward: then close your hand, and in or after the closing
thereof turn the piece, and so instead of a counter (which they suppose
to bee in your hand) you shall seeme to have a groat, to the admiration
of the beholders, if it be well handled.


_An excellent feat to make a twopeny piece lye plaine in your hand, and
to be passed from thence when you lift._

PVt a little red waxe (but not too thinne) upon the naile of your
longest finger, and let a stranger put a twopeny piece into the palme of
your hand, and shut your fist suddenly, and convey the twopeny piece
upon the wax, which with use you may so accomplish, as no man shall
perceive it. Then say, _Ailif, casil, zaze, hit, mel_, and suddenly open
your hand, holding the tips of your fingers rather lower than higher
than the palme of your hand, and the beholders will wonder where it is
become. Then shut your hand suddenly againe, and lay a wager whether it
be there or no; and you may either leave it there, or take it away with
you at your pleasure.


_How to transforme any one small thing into another forme by folding of
paper._

TAke a sheet of paper and fold, or double the same, so as one side be a
little longer than the other: Then put a Counter betweene the two leaves
of the paper up to the middle of the top of the fold, holding the same
so as it be not perceived, and lay a groat on the outside thereof, right
against the Counter, and fold it downe to the end of the longer side:
and when you unfold it againe, the groat will be where the Counter was,
and the counter where the groat was; so as some will suppose that you
have changed the money into a counter, and with this many feats may be
done.


_How to convey money out of one of your hands into the other by
=Legerdemain=._

FIrst, you must hold open your right hand, and lay therein a Tester, or
some big piece of money, then lay thereupon the top of your long left
finger, and use some words of Art, & upon the sudden, slip your right
hand from your finger, wherewith you held downe the Tester, and bending
your hand a very little, you shall retain the Tester still therein, and
suddenly drawing your right hand thorow your left, you shall seeme to
have left the Tester there, specially when you shut in due time your
left hand. Which that it may more plainly appeare to be truly done, you
may take a knife, and seeme to knocke against it, so as it shall make a
great sound: but instead of knocking the piece in the left hand (where
none is) you shall hold the point of the knife fast with the left hand,
and knocke against the tester held in the other hand, and it wil be
thought to hit against the money in the left hand. Then after some words
of Art pronounced, open your hand, and when nothing is seene, it will be
wondered at how the Tester was removed.


_How to make a six pence seeme to fall thorow a Table._

YOu must have an Handkercher about you, having a Counter neatly sewed in
one of the corners of it: take it out of your pocket, and desire some
bodie to lend you a tester, and seeme to wrap it up in the midst of the
Handkercher, but retaine it in your hand, and in stead of so doing, wrap
the corner in the middest that hath the counter sewed in it, and then
bid them feele if it be not there, which they will imagine to bee no
other than the tester that they lent you. Then bid them lay it under a
hat upon the Table, and call for a Basin of water, hold it under the
Table, and knocke, saying, _Vade_, come quicke, and then let the
sixpence fall out of your hand into the water. Then take up the hat, and
take the handkercher and shake it, saying, that's gone, then shew them
the money in the Basin of water.


_How to seeme to blow sixpence out of another mans hand._

TAke a sixpence, blow on it, and clap it presently into one of your
spectators hands, bidding them to hold it fast: Then aske of him if he
be sure he have it, then to be certaine, he will open his hand and
look. Then say to him nay, but if you let my breath go off, I cannot do
it. Then take it out of his hand againe, and blow on it, and staring him
in the face, clap a piece of horne in his hand, and retaine the
sixpence, shutting his hand your selfe. Bid him hold his hand downe, and
slip the tester betweene one of his cuffes. Then take the stone that you
shew feats with, and hold it unto his hand, saying, _By vertue hereof, I
will and command the money to vanish you hold in your hand, vade_, now
see: when they have looked, then will they thinke that it is changed by
the vertue of your stone. Then take the horne againe, and seeme to cast
it from you, retaining it, and say, _vade_, and anon, say you have your
money againe: He then will begin to marvell, and say, I have not, say
then to him again, you have, and I am sure you have it: Is't not in your
hands? if it be not there, turne downe one of your sleeves, for it is in
one I am sure, where when he findeth it, he will not a little wonder.


_How to deliver to one man one sixpence, and to another another
sixpence, and to make both the testers come into one mans hand._

[Sidenote: Your finger must be rubd with waxe, so you may delude him
without any suspition.

The hard pressing of the money in the hand, will seeme that the money is
in the hand when it is not, for a moment therefore be quick.]

DEliver into one mans hand two testers even set instead of one, shutting
his hand immediatly: then take another tester, and have in readinesse a
piece of horne cut even with it. Clap the said tester into his right
hand with the horne under it, staying the tops of your two middlemost
fingers stiffe upon the tester; so bending his hand a little downward,
draw your fingers toward you, and they will slip the tester out of his
hand, and shut his hand presently, who feeling the piece of horne, will
imagine it is the tester: then say, he that kissed a pretty wench last
in a corner, shal have both Testers in his hand, & the other shall have
none. This may also be performed without a peece of horne, wringing one
tester in the palme of the hand, and taking it away with your thumbe
being waxed; for the hard wringing the money in the hand will make the
partie beleeve he hath it, when he hath it not.


_Conveyance of Cards and Dice._

THere are a multitude of delightful feats which may be performed by an
orderly placing, facing, shuffling, and cutting of cards usually played
withall. Also a number of other strange feats may bee shewed by cards
and dice, such as may be purposely made. The cards may be made halfe of
one print and halfe of another; so by holding them divers wayes sundrie
things may be presented each contrary to other. For example, with foure
of the same Cards purposely made, and holding them accordingly, you
shall present eight severall things. Now for the Dice the cunning is in
forging them, and a readie retaining or throwing two among three, or one
with two: they must, I say, be forged bigger towards one side than the
other, so that the weight of one side may draw up the other. Other some
may be made flatter being furnished with such like. And having learned
to retaine them handsomely and readily, you may have the game at
command, and know before-hand what will be your cast, and so vie upon it
too. Moreover, for the Cards there are divers other tricks, of which
those that are cheaters make continuall practice, as nipping them,
turning up one corner, marking them with little spots, placing glasses
behinde those that are gamesters, and in rings for the purpose, dumbe
shoes of some standers by. But I will not stand on discovering these,
for in this our cousening age there are too many so expert herein, that
they maintaine themselves better than many an honest man with a lawfull
trade and calling. Onely take this by the way, Those that have money in
their purses, let them beware of Carding and Dicing, lest they wish they
had when it is too late. As for my owne part, Ile never play for that I
am sure of already: if any will play with mee upon other tearmes, I am
sure I shall loose nothing by the bargaine.


_Of Confederacie._

SOme there are that have said I writ not sufficiently of this part in
the former Edition; I rather thinke the cause was they thought they had
too litle for their money. Neverthelesse I will to give every one their
desired content, and deliver my minde more fully herein, and it may be
which I most desire they may learne to avoid the company of roaving
gamesters, cheaters, I meane that frequent the high-wayes, and
principall Townes and places of resort thereabouts; for they are of the
same manner though for a worser end. First therefore by this word
Confederacie is meant, a kinde of Combination, or making an agreement or
covenanting among sundrie persons for the accomplishment of one and the
selfe same businesse: understand me aright, All these being very well
knowne each to other (at least the designe as may appeare by their
agreement therabout) do so estrange themselues as if they had never
seene each other before. And to the end that they might performe their
designe, not giving any the least suspition to any of the beholders, I
will give you an instance or two whereby I shall give you sufficient
information for the more ready conceiving of every particular in this
nature when and wheresoever you see them performed.


_How to cast a peece of money away, and to finde it in another mans
mouth, pocket, or purse._

THe Iugler cals for some one piece of coine, as a tester or a shilling
of any one in the company, he willeth him to marke it with what marke he
will, then he taketh it and casteth it away, and commeth to his
confederate (who is furnished before-hand with the like piece of coine
marked with the very same marke) and bids him deliver the money out of
his pocket, purse, or if hee say the word, his mouth; for this is
concluded of before-hand. Now this confederate to make the matter seeme
more strange, wil begin to fume and fret, asking how he should come by
it, till having found the marke, he will confesse it be none of his,
wondering at his skill how he should send it hither: and all the rest be
taken with a reall admiration of his extraordinarie cunning.


_How by the sound of a Counter philliped to tell what side is uppermost,
whether crosse or pyle._

THe Iugler draws a Counter out of his pocket, and saith to the company,
See here is a Counter, take it who please, and let them phillip it up,
and I will by my cunning tell you whether crosse or pyle be uppermost by
the very sound for you shall hood-winke me. Now there are three, foure,
or more confederates in the place, who seeming strangers as well as the
rest will be very importunate to have the philliping it, and before one
of these shall have it, who by some signe of the fingers or countenance
(foreknowne to the Iugler) do give him information after he is demanded.
Of the same nature is that tricke formerly mentioned in the booke, and
called The decollation of _Iohn Baptist_.

To make one dance naked is a tricke of the same nature, for the partie
beforehand is agreed to do it, and also the manner and circumstances: So
that the Iugler to blind the people pronounceth sundrie words to such a
person, he then begins to rave like a madde man, and put his clothes off
with a kinde of violent carelesnesse, though, God knows, the party knows
as well what he doth as your selfe that reade it.

After the same manner shall you know what money another hath in his
purse, and casting money into a pond, and finding it under a stone or
threshold in another place. Also to make a piece of money to leape out
of a cup and run to another, by meanes of a small haire fastened to the
money, which haire the confederate guideth, with a multitude of such
like strange feats, which may seeme impossible in the iudgement of the
common people to be effected without the assistance of the devill or
some familiar, which for to nominate is neither needfull, nor will my
occasions permit so much leisure as to do it.


_How to make a bellowing noyse like an oxe, of a dogge and cat fighting
together, or of two mastiffes fighting together._

THis I saw once or twice performed, and to my knowledge not above. It
was a lusty young fellow that did it with a cloth cast over his head
which reached downe to his feet, all was to beguile the people, for he
pretended that this sound came out of his belly; he had a full and
strong voice, and had practised a good while, and another man of the
like making may easily do as much. For his nostrils he stopt with his
forefinger and thumbe, and closed the other part of his hand over his
mouth as I saw him once uncased. Another man I saw at the same time,
eate halfe a dozen quicke charcoale, but this is not to be attempted by
every one: For some cannot eate their meat very hot; others there are
that cannot away with meat except it be boyling hot, and they are of
that disposition, I should have said rather constitution, that they will
not sticke to take meat as it is boyling out of a pot with their bare
hands, and yet feele no extraordinary heat.

I have here set downe, kinde Reader, not onely all usuall feates that
either my selfe have seene or heard of, but divers others also which I
am sure were never in print, nor as yet performed by any I could ever
heare of except my selfe, and all to give thee thy full content: and
take thus much from me, If thou rightly understand this, there is not a
tricke that any Iugler in the world can shew thee, but thou shalt bee
able to conceive after what manner it is performed, if he do it by
slight of hand, and not by an unlawfull and detested means. That there
are such it is not to be doubted of, that do worke by unlawfull meanes,
and have besides their owne natural endowments the assistance of some
familiar, whereby they many times effect such miraculous things as may
well be admired by whom soever shall either behold or heare tell of
them. I could give an instance in one whose father while he lived was
the greatest Iugler in _England_, and used the assistance of a familiar;
he lived a Tinker by trade, and used his feates as a trade by the by; he
lived, as I was informed, alwayes betotterd, and dyed, for ought I could
heare, in the same estate. I could here, as I have instanced in this
man, so give you his name, and where he liveth, but because he hath left
the bad way, and chose the better, because he hath amended his life, and
betooke himselfe to an honest calling, I will rather reioyce at his
good, then do him any the least disgrace by naming him to have beene
such a one. If here be any aske my name, let them know I am not bound to
tell them. If they aske why I have writ this pamphlet, Tis to delight
them: let them excuse me for the one, and thanke me for the other: and
it may be, if time will give so much leasure, I shall hereafter spend my
wits upon some better subiect.


_FINIS._




Transcriber's Notes


The book from which this e-text was transcribed bears the inscription
"Bequest of Harry Houdini April 1927".

The Library of Congress Online Catalog lists Harper as author of this
work, however WorldCat lists the book as printed by Thomas Harper for
Ralph Mab. It seems that Mab was a stationer (arguably the publisher)
and Harper the printer, not the author.

Italic text is marked _thus_. Normal text denoting emphasis within
italic headings and sections is marked =thus=.

Words which start with two capital letters are printed with large or
ornamented initial "drop capitals" in the original.

Irregular spelling, capitalisation and hyphenation are as per the
original. Spacing around punctuation has been regularised. Unclear or
missing punctuation corrected without note. Long-s in the original
replaced with regular s. Sidenotes and illustrations have been moved to
the nearest sentence break i.e. period, colon or semi-colon. Missing
letters have been restored as follows:

  "The Definition, or description of the Operator" [T in "The" added]

  "Then say thus, they swallow puddings" [p in "pudding" added]

  "moment therefore be quick" [f in "therefore" added]

  "and called The decollation of _Iohn Baptist_" [a in "Baptist" added]

Likely printer errors were noted as follows but not corrected:

  "should churme for butter, and" ["churme" should be "churne"?]

  "quantitie of linfoyl and quicksilver" and "put your linfoyl in a
  crucible" ["linfoyl" should be "tinfoyl"?]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Hocus Pocus Junior: The Anatomie of
Legerdemain, by Unknown

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOCUS POCUS JUNIOR: LEGERDEMAIN ***

***** This file should be named 34375.txt or 34375.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/3/7/34375/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by the Library of Congress)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
