The Project Gutenberg eBook, Norfolk Annals, by Charles Mackie


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Norfolk Annals
       A Chronological Record of Remarkable Events in the Nineteeth Century, Vol. 1


Author: Charles Mackie



Release Date: November 25, 2010  [eBook #34439]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NORFOLK ANNALS***


Transcribed from the 1901 edition by David Price, email ccx074@pglaf.org





                              NORFOLK ANNALS


              A CHRONOLOGICAL RECORD OF REMARKABLE EVENTS IN
                          THE NINETEENTH CENTURY

         (_Compiled from the files of the_ "_Norfolk Chronicle_")

                                    BY
                              CHARLES MACKIE

                                * * * * *

                                VOLUME I.

                                1801-1850

                                * * * * *

    "It is beyond the capacity of the human intellect to discriminate
    beforehand between what is valuable and what is valueless in the
    pursuit of historical research.  What would we give now for
    newspapers and trade circulars illustrating the social habits of many
    bygone times and peoples?"--_The Times_, May 4, 1900.

                                * * * * *

                     [_Entered at Stationers' Hall_]

                                   1901
  Printed at the Office of the "Norfolk Chronicle" Market Place Norwich




SUBSCRIBERS.


Lord Amherst of Hackney, Didlington Hall, Brandon, Norfolk.
Major C. W. Archdale, Coltishall, Norwich.

The Rev. Thomas W. B. Bartlett, Beeston Rectory, Swaffham.
Miss Bateman, 1, Hanover Road, Brunswick Road, Norwich.
Sir Reginald P. Beauchamp, Bart., Langley Park.
The Rev. John Hare Beevor, Hevingham Rectory, Norwich (two copies).
W. T. Bensly, LL.D., F.S.A., Eaton, Norwich.
C. A. Bathurst Bignold, Eaton Hall, Norwich.
Edward L. Birkbeck, Lexham.
Henry Birkbeck, Westacre.
T. C. Blofeld, Hoveton House.
Thomas Blomfield, Wellington House, East Dereham.
Edward Boardman, Albemarle Road, Norwich.
E. T. Boardman, Queen Street, Norwich.
H. C. Bolingbroke, Shirehall, Norwich.
T. B. Brittan, Brentwood, City Road, Lakenham, Norwich.
William Cooper Brown, Hartwell, Wroxham.
Henry G. Browne, 84, West Pottergate Street, Norwich.
The Rev. E. Utten Browne, Besthorpe Vicarage, Attleborough.
Sir Harry Bullard, M.P., Hellesdon House, Norwich.
General W. E. G. L. Bulwer, C.B., Quebec House, East Dereham.
Edward Bunnett, Mus. Doc, The Close, Norwich.
C. Louis Buxton, Bolwick, Marsham, Norwich.
G. F. Buxton, Dunston Hall, Norwich.

Edward J. Caley, Chapel Field Works, Norwich.
Thomas Chaplin, Milestone House, Thorpe Road, Norwich.
Henry L. Clark, Maid's Head Hotel, Norwich.
Stroud L. Cocks, Uplands, Diss.
Russell J. Colman, Bracondale Woods, Norwich.
Ben Cook, Aylsham.

Henry J. Copeman, 2, Town Close Road, Norwich.
S. Cozens-Hardy (Sheriff of Norwich), Bracondale, Norwich.
Thomas Cranmer, Clarence House, East Dereham.
Archdeacon Crosse, Cathedral Precincts, Norwich.
Henry R. Culley, 12, Bank Street, Norwich.

Travers Daveney, Linton, Cambridge.

Sir Peter Eade, St. Giles' Street, Norwich.
Frederic R. Eaton, Cleveland House, Eaton, Norwich.
M. S. Emerson, Cathedral Close, Norwich.

The Hon. Ailwyn E. Fellowes, M.P., Honingham Hall.
G. B. ffolkes, Manor House, Wolferton, King's Lynn.
Sir William H. B. ffolkes, Bart., Hillington Hall, King's Lynn.
P. Berney Ficklin, Tasburgh Hall, Norwich.
Miss Franklin, 58, Unthank Road, Norwich.
Free Library, Norwich.

W. Coke Gee, Branksome, Catton.
W. B. Gerish, Ivy Lodge, Bishop's Stortford, Herts.
Henry J. Gidney, Aylsham.
George Gilbert, Old Hall, Reedham.
Lieut.-Col. H. H. Gilbert, Cantley, Norfolk.
Sir Charles R. Gilman, Stafford House, Norwich.
The Rev. F. J. W. Girling, Shernborne Vicarage, King's Lynn.
T. Inglis Goldie, Theatre Street, Norwich.
Agas H. Goose, 17, Prince of Wales Road, Norwich.
Robert Green, Angle Cottage, Sheringham.
Frederick Gregory, Excelsior House, North Walsham, Norfolk.
Guildhall Library, London.

W. H. Hackblock, Coltishall.
H. Rider Haggard, Ditchingham House.
J. B. Tooke Hales, The Close, Norwich.
Peter E. Hansell, Wroxham House, Wroxham, Norfolk.
P. Harbord, Lammas Hall, Norwich.
Bosworth Harcourt, 39, St. Giles' Street, Norwich.
Thomas Hardie, Tudor House, Lower Clarence Road, Thorpe Hamlet.
W. T. Hartcup, Eastwood, Old Catton.

Captain E. Harvey, Holmwood, Thorpe, Norwich.
Lord Hastings, Melton Constable Hall, Norfolk.
Frank P. Hinde, The Fernery, Thorpe Hamlet, Norwich.
Sir Samuel Hoare, Bart., M.P., Sidestrand Hall.
Francis Hornor, Thorpe Mansions, Norwich.
The Rev. J. W. Hoste, Norfolk Club, Norwich.
Charles J. A. Howes, 36, Havelock Road, Earlham Road, Norwich.
The Rev. William Hudson, 15, Hartfield Square, Eastbourne.
John Hurn, 37, Surrey Street, Norwich.

Arthur Edward Jackson, 79, St. Giles' Street, Norwich.
Sir Alfred Jodrell, Bart., Bayfield, Holt.
Frederick Johnson, 33, Queen's Road, Great Yarmouth.

The Earl of Leicester, K.G., Holkham, Norfolk.
Thomas Barrett Lennard, Horsford Manor, Norwich.
Hamon le Strange, Hunstanton Hall, Norfolk.
Captain Evans Lombe, 88, Hough Green, Chester.
C. J. Temple Lynes, Blakeney, Norfolk.

A. H. Mann, Mus. Doc., King's Field, Cambridge.
The Hon. Robert Marsham-Townshend, 5, Chesterfield Street, Mayfair,
London, W.
Miss Elizabeth Matthews, The Hollies, Swaffham.
William McQueen, The Cedar, Heigham Grove, Norwich.
John C. Miles, The Denes, Great Yarmouth.
Fred Morgan, Theatre Royal, Norwich.

Norfolk and Norwich Library, Norwich.

The Earl of Orford, Mannington Hall, Aylsham, Norfolk.

J. J. D. Paul (Mayor of Norwich), Eaton Grove, Norwich.
Mrs. Petre (of Westwick), Furze Hill, North Walsham, Norfolk.
R. H. Porter, 7, Prince's Street, Cavendish Square, London, W.
Arthur W. Preston, Bradestone House, Brundall.
Richard Preston, Tonbridge, Kent.
R. J. W. Purdy, Woodgate House, Aylsham.

John Quinton, Norfolk and Norwich Library, Norwich.

Clare Sewell Read, 91, Kensington Gardens Square, London, W.
Edmund Reeve, Ber House, Norwich.

James Reeve, Castle Museum, Norwich.
F. T. S. Rippingall, Langham, Blakeney, Norfolk.
Walter R. Rudd, The Mount, Thorpe Hamlet, Norwich.
Walter Rye, St. Leonard's Priory, Norwich.

Alfred C. Self, Arlington, Mount Pleasant, Norwich.
John Shepheard, Cromer Road, North Walsham.
His Highness Prince Frederick Duleep Singh, Old Buckenham Hall,
Attleborough.
Henry Smith, Ellingham Hall, Bungay.
Edwin B. Southwell, 60, Bracondale, Norwich.
E. Bowyer Sparke, Gunthorpe Hall, Dereham.
A. W. Spratt, St. Catherine's College, Cambridge.
F. Primrose Stevenson, F.Z.S., 155, Trinity Road, Upper Tooting, London,
S.W.

Francis Taylor, Diss.

W. Gladstone Ulph, The Grange, Martham.

John Walker, Wentworth Villa, Newmarket Road, Norwich.
Lord Walsingham, F.R.S., Merton Hall, Thetford.
John H. Walter, Drayton House, Norwich.
The Rev. G. D. D. Watt, 2, Park Road, Forest Hill, London, S.E.
George White, M.P., The Grange, Eaton, Norwich.
Edward Wild, The Hawthorns, Eaton, Norwich.
Edward R. Woodward, Guardians' Office, St. Andrew's Street, Norwich.




PREFACE.


The "Norfolk and Norwich Remembrancer and Vade Mecum," upon the plan of
which this work is compiled, was published in two editions.  The first
(undated) was issued in or about 1801.  It appeared in pamphlet form
(f'cap 8vo), and contained (1) a brief topographical description of the
city and county; (2) a "Chronological Retrospect of the most remarkable
events which have occurred in Norfolk and Norwich during the 18th
century, with a list of Bishops, Deans, High Sheriffs, Mayors and
Sheriffs of Norwich, and Mayors of Yarmouth and Lynn within that period";
(3) an Index Villaris, "including an accurate account of the population,
&c., of every parish in the county, extracted from the official returns
taken in 1801, with the measured and computed distance of each market
town and village from the city of Norwich; also the returns of the
population of Norwich, as taken in 1693, 1752, 1786, and 1801"; (4) a
list of direct and cross roads from Yarmouth, Lynn, and Cromer; and (5)
an alphabetical list of "noblemen and gentlemen's seats and villas in the
county, with their distance from Norwich."  The work was printed and sold
by Stevenson and Matchett, Market Place, Norwich, and was "to be had of
the distributors of the NORFOLK CHRONICLE and of all booksellers."

The "Remembrancer" consisted of 80 pages, and was published at
eighteenpence.  Although the "Chronological Retrospect" extended over the
period of one hundred years--from 1701 to 1800 inclusive, it was
compressed into 43 pages.  This, the most important section of the work,
was reprinted from a local chronology published in the NORFOLK CHRONICLE,
compiled partly from old Norwich histories and partly from the early
files of the newspaper.  "Omissions or errors which may have occurred in
this work," says a footnote to the "advertisement" to the first edition,
"shall be corrected in a future edition, and notice of such will be
thankfully received by the Editors."

But many years elapsed before the publication of a second edition, and it
was not until 1822 that the "Remembrancer" again made its appearance.
The modest pamphlet of 1801 had grown to a crown 8vo volume of 274 pages,
bound in cloth, and issued at three shillings and sixpence.  It was
printed in bolder type, and contained additional information of a
miscellaneous character, which, published at a time when few general
directories and books of reference were in circulation, and local
statistics difficult to obtain, was received with favour as one of the
earliest attempts to supply the want now so fully met by local handbooks
and year-books.  In this, as in the first edition, the Chronology was by
far the most important part of the book.  The 18th century "Retrospect"
was revised and amplified, and the record, continued from January, 1801,
to December, 1821, occupied 208 pages.  The compiler of this edition, and
probably of the former issue, although his name did not appear in
connection therewith, was Mr. Jonathan Matchett, the senior proprietor of
the NORFOLK CHRONICLE, who states in his preface: "The Chronology of
Remarkable Events has been compiled principally from the volumes of the
NORFOLK CHRONICLE, of which, with the local occurrences of the last fifty
years at least, the Retrospect may be considered an epitome.  Such errors
of omission or commission as may be discovered in this humble compilation
shall, if pointed out, be corrected in a future edition, if ever a third
should be called for."  As no subsequent issue appeared, it may be
assumed that the demand for the work was not such as to justify the
expenditure of the time and labour necessary to its production.  Mr.
Matchett died November 24th, 1844, and from that time until the present
no effort had been made to continue the Chronology.

Little need be written by way of preface to this work.  It was commenced
as an index to the Nineteenth Century files of the NORFOLK CHRONICLE, and
was not, as originally planned, intended for publication.  The compiler,
however, was advised to elaborate his scheme and to prepare, in place of
a MS. index designed for private use, a work which would serve the
twofold purpose of continuing the excellent Chronology begun by Mr.
Matchett, and of supplying a book of reference upon a variety of subjects
pertaining to Norfolk and Norwich.  In Volume I. of "Norfolk Annals" are
recorded the events of the two decades included in the second edition of
the "Remembrancer," but the matter has been entirely re-written, and the
field of research considerably enlarged.  With the lapse of time many
things, too familiar and commonplace to be very fully noticed in the
"Remembrancer,"--_e.g._, the coaching system, sports which are now
obsolete, country celebrations and observances, &c.,--have acquired an
interest which they did not present to a compiler of eighty or a hundred
years ago.  Some of the facts recorded in these pages may not in
themselves be considered "remarkable," but collectively they illustrate
the manners and customs, the wisdom and follies, the labours and
amusements, of Norfolk people in the century just closed, and, it is
hoped, show to what extent the county and city have progressed morally
and socially during the last hundred years.  In one respect "Norfolk
Annals" is less pretentious than its antecessor--it gives no
topographical and statistical information of the kind published in the
"Norfolk and Norwich Remembrancer"; in another sense it is more
pretentious--it contains an index, which will add to its usefulness as a
book of reference.

The writer is indebted to the Chairman (Sir Charles Gilman) and the
Directors of the NORFOLK CHRONICLE CO., Limited, for permitting him to
make use of the files of that newspaper, from which exclusively the
following pages have been compiled.




CORRIGENDA. {0}


Page 128, last line, _for_ "present" _read_ "presented."

,, 138, line 9, _for_ "Hawkes" _read_ "Hankes."

,, 166, line 2, _for_ "Henry" _read_ "Hurry."

,, 187, line 8, _for_ "Miller" _read_ "Milles."

,, 216, first line of last paragraph _for_ "Norfolk" _read_ "Norwich."




NORFOLK ANNALS.
VOLUME I.
1801-1850.


[NOTE.--_Marginal dates distinguished by an asterisk are dates of
publication_, _not of occurrence_.]



1801.


JANUARY.


1.--This day (Thursday) was observed as the first day of the Nineteenth
Century.  It was also the day upon which the legislative Union of Great
Britain and Ireland was effected.  At Norwich, the 13th Regiment of Light
Dragoons and the East Essex Militia fired a _feu de joie_ in the Market
Place, and the Union flag was displayed upon the tower of St. Peter
Mancroft.  At Yarmouth, there was a ceremonial parade of the Durham
Militia, and the vessels in the Roads fired a royal salute and hoisted
their new colours in honour of the Union.  Rain fell heavily throughout
the day.

3.--The Norwich Theatre was opened with the performance of "the last new
comedy, 'Life,' and the farce, 'Curiosity.'"  The manager, Mr. Hindes,
delivered an address to a crowded and fashionable audience.  The
alterations in the house were executed after designs by Mr. William
Wilkins, the patentee, and it was said to be one of the handsomest
theatres in the provinces.

5.*--"The Duke of Grafton's hounds unkenneled a fox at Fakenham Wood,
near Euston, and after a chase of upwards of 50 miles in 4 hours 5
minutes, killed him at New Buckenham."

27.*--"A match for ten guineas (two miles) was trotted on the turnpike
road between Setch and Lynn, between Mr. Robson's pony Filch and Mr.
Scarfe's pony Fidler, which was won with great ease by the former, he
having trotted over the ground at the rate of 18 miles an hour."

Great scarcity prevailed throughout this month.  About 1,500 pounds was
subscribed for supplying the poor of Norwich with soup, and upwards of
247,000 quarts were distributed.  At Norwich market wheat was quoted at
the beginning of the month at 146s. per quarter, and rose at the end to
180s.; barley, 84s.; and oats, 50s.  Various expedients were adopted to
lessen the consumption of bread.  "The officers of the West Norfolk
Militia" it was stated, "have entirely left off the use of bread at their
mess, and have forbid the use of puddings and pies, except the crust is
made of rice or potatoes, which they eat in a variety of shapes as a
substitute for bread."  Nurses were advised to use linseed meal and water
instead of bread and milk in making poultices.


FEBRUARY.


9.--Died at Postwick, aged 21, Edward West, who had served as midshipman
under Lord Nelson at the battle of the Nile, and accompanied Capt. Sir
Edward Berry in the Foudroyant.  In the action with the Guillaume Tell
"he received a most severe wound, which occasioned a decline."

11.--A General Fast was observed in Norwich.

14.*--"It is much to be regretted that although many large manufactures
of hempen cloth are established in Norwich, all the spinning of the hemp
is done in Suffolk, and a sufficient quantity is with difficulty obtained
from thence.  It is suggested to establish a spinning school for
children, under the patronage of benevolent ladies."

17.--A company was formed at Norwich for the erection of a "public mill
to be worked by steam for supplying the bakers and inhabitants with
flour."  A capital of 12,500 pounds was raised in transferable shares of
25 pounds, and the mill was erected upon a site near Blackfriars' Bridge.

24.--Mr. Charles Harvey, Steward of Norwich, elected Recorder, in place
of Mr. Henry Partridge, resigned.

28.--The price of wheat at Norwich Market was 168s. per quarter.


MARCH.


6.--The Anacreontic Society, "which for many years has been established
in Norwich, and to which the cause of music owes so much," closed its
winter session.  The Hon. Mr. Wodehouse, Sir William Jerningham, Sir
Richard Bedingfeld, and Capt. Sir Edward Berry were present.  The Society
gave monthly concerts in the Assembly Room from October to March.  In the
advertisement announcing the commencement of the next session, it was
stated that the first concert would "begin precisely at 6; supper-rooms
open at 9, and the President to quit the chair at 12 o'clock."

7.--Arrived in Yarmouth Roads, the St. George, of 98 guns, bearing the
flag of Lord Nelson.  The grand fleet of 47 ships of war (with 3,000
marines), sailed on the 12th, under the command of Admiral Sir Hyde
Parker, in the London, of 98 guns, with Nelson as his Vice-Admiral.  The
fleet first "rendezvoused" in Leith Roods, where it was joined by seven
sail of the line, and afterwards proceeded to Copenhagen.

10.--A mob assembled at Lynn and grossly assaulted several millers and
farmers by throwing at them stones and dirt.  In the evening they broke
the windows in the dining-room of the Duke's Head Inn.  "One of the
ringleaders was taken to gaol, and by the active exertions of the Rutland
Militia tranquillity was restored without bloodshed."

11.*--"Mr. Kett, butcher, of Norwich, undertook to ride his horse 50
miles in four hours.  He started from St. Stephen's Gates at 12 o'clock,
reached the 25th milestone on the Thetford road in about 2.5 hours, and
returned to the place whence he had set out one and a half minutes before
the time allowed.  Six to four was laid that the horse did not perform
the journey."

14.*--[Advt.]  "The Yarmouth and Norwich mail coach will set out from the
King's Head, Market Place, Norwich, and the Star Tavern, Quay, Yarmouth,
every day, at 12 o'clock."

16.--The Invincible, of 74 guns (built in 1766), Rear-Admiral Totty, on
her way to join the grand fleet, got on the Ridge, near Happisburgh Sand,
and remained there till daybreak next morning, when she floated off.  On
entering deep water she went down immediately, with several officers and
300 men.  Daniel Grigson, master of the Nancy cod-smack, saved seven
officers and about 190 of the crew.  At a Court Martial held at
Sheerness, on March 31st, on Admiral Totty and the surviving officers and
crew, it was proved that the disaster occurred through the ignorance of
the pilot, and a verdict of honourable acquittal was returned.

19.--At the Norfolk Assizes, held at Thetford, before Mr. Justice Grose,
the action, the King _v._ Augustus Beevor, clerk, was tried.  The
information was filed against the defendant by leave of the Court of
King's Bench, for sending a challenge to Major Edward Payne, in
consequence of a dispute that had taken place between the Major and the
defendant's father.  Defendant, referring to this dispute, wrote to Major
Payne, demanding an apology, "or he should be under the necessity of
compelling it by a mode generally used among gentlemen."  No notice was
taken of the letter, and the defendant meeting Major Payne in the Market
Place at Norwich told him publicly that "the contempt he had for his
character protected his person."  The defendant was found guilty, and at
the next term of the Court of King's Bench (May 7) was sentenced to three
weeks' imprisonment in the King's Bench Prison, and ordered to enter into
his own recognisances of 500 pounds, to find two sureties of 250 pounds
each, and to be of good behaviour for three years.

20.*--"The remains of Miss Sophia Goddard, of the Theatre Royal, Norwich,
were interred at St. Peter Mancroft.  Mr. Hindes, the manager, and the
principal actors attended on the melancholy occasion.  This young lady
had obtained considerable reputation on the Norwich boards, and was
making rapid advance to eminence in her profession when death prematurely
deprived the theatrical world of an actress whose talents would have
ensured her success on any stage.  She supported with great fortitude and
resignation a long and painful illness, brought on by exertions that her
constitution was unequal to, and died on Sunday last (March 15), in her
26th year, sincerely beloved and lamented by her family and friends."

Wheat this month rose to 180s. per quarter.


APRIL.


3.--Died at the Cavalry Barracks, Norwich, Lieut. Robert Scully, 13th
Light Dragoons.  His remains were interred on Sunday, April 4th, with
military honours, at St. Peter Mancroft.

4.--Died at Cambridge, Mrs. Lloyd, widow of Dean Lloyd, aged 79.  "Her
performances in needlework were so exquisitely wrought that they may
justly be compared with the paintings of the most celebrated artists.
The Transfiguration and other figures represented in the eastern windows
of Norwich Cathedral have displayed the superior skill of her personal
attainments."

--Mousehold Heath, Norwich, was enclosed and cultivated.  Plots of land
were afterwards let at 25s. per acre.

--John Allen (23) and John Day (26), for burglary at the house of the
Rev. Isaac Horsley, at North Walsham; Richard Grafton, for stealing a cow
and three heifers; and James Chettleburgh (36), for stealing six sheep at
Saxlingham, were executed at Thetford.  "Day confessed to having
committed four burglaries previous to that for which he suffered, and to
having deserted thirteen times from different regiments."

--In consequence of objections being made to the elections of Messrs.
Staff and Proctor in the Wymer Ward, and of Messrs. Brittan and Scott in
the Northern Ward, Norwich, on the ground of their being ineligible under
the Corporation Act, having omitted to receive the Sacrament within a
year previous to the election of Common Council, the Mayor did not make
the returns till several days after the usual time.  At a Court held on
this day, the Recorder (Mr. Harvey), after the objections had been fully
argued by counsel, declared that the persons objected to, who had the
majority of votes, having omitted to come into Court according to
summons, were not duly elected; but, as no regular notice had been given
previous to the election, the candidates in the minority could not be
returned.  On May 2nd a rule was moved for in the Court of King's Bench,
to show cause why a mandamus should not be directed to the Mayor of
Norwich to admit Mr. George Wymer into the office of Common Councilman of
the city.  Similar motions were made on behalf of Messrs. Bacon, Cooke,
Fiske, and Webster, the other defeated candidates.  "Lord Kenyon desired
counsel to take rule to show cause, and to serve the rule not only on the
Mayor, but also on those persons who were elected in fact, but not _de
jure_."  On May 13th, Lord Kenyon confirmed the decision of the Recorder
that "neither the candidates who had the majority of votes, from their
not having taken the Sacrament, nor those in the minority were duly
elected."  Another election for the wards took place on May 25th and
26th.

11.*--(Advt.)  "To be seen alive in a genteel room at Mr. Peck's
Coffee-house, Church Stile, Market-place, Norwich, the largest
Rattlesnake ever seen in England, 42 years old, near nine feet long, in
full health and vigour.  He is well secured, so that Ladies and Gentlemen
may view him without the least danger.  He has not taken any sustenance
for the last 11 months.  Admittance, Ladies and Gentlemen, 1s.; working
people and children, 6d."

14.--Intelligence received at Yarmouth of the destruction of the Danish
fleet in Copenhagen Bay, by the British fleet, under the immediate
command of Lord Nelson, on April 2nd, after a battle of four hours.
Seventeen sail of the Danish navy were taken or destroyed.  The news was
conveyed to Norwich by the coach, which entered the city with colours
flying; the Volunteer corps paraded in the Market Place and fired a _feu
de joie_, and the bells of St. Peter Mancroft and of other churches were
rung.

18.*--"By the latest returns of the Secret Committee the County of
Norfolk is reported amongst the most loyal counties in the kingdom."

20.--A performance took place at the Theatre Royal, Norwich, "towards
raising a fund for the benefit of those who through age or infirmity are
obliged to retire from the Stage."

23.--Died at Norwich, Mr. John Bonsell, aged 75 years, "an eminent
leather cutter, who for upwards of 20 years lived an abstemious life,
refraining from animal food and fermented liquors.  He rendered himself
very conspicuous in the religious world, as he professed opinions, in a
great measure peculiar to himself, which bordered upon fanaticism.  He
wrote several religious controversial pamphlets, as 'The Ram's Horn,'
&c."

25.--Comparative returns of the population of Norwich, "as taken in 1801,
1786, 1752, and 1693," were published.  In 1801, the population was
36,832; in 1786, 40,051; in 1752, 36,169; in 1693, 28,881.  "The decrease
of the population of this city since 1786 is 3,219, but it is to be
observed that 1786 was a year of peace, and that in the returns of 1801
those serving in the Navy, Army, and Militia are not included.  Norwich,
during the present war, has furnished at least 4,000 recruits for the
Army and Navy, and these will account for the decrease, and also for the
great excess of females, which appears by the returns to be above
one-fourth.  Of the present population, 408 are chiefly employed in
agriculture, and 12,267 in trade, manufactures, and handicrafts."


MAY.


1.--"There being again this year no alderman below the chair who had
served the office of Sheriff, the following aldermen were put in
nomination for the office of Mayor:--James Crowe, Sir Roger Kerrison,
John Morse, and Jeremiah Ives, jun.  At the close the numbers were Ives,
668; Crowe, 638; Kerrison, 375; Morse, 37."  At a court of Mayoralty,
held on Sunday, May 3rd, it was ruled that Mr. Crowe was ineligible, in
consequence of having served the office three years previously to the
date of the election.  Sir Roger Kerrison, who stood next on the poll,
retired in favour of Mr. Ives, who was thereupon declared elected, and
was duly sworn on June 16th.

9.--Died, at Easton House, Sir Lambert Blackwell, Bart., aged 69.  The
title (conferred on his grandfather in 1718) became extinct.  He
bequeathed all his estates, with his valuable paintings, books, coins,
&c., to Mr. William Foster, jun., of Norwich, subject to certain
annuities.

16.--A reduction of from 15s. to 20s. per quarter in the price of bread
corn was announced.  There was also a decrease in the price of live
cattle of all kinds.  "A sixpenny standard wheaten loaf, which about six
weeks ago weighed only 1 lb. 4 ozs. 6 drs., now weighs 2 lbs. 10 ozs. 6
drs."

23.*--"Another capital prize in the lottery has come down to Norwich.
The whole ticket, number 24,350, a prize of 15,000 pounds in the July
Irish Lottery, is the sole property of Charles Weston, Esq., banker and
brewer of this city.  The ticket was purchased twelve months ago, and not
being registered, the fortunate holder remained unconscious of his wealth
until last week, when, on examining the public lists, he discovered that
his ticket was a prize of the amount above stated."


JUNE.


2.--Mr. Henry Harmer elected Speaker of the Common Council of Norwich, in
place of his father, Mr. Samuel Harmer, who held the office upwards of 20
years.

4.--The King's Birthday was celebrated at Norwich with great
demonstrations of joy.  The Corporation attended service at the
Cathedral, the Loyal Military Association and the several parochial
associations paraded in the Market Place and fired a _feu de joie_, and
the members of the Norwich Light Horse, after a like ceremony, dined at
the Maid's Head.  Major Patteson's corps adjourned to Neeche's Gardens,
Capt. Blake's corps to the Rose Inn, St Augustine's, and the other corps
to different taverns.  The Mayor gave a dinner to the Aldermen.

8.*--"A quartermaster of the 13th Light Dragoons rode a certain distance
up Thorpe Road in a given time, with his face to the horse's tail, and
afterwards up the sand hill near Kett's Castle in the same position, and
won both wagers."

18.--The body of William Suffolk, who was executed in March, 1797, for
the murder of Mary Beck, of North Walsham, was taken down by authority of
the magistrates and interred on the spot where the gibbet was erected.
"About ten days back a starling's nest, with young ones, was taken out of
the breast of Watson, who hangs on a gibbet on Bradenham Common, near
Swaffham, for the murder of his wife, which was witnessed by hundreds of
people as something very singular and extraordinary."

20.--The ensign of the Genereux having been presented to the city by
Capt. Sir Edward Berry, the Corporation caused it to be displayed in St.
Andrew's Hall, Norwich, with a suitable inscription.

22.--Holkham Sheep Shearing commenced and lasted until the 26th.  Among
those present were the Duke of Bedford, the Duke of Manchester, and other
distinguished visitors.  The new implements exhibited included a machine
for drilling turnips, invented by the Rev. T. C. Munnings.  It was
described as "nothing more than a perforated tin box, affixed to and
vertical with the axis of a wheelbarrow."  A thrashing machine "was much
approved of."  At this meeting Mr. Coke announced his intention to give
premiums for promoting the improvement of live stock and for encouraging
experimental husbandry.

25.--A fire broke out on the roof of Norwich Cathedral, and occasioned
damage to the amount of 500 pounds.  Bishop Manners Sutton personally
distributed refreshments to the soldiers and others who assisted in
extinguishing the flames.  About 45 feet of the roof were destroyed.  The
fire originated from the carelessness of plumbers at work upon the
building.

27.*--"At the ordinary visitation of the clergy and general confirmation
held during this month, Bishop Manners Sutton confirmed at Newmarket
1,150 persons of both sexes; at Bury St. Edmund's, 4,500; at Stowmarket,
1,150; at Ipswich, 1,300; at Woodbridge, 1,150; at Framlingham, 960; at
Beccles, 660; and at Norwich, 1,100."

29.--Vice-Admiral Lord Nelson arrived at Yarmouth in the Kite sloop,
Capt. Domett, from Copenhagen.  He immediately proceeded on foot from the
jetty to the Hospital, and visited the sick and wounded seamen.  After a
stay of about three hours, his lordship left Yarmouth for London, under
escort of a troop of Yeomanry Cavalry.

The price of wheat at the end of this month fell to 120s. per quarter.


JULY.


11.*--"The duty on port wine expected at Lynn alone will, it is said,
amount to 80,000 pounds."

--*"The Postmasters General have permitted the mail coach to be
established from Lynn to unite with that from Norwich and Yarmouth at
Barton Mills."

17.--Wroxham Regatta took place.  "The novelty of a sailing match
attracted a great deal of company."  It was won by the Union, the
property of the Rev. Mr. Preston.

18.--The population of Norfolk was returned as 274,221, of whom 130,249
were males and 143,972 females.

28.--At a general meeting of the Deputy-Lieutenants and magistrates,
presided over by the Lord Lieutenant (the Marquis Townshend), it was
resolved to adopt measures for the effectual defence of the county and
the preservation of property.


AUGUST.


1.--At the Norfolk Assizes, held at Thetford, before Lord Chief Baron
Macdonald, was tried the action, Stracey _v._ Davy.  The plaintiff was
lord of the Manor of Rackheath, and the defendant a tenant of Mr. John
Morse, jun.  The action, which was for trespass, was brought for the
purpose of ascertaining certain rights set up by the defendant.  Davy
sought to establish the privilege of sheep walk over that part of
Mousehold Heath then belonging to the parish of Rackheath.  He claimed
severally the right of feeding 500, 400, and 300 sheep, and also the
right of depasturing his sheep levant and couchant, and in various other
modes.  The special jury found a verdict for the defendant, and confirmed
his right of feeding 500 sheep at six score to the hundred.

3.--The annual Venison Feast was held at the Red Lion, Fakenham, to
celebrate Lord Nelson's victory of the Nile.

4.--The Norwich parochial Volunteer Associations assembled at St.
Andrew's Hall, and afterwards marched to the Market Place, where Capt.
William Herring, the commanding officer for the day, read a letter from
the Lord Lieutenant, requesting the men to be prepared in case of
invasion.

--"This day, from five in the morning till ten at night, heavy
cannonading was distinctly heard by the Rev. Mr. Burton and several of
his parishioners at Horsford, which was at the time supposed to be the
cannonading from Lord Nelson's fleet before Boulogne."

15.--Henry Lawn, aged 41, executed on the Castle Hill, Norwich, for horse
stealing.  "He denied to the last that he was guilty.  He left a wife and
six children.  He would have enjoyed a considerable property, which the
present possessor has entailed upon his children."

24.--The Supplementary Militia was re-embodied.  During this month
meetings were held in different parishes in city and county to discuss
the means to be adopted in case of invasion.  The clergy in country
parishes took account of the live and dead stock that could be removed,
and of the number of waggons and carts to be made use of.  The drilling
of Yeomanry and Volunteer corps became general.


SEPTEMBER.


20.--Died at Brompton, Sir John Gresham, Bart., the last male heir of the
family.

26.*--"A person residing in this city has within the last week been
convicted in penalties amounting to 166 pounds 10s., for having laid a
leaden pipe from his dwelling-house to communicate with the pipes
belonging to the proprietors of the waterworks, without having obtained
their consent or paid the accustomed water rent.  The amount was paid to
the company's solicitor, who immediately returned the money, except 30
guineas, which he has paid to the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital for the
benefit of that institution."

The portraits of Lord Nelson, by Sir William Beechey, and of Mr. John
Herring, Mayor of Norwich in 1799, by Opie, were this month placed in St.
Andrew's Hall.


OCTOBER.


1.--Intelligence was received at Yarmouth, from Constantinople, of the
surrender of Alexandria to the British and Turkish armies under General
Hutchinson and the Grand Vizier.

3.--The intelligence reached Norwich that the Preliminaries of Peace had
been signed in Paris.  There were great rejoicings on the 10th on the
ratification of the news.  The horses of the mail coach, by which the
intelligence was brought to the city, were so terrified by the
demonstration that they became unmanageable, the coach was overturned,
and the coachman, the guard, and some of the passengers injured.

5.--At Yarmouth, during the Peace illuminations, a mob broke the windows
of several houses occupied by Quakers.  The ringleaders were committed
for trial at the Sessions.

7.--At the Norfolk County Sessions, Elizabeth Manship, of Ormesby, was
indicted for committing an outrage upon the Rev. Eli Morgan Price, when
in the act of officiating at Divine service at the parish church.  It
appeared that while Mr. Price was reading a new form of thanksgiving "for
the late plentiful season" the defendant rushed out of her pew and
snatched the paper out of his hands, to the very great disturbance and
alarm of the congregation.  The jury found the defendant guilty, and she
was sentenced to pay a fine of 20 pounds.

21.--A general illumination took place in Norwich in celebration of the
Peace.  There was a grand display of transparencies, and a huge bonfire
was lighted in the Market Place, around which the Mayor and Corporation
paraded.  The celebration was general throughout the county.

24.*--"In the spring of this year the Palace Workhouse, Norwich,
contained 1,017 paupers.  They are now reduced to 425, a smaller number
than has been known for the past 20 years.  The reduction in the other
workhouse has been nearly proportionate."


NOVEMBER.


2.--The Prince of Orange arrived at Yarmouth from London, and on the 6th
sailed in the Diana packet for Cuxhaven.

13.--Peter Donahue, a sergeant in the 30th Regiment of Foot, was executed
at Lynn, for uttering counterfeit Bank of England notes.  "We are sorry
to add that he appeared sensible for many minutes after he was turned
off, and a large effusion of blood gushed from his mouth and nose, which
rendered the scene most awful, terrible, and distressing."

20.--Prince William Frederick of Gloucester arrived at the house of Mr.
J. Patteson, at Norwich, and in the afternoon stood sponsor for Mr.
Patteson's youngest son, who was christened at St. Stephen's Church by
the name of William Frederick.  The Prince afterwards went to Houghton,
where Lord Cholmondeley gave a grand _fete_ in honour of the Peace.  On
his return to Norwich, on November 25th, his Royal Highness attended a
ball and supper, given by Mrs. Charles Manners Sutton at the Bishop's
Palace.

21.*--"The coursing meeting at Swaffham last week was numerously and
respectably attended.  The silver cup was won by Mr. Denton's bitch
Nettle, which beat Mr. Tyssen's bitch.  The assembly was brilliantly and
numerously attended"


DECEMBER.


5.--It was announced that the Duke of Norfolk intended to "pull down the
old Palace, now used as a workhouse, and employ the premises for some
beneficial and ornamental purpose."

16.--The old Hall at Stratton Strawless, belonging to Mr. Robert Marsham,
was destroyed by fire.  The family had removed a few weeks before into
the new hall.

26.--A serious affray occurred at Horsford between two Excise officers,
assisted by two privates of the 3rd Dragoon Guards, and 30 smugglers.
The officers had seized a large quantity of smuggled goods at Cawston,
and the smugglers succeeded in retaking only a small part.  One of the
soldiers was shot; several of the smugglers were desperately wounded, and
two died of their wounds.

--*(Advt.)  "The Lord Nelson new Light Coach, from London to Lynn in 14
hours, through Cambridge and Ely.  Agreeable to the wishes of the
Vice-Chancellor and several members of the University, the proprietors
mean to relinquish travelling on the Sunday.  The coach will leave the
Golden Cross, Charing Cross, on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday mornings at
half-past five, arrive at Cambridge at one, and Lynn at eight in the
evening.  The coach will return from the Globe Inn, Lynn, on Tuesday,
Thursday, and Saturday mornings.  The coach carries four insides."

--*(Advt.)  "The Lord Nelson Coach, from London to Fakenham.  The coach
leaves the Crown, Fakenham, on Sunday, Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday;
sups at Cambridge, and arrives in London about seven in the morning.
From the Golden Cross, same days, at six in the evening."

Prices of corn at the end of the year: Wheat, 70s. to 76s.  Rye, 36s.
Barley, 40s. to 42s. per quarter.  Oats, 20s. to 24s.  Malt, 32s. per
coomb.  Best flour, 3 pounds 1s. 8.25d per sack.  Coals, 40s. 4d. per
chaldron.



1802.


JANUARY.


2.*--"Mr. W. E. Bulwer, of Heydon, has resolved to divide all his farms
into 200 acres, as they come out of lease.  They are worthy the attention
of industrious men wanting situations."

4.--The Duke of Bedford, Lord Paget, and Lord John Thynne, with four
other gentlemen, on a visit to Lord Cholmondeley at Houghton, "had the
greatest day's sport ever known in Norfolk.  They killed altogether 165
hares, 42 pheasants, 5 rabbits, 2 woodcock, and 2 partridges, and this
notwithstanding that the woods had been beat five times this season."

9.--A reduction of 3s. 6d. in the pound poor-rates announced.  The mulct
was fixed at 7s. in the pound.  "For the last 30 years there have not
been so few paupers in the two workhouses, principally owing to the
manufacturers of Norwich having such large orders to execute that hands
are actually wanted."

--The non-commissioned officers and privates of the Blofield and South
Walsham troop of Yeomanry Cavalry offered to continue their services to
the Government, and "thanked the officers for the unremitting and polite
attention paid to them since the establishment in 1794."  Other troops of
Yeomanry in the county made similar offers.

13.*--"Died lately at Bristol Hot Wells, where she had gone for the
recovery of her health, the Countess of Leicester."

--*"Died last week Mr. William Websdale.  This venerable man lived in
three centuries, and expired at the advanced age of 102 years."

--*The following Coach advertisements were published on this date:--

"Royal Lynn Mail Coach sets out daily from the Duke's Head Inn, Lynn, by
way of Brandon, Barton Mills, Newmarket, Bournbridge, and Epping, to the
White Horse, in Fetter Lane, whence it returns every day at three
o'clock."

"The Fakenham and Swaffham Light Post Coach sets out daily from the Red
Lion, in Fakenham, at two o'clock, and returns from London as above."

"The Lord Nelson Coach, from Lynn to Norwich in seven hours.  From the
Globe, Lynn, to the King's Head, Norwich, every Monday, Wednesday, and
Friday, returning Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday at seven o'clock each
morning."

"The Lynn and Norwich Machine, from the Crown Tavern, Lynn, to the White
Swan, Norwich.  Runs three times a week.  Insides, 12s.; outsides, 7s."

14.--Mr. William Earle Bulwer installed Provincial Grand Master of
Freemasons at the White Swan, St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich.

15.--The thermometer "very near to 0 (32 degrees below freezing point)."

16.--A fine grey eagle was taken alive in a trap upon the estate of Lord
Montrath, at Weeting.  It measured from the extremity of each wing 7 feet
8 inches, and from the beak to the tail nearly four feet.


FEBRUARY.


15.--The Norwich Court of Guardians considered the question of the
erection of a new workhouse.  The average number of poor maintained in
the two workhouses during the previous 18 years had been 1,282.  It was
recommended that one building be erected to accommodate 1,300, the money
to be borrowed on shares of 100 pounds each, bearing interest, and to be
paid off by lot, so that the whole debt, with interest thereon, would be
discharged in 20 years.  A Bill was brought before Parliament and
received the Royal assent on May 24th, and a site for the building was
purchased near "the opening to Chapel Field."  On December 7th, in
consequence of observations made by Mr. Alderman Rigby on the subject of
outdoor relief, the question was deferred until the committee had
informed the Court whether "these allowances may not be so extended
without any diminution of the comforts of the poor as to render
unnecessary the building of such a workhouse as has hitherto been
proposed."  The scheme for the erection of the workhouse was ultimately
abandoned.

21.--Died, Mr. Henry Skipper, dyer, St. Peter Hungate, Norwich.  "He was
in his time a famous pugilist, and fought several pitched battles with
Algar, Henry, and others."


MARCH.


16.--Died, at his house in Greville Street, Hatton Garden, London, in the
28th year of his age, Thomas Archibald Murray, M.D., one of the
physicians of the public dispensary in Carey Street, and of the House of
Recovery for Infectious Diseases, an institution which, in a great
measure, owed its establishment to Dr. Murray's exertions.  He was the
youngest son of Dr. John Murray, founder of the Scots Society in Norwich,
who died September 26th, 1792.

20.*--"Died, lately, at Strawberry Hill, near Collumpton, Devonshire,
aged 78, the Earl of Montrath, of Weeting Hall.  The Earldom is extinct.
His lordship left a legacy of 2,000 pounds to the Norfolk and Norwich
Hospital.  His invariable dread of small-pox occasioned his lordship to
lead absolutely the life of a recluse.  His terror was so great that he
had five houses between his seat at Weeting and his house in Devonshire,
to prevent the chance of infection, and at these houses small
establishments were kept up, as he dared not sleep in an inn."

24.--At the Norfolk Assizes, held at Thetford, the Grand Jury made a
presentment, to the effect that, as hay and corn were considerably
reduced in price, publicans and posting-masters might, without injury to
themselves, decrease their charges.  It was resolved "That those
publicans and posting-masters who have already reduced their charges are
deserving approbation and encouragement."  In an advertisement published
on April 24th the post-masters stated that from the heavy duties imposed
upon carriages, the first expense of chaises and their repair, the
increased price of horses and of smith's work, they could not, without
great injury to themselves and their families, make any abatement in the
charge of fifteen pence (which included the payment of a duty of 3d.) per
mile, they having been considerable losers during the previous two years.

27.--Died, at Melton Constable, Sir Edward Astley, Bart., who represented
Norfolk in four successive Parliaments.  He was succeeded in the title
and estates by Sir J. H. Astley, his only surviving son by his first
wife, the eldest sister of John Lord Delaval, of Seaton Delaval,
Northumberland.

30.--News was received of the Definite Treaty of Peace having been signed
at Amiens, on March 27th, by the Marquis Cornwallis and Buonaparte.  The
Norwich Loyal Military Associations assembled at St. Andrew's Hall.
"Instead of field-pieces and ammunition waggons the martial divisions
were preceded in their march from the Hall to the Market Place by two
brewers' drays, laden with six barrels of Norwich porter, which were
drunk with much joy."


APRIL.


10.*--(Advt.)  "To Seafaring Men.  A Double Caule to be sold.  For price
and particulars enquire of the Printers."

--*"Within the last three months nearly 300 paupers have been discharged
from the two workhouses, which at the present time do not contain more
than 550 persons, the smallest number ever remembered.  The next
poor-rate, in consequence, will not exceed 4s. 3d. in the pound in
Norwich."

--*"It appears from the returns of assessment of income that Norfolk and
Norwich last year contributed 111,513 pounds 17s. 1d., of which sum
18,801 pounds 0s. 3.25d. was paid by persons possessing incomes under 200
pounds a year, and 92,712 pounds 16s. 9.75d. by persons of superior
income."

17.*--(Advt.)  "Bear Baiting.  Henry Gerrard respectfully informs the
public that there will be a Bear Baiting in a meadow belonging to the
Ferry Farm House, Great Yarmouth, on Monday next, the 19th inst., in the
afternoon.  Admission 1s.; 6d. to be returned in liquor."  (The baiting
was prevented by the action of the county justices.)

--William Dunnett, for horse stealing, and John Saunders, for stealing a
cow, were executed at Thetford.

24.--The East and West Regiments of Norfolk Militia disembodied at
Yarmouth and Dereham.  The several corps of Yeomanry Cavalry and
Volunteer Infantry, on being disbanded, were thanked by the Government
for their services.

--*"The whole of the French and Dutch prisoners confined in Yaxley
Barracks were last week put on board different vessels in Lynn harbour,
from whence they proceeded to their respective countries."

26.--Died, at Bath, aged 78, the Rev. Edmund Nelson, father of Lord
Nelson.  He was rector of Burnham Thorpe, to which he was presented in
1755 by Lord Walpole.

27.--To commemorate the opening of the new organ, "built by the
celebrated Mr. England, of London," the oratorio, "The Messiah," was
performed at St. George Colegate Church, Norwich, which was "lighted up
and matted for the occasion."  The organ was opened by Mr. Beckwith, who
also conducted the band.  Three shillings was charged for admission to
the church.


MAY.


3.--The Corporation of Norwich voted an address to his Majesty the King
on the acquisition of Peace.  The address was presented to his Majesty at
a Levee at St. James's Palace, on May 21st, by Mr. Jeremiah Ives, jun.,
Mayor; Sir Roger Kerrison, Mayor-Elect; and Mr. William Foster, jun.

4.--Peace was proclaimed by the Mayor and Corporation, who went in
procession through the streets of Norwich.  Major Patteson's corps of
Volunteers and the several parochial military associations, after firing
volleys in the Market Place, marched to the residence of the Mayor-Elect,
where they deposited their muskets and regimental colours.  Officers and
men afterwards repaired to Neeche's Gardens, where they dined.  In the
evening there was a general illumination.  The day was similarly observed
at Yarmouth.

10.--A _fete_ was held in Reffley Wood, near Lynn.  A "fine Norfolk
sheep" was roasted for the feast, presided over by Sir Martin ffolkes.

13.--Died, aged 85, Mrs. Beaton, of St. John Maddermarket, Norwich.  "She
was a native of Wales, and commonly called here 'The Freemason,' from the
circumstance of her having contrived to conceal herself one evening in
the wainscoting of the lodge-room, where she learnt that secret, the
knowledge of which thousands of her sex in vain attempted to arrive at.
She was a very singular old woman, and, as a proof of it, the secret died
with her."

14.--A heavy fall of snow, which in many places lay more than an inch
thick upon the ground.  On the 15th there was a severe frost, and snow
fell for two hours.  At Langley and other places it was between three and
four inches in depth.

22.--Between one and two o'clock in the morning the dwelling-house of the
Rev. Mr. Sykes, of Guestwick, was burglariously entered by two men.
"They presented themselves at Mr. and Mrs. Sykes' bedside.  Their faces
were blackened, and one of them had on a slip of linen, and the other a
woman's checked bed-gown.  They each had a cudgel and a candle in their
hands.  They said, 'We have pistols; your money or your lives.'  One of
them remained by the bedside, while the other plundered the drawers.
Then they departed, carrying away some money and a watch."

24.--The Duke of Cambridge sailed from Yarmouth in the Amphion frigate
for Hanover, of which kingdom he was appointed Regent.

24.--Died, aged 90, Mrs. Ann Fuller, of Raveningham.  "Her remains were
interred at the parish of Toft Monks.  The pall was supported by six
grandchildren, and the funeral attended by children, grandchildren, and
great grandchildren in her own lineal descent to the number of 47."

29.--At a county meeting an address to his Majesty on the Peace was moved
by the Hon. Col. Wodehouse, seconded by the Hon. Col. Harbord, and
unanimously adopted.  The address was presented to the King by Mr. Robert
Wilson, High Sheriff.

31.--A fire occurred at Swanton paper mill, a great part of which was
destroyed, with all the paper.  The damage was estimated at 4,000 pounds.


JUNE.


1.--This day was ordered to be observed as one of general thanksgiving
for the Restoration of Peace.  The Mayor and Corporation of Norwich
attended the Cathedral, and the appointed service was performed at all
parish churches.  At Lynn, the inhabitants, instead of having an
illumination, collected 300 pounds, which was distributed amongst the
poor.

21.--Holkham Sheep Shearing commenced.  A new thrashing machine was
exhibited.  An improved drill for turnip sowing was also shown.  "From
the same barrel seed and oilcake manure are delivered into one tube,
through which it is deposited in the earth by the same coulters."

22.--Guild Day at Norwich.  The Mayor, Sir Roger Kerrison, went to the
Cathedral "in a most elegant new chariot, the colour of royal blue; the
coachman and the three footmen behind had handsome new liveries, with
gold-laced cocked hats and gold-headed canes."  His worship "wore a full
dress coat and embroidered waistcoat."  At the Guild feast, in St.
Andrew's Hall, 800 guests were present; and at the ball given in the
evening, at Chapel Field House, Mr. T. A. Kerrison and Miss Chad opened
the dancing for the 450 guests.

26.*--(Advt.)  "On Wednesday, the 30th inst., a main of cocks will be
fought at Aylsham, between the gentlemen of Suffolk and the gentlemen of
Norfolk, for ten guineas a battle and twenty the odd.  Feeder for
Suffolk, Nath. Rowen; ditto for Norfolk, Henry Seaman."


JULY.


2.--Dibden gave his entertainment, "Sans Souci," at the Theatre Royal,
Norwich.  The performance was repeated on the succeeding evening.

5.--Parliament having been dissolved on June 29th, the election of
members for the city of Norwich took place on this day.  The candidates
were the Right Hon. Wm. Windham, of Felbrigg, and Mr. John Frere, of
Roydon; Mr. Robert Fellowes, of Shottesham, and Mr. William Smith.  At
the close of the poll the numbers were:--Fellowes, 1,532; Smith, 1,439;
Windham, 1,356; Frere, 1,328.  There was great rioting.  The chairing
took place on the day following the declaration of the poll.

12.--After the lapse of 34 years, a contested election took place for the
county of Norfolk.  The poll opened on the 12th, and continued for eight
days.  The result was declared as follows:--Mr. Thomas Wm. Coke, 4,317;
Sir Jacob Henry Astley, 3,612; the Hon. Col. Wodehouse, 3,517.  A
scrutiny was demanded by the friends of the latter and granted.  It
commenced on July 30th, and continued till August 28th, when Col.
Wodehouse's counsel retired from the case, and Sir J. H. Astley and Mr.
Coke were declared duly elected.  The expenses of the contest were
estimated at 35,000 pounds, and the amount spent by the successful
candidates to bring distant voters to the poll was enormous.

Mr. John Hookham Frere, of Roydon, was this month appointed Envoy
Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to the Court of Madrid.


AUGUST.


12.--This year's anniversary service at the Cathedral, in aid of the
Norfolk and Norwich Hospital, realised 165 pounds 3s. 4.75d.  With the
proceeds of the dinner at the Maid's Head Inn, the total amount handed to
the institution was 204 pounds 17s. 8.75d.

14.*--"We hear from Brussels that a party of gentlemen from Lynn have
reached that city in the Hebe pleasure yacht.  This being the first
vessel that ever displayed the British flag in Brussels the quay of the
port has been crowded with spectators looking at her."

17.--A duel was fought on Mousehold Heath, Norwich, by Mr. Robert
Alderson, a well-known barrister, and Mr. Grigby.  The latter conceived
that he had been unfairly treated in cross-examination by Mr. Alderson at
the Suffolk Assizes, and, refusing to accept his explanation, sent him a
challenge.  "Mr. Alderson was attended to the field by Mr. Mackintosh,
and Mr. Grigby by Mr. Turner.  Two shots were exchanged, with no effect
than that of Mr. Grigby's first ball passing through the skirts of Mr.
Alderson's coat.  A cordial reconciliation was afterwards effected."

28.--William Rix was executed on Castle Hill, Norwich, for sheep
stealing.


SEPTEMBER.


5.--The organ of the Octagon Chapel, Norwich, was opened by Mr. Beckwith.
The instrument was built by Crotch.


OCTOBER.


4.--A grand Musical Festival was held in Norwich, under the direction of
Messrs. Beckwith and Sharp, and Mr. Ashley, of London, Mrs. Billington,
Mr. Bartleman, and Mr. Braham were the principal _artistes_.  The last
performance was given on the 7th.

8.--The Princess of Wales concluded a visit to the Marquis and
Marchioness Townshend at Rainham, and returned to Blackheath.

13.--Mr. Alderman Francis Columbine resigned his seat.  Owing to his
pecuniary distress, the Corporation of Norwich granted to him and his
daughter an annuity of 100 pounds.

14.--Races were held at Blickling Park.  Lady Caroline Harbord gave a
ball and supper, attended by upwards of 100 guests from Aylsham and the
neighbourhood.

18.--Three gentlemen, for a considerable wager, undertook to walk
blindfolded from Post Office Court to the great doors of St. Peter
Mancroft Church, Norwich, in 15 minutes.  "Two of them performed it in
less than the given time, much to the satisfaction of the spectators, but
the other unfortunate gentleman bent his course rapidly for the Upper
Market, and found himself at the expiration of the time at the great
doors of St. Andrew's Hall."

21.--Mr. Edward Rigby was elected Alderman of the Great Northern Ward, in
room of Mr. Francis Columbine, after a severe contest lasting two days.
His opponent was Mr. Jonathan Davey.

23.--Died, at Vienna, aged 80, General Jerningham, nephew of Sir George
Jerningham, Bart., of Costessey.  He was upwards of 50 years in the
Imperial service, and was Chamberlin to the Empress Maria Theresa and to
the Emperors Joseph, Leopold, and Francis.


NOVEMBER.


8.--Swaffham coursing meeting commenced.

25.--Mr. Welby, of Blickling, undertook, for a bet of 50 guineas, to ride
his mare 90 miles on the Aylsham road in ten hours, all paces.  "She
performed the first 80 miles in 8 hours 25 minutes, and had an hour and
thirty-five minutes to run the last ten miles, but was unable to
accomplish it, to the great disappointment of those who bet three and
four to one that the mare performed the journey."



1803.


FEBRUARY.


8.--At a meeting held at the Guildhall, Norwich, a committee was
appointed to prepare a Bill to be laid before a future meeting for the
better paving, lighting, watching, and cleansing of the city.  A meeting
was held on the 15th, at which resolutions were passed in opposition to
the proposal; and in the month of March it was announced that the Paving
Committee deemed it advisable in the then state of public affairs to
defer going to Parliament with their Bill until the next Session.

--Died, after having lived in three centuries, Mary Helsdon, of East
Ruston, widow.  "Her age was 105 years 11 months; she retained her
faculties till about a year before her death, and she left a progeny of
near 80 persons, including children, grandchildren, great grandchildren,
and great-great grandchildren."

12.*--"Mr. Coke, of Holkham, let out his Southdown tups last season for
1,500 pounds."

--Nearly 100 pairs of shoes, the property of 20 different persons who had
been fined for making them contrary to Act of Parliament, were publicly
burnt in Norwich Market Place.  One shoemaker, for refusing to allow the
searchers to perform their duty, was fined the full penalty of 5 pounds.
The tradespeople, after obtaining counsel's opinion, gave notice that
actions for trespass would be taken against searchers and sealers of
leather if they entered their premises.  On March 7th two shoemakers were
fined for offering resistence.

23.--Died, Mr. Wignell, manager of the Philadelphia Theatre.  He married,
a short time before his death, Mrs. Merry, formerly Miss Brunton, of
Norwich Theatre.

24.--Died, at Coltishall, Mr. Bartlett Gurney, banker, of Norwich, aged
46.  He left 500 pounds to the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital.


MARCH.


5.*--"Mr. Stephen Martin, an old gentleman who lately died at Brentwood,
bequeathed to the minister and churchwardens of St. Giles', Norwich, the
sum of 1,000 pounds Stock in the three per cent. Consols, to be laid out
for the use and benefit of the poor of that parish, of which he was a
native.  He was born in 1717, and when an infant was taken to Jamaica,
where he amassed a fortune."

7.--At an assembly of the Corporation of Norwich an address of
congratulation was ordered to be presented to his Majesty "on the
providential discovery of the late traitorous conspiracy against his
Royal person and Government, entered into by Col. Despard and six other
persons, who were executed on the top of the new Surrey prison, in
Horsemonger Lane, on February 21st."  The address was presented to the
King by the Mayor (Sir Roger Kerrison), accompanied by Mr. Robert
Fellowes, M.P., and Alderman John Harvey.  Similar addresses were voted
by the Corporations of Yarmouth, Thetford, and Lynn; and by the High
Sheriff and Grand Jury of Norfolk at the Assizes at Thetford.  The latter
address was presented by Sir J. H. Astley, M.P., and Mr. T. W. Coke,
M.P., on March 30th.

11.--Died, aged 73, Mr. Thomas Twiddy, "who had been many years trumpet
herald to the Norwich Company of Comedians."

14.--Died, Mrs. Parfrey, aged 80, wife of Mr. R. Parfrey, of Holme Hale,
near Swaffham.  "The public will best recollect her, as a doctress, by
her former name of Fyson, and for the many cures she made in dropsy and
other complaints."

15.--At a meeting held at St. Andrew's Hall the late members of the
Norwich Loyal Military Association, in consequence of the aspect of
public affairs, offered their services to the Government.

19.*--"Two pairs of eagles were lately shot near Yarmouth.  One pair
measured and weighed as follows:--Female, length, 3 feet 4 inches; extent
of wings, 8 feet; weight, 9.75 lbs.  Male, length, 2 feet 9 inches;
extent of wings, 7 feet 1 inch; weight, 9.25 lbs.  Seventeen wild swans
have also been shot by one man in the week."

21.--The Militia Regiments in the county this day assembled at Yarmouth,
East Dereham, and Swaffham.

22.--At the Norfolk Assizes, held at Thetford, before Mr. Justice Grose
and a special jury, the case, Astley _v._ Harwood, was tried.  This was
an action for defamation.  It was alleged that the defendant, at a ball
held on July 6th, 1802, the day after the Norwich election, mounted a
table, and, addressing the company, called the plaintiff a liar, a
coward, an assassin, a scoundrel, and a murderer, "for he had murdered
his father."  The jury found a verdict for the plaintiff, and assessed
the damages at 2,000 pounds.  On June 11th the Court of King's Bench
granted a new trial, on the ground that the impression the words made on
the hearers was matter for aggravation or mitigation of damages.  The new
trial took place at Norwich Assizes in August, 1803, when a special jury
confirmed the former verdict, and awarded Sir Jacob Astley 2,000 pounds
damages.  On December 3rd, it was announced that the case had been
removed to the Court of Exchequer on writ of error.  In June, 1804, the
judges in the Exchequer Chamber unanimously confirmed the former verdict,
and gave judgment, with costs, against Col. Harwood.  Finally, on July
19th, 1804, the case was taken to the House of Lords, when the Lord
Chancellor delivered his opinion in favour of Sir Jacob Astley, which was
confirmed by the Lords, who ordered Col. Harwood to pay Sir Jacob 100
pounds costs, occasioned by the writ of error.

The portrait of Capt. John Harvey, of the Norwich Light Horse Volunteers,
painted by Opie at the request of the corps, was this month placed in St.
Andrew's Hall.


APRIL.


9.--Henry Ford was executed at Thetford, for stealing a silver watch,
coat, and jacket from the person of Thomas Aylmer, of Pentney.

16.--A county meeting held at the Shirehall, Norwich, when an address of
congratulation to his Majesty, on has escape "from the late traitorous
conspiracy," was moved by the Hon. Col. Wodehouse, seconded by Sir Roger
Kerrison, and unanimously adopted.

26.--A rowing match took place between two crews, manning respectively
two well-known Norwich boats, the Lion and the Dove.  It was the only
contest of the kind that had been witnessed in Norwich for nearly a
quarter of a century.  The course was from Carrow Abbey "to a signal post
standing in Whitlingham reach, and return to Carrow, a distance of four
miles."  In consequence of the narrowness of the stream, "the boats
started about 300 yards distant from each other, the first having to go
to the place whence the last set off."  The Lion won by about 80 yards in
38 minutes 40 seconds.  (The number of oars not mentioned.)

27.--A public dispensary was established in Norwich.  "The committee
propose to recommend to the general meeting an extension of the original
plan, and to connect with it inoculation for the cow-pox."


MAY.


3.--Mr. William Firth was elected Steward of the Corporation of Norwich.

--The Norwich Loyal Military Association was re-established, and 300 men
entered to serve therein.

5.--An impressment took place at Yarmouth.

7.*--"Lately, was married at Ranworth, Wm. Brown, aged 80, to Elizabeth
Gunton, aged 63.  The bridegroom had had three wives, the bride three
husbands, and the bridegroom's daughter, who attended this wedding, had
also had three husbands."

14.--The friends of the Right Hon. Wm. Windham celebrated his birthday by
dining at the White Swan, St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich.

15.--Found dead in his bed, Edward Baldwin, of Wereham, near Stoke Ferry.
He was a glover, aged 89, "commonly reputed 'the Almanack' of that
neighbourhood, as he was remarkable for many years past for being a true
prognosticator of the weather."

16.--An embargo was laid on all the shipping in Yarmouth Roads.

18.--The Mayor of Norwich, attended by the two Sheriffs, the city
officers, and citizens, proceeded on horseback, at nine o'clock, with
band playing and colours flying, from the Guildhall, to visit the
boundaries of the city and county of the city of Norwich.  The cavalcade
went from Conesford Gate to Trowse "Eye," thence to Trowse, Lakenham,
Hartford Bridge, Eaton, Earlham, Hellesdon, Mile Cross, Catton Field
("including Sir Edward Berry's house"), across Mousehold Heath to Thorpe,
Trowse Newton Hall, and Bishop's Bridge.  The company then returned to
the Market Place, where three cheers were given and the band played "God
Save the King."  In the evening, the Mayor dined with a large party at
the King's Head.  (A similar perambulation took place in 1793.)

30.--Died, at Hardingham, aged 64, Sir Archibald Dickson, Admiral of the
Blue.

31.--Thomas H. Case, of Great Fransham, formerly a private in the East
Dereham or Second Troop of Yeomanry Cavalry, was charged before the Rev.
Dixon Hoste with "obstinately refusing to deliver up his arms,
accoutrements, and clothing," for which he was fined 10 pounds.

--A two days' race meeting commenced at Tivetshall.  "The poney races
afforded excellent sport, and there was some good running between the
hunters."


JUNE.


4.*--"This week the West Norfolk Militia marched from Thetford and
Dereham to Colchester Barracks, to which place the East Norfolk have
received orders to march next week."

13.--The Duke of Cambridge and suite arrived in Norwich from Yarmouth.
After changing horses and taking refreshment at the Maid's Head, they
proceeded on their way to London, by Attleborough.  His Royal Highness
had come to Yarmouth in the Amethyst frigate, with Prince William of
Gloucester, from Cuxhaven, where they narrowly escaped being made
prisoners by the advance guard of the French army.  The French general in
Holland put an immense number of fishing boats in requisition for the
avowed purpose of invading England.

--The Aldermen requested the concurrence of the Common Council of Norwich
to a dutiful and loyal address to his Majesty "on the present important
crisis," and a motion was made for the appointment of a committee to draw
up such address.  It was opposed by several members of the Common
Council, and on a division rejected by 29 votes to 19.

21.--Mr. John Patteson was appointed to be lieutenant-colonel, Mr.
Charles Harvey, major, and Messrs. Andrew Sieley, J. H. Cole, R.
Partridge, and Hammond Fiske, captains in the battalion of Norwich
Volunteers.

This month a ballot took place for the Supplementary Militia.  Under the
Army of Reserve Act, Norfolk (including Norwich) raised 927 men.


JULY.


9.--At a meeting of the deputy-lieutenants and magistrates of the county,
presided over by the Marquis Townshend, the plan recommended by the
Government, for establishing a system of communication throughout the
county and for rendering the body of the people instrumental in the
general defence and preservation of property in case of invasion, was
approved and adopted.  The county was formed into 13 divisions,
consisting of a certain number of hundreds; each division was placed
under the charge of lieutenants of divisions, nominated by the Lord
Lieutenant; each hundred was under a magistrate, known as an Inspector of
the Hundred; and each parish under some gentleman, clergyman, or
principal farmer, termed Superintendent of the Parish.

13.--On this day and on the 14th, William Green, bricklayer, undertook at
Yarmouth, for a bet of five guineas, to lay 3,800 bricks in a workmanlike
manner in 24 hours, and completed his task in 20 hours, on a new building
at the Bowling Green House.

23.--Two men, named Denny and Allen, were placed in the pillory at
Norwich, in accordance with sentence passed upon them at the Quarter
Sessions on July 15th, for conspiracy against Mr. F. Latham.  "Over their
heads was the inscription, 'False Conspirators.'  Allen wept bitterly
when he was put in, but Denny, with great effrontery, continued to nod
and smile at the numerous spectators, until the people, by a shower of
rotten eggs, and, at last, potatoes, convinced him of their detestation
and abhorrence of his character and crime.  This continued for about
half-an-hour, when Denny, against whom all their violence was directed,
appeared to faint, and by the advice of a medical man was taken out of
the pillory and conducted to the gaol, where, being examined by several
medical men, he was deemed to be in a fit state to be replaced on the
pillory, and was carried back for that purpose, but all efforts to
reinstate him there proved ineffectual, and he lay thereon till the hour
was expired, amidst the execrations of the enraged multitude.  When Denny
was taken out the populace clamorously demanded that Allen, whose
appearance excited their commiseration rather than their indignation,
should be taken down.  Mr. Sheriff Back immediately ascended the
scaffold, and with the greatest firmness and severity expressed his
determination to enforce obedience to the laws and to carry the sentence
fully into execution.  When the hour was expired they were taken down and
removed to the Bridewell to undergo two years' imprisonment."

23.*--"All persons arrived from France and Holland and witnessed the
immense preparations which are now making for the invasion of this
country, express astonishment at the apathy and indifference which
prevail here."

24.--This day (Sunday) the Norfolk Rangers (Yeomanry Cavalry) had a field
day at Rainham Park, and subscribed 100 pounds towards the fund
instituted by the merchants of London for the relief of persons "who may
suffer in the general defence of the country."

30.*--"At a Court of the Commissioners of Sewers, concerning the
repairing of sea breaches between Happisburgh and Yarmouth, the jury,
after hearing read three several verdicts of former juries given in 1702,
1715, and 1742, and also, hearing several witnesses, delivered a verdict
agreeable to the above, by all of which it was determined that no
particular persons were bound to sustain or repair the sea walls
adjoining their lands."

--*"The male part of the Norwich Company (theatrical) have agreed to
enroll themselves to learn the use of arms."

--*"Messrs. Marsh and Sons, Norwich and Cambridge carriers, have within
the last few days offered, for the service of the Government in case of
invasion, 100 horses, 12 broad-wheel waggons, 24 men as drivers and
assistants, 24 boats, amounting altogether to 200 tons burden, 6
watermen, and 9 boys, with blacksmiths, with their apparatus, tools, &c.,
and 2 wheelwrights, and 2 harness makers, with all necessary tools."

--Major-General Money published an address on the necessity of
immediately associating, subscribing, and arming for the defence of the
county in case of invasion.  It resulted in the formation of Volunteer
corps in all the seaports and market towns in Norfolk.

Capt. John Harvey was this month promoted to be major of the squadron of
Norwich Light Horse Volunteers.

During this month the number of poor in the Norwich Workhouse did not
exceed 400, "a circumstance almost unprecedented."


AUGUST.


6.*--"The Rev. Mr. Beloe, formerly of this city, has been appointed
librarian to the British Museum."

9.--A brig was launched from Cattermoul's yard at Thorpe, near Norwich,
in the presence of many hundreds of spectators.  "She went off the stocks
in very fine style, but when she was towing ashore for the company on
board to get off her, everyone endeavouring to get ashore first, the
weight of such a body of people, added to those on the rigging, overset
her.  Nearly one hundred men, women, and children were plunged into the
water, and messengers were at once sent to Norwich for medical
assistance."  It is somewhat remarkable that no lives were lost.

20.--The case of Mr. Cony, a ward in Chancery, came before the Court of
Chancery.  He was only 17 years of age, and had married Elizabeth
Franklin, the daughter of an innkeeper at Downham Market, in which
district he possessed a large property.  The marriage took place by
licence in London.  The Chancellor annulled the marriage, ordering the
cessation of all further intercourse between the parties, at the same
time intimating that, if his orders were not strictly complied with, "he
should take such steps as would prevent the possibility of their
meeting."

25.--Mr. George Wyer, of Downham Market, "carried a 20 stone sack of
flour one mile, leading through the town of Watton, for a wager of 230
guineas, which he performed with great ease in 18 minutes, to the
astonishment of a vast number of spectators."

Active preparations commenced for the defence of the county in view of
possible invasion.  On the 8th several officers and non-commissioned
officers of the 47th Regiment of Foot arrived in Norwich to receive the
balloted men and substitutes of the Army of Reserve, the training of whom
commenced next day in Chapel Field.  A county meeting was held at the
Shirehall, Norwich, on the 10th, when resolutions were passed, assuring
his Majesty of the readiness of the county to take defensive measures.  A
meeting of the inhabitants of Norwich was held at the Guildhall on the
16th, at which a subscription was opened for raising a regiment of
Volunteer Infantry.  Clerks attended in the porch of the Guildhall to
enroll the names of the Volunteers, and the city flag was displayed from
the window of the Town Clerk's office.  On the following day 702 men had
offered themselves, and by Saturday, the 20th, the number had increased
to 1,085, and the public subscription exceeded 3,000 pounds, of which 500
pounds was given by the Corporation.  On the 26th the regiment was
formed, 800 strong, under Lieut.-Col. Harvey (commanding), Lieut.-Col.
Plumptre, and Major Sigismund Trafford.  The public subscription then
amounted to 6,400 pounds.  A Rifle Corps was also formed, with Mr. R. M.
Bacon as captain.  At Yarmouth, 500 persons enrolled themselves, under
the command of Lieut.-Col. Wm. Gould.  On the 27th, it was announced that
the number of Volunteers in the county enabled the Lord Lieutenant to
suspend the compulsory clauses of the Defence Act.  The total number was
about 7,300.  The Government purchased some properties in Norwich to be
converted into temporary barracks for the reception of 800 infantry.


SEPTEMBER.


1.--The first parade of the Norwich Regiment of Volunteer Infantry took
place.  Eight battalion companies, a light infantry company, and a
grenadier company were formed, and "from five barrels of British brown
stout they drank the King's health and prosperity to their country and
city, and success to the corps."

7.--The brass ordnance belonging to the city were tested by some of the
regular artillery stationed in Norwich.  Four of the guns burst, and
appended to the account delivered to the Corporation was the
intimation:--"It is customary for the corporal to have the old metal when
any of the pieces burst."  The official reply was to the effect that the
Corporation were of opinion that the corporal "did not want brass."  The
iron nine-pounders stood the test.  The brass gun used by Kett in 1549
was preserved as a relic.

22.--The Norwich Volunteers, commanded by Lieut.-Col. Patteson, entered
the Market Place, and after marching round the Hall and saluting the
Corporation, had their colours presented to them by the Mayor.  The men
were afterwards regaled at Neeche's Gardens, and the officers dined at
the King's Head.

24*--"Telegraphs, signal flags, or tar barrels are being stationed on all
the churches and lofty edifices on the coast, in order to give in a chain
of communication the earliest intelligence, either by night or day, of
the event of the enemy's landing."

29.--A trial was made on the Castle ditches, Norwich, of carriages
constructed for the conveyance of troops.  A wooden frame, serving as a
seat, was affixed to the skeleton of a four-wheel cart.  A board for the
feet was attached to it by ropes.  The vehicle was capable of conveying
17 men.


OCTOBER.


6.--At the Norfolk Quarter Sessions various resolutions were adopted and
transmitted to the Government regarding the defence of the county.  The
principal resolution was as follows:--"An object of most essential
concern, which this meeting think it incumbent upon them to point out, is
the town and port of Yarmouth, the infinite importance of which as the
principal and almost only naval station in the North Sea, and the
circumstances of which they do not wish to detail, but which, they
conceive, require the immediate attention of the Government, in order
that they may be rendered as secure against attack likely to be made upon
it by land as by the presence of a fleet, it is, they presume, against
any attempt by sea."

15.--At a parade of the Norwich Volunteers this day (Sunday) a letter was
read from the Lord Lieutenant, asking if they would undertake to perform
permanent duty at Yarmouth.  A unanimous reply was given in the
affirmative, and "the officers and gentlemen of the Light Horse
Volunteers laid their hands on their breasts, as an appeal to their
honour to undertake the duty whenever they should be required."  Shortly
afterwards the commanding officers received instructions to have their
corps in a perfect state of military equipment, and be prepared to march
at a moment's notice.

18.--The Artillery, Shropshire Militia, and the Volunteer Corps (horse
and foot) took part in a sham fight on Bramerton Common.  General Milner,
the inspecting officer, commended all arms for their steadiness on
parade.

19.--A general fast was observed.  The Bishop of Norwich preached at the
Cathedral, and the military attended service in the evening.

22.--Died, at Norwich, Mr. Elias Norgate, aged 76.  He served the office
of Sheriff in 1781, and of Mayor in 1785, and was a surgeon of great
local eminence.

26.--The Lord Lieutenant transmitted to the justices of the peace his
Majesty's proclamation for establishing certain regulations under the
Act, respecting aliens arriving in the kingdom or resident therein.

The monument to the memory of the Poet Cowper and of his friend, Mrs.
Unwin, in the church of St. Nicholas, East Dereham, was erected this
month.


NOVEMBER.


5.--Bonfires were prohibited in city and county, "as they might cause a
false alarm."

8.--The battalion of Norwich Volunteers, commanded by Lieut.-Col.
Patteson, paraded in the Market Place at seven a.m., and, amid the
ringing of St. Peter Mancroft bells, started on their march to Yarmouth
for the performance of garrison duty.  The battalion halted at Acle, and,
on resuming their march, reached Yarmouth at four o'clock.  The rank and
file numbered 280, out of an establishment of 312, and two officers only
were absent.  On the same day two troops of the Norfolk Rangers, headed
by the Marquis Townshend and commanded by Capt. Sir M. B. ffolkes, Bart.,
and Capt. Beauchamp, entered Norwich on their way to Yarmouth.  There
were seven officers, two quartermasters, seven sergeants, two trumpeters,
and 94 privates.  The officers dined in the evening with Sir Roger
Kerrison, and on the following morning the squadron resumed its march.

9.--The Fakenham Volunteers, Capt. P. M. Case, marched into Norwich from
Aylsham.  There were four officers, seven sergeants, four drummers, and
80 privates.  This was the first Volunteer corps in Norfolk to volunteer
for garrison duty at Yarmouth.

16.--The Norfolk Rangers arrived at Norwich on the termination of their
duty at Yarmouth, and on the next day proceeded to their homes.

22.--The Norwich Regiment of Volunteer Infantry, under Lieut.-Col.
Harvey, paraded on Tombland and marched to Yarmouth for garrison duly.
On the same day Col. Patteson's battalion marched in.  They were preceded
by the Fakenham corps, whose headquarters were at the White Swan.

30.--The troops stationed at Yarmouth were reviewed upon the Denes by
General Milner.

--At the annual meeting of the Society of Universal Good Will, Norwich
(formerly the Scots Society), it was reported that since its
establishment in 1775 it had relieved 1,813 persons.

--The Lord Lieutenant received a circular letter from the Government,
relative to the appointment of such householders to act as special
constables who were not enrolled in any Volunteer corps.

--Mr. Thomas Wm. Coke was gazetted captain of the Holkham Yeomanry
Cavalry.

--Alderman John Herring, of Norwich, received from the Duke of York a
letter, in which his Royal Highness expressed approbation of the
readiness with which the Norwich Volunteers had undertaken to do garrison
duty at Yarmouth.


DECEMBER.


1.--Died, in Norwich, aged 43, Mr. James Burkin Burroughes, captain of
the Blofield and South Walsham troop of Yeomanry Cavalry.  His remains
were interred, with military honours, at Burlingham on December 6th.

--The squadron of Norwich Light Horse, Major John Harvey, marched to
Yarmouth, to relieve the Tunstead and Happing troop.

6.--Col. Harvey's battalion returned to Norwich from Yarmouth.  In the
Regimental Orders, Col. Harvey referred to the steady and orderly march
on the road, to the loyal discharge of duty at Yarmouth, and to the
kindness with which the people of that town treated the men while in
quarters.

15.--The Lynn and Freebridge Yeomanry Cavalry, with the artillery and
rifle corps, commanded by Major Taylor, marched through Norwich for
Yarmouth, to relieve the South Erpingham troop in garrison duty.

20.--The North Walsham Volunteers marched from that town at four o'clock
in the morning, and arrived at Yarmouth at one o'clock, "without leaving
a single man behind, although the roads were extremely bad, and the
distance 26 miles."

22.--The Dereham and Swaffham troops of Yeomanry Cavalry (Capts. Crisp
and Johnson) marched through Norwich to Yarmouth, to relieve the Lynn and
Freebridge troops.  The Diss (Capt. Woodward), Wells (Capt. Bloom), and
Old Buckenham (Capt. Powell) companies of infantry marched into Yarmouth
for a fortnight's garrison duty.

25.--This day (Sunday) the Norwich Rifle Corps paraded at St. Andrew's
Hall, took the oath of allegiance, and attended service at the church of
St. Peter Mancroft.  (The uniform and appointments of this corps
consisted of a dark green jacket, with lace of the same colour,
pantaloons, and short black gaiters; hussar cap, with green feather and
trimmings; a rifle-carbine, sword bayonet attached to the side by a black
waist belt, and a ball pouch and powder horn slung from the left
shoulder.)

--At a church parade of the Lynn Sea Fencibles, Capt. Bentinck, the
commanding officer, presented to the corps "a most elegant banner,"
worked by Viscountess Andover, daughter of Mr. Coke, M.P.

30.--The Hingham troop (Capt. Alpe) and the Wymondham troop (Capt. the
Hon. Wm. Wodehouse) marched to Yarmouth, to relieve the Dereham and
Swaffham troops.

31.--The Dereham troop, which left Yarmouth on the 30th, arrived at
Dereham, and was welcomed by a great concourse of the inhabitants.  The
church bells were rung, and the officers and many members of the troop
dined in the evening at the King's Arms Inn.

The twenty-two troops of Yeomanry Cavalry in the county were this month
formed into three regiments.  The Marquis Townshend was appointed colonel
of the Western Regiment; Major-General Money, colonel of the Eastern
Regiment; and Col. (afterwards Brigadier-General) Bulwer, colonel of the
Midland (or Mid Norfolk) Regiment.

31.--Polito's wild beasts were exhibited in the yard at the Duke's
Palace, Norwich.



1804.


JANUARY.


3.--The Old Buckenham Volunteers marched into Norwich from Yarmouth, and
next day proceeded to their homes.  The corps numbered 5 officers and 125
non-commissioned officers and privates.

--Capt. Dickens, of the Shropshire Militia, "undertook for a considerable
wager to walk from the Angel at Yarmouth to the Angel at Norwich and back
again (47 miles) in twelve hours, which he performed with apparent ease
in eleven hours and a half."

7.--Died, at Colchester, aged 65, Sir William Gordon, Bart., captain in
the West Norfolk Militia, and for many years a resident in Norwich.

12.--A meeting was held at the Shirehall, Norwich, as to the depressed
state of the corn trade.  It was resolved to petition Parliament on the
subject.  (The prices quoted at this date were:--Wheat, 14s. to 26s.;
barley, 9s. 6d. to 10s.; oats, 9s. 6d. to 10s. 6d. per coomb.)

13.--The Wymondham troop of Yeomanry Cavalry, commanded by Capt. the Hon.
Wm. Wodehouse, attended at Kimberley and "thanked Lady Wodehouse for the
colours lately presented by her ladyship, when they had the honour of
dining with the family."

14.--The colours of the Norwich Juvenile Regiment of Infantry were
presented to them by "a young lady of the city."  (This was a cadet
corps, armed with dummy muskets and tin bayonets.)

14.*--(Advt.)  "The Norwich and Yarmouth Volunteer Coach leaves the Bell
Inn, Hog Hill, every morning at eight o'clock, to the Wrestlers Inn,
Great Yarmouth, and returns at four o'clock."

18.--The City of Norwich Regiment of Volunteer Infantry, Lieut.-Col.
Harvey, were presented with colours by the Mayor and Corporation.  The
colours were consecrated by the Rev. E. S. Thurlow, Prebendary of
Norwich, and handed to the colonel by the Mayor (Mr. John Morse); and the
King's and regimental standards were delivered to the ensigns.  The
artillery, on Castle Hill, fired salutes, and the regiment discharged
three volleys in the Market Place in the presence of an immense crowd.

22.--This day (Sunday) John Baker, a private in the Loddon Volunteers,
was dismissed, "with every mark of ignominy at the head of the company,
for refusing to take the oath of allegiance to his Majesty.  His arms and
accoutrements, together with the Volunteer clothing, were stripped off on
parade, much to the satisfaction of the whole corps."

31.--A baker of Norwich, named Winter, undertook, for a wager of 40
pounds, to carry 6s. worth of bread in a basket from Norwich to Yarmouth
within six hours.  He accomplished his task in 5 hours 35 minutes.

Mr. T. W. Coke was this month promoted to be lieutenant-colonel of the
Western Regiment of Yeomanry Cavalry; Mr. Hammond Alpe to be
lieutenant-colonel of the Eastern Regiment; and Mr. John Smyth to be
lieutenant-colonel of the Midland Regiment.

The several companies of Norfolk Volunteer Infantry were this month
formed into battalions as follow:--1st (Lynn), Lieut.-Col. E. Everard;
2nd (Wells, &c.), Lieut.-Col. Francis Bedingfeld; 3rd (not then
appointed); 4th (Cromer, &c.), Lieut.-Col. the Right Hon. Wm. Windham;
5th (Aylsham, &c.), Lieut.-Col. Thomas Hutton (afterwards Sir Thomas
Preston, Bart.); 6th (Yarmouth), Lieut.-Col. Wm Gould; 7th (Norwich),
Lieut.-Col. Harvey; 8th (Loddon, &c.), Lieut.-Col. John Kerrich; 9th
(Diss, &c.), Lieut.-Col. T. J. Woodward; 10th (Swaffham, &c.),
Lieut.-Col. R. W. Ottley; 11th (Freebridge Lynn, &c.), Lieut.-Col. A.
Hamond.

300 pikes were sent to Norwich for the use of the special constables, who
were called out to receive instruction in the pike exercise.

Flag staffs were placed at Rainham Hall, Holkham Hall, and Houghton Hall.
The red flag was only to be hoisted in case of actual invasion or on the
appearance of an enemy on the coast.

The ladies of Lynn inaugurated a movement for making flannel
underclothing for the use of the men of the Lynn Volunteers.


FEBRUARY.


4.--The Cromer Sea Fencibles were practising with canister and grape shot
upon the beach, when a ball struck Capt. Tremlett, R.N., on the foot, and
shattered the leg of Mr. John Smith, so as to render immediate amputation
necessary.  A public subscription, amounting to 500 pounds, was made for
Mr. Smith.

21.--Died, at Long Stratton, Mrs. Everitt, a Quaker, who had attained her
one hundredth year.  Lineally descended from her and living at the time
were 77 children, grandchildren, and great grandchildren.

27.--Colours were presented to the East Dereham troop of Yeomanry Cavalry
by Mrs. Smyth, on behalf of the ladies of the town and neighbourhood.
The troop, accompanied by Capt. Leeder's corps of infantry, attended
service at the parish church, where the colours were "consecrated by
prayer," and the sermon was preached by the Rev. Geo. Preston, curate.  A
dinner followed at the King's Arms Inn.

The Corporation of Norwich this month ordered an iron bridge to be
erected at St. Michael's Coslany.  It was opened on November 15th.


MARCH.


1.--The birthday of the Marquis Townshend was celebrated at Fakenham by a
dinner to the Norfolk Rangers.

27.--Lieut.-General Sir James Craig inspected the batteries and works
from Holt to Cromer.  Next day he reviewed, near Norwich, the 24th
Regiment of Foot (Col. Macdonald); the detachment of Royal Artillery
under Capt. Fyers; and two troops of the 1st Dragoons (Capt. Craven).


APRIL.


4.--Arrived at Yarmouth, the Antelope, cruiser brig, Commodore Sir Sidney
Smith, and the Prince of Wales cutter, from the Flushing station.  Some
boats sent out by Sir Sidney made an unsuccessful attempt to cut out an
armed brig near the Scaw.  The boats were attacked by an armed schooner,
and obliged to abandon their enterprise, with the loss of five killed and
ten wounded.

10.--Died, aged 12, Lord Viscount Bury, eldest son of the Earl of
Albemarle.

11.--Commodore Sir Sidney Smith arrived at Norwich from Yarmouth,
proceeded next day on a tour of the county, and returned to Yarmouth on
the 13th.

21.--James Airton was publicly whipped in Norwich Market Place for
stealing a box coat from the coach-house of Mr. Wm. Harvey.

25.--The Scipio of North Shields, Capt. Robinson, coal laden, was
attacked by a sloop-rigged privateer four miles from Cromer.  A sharp
action, lasting three quarters of an hour, ensued, when the privateer
sheered off.  Capt. Robinson was wounded in the foot by a musket ball,
and the vessel, whose sails and rigging were very much cut, was taken by
the crew to Yarmouth Roads, where medical assistance was rendered to
Capt. Robinson on board the Irresistible.

The portrait, painted by Hoppner, of the Right Hon. William Windham was
this month placed in St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich.  It was afterwards
engraved in mezzotinto by Reynolds.


MAY.


2.--The gibbet on which the body of Payne (the pirate) was hung in
chains, about 23 years previously, upon Yarmouth North Denes, was taken
down by order of the Corporation.  "A ludicrous circumstance happened the
night it was erected.  The different tackling being all adjusted previous
to putting down the gibbet the day before Payne was hanged, some daring
licencious bloods hoisted up a young ass by the hind legs, to the
amusement of the spectators next morning, who could not but be surprised
to find the gibbet so unexpectedly occupied.  In consequence, however,
the tackling became so entangled that until a young sailor undertook to
climb the gibbet the prisoner could not be suspended."

3.--The 2nd Battalion Norfolk Volunteer Infantry marched into Yarmouth
for a fortnight's permanent duty.

--A party of the Shropshire Militia marched into Norwich from Yarmouth
with 84 French and Dutch prisoners, including five officers.  The next
day they proceeded on their route for Yaxley Barracks, under an escort
provided by the 24th Regiment of Foot.

--An assembly of the Corporation of Norwich unanimously requested Mr.
Charles Harvey, Recorder of the city, to sit for his portrait.

5.*--(Advt.)  "There will be a regular main of cocks fought between the
gentlemen of Norwich and the gentlemen of Norfolk, to show 21 mains for
ten guineas the battle, and 50 the odd.  The three turn outs for ten
guineas a battle; to fight on the 23rd and 24th days of May at Mrs.
Back's, at the Bowling Green, Chapel Field.  A pair of cocks to be pitted
at six o'clock precisely.  Feeders, Lamb for Norwich; Cox for Norfolk."

7.--Col. Patteson's Battalion of Volunteers (with the Riffle Corps
attached), commanded by Capt. Cole; and the City of Norwich Regiment of
Volunteer Infantry were brigaded under the command of Lieut.-Col. Harvey,
and, with the Royal Artillery under Capt. Fyers, were manoeuvred at
Hellesdon.

13.--Died, aged 76, the Rev. John Bruckner.  He was invited to Norwich in
1750 as minister of the Walloon congregation, and during many years gave
public and private lessons in French.

--The 10th Battalion Norfolk Volunteer Infantry marched into Lynn for ten
days' permanent duty.

14.--The birthday of the Right Hon. Wm Windham was celebrated by a
numerous party of his friends at the Angel Inn, Norwich.

--The 1st Battalion of Norfolk Volunteer Infantry marched to Yarmouth for
14 days' permanent duty.

21.--The 3rd Regiment of Norfolk Yeomanry Cavalry marched into Norwich
for five days' drill, and on the 24th were inspected by Major-General
Milner at Hellesdon.

22.--The Blickling and Gunton Riflemen, commanded by the Hon. Lieut.-Col.
Harbord, marched into Norwich, and next day proceeded to Yarmouth for 14
days' permanent duty.

24.--A tight rope performer, named Richer, appeared at Norwich Theatre,
where his performances were "the theme of general admiration."

25.--A general fast was observed.  At Yarmouth, the Shropshire Militia
and Volunteers on permanent duty, to the number of nearly 2,500, attended
Divine service.

26.--The Helena war sloop, of 20 guns, Capt. Losack, was launched from
Mr. John Preston's dockyard at Yarmouth.

--The North Walsham Light Infantry marched into Yarmouth for 14 days'
permanent duty.

--The 7th Battalion of the Army of Reserve, to which 500 Norfolk and
Suffolk men belonged, volunteered to extend their services and become a
regiment of the line.


JUNE.


1.--The City of Norwich Battalion of Volunteer Infantry, under the
command of Lieut.-Col. Harvey, began one month's permanent duty in
Norwich.  The battalion mustered 500, exclusive of officers.

4.--The King's birthday was celebrated in Norwich.  The detachment of
Royal Artillery, the 24th Regiment of Foot, and the Norwich and Catton
Volunteers, to the total number of 1,700, paraded on the Castle Hill, and
fired a _feu de joie_.  At Cromer, the Sea Fencibles, under Capt.
Tremlett, R.N., three companies of the 4th Battalion Norfolk Volunteers,
commanded by Lieut.-Col. George Windham, and the Volunteers of the Cromer
battery had a sham fight at that place.  Other Volunteer corps in the
county held ceremonial parades.

7.--The water mills of Mr. Wm. Partridge, of North Walsham, were
destroyed by fire.

11.--A sham fight, in which all the regular and auxiliary troops
stationed in Norwich were engaged, took place at Bramerton.  A pontoon
bridge, formed of wherries, was made use of in the course of the
operations.

18.--The Corporation of Norwich granted the Blackfriars' site in St.
Andrew's to the Court of Guardians for 200 years, the latter body having
considered plans for improving the workhouse there for the accommodation
of 800 persons.

--A motion by the Common Council of Norwich, to confer the freedom of the
city upon Mr. R. Fellowes, M.P., and Mr. W. Smith, M.P., was, on a
division, rejected by the aldermen by ten votes to eight.

--A motion was made in the Common Council to augment the sum of 100
pounds, allowed to the Mayor towards defraying the expenses of the
Guild-day festival, but, as the revenue of Norwich did not justify the
increase, it was not acceded to by the aldermen.  The allowance of 100
pounds was fixed 80 years previously.

25.--Holkham Sheep Shearing commenced.  "Mr. Coke won the sweepstakes,
having estimated with more exactness than any of his competitors the
weight both of wool and of carcase of the Southdown ewe slain on the
occasion."  A drill for "scattering at the same time turnip seed and the
dust of pounded oil cakes, believed to be the best adapted manure," was
exhibited.

30.--Several "battles" were fought on Yarmouth Denes by the soldiers of
the Shropshire Regiment.  In an encounter between a private and an
officer's servant, the former received injuries from which he died three
hours after, and at the inquest a verdict of manslaughter was returned
against his assailant.

Major-General Money was appointed to the staff of the Eastern District.
The command consisted of 32,000 fully equipped and efficient men.

Under Mr. Pitt's Defence Bill the quota for Norfolk was 1,813 men.


JULY.


1.--The City of Norwich Battalion of Volunteer Infantry terminated its
permanent duty of 30 days.  All ranks received the highest commendation
of Major-General Milner and Lieut.-Col. Metzner.

3.--The malt kiln, with a granary and dwelling-house, at the new brewery
of Messrs. Prentice and Co., King Street, Norwich, was destroyed by fire.
The loss amounted to nearly 1,000 pounds.

5.--The East Harling magistrates fined a farmer 20s., for refusing to
send his waggon to assist in taking the baggage of the East Suffolk
Militia from Thetford to Downham, after having been summoned for that
purpose.

6.--Mrs. Bennett, wife of an actor in the Norwich company, gave birth to
triplets.

--A foot race was run by Lord Frederick Bentinck and the Hon. Edward
Harbord for the sum of 100 guineas, between the second and third
milestone on the Edgeware Road, London.  Mr. Harbord won easily.

12.--Died, aged 82, at Walsingham Abbey, Mr. Henry Lee Warner, "in whom
the gentleman and scholar were happily blended."  His fine estate at
Walsingham was devastated by lawless persons, whom, from mistaken
leniency, he would not molest.  He rose late in the evening, breakfasted
at midnight, and dined at four or five o'clock in the morning.  He wore a
gold-laced hat, and waistcoat, with deep slashworked sleeves and
richly-embossed buttons, a deep chitterling of rich yellow lace, and
curved-toed shoes, with oblong buckles.  Mr. Lee Warner served the office
of High Sheriff in 1782, and was lineally descended from John Warner,
Bishop of Rochester, whose estates he possessed, as well as those of Sir
James Howe, Bart., of Berwick, Wilts., and of Mr. Henry Lee, in Kent.

14.--Messrs. Fisher and Scragg's Company of Comedians concluded a
theatrical season at East Dereham.  Fisher ultimately assumed the sole
management of the company, which for many years performed in its own
theatres on the Norfolk and Suffolk Circuit.

--At the Norwich Court of Mayoralty, Mr. Edward Manning, citizen and
brazier, was elected Sheriff, but was discharged from office on paying
the statutory fine of 80 pounds.  The letter was afterwards sent to Mr.
James Pastons, citizen and grocer, and to Mr. John Howard, citizen and
baker, who were also excused from serving on both paying the same fine.
The letter was then sent to Mr. James Watts, citizen and butcher, who
received his discharge on payment of the fine.  It was next sent to Mr.
Cotton Wright, citizen and coomber, who verbally replied that "he had
neither ate nor drank at the expense of the Corporation, and he should
neither pay the fine nor serve the office."  Mr. Wright paid the fine,
but denied that he had sent the message above quoted.  Eventually Mr.
John Wright, citizen and linen draper, accepted office.

16.--The Yarmouth Volunteer Infantry terminated a fortnight's garrison
duty there.

21.*--"The Norwich and Yarmouth water frolics last week offered the
utmost gratification to lovers of aquatic exercises.  Nearly twenty boats
proceeded from Sandling's Ferry to Postwick Grove and the Wood's End,
and, if the day proved unfavourable, mirth and good humour prevailed."
The Mayor of Yarmouth and several members of the Corporation proceeded in
a wherry, "purposely fitted up and plentifully stored," over Breydon.
Several boats started for a silver cup, which was won by Mr. Lovell's
craft.

--A "farewell dejeune" was given at Cromer by Brigadier-General
Sherbrooke, on his removal from the Holt district.  Breakfast was served
at the New Inn, and was attended, amongst others, by Col. and Mrs.
Macdonald, Sir Jacob and Lady Astley, and Sir Edward and Lady Berry.
Then the company adjourned to a barn, where dancing was kept up till five
o'clock in the afternoon.

23.--A silver vase, which cost upwards of 700 pounds, was presented by
Mr. Dusgate, in the name of the farmers of Norfolk, to Mr. T. W. Coke,
"as a token of their esteem, for the liberality of his conduct as a
landlord, and of their gratitude for the benefit of his example as a
practical farmer and most valuable member of society."

24.--The Mayor and magistrates of Norwich resolved to present a petition
against the Corn Regulation Bill, which, however, was passed and received
the Royal assent.  The Act was framed to govern the export and import of
England and Scotland by one general average of each country, taking the
aggregate average of the twelve maritime districts of England and four of
Scotland as the rule.  Exportation was prohibited when wheat was above
54s. and barley 31s. per quarter.  When wheat was at or under 48s. a five
shilling bounty was to be given per quarter on exportation, and when
barley was at or under 28s., a bounty of 2s. 6d. a quarter.  A duty of
from 6d. to 2s. 6d. was to be imposed on foreign corn imported if the
price was as high as 66s. or 63s.

25.--The East and West Regiments of Norfolk Militia marched from
Colchester Barracks to Coxheath Camp, in Kent, which was reached on the
27th.

28.--A general meeting of Lieutenancy was held at the Shirehall, Norwich,
to carry into execution an Act "for establishing and maintaining a
permanent additional force for the defence of the realm, and to provide
for augmenting his Majesty's regular forces, and for the gradual
reduction of the Militia of England."

30.--At the Norfolk Assizes, held at Norwich, before Lord Chief Justice
Mansfield, a prisoner, named John Heath, was charged with an offence
committed at Great Melton, "but it being proved that the prisoner was
both deaf and dumb by the visitation of God, the prosecution was stopped,
but he was ordered to remain till the next Assizes."  (There is no
further record of the case.)

Col. Bulwer, of Heydon, was this month appointed Brigadier-General in the
Eastern District.  On August 8th, he fixed his headquarters in Norwich,
and reviewed the several corps of Volunteers in the city, and on
September 1st it was announced that the general had been ordered to
Liverpool, to take command of the Volunteers in that district.


AUGUST.


3.--A violent thunderstorm occurred.  Several horses were killed by
lightning in different parts of the county; mills and barns were damaged,
and trees torn up by the roots.

4.--At the Norfolk and Norwich Assizes, the action, Palmer _v._ James and
William Bloomfield, was tried.  It was an action for trespass, and the
plaintiff, a miller at Elsing, claimed 2,000 pounds damages because the
defendants, occupiers of land at Bylaugh, had cut away a large part of
the bank of the river Wensum, whereby a great quantity of water escaped
from the stream into an old river or drain, and he was deprived of its
service for the working of his mill.  The hearing lasted ten hours, and
Lord Chief Justice Mansfield, who left the court at eleven p.m., received
the jury at his lodgings, when they returned a verdict for the
defendants.  In the Court of Common Pleas, on November 12th, rule _nisi_
was taken for a new trial, but there is no further record of the case.

9.--Died, aged 83, the Rev. Robert Potter, M.A., Prebendary of Norwich
Cathedral, vicar of Lowestoft, and a translator of AEschylus and other
writers of Greek tragedy.

13.--The troops in the Eastern district received orders to hold
themselves in readiness to take the field at the shortest notice.

18.--The death was recorded, at Bungay, of Mr. Thomas Miller, who was
born at Norwich on August 14th, 1731.  He was an extensive collector of
books and antiquities, and in 1795 issued the "Miller half-penny," of
which only twenty-three pieces were struck off.

22.--A threshing machine on an entirely new principle, invented by a
Devonshire engineer, named Ball, was tested at Norwich.  At Hethersett,
on December 6th, in competition with another machine, built by John
Brown, a Norwich mechanic, it thrashed in 50 minutes 40 seconds about
29.5 coombs of barley, Brown's machine breaking down.  Mutual
recriminations and threats of legal proceedings followed, but without
result.

Night signals were established along the coast, and special constables
sworn in at Yarmouth, Lynn, and elsewhere.

At the suggestion of Major-General Money, two companies of Sharpshooters
were raised, and, with a company of Cavalry Pioneers, were attached to
the East Norfolk Regiment of Yeomanry Cavalry.


SEPTEMBER.


1.--What was considered to be a big bag of partridges was killed at
Stiffkey by Lord James Townshend and Major Loftus, namely, 43 brace.  At
Cromer, Major Windham killed 25 brace.

4.--The Musquito brig, of 18 guns, was launched from Mr. John Preston's
yard at Yarmouth.

6.--The Cygnet sloop of war, of 18 guns, was launched from Mr. Nathaniel
Palmer's yard at Yarmouth.

13.--Excessive heat prevailed.  On this day 80 degrees Fahr. was
recorded.

15.*--"The Ipswich Mail now goes every day from the King's Head Inn,
Market Place, Norwich, to the Swan with two Necks, Lad Lane; and the
Newmarket Mail to the Golden Cross, Charing Cross, daily.  The mails
arrive in London every morning at seven o'clock."

24.--The East Norfolk Regiment of Yeomanry Cavalry, with Capt. C. Brown's
Company of Cavalry Pioneers, and Capt. Pillan's Company of Sharpshooters,
encamped on Hellesdon Field, under the command of Major-General Money.  A
sham fight, in which were engaged the Norwich Volunteer Infantry, under
Col. Harvey, the Norwich Rifles, and the Artillery detachment, under
Capt. Fyers, followed.

Major-General Milner was appointed to the charge of the Volunteer
Infantry of Norfolk, which were inspected by him during the month.


OCTOBER.


6.--Died, aged 60, Sir Wm. Kemp, Bart., of Briston.  "He was riding on a
hobby, from which he fell and expired immediately."

13.--A report was published by Messrs. Kent and Crease, suggesting
improvements to Wells harbour at the estimated cost of 30,000 pounds.

17.--Died, in St. Augustine's, Norwich, Mr. John Thompson, aged 70.  "He
established himself the heir-at-law of the late John Tilyard, whose
property had long been the subject of litigation, by obtaining a verdict
in his favour at the summer Assizes for this county in 1792, whereby he
became entitled to a valuable estate at Oby."

20.--A musical farce, entitled "Dash, or who but he?" written by Mr. F.
Lathom, of Norwich, was produced at Drury Lane.  It was first performed
at Norwich Theatre under the title of "Holiday Time, or the School Boy's
Frolic."

26.--Died, aged 83, the Rev. John Peele, 38 years Upper Minister of St.
Peter Mancroft, Norwich.  He was succeeded by the Rev. C J. Chapman.

--Races were held at Blickling Park.  Events: A subscription purse for
horses bred in Norfolk, the best of three one mile, heats; a subscription
purse of 50 pounds, for the best of three two mile heats.  Silver cup for
the best of three two mile heats.  A purse of five guineas for ponies,
for the best of three two mile heats.

27.*--(Advt.)  "The public are respectfully informed that the first
number of a new weekly newspaper, entitled the 'Yarmouth Herald, or
Norfolk, Suffolk, and Essex Advertiser,' will be published on Saturday,
November 10th, 1804, and sold by James Black, bookseller, Great
Yarmouth."

--*"Mrs. Tuthill, wife of Mr. John Tuthill, of Heigham, is the fortunate
holder of a 16th of the 10,000 pounds prize."

28.--Died, at Ipswich, Lord Viscount Chedworth.  His estate was valued at
500,000 pounds, of which sum he bequeathed 180,000 pounds in legacies to
various persons, some of whom were unknown to him personally.  Mr. Thomas
Penrice, of Yarmouth, received 20,000 pounds legacy, and was also
residuary legatee, by which he came into a property of at least 300,000
pounds.  His lordship left 40,000 pounds to his solicitor, and large
amounts to actors and actresses in Norwich and London.  A caveat was
entered by the next of kin, and on July 5th, 1805, an action to contest
the validity of the will was tried before Lord Ellenborough in the Court
of King's Bench.  The jury confirmed the will, and gave a verdict
accordingly.  An application for a new trial was refused.

31.--At a public meeting at Cromer it was resolved to establish a
lifeboat, and upwards of 500 pounds was subscribed for the purpose.


NOVEMBER.


10.--A one hundred yards race took place in Gunton Park between the Hon.
Edward Harbord and a well-known runner, named Wade, of Aylsham.  Mr.
Harbord won by about four yards.

11.*--"In pulling down the old workhouse in the Lower Close, Norwich, to
improve the entrance to the Deanery, some very curious remains of an
ancient Saxon Gothic building were discovered.  The arches and capitals
had been richly gilt and ornamented.  The style of architecture appeared
to be that in use about the reign of King Stephen."

14.--Died, at Norton, near Lincoln, aged 74, the Right Hon. George, Earl
of Buckinghamshire, Baron Hobart, of Blickling, in Norfolk.  He was
succeeded in his title and estates by the Right Hon. Lord Hobart,
formerly his Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for the Department of
War and the Colonies.

16.--The Rev. J. Bowman was elected Under Minister at St. Peter Mancroft,
Norwich, in succession to the Rev. C. J. Chapman.

22.--The Romney, of 50 guns, which sailed from Yarmouth Roads on the
18th, with bullocks and vegetables for the blockading fleet off the
Texel, was lost in a gale on the South Haak Sand.  All the officers and
crew saved themselves on rafts, but were made prisoners by the Dutch.
The officers were liberated on their parole by the Dutch Admiral Kikkert.

24.--The night coach from Norwich to Yarmouth was left near the King's
Arms, Burgh, in charge of a lad, when the horses broke away and galloped
in the direction of Yarmouth.  A Norwich tradesman, who was an inside
passenger, climbed upon the box, succeeded in reaching the reins, which
had become entangled upon the splinter bar, and stopped the animals.

26.--Ninety-eight French prisoners, the crew of a large French privateer,
of 18 guns, commanded by the noted Blackman, and captured by Capt.
Hancock, of the Cruiser sloop, marched into Norwich, and next morning
proceeded, under a guard of Fifeshire Militia, for Norman Cross Barracks.
The Corporation of Yarmouth and the merchants of the port voted their
thanks to Capt. Hancock and his officers for their exertions in capturing
Blackman, who had committed great depredations.  Blackman himself was
shipped to Chatham in the Monmouth.  His vessel, La Contre-Amiral Magon,
had sustained but trifling damage, and while she was lying at Mr.
Palmer's dock at Yarmouth, 2,500 pounds was offered for her for
privateering purposes.

27.--David Graham was convicted, before the Rev. J. Oldershaw, for
driving cattle on Sunday at Harleston, and under the Act of Charles I.
paid a penalty of 20s.

30.--It was reported at the annual meeting of the Society of Universal
Good Will, at Norwich, that the number of persons relieved by it since
its establishment was 1,940.  An appeal was made for public support.


DECEMBER.


3.*--"The inhabitants of Loddon have entered into a subscription for the
purpose of defraying the expense of lighting the town."

4.--Signor Belzoni from Sadler's Wells, by permission of the Mayor, gave
a performance in the assembly room at the Maid's Head Inn, Norwich.  It
was described as "a grand hydraulic exhibition, called Fire and Water,
along with his phantasmagoria and wonderful feats of strength performed
by the Patagonian Samson, who will carry on his head, arms, and body from
five to ten men with the greatest ease."  This was the famous Belzoni,
the traveller and discoverer of Egyptian antiquities, whose book
entitled, "Narrative of the Operations and recent Discoveries in the
Pyramids, Temples, Tombs, and Cities of Egypt and Nubia," obtained a wide
circulation.

10.--Thetford coursing meeting commenced.  It lasted four days.



1805.


JANUARY.


10.--The Supervisor and officers of Excise belonging to the East Dereham
district seized at Melton a horse and cart, with 80 gallons of Geneva and
four gallons of brandy.

11.--A murderous poaching affray occurred in Thorpe Wood, near Aylsham,
when several game watchers, in the service of Lord Suffield, were
severely wounded.  At the Norfolk Assizes at Thetford, in March, six of
the poachers, indicted under the Black Act, were found guilty and
sentenced to death.  Lord Suffield and the Hon. Edward Harbord pleaded
that their lives might be spared, and the sentence was ultimately
commuted to transportation.  When the gang were being conveyed by the
Expedition night mail coach from Norwich, on their way to Portsmouth, the
convicts got free from the chain and made a desperate attempt to escape,
but were too heavily ironed.  They attacked the coachman, and one of the
guards presented a pistol, which missed fire; Johnson, the gaoler, rushed
amongst them with a cutlass, and subdued them.  One prisoner escaped, and
the others were lodged in the Surrey New Gaol on the following morning.

17.--At a public meeting held at the Guildhall, Norwich, it was resolved
to establish a Hospital and School for the Indigent Blind in Norfolk and
Norwich; towards the foundation of which Mr. Thomas Tawell contributed a
house and 3.5 acres of land in Magdalen Street, valued at 1,050 pounds.
Mr. Tawell, who was himself blind, made an eloquent and successful
appeal, and the institution was opened on October 14th.

28.--The pantomime, "Don Juan," was produced at Norwich Theatre "in a
style which, for the display of beautiful scenery and of appropriate
decorations and costumes, is very rarely to be witnessed on provincial
boards."

29.--Died, aged 57, Mr. Thomas Wodehouse, of Sennowe Lodge.  He was one
of the gentlemen of his Majesty's Privy Chamber, in which office he was
succeeded by Mr. J. W. Thomlinson, of Cley.


FEBRUARY.


2.--Bishop Manners Sutton, of Norwich, was nominated by the King and
chosen, February 12th, Archbishop of Canterbury.  On the 13th, his Grace
arrived at the Palace, Norwich, from London; and on the 15th, the Mayor
and Court of Aldermen proceeded in state from the Guildhall to the
Palace, where the Recorder (Mr. Harvey) read an address of congratulation
to the Archbishop.  The clergy of Norwich, on the 16th, waited on his
Grace, when the Rev. Prebendary Pretyman addressed the Archbishop in an
appropriate speech.  On the 17th, his Grace preached his farewell sermon
at the Cathedral, and on the 18th departed for Lambeth.

9.--A woman, who had eloped from her home in Kent with a horse dealer,
was found by her husband in a house in St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich.  She
refused to return to him.  The dealer offered to buy the woman for 5
pounds, and her husband, agreeing, placed a halter round her neck, and
surrendered all right and title to her for the sum named.

19.--Died, at his house, the Town Close, Norwich, Mr. Jeremiah Ives,
senior alderman of Norwich.  He was 78 years of age, and had served the
office of Mayor in 1769-1795.

20.--A solemn fast was observed at Norwich.

21.--Mr. Robert Herring, of Bracondale, elected an alderman, in place of
Mr. Jeremiah Ives, deceased.

23.--Experiments were made at Norwich to test the practicability of
firing a field-piece from a common waggon without injury to the vehicle.
The idea, which originated with Major-General Money, "succeeded
perfectly, and the horses stood steady during the discharge of the
field-piece."

24.--The clergy of Norwich, having intimated that it was their intention
to apply to Parliament for an increase of their incomes by assessment,
considerable feeling was manifested in opposition.  The Corporation at a
quarterly assembly resolved to oppose the application.  Vestry meetings
were held throughout the city, and the inhabitants unanimously expressed
an opinion adverse to the clergy's proposal.

--The freedom of the city was conferred on Mr. John Frere, the former,
and Mr. Robert Fellowes and Mr. William Smith, the then Parliamentary
representatives of Norwich.

--A lease of the Dutch Church was granted to the Corporation for 200
years, for the use of the poor in the workhouse; the Dutch congregation
reserving the right to bury their dead in the church, and to hold Divine
service therein every forenoon of the first Sunday in the month.


MARCH.


4.--Died, aged 60, Elizabeth Clayton, of Wells-next-the-Sea.  "This
woman, from an early propensity for masculine employments, had worked as
a ship's carpenter at the dockyard of the above port upwards of 40 years,
and always in man's apparel.  She used to drink, chew tobacco, and keep
company only with workmen, yet would never enter into the matrimonial
state.  She was a strong robust woman, and never permitted anyone to
insult her with impunity."

18.--The Rev. Henry Bathurst, D.D., "elected Bishop of this Diocese by
the Dean and Chapter."  His lordship was installed on May 10th.

23.--At a meeting at the Guildhall, Norwich, resolutions were agreed to
"condemning the proposed alterations of the course of the mail coach from
London to Norwich by way of Bury, from the consequent later delivery of
the letters to the post-office here, and from the earlier despatch from
thence, to the great inconvenience of the mercantile and trading houses
of the city."  Representations to this effect were made to the
Postmaster-General, but without result.  The coach started from the
King's Head, Norwich, at four o'clock, and passed through Thetford, Bury,
and Newmarket.  It ran every day and stopped at the Golden Cross, Charing
Cross, London.  Another coach, by Ipswich and Colchester, set up at the
Swan with two Necks, Lad Lane.

28.--Miss Aickin, "an actress of superior talents and personal
attractions," made her first appearance at Norwich Theatre in the
character of Widow Cheerly in the comedy of "The Soldier's Daughter," and
as Aura in the farce of "The Farm House."  She played the part of Hamlet
on May 4th.

30.*--"The Rev. William L. Gebbart has been elected minister of the Dutch
congregation, and also appointed minister of the French church in
Norwich."

--*"It is in contemplation to establish telegraphic communication between
Norwich and Yarmouth for mercantile purposes."  In October the Norwich
Corporation agreed to pay 10 pounds annually for its support.

--*"An earthen pot, containing 500 pieces of antient English silver coin,
was ploughed up in a field near Aylsham.  The pieces consisted chiefly of
groats of Henry VII. and pennies of the Edwards.  There were two gold
angels of Henry VI."


APRIL.


6.*--"A person in the country has lately been convicted, before Mr.
Crowe, Mr. Astley and Mr. Norris, in the legal penalty for working and
digging in his garden and openly profaning the Sabbath.  It is to be
hoped that his example will operate towards the discontinuance of the
practice, which, perhaps, is nowhere so prevalent as in this county."

--Leeds Mays, for horse stealing, was executed on the "new drop" on the
Castle Hill, Norwich.

--Charles Pegg was publicly whipped in Norwich Market Place, for
purchasing soldiers' necessaries.

13.*--(Advt.)  "A main of cocks will be fought on Easter Tuesday and
Wednesday, 21 in the main for ten guineas the battle, and 30 guineas the
odd; and likewise two turn outs for 20 pounds the battle, and also two
byes.  April 16th and 17th, at Hindringham Duke of York.  The first pair
of cocks to be pitted at eleven o'clock in the forenoon.  Accommodation
for man and horse.  Feeders, Fox for Walsingham; Whisker for Wighton."

22.--At Swaffham, a man, named Angel, undertook for a trifling wager to
run 20 miles in three hours.  He ran it with ease in 2 hours 50 minutes.

27.--Two gun brigs, of 14 guns each, were launched from Mr. John
Preston's dockyard at Yarmouth.

28.--The oil mill at Hellesdon, belonging to Mr. Wm. Parkinson, was
destroyed by fire.  The loss amounted to between 2,000 and 3,000 pounds.


MAY.


2.--A public meeting was held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, when
resolutions, expressive of obligations to Earl St. Vincent, for promoting
an enquiry into naval abuses, with thanks to Mr. Whitbread for
introducing the tenth report of the Commissioners of Naval Enquiry to the
notice of the House of Commons; and thanks to Mr. Robert Fellowes, M.P.,
and Mr. W. Smith, M.P., for supporting Mr. Whitbread's motion, were
unanimously agreed to.

3.--The Common Council of Norwich proposed a vote of thanks to Earl St.
Vincent, to the Commissioners of Naval Enquiry, to Mr. Whitbread, and to
the members of Parliament for the city.  This was negatived by the
aldermen by 12 votes to 4.

6.--An impressment took place at Yarmouth.  "Ships' parties stopped every
person they met without discrimination or respect for appearances.  No
less than 300 persons were impressed.  Some were confined in the
rendezvous of the town gang, others were marched to the barracks or
conveyed to the boats lying in readiness at the jetty, and the whole body
were carried during the night on to the Monmouth.  Next morning a
regulation took place, and 50 only were detained."

14.--At a county meeting, held at the Norwich Shirehall, several
resolutions, thanking Earl St. Vincent and the Commissioners of Naval
Enquiry, and Mr. Whitbread, Sir J. H. Astley, and Mr. T. W. Coke for
their patriotic and independent conduct in Parliament, were unanimously
agreed to.

18.--An officer of the Shropshire Militia decided in his favour a wager
of ten guineas, "to pick up 100 stones laid in Chapel Field, Norwich, at
a distance of a yard from each other, and to deposit them in two baskets
placed at the extremities of the line, in the space of one hour."
Another person, a few weeks afterwards, performed the same feat in 44
minutes.

25.--Married, by special licence by the Bishop of Norwich, at his
lordship's house in Manchester-square, London, Mr. Benjamin Bathurst,
secretary of legation to the Court of Stockholm, to Miss Call, daughter
of Sir John Call, Bart.  (In November, 1809, when travelling to England
with important despatches as envoy to the Court of Vienna, Bathurst
mysteriously disappeared in the town of Perleberg, and was never more
seen or heard of.)

--*"A street, 26 feet wide, is about to be opened, forming an entrance,
which has long been most desirable, from Chapel Field directly into
Bethel Street, Norwich."

The several battalions of Volunteer Infantry in the county performed a
month's garrison duty in Yarmouth.  The Norwich Volunteers were on duty
in the city.


JUNE.


1.--Lord Frederick Beauclerk and the Hon. Edward Harbord ran a hundred
yards race on Lord's Cricket Ground, London.  Mr. Harbord was beaten by
two yards.  He afterwards ran the same distance against Mr. Lambert, and
won easily.

4.--The King's birthday was celebrated in Norwich by the garrison and
Volunteers, who paraded to the number of 1,800 and fired a _feu de joie_
on the Castle Meadow.  The weather was very cold, and at nine o'clock at
night the thermometer registered 36 degrees, only four degrees above
freezing point.

8.--William Carter, a private in the City of Norwich Battalion of
Infantry Volunteers, convicted, before a regimental court martial, of
absenting himself from parade on four successive days, was publicly
disgraced and dismissed the battalion.

22.*--"Gabriel Swallow, aged 13, son of a gamekeeper to the Hon. Col.
Harbord at Hunworth, shot 21 bullets at a target 80 yards distant for a
bet of two guineas.  With the exception of three shots, they were all
placed within 5.5 inches of the centre; three bullets were one inch from
the centre; five ditto, two inches; six ditto, three inches; one ditto,
four inches; two ditto, five inches; one ditto, 5.5 inches."

24.--Holkham Sheep Shearing commenced.  Mr. Ball's threshing machine was
shown at work.  An ingenious model of a dibbling machine, made by a young
man in the neighbourhood; a mowing machine, invented by Mr. Burrell, of
Thetford; a scuffler, by Mr. Clarke; the model of a threshing machine, by
Mr. Cook, of Aylsham; and an improved drill, by Messrs. Wilson and
Standish, of Lynn, were also exhibited.  The sweepstake, to estimate the
weight of Mr. Coke's three-shear Leicester wether, was won by Lord
Winchilsea, who guessed within half a pound of the actual weight.


JULY.


6.--Mr. Edward Rigby, Mayor of Norwich, in a letter to the NORFOLK
CHRONICLE, advocated vaccine inoculation.  He wrote: "I inoculated my
twin children when they were eight months old with smallpox ichor, and
they resisted the infection.  Since then I have exposed them to patients
under smallpox and at that period of the disease when most likely to
communicate infection, which, as before, they were insusceptible to."

9.--Mdlle. Eloise Adelaide de Bourbon, daughter of the Prince of Conde,
took the veil at Bodney Hall, the retreat of the nuns of Montargis.

--A "bugle man" of the Norwich Rifle Corps, named Hardingham, was killed
by the accidental discharge of a rifle at target practice.  His remains
were interred, with military honours, in St. Giles' churchyard on the
11th.

16.--At a meeting held at the Guildhall, presided over by the Mayor of
Norwich, resolutions were adopted for taking the best means of stopping
the progress of the contagion of smallpox, and of extending vaccine
inoculation.  A committee afterwards presented a memorial in favour of
vaccination.  On September 14th it was announced that nearly 400 of the
poor had been vaccinated.

24.--A gift of silver plate was presented to Sir Thomas Beevor, Bart., at
Hethel, by the Chairman and Committees of Chief Constables in Humbleyard
and adjacent Hundreds, as "a testimonial of esteem and respect and
approbation of the able and upright manner in which he had discharged the
duties of a magistrate for more than half a century."

27.*--"At Diss, a number of labourers in husbandry refused to work for
the customary wages, and being out of employment applied to the
magistrates, who advised the parish officers to put them to work, which
they accordingly did.  Their business was to carry bricks in a hod from
Palgrave to Diss, a distance of two miles.  This medicine had the desired
effect, for after two days they returned to their former employment."


AUGUST.


3.*--(Advt.)  "A main of cocks will be fought at the Sun Inn, Wells, on
Tuesday, August 13th, between the gentlemen of Foulsham and the gentlemen
of Wells, five guineas the battle and twenty guineas the odd.  There will
be two pits.  Feeders, Whisker for Foulsham; Souther for Wells."

6.--The Norwich Society of Artists opened an exhibition of paintings and
drawings in their room in Sir Benjamin Wrenche's Court.

8.--In consequence of official intelligence of preparations along the
enemy's coast, Major-General Money addressed a letter to the commandants
of Yeomanry and Volunteer Cavalry in Norfolk and Suffolk, requesting them
to have their corps ready for inspection, and in marching order.  A
similar letter was sent by Major-General Milner to the commandants of
Norfolk Volunteer Infantry, adding that the requisite number of waggons
was ordered for their conveyance in case of necessity.

12.--A cricket match was played at Reepham between the gentlemen of
Foulsham and the gentlemen of Reepham, Hackford, Whitwell, and Corpusty
"for a considerable sum."  It was won by the former, "with eight notches
to spare."  The return match, on October 21st, was also won by Foulsham.

26.--A cricket match was played in Blickling Park between elevens of the
Blickling and Norwich clubs, and was won by the former.  It was followed
by a single wicket match between the same teams, when Blickling again
won, with nine wickets to go down.


SEPTEMBER.


3.--The committee of the Court of Guardians, appointed to examine the
poor-rates of the city and hamlets of Norwich, and to obtain a more equal
assessment, reported that an increase of 16,000 pounds stock and 1,800
pounds rent, calculating on the half-rental only, might be made; and
recommended a general survey and new valuation to be taken, in
consequence of the great alteration which had taken place in property,
and in the value of land in particular since 1786, when the last survey
was made.

7.--A remarkable whirlwind occurred at Rockland St. Mary.  A rowing boat,
lying on the bank of the broad, was lifted into the air and blown a
distance of 70 yards; and another large boat was raised out of the water
and hurled a considerable distance.  A young man was lifted three or four
yards in the air and blown several yards.  Much damage was done to the
roofs of cottages and to wheat sheafs in the fields.

13.--Mr. Incledon, the famous vocalist, appeared at Norwich Theatre in
his entertainment, "The Wandering Melodist."

21.--At a meeting of the Norwich Corporation the committee appointed to
take into consideration the propriety of applying to Parliament for an
Act for the better lighting, watching, and paving of the city, reported
in favour of the proposal, and a gentleman present offered to subscribe
500 pounds towards the undertaking.  On October 26th, it was reported
that the aldermen had adopted the recommendation, but the Commons threw
it out by 20 votes against 16.  At a meeting held on October 30th, at
which the Bishop, the Mayor, and many of the principal owners and
occupiers of estates were present, the petition was unanimously agreed to
and signed.

28.*--"A finely preserved Saxon font has been discovered in the church of
Great Hautbois, near Coltishall, by Mr. J. A. Repton.  Many curious
remains of antient sculpture are obscured by repeated coats of dirt and
whitewash in our churches."

--*"Died, lately, Sir James Tylney Longe, Bart., in the eleventh year of
his age.  By his death the Tylney property, amounting to 25,000 pounds
per annum and nearly 300,000 pounds in the Funds, devolves on the distant
branches of the Longe family."

During this month Mr. James Neild, of Chelsea, a well-known
philanthropist, visited the county gaol, the city gaol and bridewell, the
Norfolk and Norwich Hospital, and the Duke's Palace Workhouse.  In his
report on the Hospital he wrote: "It does honour to the county, and is
one of the best I have seen."


OCTOBER.


7.--A mysterious outrage was committed at Fakenham.  A man entered the
bed-room of two maiden ladies, named Bale, brutally thrashed one, and
attempted to cut the throat of the other, after which he decamped.  The
Home Office offered his Majesty's pardon to any accomplice who gave
evidence that would lead to a conviction, and Mr. Edward Bale, of
Toftrees, offered a reward of 100 pounds for the discovery of the guilty
person.  No clue was forthcoming.

12.*--"A few days since the Russian Countess Mengdon arrived at her
newly-purchased seat, called New Place, Thetford, late the residence of
Mr. James Mingay."

18.--One of a pair of eagles was shot at Cantley.  The extended wings
measured 7 feet 4.5 inches, and the bird was 2.5 feet in height.

22.--A two days' race meeting commenced in Blickling Park.  A ball and
supper were given by Lord Suffield.

--The Norwich Battalion of Volunteers, commanded by Lieut.-Col. Patteson,
and the City of Norwich Battalion of Volunteer Infantry (Lieut.-Col.
Harvey) were inspected by Major-General Milner.  "A portion of the latter
corps proceeded from the Castle ditches to Mile End in waggons, fitted up
with seats, and provided throughout the county pursuant to general
orders."

Under the Additional Force Act, Norfolk raised this month 248 men to
supply vacancies occasioned by those who had enlisted out of the Militia
into the regular Army.


NOVEMBER.


2.*--"The Sheriff of Norwich, Mr. J. H. Yallop, is the fortunate holder
of a sixteenth share of the ticket drawn for a prize of 3,000 pounds.  In
the lottery of 1803, Mr. Yallop also shared a prize of 2,000 pounds, and
in 1804, part of the 20,000 pounds prize."

7.--Intelligence was received of the battle of Trafalgar, which was
fought on October 21st, and of the death of Nelson.  "The bells were rung
and fired throughout the day, but all the joy that would have arisen from
the victory was wholly absorbed in sorrow and regret for the death of the
Hero of the Nile and Trafalgar."  Great rejoicings afterwards took place,
and addresses of congratulation to his Majesty were unanimously voted by
the Corporations of Norwich, Yarmouth, Lynn, &c.

30.--A county meeting was held at the Shirehall, Norwich, when an address
to his Majesty on the victory of Trafalgar was agreed to.  It was also
resolved to open a subscription for erecting a memorial to perpetuate the
memory of Lord Nelson's victories.


DECEMBER.


3.--The Duke of Norfolk arrived at Norwich, and visited the Cathedral,
St. Andrew's Hall, and other public buildings.

--Thanksgiving day.  Collections were made in the churches for the relief
of the families of those who fell, and for those who were wounded.  At
Aylsham, there was a "grand naval procession," barrels of beer were drunk
in the Market Place, and a display of fireworks took place at night.

17.--A grand _fete_ was held at the Norwich Assembly Rooms, in honour of
Nelson's victory.  Upwards of 450 ladies and gentlemen of the county and
city were present at the ball and supper, and the rooms were decorated
with transparencies and brilliantly illuminated.  The arrangements were
carried out by the Norfolk Society, established in 1770.

Among the Acts of Parliament passed this year was one to enable Mr.
Daniel Henry Woodward, his sons, and their descendants to use the surname
and family arms of Mr. Henry Lee Warner, late of Walsingham.



1806.


JANUARY.


4.*--(Advt.)  "To be sold, a Proprietor's Share in the Norwich Theatre,
with or without transferable ticket, which will admit the holder to the
Yarmouth, Ipswich, and Colchester Theatres."

--*"A man of the name of Baxter, formerly a respectable farmer at
Buckenham, who took a rash resolution of refusing any kind of sustenance
but water, which he continued to do for 38 days at the White Horse at
Kenninghall, was induced to give up the same on Monday last by the offer
of a noble lady to settle an allowance upon him.  He some time ago
persisted in the same mode of existence for 19 days."

9.--The church bells in city and county were tolled from twelve o'clock
to two o'clock, on the occasion of the funeral of Lord Nelson at St.
Paul's Cathedral.

12.--A subscription was made for the relief of the poor in Germany, who
were suffering under the combined miseries of war and famine.  About 300
pounds was collected.

14.--A meeting was held at the Guildhall for the purpose of opposing the
Norwich Paving Bill, and a petition against the measure was signed by
1,600 owners and occupiers.  On February 8th, the Mayor (Mr. Rigby)
announced that "the respectability of the signatures to the petition in
favour of the Bill, and the large sum raised to defray the expenses of
the application to Parliament, could not but determine its supporters to
persevere firmly in promoting it."  On February 24th, the aldermen, by
ten votes to eight, ordered the city seal to be affixed to the Bill.
Leave was given on March 7th for the insertion of fresh notices in the
Bill, in order that it might be carried before Parliament that Session.
The Bill was read a first time on April 21st, and was in due course
transmitted to a committee of the House of Commons.  The taking of
evidence for and against the Bill concluded on May 21st, and on June 13th
it passed both Houses of Parliament and received the Royal assent.  The
first election of Commissioners under the Norwich Paving Act took place
in July, and the first meeting of Commissioners was held on July 15th,
when the Deputy-Mayor (Mr. Rigby) was appointed chairman; Mr. Elisha De
Hague, clerk; Messrs. Harvey and Hudson, treasurers; and Mr. John Roots,
surveyor.

15.--The vane and spindle of the "antient and beautiful spire" of St.
Gregory's Church, Norwich, were blown off during a severe gale.


FEBRUARY.


3.--On opening a vault at the church of St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich, a
live bat was found therein, of a greyish colour, where it had probably
lain in a torpid state more than 32 years, the distance of time since the
vault was before opened."

8.*--(Advt.)  "A main of cocks will be fought on Wednesday, February
19th, at the Red Lion Inn, Fakenham, between the gentlemen of Fakenham
and the gentlemen of Foulsham.  Eleven mains, two byes, and one turn out
for five guineas the battle, and ten guineas the odd.  Feeders, George
Syder for Fakenham; David Lamb for Foulsham."

9.--James Coleman, bricklayer, of Swardeston, was tolling the bell at the
parish church, "when the crown and cannons broke from the bell, and she
came down through both floors, killing him on the spot."

13.--Married, at St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich, Henry Robert Bowles,
acting-manager at the Theatre Royal, to Miss Aickin, of the same theatre.

16.--Died, at St. George Colegate, Norwich, Thomas Troughton, aged 88.
"He was a member of the corps of Artillery raised for the internal
defence during the Revolution of 1745, and is believed to be the last
survivor of that loyal corps."

22.*--"The interior of the Cathedral is about to undergo a thorough
cleaning and repair.  It is sixty years since a similar repair was done."
It was re-opened November 22nd.

24.--At a quarterly assembly of the Corporation of Norwich an address was
ordered to be presented to his Majesty, "expressive of their gratitude
for the paternal affection he has shown to his subjects by waiving every
consideration for the public good in the appointment of men of the first
abilities in the country to the high offices of State."  A county meeting
was held at the Shirehall, Norwich, on March 28th, when a similar
resolution was adopted, congratulating his Majesty on the appointment of
an administration "in whom the nation feels a well-grounded confidence."
Like addresses were presented by the Corporations of Yarmouth and King's
Lynn.

27.--Landed at Yarmouth, on their return from the Continent, the 4th,
23rd, and 28th Regiments of Foot, and 300 riflemen, comprising the
brigade commanded by General Paget.


MARCH.


1.*--"Lately, died, at the age of 113, Mrs. Roope, of Tharston, near Long
Stratton.  She lived to see her fifth generation."

5.--A troop of the King's German Legion (heavy cavalry) arrived at
Norwich from Yarmouth, and on the following day proceeded on their march
to Scotland.

7.--A public concert was given at Chapel Field House, Norwich.
Vocalists: Mr. Vaughan and Mrs. Vaughan (formerly Miss Tennant); leader
of the band, Mr. Parnell; at the pianoforte, Mr. Beckwith.

11.--The Board of Agriculture voted their gold medal to Mr. Thomas
William Coke, "for his extensive and successful mode of irrigation, by
which he has converted a track of unprofitable boggy land in Norfolk into
sound and excellent water meadows."

--The Marquis Townshend's 85th birthday was celebrated by a dinner at the
Crown Inn, and by a ball and supper at the Red Lion Inn, Fakenham.

15.--At the Norfolk Assizes, held at Thetford, before Mr. Justice Grose,
was tried the case, the King _v._ Anthony.  This was an information filed
against the defendant by the Attorney-General for assaulting John
Stevenson, an officer of Excise, while in the execution of his duty.
Stevenson called at the White Horse Inn, Edgefield, on December 2nd,
1805, and found smuggled liquor in panniers belonging to the defendant,
whose ostensible trade was that of a vendor of oysters.  The officer
seized the panniers, but defendant, in regaining them, committed an
assault.  He was found guilty, and the case was remitted to the King's
Bench for judgment.  (No further record appears.)

--*(Advt.)  "A main of cocks will be fought at the Maid's Head Inn,
Norwich, on Tuesday, the 25th inst., and two following days between the
gentlemen of Norwich and the gentlemen of Yarmouth.  To show 31 mains,
and ten bye-cocks, to fight for ten guineas a battle, and 50 guineas the
odd battle.  There will be five pits.  Feeders, David Lamb for Norwich;
Thomas Cox for Yarmouth."

16.--Died, at his house in Surrey Street, Norwich, John Manning, M.D.,
upwards of 30 years physician at the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital.

17.--Died, at Snettisham Lodge, Mr. Thomas Daniell, Attorney-General of
Dominica.

24.--Intelligence was received at Norwich of Vice-Admiral Duckworth's
victory over the French squadron in St. Domingo Bay.  Col. Patteson's
Volunteers fired a _feu de joie_ in the Market Place, and the bells of
St. Peter Mancroft rang until midnight.

27.--Mr. Heath caught in Panxworth Broad a pike weighing 31 lbs., and
measuring 45 inches in length, and 25 inches in girth.

28.--Died, at Bodney Hall, aged 49, Madame Elizabeth de Mirepoix.
"Descended from one of the most distinguished families in France, she
forsook the allurements of the Court for the retirement and austerity of
monastic life.  From the storms of the French Revolution the Benedictine
Monastery (of which she had been a member 31 years and superior 22 years)
sought shelter in England, and found an asylum in this county, where for
the last 15 years the nuns have been occupied in the education of
Catholic young ladies."

This month upwards of 800 pounds was subscribed to defray the cost of the
erection in Norwich of a monument to the memory of Lord Nelson.  Mr.
Browne and Mr. Percy submitted designs and models to the committee, but
insufficient support was given to the movement.


APRIL.


5.*--"The King has granted the dignity of Earl to the Right Hon. Horatio
Baron Walpole, to be known as the Earl of Orford."  Mr. Thomas Wm. Coke
was offered, but declined a peerage.

12.--At a meeting of farmers and others at Thetford, it was decided to
hold a sheep and lamb fair in that town annually on September 1st.

19.--The Boreas frigate, 28 guns, was launched from the dockyard of
Messrs. Stone and Custance, at Yarmouth.  On the same day the Ariel
sloop, of 18 guns, was launched from Mr. N. Palmer's yard.

27.--General Milner inspected the Norwich Rifle Corps this day (Sunday);
the Norwich Volunteer Regiment on the 28th; and Col. Patteson's Battalion
on the 29th.


MAY.


6.--Died, in his 82nd year, the Rev. George Thomas, vicar of East Dereham
and brother of Dr. Thomas, Bishop of Rochester.  He was succeeded by the
Rev. Charles Hyde Wollaston.

14.--The annual meeting of the Dissenters Benevolent Society, presided
over by Mr. Geo. Watson, was held at the Angel Inn, Norwich.

16.--A hundred yards foot race took place on Lord's Cricket Ground
between Lord E. Somerset and the Hon. Edward Harbord.  "Lord Edward had
the start of Mr. Harbord, and maintained the lead about 60 yards, when
Mr. Harbord gained upon and crossed him.  There was a foul, and Lord
Edward fell.  Lord Frederick Beauclerk, who was umpire, gave his decision
as follows:--That on account of the accident the race was deemed void,
but Mr. Harbord is allowed the power of calling upon Lord Edward to run
the race over again any time within the next six months upon giving his
lordship six weeks' notice."

17.--The sword of the Spanish Admiral, Don Xavier Francisco Winthuysen,
who died of his wounds at the battle off Cape St. Vincent, February 14th,
1797, presented to the city of Norwich by Lord Nelson, was placed in the
mural monument at the Guildhall.

29.--General Milner, in a letter addressed to the commanding officers of
Volunteers in Norwich and Norfolk, expressed "the high sense he
entertained of the merit of the Volunteer corps in coming forward in such
force, when the country, and this district in particular, was threatened
with invasion by a powerful enemy."

30.--Died, at Calabar, East Indies, in his 32nd year, Capt. Smyth, 56th
Regiment, son of Mr. James Smyth, attorney-at-law, of Norwich.  He served
in all the campaigns in Flanders and Holland under General Coote, in
Ireland at the battle of Vinegar Hill, at Gibraltar during the mutiny,
and under Sir Ralph Abercromby in Egypt.


JUNE.


9.--Vice-Admiral Russell, accompanied by several officers of the North
Sea Fleet, stationed at Yarmouth, visited Norwich.

10.--A rowing match took place between the Lion and the Dove.  The
course, five miles, was between Carrow and Whitlingham, and the Lion won
by 100 yards in 34 minutes.

18.--Wrestling matches were contested on Panxworth Green in the presence
of a large number of spectators.  "Green, of Beighton, was champion of
the green, and came off victorious from all his engagements."  He was
eighteen years old.

19.--Norwich Guild day.  In consequence of the Cathedral undergoing
reparation, the Mayor and Corporation attended service at the church of
St. Peter Mancroft.  The Mayor, Mr. Thomas Allday Kerrison, entertained
500 guests at dinner at St. Andrew's Hall; the ball was held at Chapel
Field House.

23.--At Holkham Sheep Shearing, Mr. John Herring, jun., of Norwich,
exhibited three shawls, manufactured by Messrs. John Herring and Sons
entirely from the fleece of Mr. Coke's Southdowns.

24.--Lord Waldegrave, in command of a detachment of the 7th Light
Dragoons, stationed at Norwich, commenced a series of three cricket
matches, "with a select number of the men under his command against a
party of gentlemen of this city and neighbourhood."  The soldiers won two
out of the three games.  In the following month Lord Waldegrave came of
age, and succeeded to a property amounting to 30,000 pounds a year.

28.--Mr. Incledon appeared at Norwich Theatre in his entertainment,
consisting of songs and recitations, "Hospitality, or the Harvest Home."
He reappeared on the 30th.


JULY.


5.--Died, at his house in George Street, Portman Square, London, Arthur
Richard Dillon, Archbishop and Duke of Narbonne, Primate of the Gauls,
President of the States of Languedoc, and Commander of the Order of the
Holy Ghost.  "This venerable prelate was uncle to Lady Jerningham, of
Costessey."

--The Primary Visitation of the Bishop of Norwich (which commenced at
Thetford on May 22nd) terminated at St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich.  "Six
hundred and ninety-nine young persons from the adjacent parishes, and on
the following day nearly 600 persons from the several parishes and
hamlets of the city were confirmed.  The total number of persons who had
been confirmed throughout the diocese in the course of this visitation is
computed at nearly 17,000."

10.--This day "the thermometer stood at 82, exposed to the north."  On
the 19th of the previous month the heat was so great that many post
horses died.

12.--The Royal assent was given to an Act to enable his Majesty "to grant
the Castle of Norwich, with the county gaol, Castle Hill, and certain
land adjacent thereto, in Norfolk, and for vesting the same in the
justices of the peace for the said county, with the use thereof."

13.--A remarkable suicide took place at Yarmouth.  "Two servant women
tied themselves together with ribbon, walked into the sea, and were
drowned."  They were the wives of privates in the Shropshire Militia.
"Their husbands had come to see them the previous day, and, refusing to
permit them to return with them, they committed the rash act."

14.--A large concourse assembled to witness a camping match on Crostwick
Common between the Hundreds of Taverham and of Blofield.
Conditions:--"Play 40 minutes; candidates to be young men under 25 and
unmarried.  Prize, a hat of the value of 10s. 6d. for each of the
successful combatants."  The affair ended in a walk over, owing to the
absence of the Blofield men.  "It is now 20 years since a regular camp
was played at Crostwick, and that one was patronised by one of his
Majesty's present ministers, who is not more celebrated for his political
talents, and the accomplishments of a liberal and enlightened mind, than
for his attachment to the ancient sports and amusements of his country."
(Reference is here made to William Windham.)

17.--The annual water frolic and aquatic procession took place at
Norwich, "led by Admiral Clarke in full uniform in the Apollo."

21.--The Corporation of Norwich again granted the use of St. Andrew's
Hall to the corn merchants, as a place of exchange, at the annual rent of
50 guineas.  "A letter from Mr. Opie was read, in which that celebrated
artist stated that, if due care was taken to prevent persons from
touching the paintings in the hall, they would sustain no injury if the
hall was opened ten times a week."

26.--Arrived, at Yarmouth, the Blanche frigate, Capt. Lavie, with La
Guerriere, French frigate of 50 guns, Capt. Hubert, captured on the 18th,
after a desperate action of 45 minutes.  La Guerriere had taken eight
Greenlandmen and one Yarmouth vessel, all of which she had destroyed.

28.--The Volunteer corps agreed to continue their services under new
regulations and at reduced pay.  The regulations were made in accordance
with a new Act of Parliament, which provided for the military training of
the population by the calling out of 200,000 men in each year.

31.--The Duke's Palace estate in Norwich, belonging to the Duke of
Norfolk, was sold in lots for 5,055 pounds, exclusive of the Public
Library and house adjoining.


AUGUST.


9.*--(Advt.)  "To be seen alive (from Mr. Kendrick's menagerie, 42,
Piccadilly), in a commodious room at Mr. Peck's, the Church Stile, in the
Market Place, Norwich, a most surprising crocodile from the Nile ever
seen in this kingdom.  He is so remarkably tame that any lady or
gentleman may touch him with safety."

13.--The Norwich Society of Artists opened an exhibition in their room in
Sir Benjamin Wrenche's Court.  The exhibitors included A. Brown, W.
Browne, and Stone, architectural subjects; Crome, Dixon, Gordon, C.
Hodgson, Ladbrooke, Leeds, and Thirtle, landscapes; Cooper, horses and
cattle; Mrs. Coppin, Freeman, and Thirtle, portraits; and Sillett,
flowers and still life.  "The exhibition is such as to authorise our
predicting that the seeds of genius, which have evidently taken deep root
in some of the artists, will secure them most respectable places in the
roll of fame."

14.--The anniversary sermon for the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital was
preached by the Bishop of Norwich at St. Peter Mancroft.  The sum
collected was 185 pounds 16s. 6d., and the proceeds of the dinner at the
Swan Inn amounted to 41 pounds 9s. 6d.

28.--The Comus frigate, 22 guns, was launched from the dockyard of
Messrs. Custance and Co., at Yarmouth.

30.--The Norwich Paving Commissioners advertised that they were "ready to
contract with any person or persons for watch boxes, to be made of good
and well-seasoned yellow deal, and painted on the outsides of a lead
colour three times in oil.  Also to receive proposals for and contract
with any person or persons for 36 strong and well-made watchmen's coats
of a dark drab coloured cloth, large double collar, with belt of the same
sewed to the coat, and white and strong metal buttons."


SEPTEMBER.


11.--Died, at the age of 100 years, Mrs. Crisp, of Loddon.

12.--Died, at Brighton, aged 76, the Right Hon. Edward Lord Thurlow, Lord
Chancellor 1778 to 1793, except for a few months during the Coalition
Administration in 1783, when the seals were put in Commission.  He was
the son of the Rev. Mr. Thurlow, rector of Ashfield, Suffolk, and was
born at Braconash, Norfolk, December 9th, 1730.  He was succeeded in his
title and estates by his nephew, only son of the Bishop of Durham.

--Died, at Breccles, near Watton, aged 107 years and 8 months, John
Stubings, husbandman.  "He never occupied more than five acres of land
nor received any parochial relief."

13.*--(Advt.)  "Docking Snettisham, Lynn, and Norwich Telegraph, from
Docking to Lynn and Lynn to Norwich.  Leaves Docking at seven o'clock on
Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, through Snettisham and Castle Rising,
to Star Inn, Lynn.  Leaves Lynn at eleven o'clock, to the Woolpack, St.
Giles, Norwich, through Gayton, Litcham, Mileham, Brisley, Elmham,
Bawdeswell, Lenwade Bridge, Attlebridge, and Drayton, and returns the
following morning at seven o'clock."

25.--A shark, measuring nine feet in length and weighing three cwts., was
caught off Yarmouth.


OCTOBER.


3.--The bells of several parish churches in Norwich were tolled at noon,
the hour appointed for the interment, in Westminster Abbey, of the
remains of the Right Hon. Charles James Fox, who died September 13th.

4.*--(Advt.)  "The Norwich and Yarmouth Machine runs every day from the
Black Horse, Tombland, and White Hart, near the Wrestlers, Yarmouth."

15.--Died suddenly, aged 58, Henry Bowles, the elder, formerly of the
Theatre Royal, Norwich.

21.--Blickling races commenced, and afforded "the greatest sport ever
known at this place."  The principal event, a sweepstake for 50 guineas
for horses bred in Norfolk, was won by Col. Harbord's bay filly Czarina.

--Launched from the dockyard of Mr. J. S. Douglas, Yarmouth, the Lord
Nelson packet, 91 tons, intended for the Harwich station.

29.--A trotting match for 50 guineas took place on the turnpike road from
Norwich to Watton, between Mr. King's chestnut hone Doubtful and Mr.
Jeary's brown mare Velocity.  "The horse won by about two lengths.  Owing
to a dispute respecting the horse galloping within the last hundred yards
the match still remains undetermined.  Fifteen and a half miles were
covered in one hour."

Capt. Sir Edward Berry, R.N., was this month created a baronet, in
consideration of his eminent services to the country.


NOVEMBER.


3.--A Parliamentary election took place at Norwich, resulting in the
return of Mr. John Patteson, 1,733 votes, and Mr. Robert Fellowes, 1,370
votes.  Mr. Wm. Smith, who polled 1,333 votes, was the unsuccessful
candidate.  On the 10th "the Norwich Battalion of Volunteers received
Col. Patteson, M.P., with a general salute, and fired three vollies and
gave three cheers in token of their satisfaction at his being elected one
of the representatives of the city."

--King's Lynn election.  Lord Walpole and Sir M. B. ffolkes returned
unopposed.

4.--Thetford election.  Lord William Fitzroy, 28 votes; Mr. James Mingay,
17 votes.  Mr. Thomas Creevey, the unsuccessful candidate, polled 14
votes.

--Yarmouth election.  The Hon. Edward Harbord and Mr. S. Lushington
returned unopposed.  A petition was lodged against the return, but the
committee of the House of Commons declared it to be frivolous and
vexatious, and the members retained their seats.

6.--Miss Elizabeth Bidwell, niece of Mr. Bidwell, of Thetford, arrived at
Harwich from Berlin.  "She was tutoress to the King of Prussia's
children, and had a narrow escape of falling into the hands of the
French, and when she landed was destitute of money and change of
raiment."  Miss Bidwell afterwards had an audience of the Queen at
Windsor, to whom she related the details of her escape.

12.--The Sapphire sloop of war, 18 guns, launched from Messrs. Brindley's
yard at King's Lynn.

13.--County election.  The poll was open for six days.  Mr. T. W. Coke,
4,118 votes; the Right Hon. William Windham, 3,722 votes.  The
unsuccessful candidate, the Hon. John Wodehouse, received 3,365 votes.
"On the chairing day, as well as every day during the election, there
were excellent dinners provided at the White Swan and Angel, where Mr.
Coke and Mr. Windham met large parties of their friends, whose convivial
enjoyments were much heightened by the eloquent orations of Mr. Plumptre
and the exertions of Mr. Mingay, whose good-humoured sallies and
witticisms never failed to set the tables in a roar."  A petition against
the return of the members was presented by Mr. T. T. Berney and others,
and on February 12th, 1807, the committee of the House of Commons
declared the election void.  On February 26th, Mr. Coke was returned
unopposed for Derby, in place of his brother, Mr. E. Coke, who had
accepted the Chiltern Hundreds.  On March 5th, Mr. E. Coke and Sir Jacob
Astley, Bart., were returned unopposed for Norfolk, and Mr. Windham took
his seat, without opposition, as member for New Romney.

24.--Died, in St. Lawrence', Norwich, Mrs. Galey, aged 101.

30.--At the meeting of the Society of Universal Good Will, at Norwich, it
was reported that 187 persons, besides weekly pensioners, had been
relieved during the year, making in all 2,218 since the establishment of
the institution.


DECEMBER.


4.--Mr. J. W. Robberds was elected an alderman for the Ward beyond the
Water, Norwich, in place of Mr. J. G. Baseley, who died December 1st.

6.--Died, in the 63rd year of his age, Thomas Osborn, bell founder,
Downham Market.

13.*--"Died, lately, in the parish of St. Mary, Norwich, Sarah Pickwood,
aged 49 years.  This was one of the most enormous cases of dropsy on
record.  In the course of about 50 months she was tapped 38 times, and
discharged 350 gallons of the fluid, weighing 4,656 lbs. troy.  The
greatest quantity discharged at one operation measured 11.5 gallons, and
weighed 153.5 lbs."

18.--In the course of alterations at Ketteringham Hall, a fire occurred,
which destroyed the centre of the building, with all the new work.

20.*--"Whenever a fire occurs in the neighbourhood the large travelling
engine, belonging to the Norwich Fire Office, may be obtained by sending
a man and two horses and applying to the sexton of St. Peter Mancroft
Church, _in which place the engine is deposited_."

The following Acts were passed this year:--

An Act to enable his Majesty to grant an annuity to Lady Viscountess
Nelson, in consideration of the eminent services performed by the late
Vice-Admiral Lord Nelson to his Majesty and the public.

An Act for settling and securing a certain annuity on Earl Nelson and the
heirs male of his body and such persons to whom the title of Earl Nelson
may descend, and for granting the sum of 100,000 pounds to purchase an
estate to accompany the said title; and for granting 10,000 pounds to
each of the sisters of the late Lord Nelson (Mrs. Matchem and Mrs.
Bolton), in consideration of the eminent and signal services performed by
the said Lord Nelson to his Majesty and the public.

An Act for amending, altering, and enlarging the powers of an Act, passed
in the 42nd year of his Majesty, for paving and otherwise improving the
borough of King's Lynn.

An Act for repairing the parish Church of Great Yarmouth and rebuilding
the tower thereof.



1807.


JANUARY.


10.--J. S. Cotman advertised that he had taken a house in Wymer Street,
St. Andrew's, Norwich, "for the accommodation of those ladies and
gentlemen who may favour him by becoming pupils."  Terms: In the Academy,
2 pounds 2s. quarterly.  Four private lessons, 1 pounds 1s.

16.--At Norwich Quarter Sessions, William Chapman, a coal hawker,
appealed against his conviction, under the Hawkers and Pedlars Act, 29th
Geo.  III. c. 26, for "carrying coals about the streets of Norwich to
sell by retail."  Mr. Steward Firth ordered the conviction to be quashed,
with costs.  This case was considered of great importance to the
citizens, and especially to the poor.

17.*--"Orders have been received in Norwich from the East India Company
for 16,000 pieces of fine camblets."

18.--A length of about 40 yards of the city wall at Norwich fell in Ber
Street with a tremendous crash.  At the Quarter Sessions on the 16th, the
Grand Jury made a presentment, in which attention was called to the
dangerous state of the wall.

26.--Died, at Lakenham, Mr. James Crowe, alderman of Norwich, aged 58.
He twice served the office of Mayor, in 1774 and 1797.  Mr. John Steward
was elected in his place.

Little Dunham Lodge, near Swaffham, was this month purchased by Mr. St.
George Knudson, for 20,000 pounds.


FEBRUARY.


7.*--"A sixteenth share of No. 23,815, which has drawn a prize of 10,000
pounds, was sold to J. Turner, servant to Mr. M. F. Rishton, of Lynn."

--*"The Paving Commissioners have decided to lay the first stone
according to the new system of paving in Norwich, in St. Stephen's
Street."

10.--At Harper's Pantheon, Norwich, was exhibited a moving panorama,
representing the funeral of Lord Nelson.

11.--A heavy fall of snow rendered the roads impassable.  The Ipswich
mail arrived at Norwich two hours after its usual time; and the Bury
coach reached the city at about the same time, after having been once
overturned.  The Newmarket mail and the Expedition coach were unable to
get through.  The guard of the mail procured horses, rode across country
with the mail bags, and on reaching Bury took a post chaise, arriving in
Norwich at four o'clock on the 12th.  The Expedition coach reached the
city about eight o'clock the same night, drawn by eight horses.  The
Newmarket mail arrived on the 13th at 1.30 p.m.

11.--Several ships were wrecked during a severe gale on the Norfolk
coast.  His Majesty's gun brig Snipe came ashore on the South Ham, with
30 French prisoners on board, many of whom, with part of the crew and
some women, perished.  In all 60 lives were lost in this ship.  Twelve
vessels were wrecked between Cromer and Yarmouth.

14.*--"The number of men liable to serve for this county under the
Training Act is 18,152."  On April 6th, 607 persons, between the ages of
18 and 45, were drawn by ballot at Norwich to be trained and exercised
for 24 days.  Among those drawn were "several magistrates and other
distinguished personages."

17.--Died, at Windsor, in his 67th year, the Rev. Dr. Lancaster Adkin,
rector of Belaugh and minister of St. Andrew, Norwich.  "He was the first
founder in Norwich of Sunday Schools, which he constantly attended and
instructed for more than 21 years."

--Orders were given for the enlargement of the courts in the Norwich
Shire-house, for the repair of the bridge leading to the Castle, for
providing a palisade, and for bringing a supply of river water from the
main pipes in Golden Ball Lane to the county gaol.


MARCH.


7.--Sergt. John Parker, 3rd Dragoons, stationed at Norwich on recruiting
service, was apprehended on suspicion of having committed a murder at
Brighton in 1796.  The extraordinary statement upon which the accused was
apprehended was concocted by a man named William Cobb, of St.
Martin-at-Oak, who informed the Mayor that Parker, when a private in the
Somerset Fencible Cavalry, met him (Cobb), then a private in Col.
Villier's Fencible Light Dragoons, while halting at Dorking, and told him
that he had murdered a woman at Brighton and had thrown her body into a
well.  An affidavit sent from Collumpton, in Devonshire, to the effect
that Parker was there ill at the time of the alleged murder, was
sufficient to procure him his discharge from custody.

9.--Died, in his 85th year, Henry Keymer, of East Dereham, "many years a
respectable auctioneer and land surveyor, and late sole proprietor of
Herring's valuable antidote for the cure of the bite of a mad dog."

11.--A bull, the property of Edward Kett, butcher, of Norwich, was baited
near "Bishop Gates."  The baiting "offered very great sport; the bull was
a game one, and the dogs equally so."

24.--Died, in the Close, Norwich, aged 90, the Rev. George Sandby, D.D.,
39 years Chancellor of the Diocese.  He was Vice-Chancellor of Merton
College, Oxford, in 1760.

28.*--"His Majesty has been pleased to appoint Wm. Firth, Esq., Steward
of Norwich, to be attorney-general in the province of Upper Canada."  On
his resignation of the Stewardship on May 3rd, Mr. Firth received the
thanks of the Corporation, and Mr. Robert Alderson was appointed in his
place.  At about this date, Mr. Thomas Amyot was appointed secretary and
registrar of Lower Canada.


APRIL.


4.--William Carter, aged 35, was executed on the "new drop," Castle Hill,
Norwich, for horse stealing.

5.--The Norwich Court of Guardians resolved to petition the House of
Commons against Mr. Whitbread's Bill for amending the Poor Laws.

9.--Died, at his house in Berners Street, London, in his 46th year, John
Opie, R.A.  His remains were interred in St. Paul's Cathedral on April
20th.

13.--The Rev. James Brown was elected minister of St. Andrew, Norwich, in
place of the Rev. Dr. Adkin, deceased.  There were three other
candidates.  None but resident parishioners were allowed to vote.

16.--Died, at his house in King Street, Norwich, aged 60, Mr. James
Hudson, banker.  He served the office of Sheriff in 1788, was elected
alderman for the Mancroft Ward in 1791, and was Mayor in 1794.  Mr.
Starling Day, jun., was elected alderman in his place.


MAY.


4.--An election took place at Norwich on the dissolution of Parliament.
Mr. J. Patteson, who polled 1,474 votes, and Mr. W. Smith, 1,156 votes,
were returned.  The unsuccessful candidate, Mr. Robert Fellowes, polled
546 votes.

--Lynn election: Lord Walpole and Sir M. B. ffolkes returned unopposed.

8.--Thetford election: Lord Wm. Fitzroy and Mr. T. Creevey returned
unopposed.

--Yarmouth election: Mr. S. Lushington, 604 votes; Mr. W. Jacob, 341; Mr.
A. Upcher (unsuccessful), 21.

12.--County election: Mr. T. W. Coke and Sir Jacob Astley, Bart., elected
unopposed.

--At a county meeting a committee was appointed for the purpose of
forming a club for the independent freeholders of Norfolk.  It was a
revival of the Norfolk Club, and met three times a year in Norwich,
namely, in the Summer Assize week, in the Michaelmas Sessions week, and
in the Easter Sessions week.  The first meeting was held at the Angel
Inn, on October 6th, when Sir John Lombe, Bart., presided.

14.--The birthday of the Right Hon. Wm. Windham was celebrated by a
dinner at the Angel Inn, Norwich, under the presidency of Mr. Wm. Smith,
M.P.

25.--A rowing match took place, from Carrow Abbey to Whitlingham, between
the Victory, four oars, and the Britannia, six oars.  The course was 4.5
miles, and the time of the winning boat, the Britannia, 33 mins. 50 secs.


JUNE.


1.--Died, at Worstead, Mrs. Ann Miller, formerly of Yarmouth, aged 102
years.

4.--His Majesty the King entered upon the 70th year of his age.  There
were great rejoicings in Norwich.  The Mayor and Corporation attended
service at the Cathedral, the troops--Regular, Militia, and
Volunteer--paraded in the Market Place, fired a _feu de joie_, and
marched past.  The Mayor gave a dinner, and the several corps dined at
their respective inns.

16.--Mr. Robert Herring was sworn into office as Mayor of Norwich, and
gave a dinner to 150 guests at Chapel Field House.  "The Mayor's wine
being of the first flavour and quality, the festivity of the day was kept
up till past one o'clock the next morning."

22.--Holkham Sheep Shearing commenced.  The implements exhibited included
an improved Norfolk plough, invented by Mr. Balls, of Saxlingham.  Mr.
Herring, jun., of Norwich, produced goods of his manufacture, and stated
that 117 shawls had that year been made by his firm from 224 lbs. of Mr.
Coke's Southdown wool.  Mr. Paul, of Norwich, showed some beautiful
specimens of shawls manufactured by himself, "including a flowered shawl,
a very close imitation of India, made wholly of Mr. Coke's marino wool."
The best implement shown this year was an ingenious device by Mr. Paul,
of Starston, for catching turnip fly.

29.--Mr. Bannister appeared at the Theatre Royal, Norwich, in
"Bannister's Budget, or an Actor's Ways and Means."  The entertainment
was repeated on July 4th.


JULY.


3.--Died, at Ferney Hill, Gloucester, Mrs. Cooper, widow of the Rev. Dr.
Cooper, of Yarmouth, and daughter of Mr. James Bransby, of Shotesham.
She was the author of several well-known works, namely, "Fanny Meadows,"
"The Daughter," "The School for Wives," and "The Exemplary Mother."

7.--Died, at Heydon House, aged 53, William Earle Bulwer, Colonel in the
Army and Brigadier-General of Volunteers.

9.--An action for _crim. con._ was heard in the Court of King's Bench, in
which Sir G. B. Brograve, of Worstead Hall, Lieut.-Col. of the East
Norfolk Militia, was plaintiff, and Capt. Elwin, of the same regiment,
defendant.  The jury returned a verdict for the plaintiff, damages, 2,000
pounds.  At Doctor's Commons, on November 21st, 1808, the court granted a
divorce _a mansa et thoro_, prayed for on the part of Sir Geo. Brograve
against Lady Brograve.

8.--Capt. Manby, barrack-master at Yarmouth, made several experiments
with his life-saving apparatus in the presence of Admiral Douglas and
other officers of the Navy, who expressed satisfaction with the
invention.

--A single wicket cricket match was played at Thetford between two
gentlemen of that town and two of Newmarket.  The former won, with 37
runs to spare.

11.--Died, at Lady Fenn's, East Dereham, aged 67, Mr. John Frere, of
Roydon, Norfolk, and of Finningham, Suffolk.  He was member for Norwich
from 1799 to 1802.

15.--Mr. Paul, of Starston, exhibited a machine for removing lice from
peas.  Two men, in four hours, caught 24 pecks of lice, and in the
afternoon took 16 pecks in 2.5 hours.

16.--Died, aged 81, Mr. Peter Finch, who for many years held the office
of Clerk of the Peace for the county.

23.--A fleet of 24 sail of the line assembled in Yarmouth Roads, under
the command of Admiral Gambier, who, with Vice-Admiral Stanhope, sailed
on the 26th with 16 sail of the line, 10 frigates, 10 sloops, 9 gun
brigs, &c., for the Baltic.  Sir Sidney Smith sailed in the Prince of
Wales, of 98 guns, Admiral Gambier's flagship.  A strict embargo
commenced on the 24th.  The remainder of the fleet afterwards sailed.  An
expedition, under Lieut.-General Sir David Baird, sailed from Harwich
about the same time.  On September 16th, intelligence was received of the
surrender on the 7th of Copenhagen, with the arsenal and the whole of the
Danish Navy, to the British forces, under the command of Lieut.-General
Lord Cathcart and Admiral Gambier.  The British fleet, which sailed from
Yarmouth, sustained but comparatively trifling loss.

27.--At the Norfolk Assizes, held at Norwich, before Mr. Justice Grose,
Martha Alden was tried for the murder of her husband, Samuel Alden, at
Attleborough, on July 18th.  While the man was asleep in bed his wife,
with a bill-hook, inflicted terrible wounds on his head, face, and
throat.  With the assistance of a girl, named Mary Orvice, the prisoner
on the 19th deposited the body in a dry ditch in the garden; on the 20th,
they carried it in a corn sack to the common and "shot" it into a pond,
where it was subsequently discovered.  His lordship, in summing up, said
that Orvice might have been charged with being accessory to an attempted
concealment of murder.  The jury found the prisoner guilty, and the judge
"doomed her to death, to be drawn on a hurdle to the place of execution,
there to be hanged by the neck, and her body to be dissected."  The
execution took place at Norwich on July 31st.  The populace at
Attleborough showed their detestation of the crime by destroying the
former dwelling-house of the prisoner.  It was reported that the ghost of
Alden "walked" on the Castle Hill, and in the month of December a party
of drunken men, who went there to "lay" the spirit, were seized by the
jailer and detained in prison for two days, pending an inquiry into their
conduct.

--At the same Assizes, before Lord Ellenborough, an action was tried, in
which Lord Albemarle claimed for the recovery of penalties, amounting to
700 pounds, under the game laws.  The defendant, one Brooke, a poulterer
and wholesale dealer in game, at Thetford, was connected with the
poachers and gamekeepers in Norfolk, and with the dealers in Leadenhall
market.  "The interruption of his commerce," said counsel, "had created
as much alarm in Leadenhall market as the stagnation of trade between
this country and the North of Germany had occasioned amongst the
merchants at the Royal Exchange."  A verdict was given for the plaintiff,
damages 40 pounds, "at the rate of 5 pounds for each head of game which
had fallen out of a basket sent by the defendant to the London waggon
office at Thetford for transit to the metropolis."

29.--At the public breakfasting at Harper's Ranelagh Gardens, Norwich,
nearly 1,100 persons assembled, and 3,500 were present at the evening
performance.

30.--The sum of 180 pounds 3s. was collected at the anniversary service
held at the Cathedral on behalf of the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital, and
50 pounds 16s. resulted from the dinner at the White Swan.


AUGUST.


5.--In the House of Commons a petition was presented on behalf of Messrs.
Blackburne and Bonner, brewers, of Lynn, and of the inhabitants of the
town, who complained of the undue influence and the arbitrary proceedings
of the magistrates of that borough in withholding publicans' licences.

8.--The Norwich Paving Commissioners advertised for tenders for lighting
the city.  The number of lamps, it was stated, would not be fewer than
1,200 nor more than 1,400.

10.--Mr. Edmund Reader, of Sisland, near Loddon, undertook, for a bet of
five guineas, to cut and tie one acre of wheat in 16 hours in a field
belonging to Mr. Burton, at Barford.  In 14 hours he had cut one acre
seven roods, and had tied 430 sheaves.

31.--A match at bowls was played at Cley, between three gentlemen of that
parish and three of Holt, for 50 guineas a side.  The latter won five
games out of seven.


SEPTEMBER.


7.--The City of Norwich Regiment of Volunteers assembled on Tombland at
five am., and marched to Yarmouth for garrison duty.  There were on
parade 26 officers, 30 sergeants, 25 corporals, and 500 rank and file.

12.--Mr. Philipsthal's Phantasmagoria was exhibited at the Theatre Royal,
Norwich.

14.--Died, at Rainham, in his 84th year, George Marquis Townshend, a
Field Marshal, Colonel of the 2nd Regiment of Dragoon Guards, and Lord
Lieutenant of Norfolk.  His lordship represented Norfolk from 1747 to
1764, and from 1768 to 1772 was Viceroy of Ireland.  He acted as
Brigadier-General, and gained much honour at the taking of Quebec in
1759, when the command of the troops devolved upon him, in consequence of
the death of General Wolfe and of the wounding of General Monkton, second
in command.  His Majesty granted a pension of 1,000 pounds a year out of
the privy purse to the Marchioness Townshend.

19.*--"One day last week a child, playing in the churchyard of St.
Michael-at-Plea, Norwich, found concealed behind a gravestone, covered
with a tile, a parcel, containing more than 90 pounds in forged Bank of
England notes and 14 pounds in counterfeit shillings."

21.--At a quarterly assembly of the Norwich Corporation the city gates
still remaining were ordered to be taken down.


OCTOBER.


13.--The Duke of Clarence, accompanied by the Earl and Countess
Cholmondeley, visited Lynn.  The Corporation presented an address to his
Royal Highness, who was afterwards admitted a free burgess.

19.--Blickling races were this year supplemented by wrestling matches.

22.--Died, aged 40, at Brickhill, Buckinghamshire, on his way from
Liverpool, where he had arrived from America, Robert Murray, merchant, of
New York, fifth son of Dr. John Murray, of Norwich.  He had been absent
more than 16 years, and had revisited England, in the hope of alleviating
the symptoms of a pulmonary complaint.

24.--Died, in Dublin, aged 72, Mr. James Bradfield, of Stoke Ferry, who
by his will endowed a school in that village for 25 poor children.

28.--Lord Cathcart, Commander-in-Chief of the Army employed against
Copenhagen, arrived in Norwich from Yarmouth, and next day proceeded to
London.

29.--Louis XVIII., travelling as Count de Lille, arrived off Yarmouth in
a Swedish frigate, and landed on November 2nd.  He was accompanied by the
Duke D'Angouleme, the Duke de Berri, and by other representatives of the
French nobility.

--A severe storm occurred off the Norfolk coast, and several transports
were lost at Yarmouth, where Admiral Gambier arrived with 32 sail of the
line, several Dutch prizes, and a great number of frigates.

31.*--"The Militia ballot has commenced.  The quota for Norfolk and
Norwich is 907."

--At the Old Bailey, J. Hopgrave was indicted for an assault, with intent
to murder his Majesty's officers of Excise in a smuggling affray at
Cawston.  The ringleader, one Jeremiah Abel, was convicted at the Old
Bailey some months previously.  Hopgrave succeeded in proving an _alibi_,
and was acquitted.  On December 8th, Richard Wiseman, of the Three Pigs,
at Edgefield, was charged at the Old Bailey with obstructing the Excise
officers at the same time.  He also was acquitted on proving an _alibi_.

At the end of this month a shooting party at Holkham killed in three days
1,457 head of game.  The party included Mr. Coke, the Marquis of
Tavistock, Lords Albemarle, Spencer, Althorpe, Anson, and Bradford,
Generals Walpole and Keppel, Sir J. Shelly, Col. Keppel, Messrs. W.
Smith, Churchill, Collet, Wilbraham, W. Fitzroy, and Smith.  Mr. Coke
killed 60 the first day, 66 the second, and 70 the third.


NOVEMBER.


4.--A large barn full of barley in the straw, and a stack of barley, the
property of General Money, of Trowse, were destroyed by fire, caused by
an incendiary, named Thomas Sutton.  At the Assizes, held at Thetford, on
March 21st, 1808, before Mr. Justice Grose, he was found guilty and
sentenced to death.  He had eight years previously been sentenced to
seven years' transportation for stealing a pony belonging to the general,
and his father had suffered death for horse stealing.  "At the trial he
behaved in a most audacious manner to the judge, and when sentenced
requested the Sheriff to let him be taken to Norwich that he might be
hanged amongst his friends."  He was executed on the Castle Hill,
Norwich, April 9th, 1808.

--An entertainment was given by Lord and Lady Cholmondeley to upwards of
300 persons at Houghton Hall.  The great hall was converted into a
theatre for the performance of an opera written by Mr. Panton.  The
performers included the author, Miss Wood, Lord Malpas, and the Messrs.
Lanyas.  Between the acts Lady Charlotte Cholmondeley and Miss
Cholmondeley played a pianoforte duet.  The opera was preceded by an
address, spoken by Lord Malpas, and was followed by a dance and supper.

7.*--"Nathaniel Easthaugh, bellman in Norwich, in gratitude for having
had possession of the city bell for 27 years (one year only excepted),
has liberally subscribed the sum of ten guineas towards the new pavement,
he being at times unable, through infirmity, to walk over the old one."

10.--Died, aged 52, the Rev. John Walker, one of the minor canons of
Norwich Cathedral.  His widow afterwards published a volume of his poems.

11.--Seven fishermen were drowned within 50 yards of the shore at
Sheringham, through the upsetting of their boats in a sudden gale.

14.--The privateer La Decide was brought into Yarmouth by L'Amiable
frigate, Capt. G. Stuart.  The privateer had long evaded the cruisers and
committed great depredations upon commerce.  She was supposed to have
captured 30 prizes within three years.

27.--Died, aged 77, John Clarke Snell, of Norwich.  "He was formerly of
Bury St. Edmund's, and remarkable for his eccentricities and for his
study of astrology, which rendered him a well-known character."

28.--John Gulley and Tom Cribb, the famous pugilists, gave an exhibition
of sparring in the great room at the King's Head Inn, Norwich.  Upwards
of 200 persons were present, including the Right Hon. William Windham and
the Hon. Edward Harbord.

30.--At the annual meeting of the Society of Universal Good Will at
Norwich, it was reported that 2,420 persons had been relieved since its
establishment.


DECEMBER.


12.--Married, at his lordship's house, Charles Street, Berkeley Square,
London, the Right Hon. the Earl of Craven to Miss Louisa Brunton, of
Covent Garden Theatre, and daughter of John Brunton, Esq., formerly of
Norwich, who gave the bride away.  "The Earl is in his 37th and the fair
bride in her 25th year."  Mr. Brunton was for many years manager of the
Norwich Theatre, and Miss Louisa Brunton was a favourite performer there.

13.--Died, in St. Simon's, Norwich, aged 86, Mrs.  Mary Mack.  "She lived
several years in the service of the late Mr. W. Tilyard, of Poringland,
during which time she constantly travelled the number of 2,920 miles
annually, which in ten years amounted to 29,220, the house being fully
four miles from Norwich, and her master, who was a very eccentric
character, never failed sending her every day (Sunday not excepted) for
such things as his whimsical and capricious fancy suggested he stood in
need of."

--Died, at Claxton, Mrs. Eliza Norton, in her 101st year.

19.*--"A telegraph or signal station is on the point of being erected
upon the hills leading from Norwich to Thorpe.  It is to be commanded by
a naval officer, and the object of it is to open and maintain a prompt
communication with Yarmouth on the one side, and with the telegraphs
between Norwich and London on the other."  Messages were afterwards sent
from the Admiralty to Yarmouth in 17 minutes.  The chain of communication
was by Strumpshaw, Thorpe Hills, Honingham, Carlton, and Harling, and
thence by way of Thetford and Bury St. Edmund's, across Newmarket Heath,
to London.

21.--Experiments were made at Norwich, with the view of testing the
practicability of General Money's proposal to Government for mounting
cannon on waggons for the protection of vessels on the coast.  The
Artillery officers at Woolwich gave General Money credit for his
invention, and many ship owners and masters of vessels approved the plan.

An Act was passed this year for enabling Rear-Admiral Bentinck, tenant
for life under the will of his late father, Mr. John Albert Bentinck, to
charge his estates in the county of Norfolk with the sums therein
mentioned, for embanking, improving, and increasing the same estates by
the means therein mentioned.



1808.


JANUARY.


9.*--"Capt. Manby's invention for rescuing persons from vessels stranded
on a lee shore has received the approbation of the Lords of the
Admiralty."  On February 12th the apparatus was successfully employed in
saving the crew of a vessel named the Elizabeth of Plymouth.  In May, the
Society of Arts awarded their gold medal to Capt. Manby for his
invention; and Parliament at different times rewarded him with grants
amounting to 6,000 pounds, and adopted his apparatus at various stations
on dangerous parts of the coast.

10.--Lord Hutchinson and Lord L. Gower arrived at Norwich from Yarmouth,
where they had landed from the Belette sloop of war, on their return from
St. Petersburgh.

14.--During a heavy gale several vessels were stranded between Blakeney
and Sheringham.  Much damage was done by an inundation at
Cley-next-the-Sea.

17.--Died, of typhus fever, in his 20th year, Viscount Trafalgar, only
son of Earl Nelson.

23.*--"In consequence of the anniversary of King Charles's martyrdom, the
nights of performance at the Theatre Royal, Norwich, next week, will be
Monday, the 25th, Wednesday, the 27th, Thursday, 28th, and Friday, 29th."


FEBRUARY.


11.--A great snow storm.  The coaches which should have arrived on Friday
did not reach Norwich until the following Tuesday and Wednesday.  "The
mail guards were obliged to traverse the country with the bags on their
shoulders, sometimes on foot, up to their breasts in snow, and sometimes
on horseback, across the open fields and heaths.  From the Friday till
the following Tuesday the bags for London by Newmarket were dispatched
hence in post chaises.  Labourers were employed in clearing the highways,
and in some places they cut three miles through the snow."  So complete
an obstruction to communication had not occurred since 1797, when the
coaches were four days performing the journey from London.

14.--Died, in London, in his 60th year, "that eccentric and truly worthy
character," the Rev. Joshua Larwood, rector of Swanton Morley, and many
years chaplain on board the Britannia.  He was the author of "Erratics,"
and of several other works.

15.--The constables of Norwich destroyed many dogs which had been found
without muzzles in the public streets.  Several cases of rabies and of
deaths from hydrophobia were reported at this date.

17.--Died, at the age of 83, at Norwich, Mr. Francis Columbine.  He
served the office of Sheriff in 1769, and of Mayor in 1776.

Meetings were held in Norwich and throughout Norfolk this month, at which
Mr. Joseph Lancaster lectured on his improved method of education.
Lancasterian schools were established in Norwich, Lynn, and Downham in
May, 1809.


MARCH.


2.--The Hon. William Asheton Harbord appointed Lord Lieutenant and Custos
Rotulorum of the county of Norfolk, in place of the Marquis Townshend,
deceased.  The Corporation of Norwich, on May 3rd, conferred upon Mr.
Harbord the honorary freedom of the city.

5.*--"The Dean of Norwich has appointed Dr. Beckwith to be organist of
the Cathedral, in the room of Mr. T. Garland, resigned."  (Mr. Garland
died on February 21st, aged 77, having been organist 59 years.)

8.--Died, at Norwich, aged 77, William Love, musician.  "He was formerly
leader of the band at the Theatre, a person of great genius in his
profession, of great suavity of manners, and of great improvidence in
conduct."

11.--At a meeting held at the Angel Inn, Norwich, at which Mr. T. W. Coke
presided, Mr. Nathaniel Kent, of Ripon Hall, was presented by the
agriculturists of the county with a massive silver goblet, in recognition
of "his integrity and impartiality between landlord and tenant, in his
profession as a surveyor of land, and for his liberal and upright
attachment to the interests of agriculture."

30.--The Racoon sloop of war, 20 guns, was launched from Mr. J. Preston's
dockyard at Yarmouth.

31.--Died, at Wells-next-the-Sea, aged 82, Mr. Charles Boyles, brother of
Mrs. Murray, widow of Dr. John Murray, of Norwich.

--Died, at Melton House, aged 18, Miss Astley, eldest daughter of Sir
Jacob Astley, Bart.  She was in the act of placing coals upon the fire,
when her dress became ignited, and she succumbed to her injuries within
twenty-four hours.


APRIL.


2.*--"We understand that, in consequence of many burdens lately brought
on the city by the birth of illegitimate children, the Corporation of the
Guardians have offered a reward of 2s. 6d. to any person who shall give
information of the pregnancy or delivery of any unmarried woman in
Norwich."

4.--The week commencing this date, during which the ward elections were
held at Norwich, was for the first time referred to as "cleansing week."
"Many voters, who had been cooped up at farm houses in the country at
great expense, were brought in post chaises to the polling places.  For
the last four days we have had as much ringing and firing of bells as if
we had received a confirmation of the reports of the naval victory in the
Mediterranean."

9.--The performance for the benefit of Mr. Hindes, manager of the Theatre
Royal, Norwich, produced the largest receipt ever known at the house on a
like occasion, namely, 163 pounds.

16.--John Chapman, 34, and William Fuller, 26, for shooting at and
wounding a gamekeeper in the service of Lord Cholmondeley, were executed
on Castle Hill, Norwich.

28.--A county meeting was held at the Shire-house, Norwich, to take into
consideration the measure pending in Parliament for prohibiting the use
of grain in distilleries, and for the substitution of sugar.  It was
resolved to petition against such prohibition as likely to prove
injurious to the owners and occupiers of land in Norfolk.  (Parliament
determined, however, in favour of using Colonial produce instead of
English barley.)

30.*--(Advt.)  "There will be a match of cocks fought between the
gentlemen of Norwich and the gentlemen of Norfolk, to show 25 mains and 8
byes, to fight for two guineas a battle, and 20 guineas the odd.  One
turn out for ten guineas; to be fought on the 2nd and 3rd day of May, at
the King's Head, in Magdalen Street, Norwich.  A pair of cocks to be
pitted at twelve o'clock precisely.  Feeders, Lamb for Norwich; Carter
for Norfolk."

Died, this month, aged 100, Mr. John Myhill, of Catfield.


MAY.


2.--A new peal of ten bells was opened at St. Nicholas, Great Yarmouth.

3.--Mr. Robert Alderson was elected Governor of the Norwich Court of
Guardians, in the place of Mr. Robert Partridge, resigned.

6.--Mrs. and Miss Robertson, of the Close, Norwich, and the Misses Doune
were returning to the city from Hockering, when they were stopped by a
highwayman near Cossey Wood.  He was armed with pistols, and, after
taking all their valuable articles of jewellery, rode off.

10.--An Expedition, consisting of 150 transports, sailed from Yarmouth
for the Baltic, for the protection of Sweden.  The Mars, Admiral Keats,
the Audacious, Capt. Lukin, and other warships formed the convoy; and Sir
John Moore, with Major-Generals Paget and Murray, had command of the
troops.

21.--The coach house, brew house, and offices at Blickling Hall, with 180
stand of arms, were destroyed by fire.


JUNE.


4.--The Society for the Encouragement of Arts and Manufactures awarded
their silver medal to Mrs. Coppin, of St. Stephen's Street, Norwich, for
her oil painting, "The Gamesters."

--An annual ploughing match was inaugurated at Ellingham by the Rev. Wm.
Johnson, to encourage the use of oxen in husbandry.

6.--The Norwich Regiment of Volunteer Infantry, Col. Harvey, 500 strong,
proceeded to Yarmouth for garrison duly, and returned to Norwich on the
18th.

13.--A cricket match, for 50 guineas a side, was played at Swaffham,
between the gentlemen of Swaffham and the gentlemen of Shipdham, and was
won by the latter.

16.--Died, at Norwich, in this 68th year, Sir Roger Kerrison, banker, and
for many years Receiver-General for Norfolk.  He was an alderman of the
Mancroft Ward, served the office of High Sheriff in 1800, and was twice
Mayor of Norwich, 1778-1802.

20.--Holkham Sheep Shearing commenced.  The sweepstakes of 28
subscribers, at 10s. 6d. each, for naming the weight of Mr. Coke's
three-shear half-bred merino wether, was won by Mr. Thomas More, of
Watham, who guessed the exact weight, 132 lbs.  A patent dibbling iron,
which deposited the seed at the time the holes were struck, exhibited by
the Rev. Mr. Barker, of Woodbridge, was the winning implement.  Mr. F.
Smith, of Norwich, exhibited specimens of ladies' merino dresses,
scarves, shawls, stockings, coating, and cassimers, most of which were
made from the wool of Mr. Coke's sheep.  "A pair of worstead stockings
were of so delicate a fabric that the two stockings passed at the same
time through a lady's ring.  A manufacturer had ordered a dozen pair at
18 guineas."

21.--The Guild feast given at St. Andrew's Hall by the Mayor of Norwich,
Mr. Starling Day, jun., was attended by 580 guests.


JULY.


12.--At the Norwich Quarter Sessions, the Norwich Flour Company appealed
against the assessment of their premises in St. Andrew's.  The company
was described as an unprofitable concern.  The assessment was reduced.

--A member of the Swaffham Cricket Club played and beat, with great ease
in one innings, "six players of professional celebrity in that town."

13.--The thermometer registered 97 degrees in the shade at Catton.  Many
horses died from the excessive heat.

14.--Sergt.-Major Marshall, of the Thetford Volunteer Corps, and his son
were killed by an accidental explosion while sorting damaged cartridges.

18.--A prize fight, for 40 pounds a side, took place on Kirstead Green,
between Wm. Underwood, of Seething, and John Chase, of Brooke.
Eighty-five rounds were fought in two hours.  Underwood won.

21.--Thorpe Water Frolic took place.  "The Admiral of the flotilla was
placed in a small boat and carried round Thorpe Gardens several times,
with guns firing, flags flying, and music playing.  The company sang 'God
Save the King' and 'Rule Britannia.'  A young gentleman favoured the
company with an excellent hornpipe on the top of the Apollo barge."

23.--The bankruptcy of Sir R. Kerrison and Sons created much sensation in
Norwich.  "The crowd was so great in the King's Head Inn yard of persons
who came to prove their debts that many had to return without proving
them."  The amount proved was considerably over 580,000 pounds.  On
January 16th, 1809, the creditors agreed to pay the sum of 5,500 pounds
to Lady Kerrison, in lieu of dower and of other claims and demands she
might have on the estate.  On May 13th, a dividend of 6s. 8d. in the
pound was ordered to be paid on the 17th to the 3,600 creditors who had
proved their debts.  Dividends amounting to 16s. 4d. in the pound were
afterwards paid.

29.--At a special meeting of the Norwich Corporation, an address to his
Majesty was unanimously agreed to, "on the subject of the noble struggle
of the patriots of Spain and Portugal against the Ruler of France, and of
the generous aid given to their endeavours by our Government."


AUGUST.


1.--Mr. Stephen Springall, farmer, of Wroxham Hall, and his nephew, aged
12, were drowned at Wroxham Water Frolic, through the capsizing of their
boat.

8.--A remarkable storm occurred at Norwich.  Streets were inundated and
cellars flooded.  "The roaring of the waters in falling from the roof to
the lower leads of the Cathedral was so tremendous as literally to drown
the noise of the thunder that accompanied it."

15.--The Norwich Society of Artists opened their fourth exhibition.

20.*--"At the Hospital anniversary at Norwich, the sum collected at the
Cathedral was 161 pounds 1s., and at the dinner, 53 pounds 7s.  Of the
church collection, 1 pounds 6s. 6d. was base coin."

--*"Among the many performers who have contributed in the course of the
Assize week to the entertainment of the city, may be reckoned the
wonderful John Howes, from Eyke, near Woodbridge.  Though bereft of sight
and moving in a humble sphere of life, his arrival in Norwich was
announced by the ringing of bells, for he carries a complete peal of
twelve about with him, which, when he performs, he suspends upon a pole
placed horizontally across the backs of two chairs.  A variety of peals,
as well as song tunes, country dances, &c., he plays with a degree of
accuracy and precision that charm all those who witness his performance."

28.--Braconash Church was reopened for service by the Bishop of Norwich,
after its complete restoration.  Mr. T. T. Berney, of Bracon Hall,
entertained many of the neighbouring clergy at dinner.

30.--Died, at the age of 101, Mrs. Mary Moneyment, of St. Faith's.

Many of the Volunteers transferred their services to the Local Militia,
established this month under the Act passed in July.


SEPTEMBER.


2.--Died, in his 49th year, Dr. Richard Lubbock, of Norwich.  He was
educated at the Grammar School, under the Rev. G. W. Lemon, author of the
"English Derivative Dictionary," was a pupil of Mr. Rigby, and studied
for several years at Edinburgh University.

5.--A cricket match was played at Thetford, between the Thetford and
Newmarket clubs.  The former won by 50 "notches."

17.*--"At the late meeting of the county magistrates, it was agreed that
the passage way from the top of the Castle Hill, Norwich, to the
north-east side should be filled up, and the iron railing continued from
the bridge quite round.  The descent from that part of the hill towards
Gurney's bank will be by a flight of stone steps."

19.--Great festivities took place at Rainham Hall to celebrate the
arrival of the Marquis Townshend.  "A bullock was roasted and four sheep
boiled, and a large quantity of that old beverage made from malt and hops
contributed to make all heads and hearts glow with gratitude to the noble
donor."

21.--At a quarterly meeting of the Norwich Corporation, the Commons
proposed that the representatives of the city be instructed to oppose the
Bill for erecting a bridge over the river at Carrow Abbey.  The motion
was not agreed to by the aldermen.  On December 15th, a numerous meeting
was held at the Guildhall to oppose the erection of the bridge, on the
ground that it was unnecessary.  On February 20th, 1809, Mr. Patteson
presented a petition to the House of Commons, praying for leave to bring
in a Bill for carrying out the proposal.  On April 21st, Mr. Patteson
moved the second reading of the Carrow Bridge Bill, which was opposed by
Mr. W. Smith.  Fourteen voted for the motion, and nine against.  These
numbers not constituting a House, the further consideration of the Bill
was deferred to a future sitting, when the second reading was carried by
48 votes to 26.  Ultimately, the Bill received the Royal assent.  On July
26th, the Commissioners selected Mr. A. Brown's plan for an iron bridge,
and on July 31st, contracts were entered into with Mr. J. G. Aggs for
casting the ironwork; with Messrs. Athow and De Carle for the stonework;
and with Mr. N. Wyeth for the brickwork and abutments.  On December 18th,
a proposition was submitted to the Commissioners in favour of abandoning
the Carrow Bridge scheme, in view of the projected erection, near the
Foundry, of a bridge over the Wensum.  It was decided, however, to push
on with the work as speedily as possible; and the first stone was laid on
April 26th, 1810, by the Mayor, Mr. Thomas Back.

25.--Died, the celebrated Greek scholar, Richard Porson.  He was a native
of Ruston, in Norfolk.  He left a sister, the wife of Mr. S. Hawes, of
Coltishall.  His brother Thomas, who kept a boarding school at Fakenham,
died in 1792.

27.--A rowing match, for ten guineas a side, took place at Norwich,
between the six-oared boats, the Britannia and the Crown Point.  The
latter won.  Distance, 4.5 miles; time, 30 minutes 30 seconds.


OCTOBER.


5.--Mr. Shelford Bidwell was elected Mayor of Thetford.  "The usual
entertainment was given to the Corporation.  The source from whence it
was, as usual, derived is worthy of record.  The roast beef is provided
by the Town Clerk; the boiled beef by the tenant of the tolls of the
navigation; the geese by the tenant of the bridge tolls; the game and
wine by the Mayor-Elect; and the keeper of the tavern adjacent to the
Guildhall finds the plumb puddings.  Is this immemorial custom in the
above very ancient borough not the origin of the present fashionable _Pic
Nics_?"

10.--About two-thirds of Col. Patteson's Volunteer Infantry were enrolled
as Local Militia.

15.--The Norwich corn merchants demanded of the farmers a month's credit,
instead of paying ready money for their corn as hitherto, but it was
resisted by the growers, and ultimately abandoned by the merchants.  In
the Court of King's Bench, on November 25th, Lord Ellenborough, who was
applied to for a rule, held that individuals might buy and sell upon
terms agreed to, but combining to impose terms upon the growers was
calculated to enhance the price of grain in the market, and to lessen the
supply in the market, which was another cause for an increased price.

16.--Fundenhall Church was opened, after extensive repair.  The chancel
was almost rebuilt by Mr. T. T. Berney, the impropriator.

18.--A rowing match, for five guineas a side, took place between the
Revenge, six oars, and the Lion, four oars.  The course was from Carrow
to Whitlingham and back.  The Revenge won.

25.--At Blickling Races a silver cup was for the first time offered for
competition by horses ridden in a regiment or troop of Norfolk Yeomanry
Cavalry.

28.--The organ erected at St. Andrew's Church, Norwich, was opened by Dr.
Beckwith.  A grand selection from the works of Handel was played upon the
instrument, and upwards of 120 pounds was collected.

31.--At Holkham, from October 31st to November 17th, Mr. Coke and seven
other guns killed 1,131 hares, 214 pheasants, 366 partridges, 983
rabbits, 30 woodcock, 12 wood pigeons, and 5 snipe.


NOVEMBER.


9.--A woman, named Mary Hudson, aged 35, escaped from Norwich City Gaol
under extraordinary circumstances.  She made a hole through the wall of
the room in which she was confined, and crept through it into the street,
taking her six months old infant with her.  The wall was two feet in
thickness, and she must have been employed some nights in making the
aperture.  The bricks were concealed beneath her bed, and the loose
rubbish put into the pillowcase.  Another bed served to conceal the hole
in the wall.  In the hue and cry advertisement, offering a reward of ten
guineas for her recapture, it was stated that a Yarmouth hawker and
pedlar, named Thomas Cocks, "who frequently feeds cocks for fighting in
Norfolk and Suffolk," was suspected of having assisted the woman to
escape.  There is no record of her recapture.

15.--Swaffham Coursing Meeting took place.  It was described as "the most
successful meeting since the renewal of coursing here."  Two hundred
persons attended the ball.

24.--The Wymondham troop of Yeomanry Cavalry presented a valuable sword
to the commanding officer, Capt. John Darell.


DECEMBER.


10.*--"The lay clerks of Norwich Cathedral have lately had their salaries
augmented 12 pounds each, being only the second advance since the time of
Henry VIII."

17.--From Saturday, the 17th, to Saturday, the 24th, the Newmarket mail
coach, owing to the heavy fall of snow, did not arrive in Norwich with
the letters until after the departure of the coaches for London.  Great
inconvenience was occasioned thereby in commercial circles.

21.--Died, aged 18, Miss Fisher, only daughter of Mr. Fisher, of the
Newmarket Theatre, and formerly of Norwich.

24.*--(Advt.)  "A main of cocks will be fought at the Maid's Head Inn,
Norwich, on Tuesday and Wednesday, the 3rd and 4th of January, 1809; to
show 31 mains, to fight for ten guineas a battle, and 100 the odd battle.
Likewise to show ten bye cocks for five guineas a battle, and two turn
outs.  Feeders, Lamb, Norfolk; Cock, Norwich."

31.--John Gulley, Tom Crib, and Tom Belcher gave a boxing exhibition at
Norwich before an audience of 800 persons.

Col. Robert Harvey, not being joined by a sufficient number of the
Volunteers under his command to permit of its becoming a battalion of
Local Militia, he resigned his commission, and was succeeded by
Lieut.-Col. De Hague.



1809.


JANUARY.


14.*--"The orders lately come down to Norwich, besides affording constant
employment to most of the manufacturing poor for nearly twelve months,
will in the different branches of labour diffuse upwards of 40,000 pounds
in earnings, exclusive of the amount circulated for combing and
spinning."

15.--The Norwich Volunteer Infantry, commanded by Lieut.-Col. De Hague,
was formed into a battalion of five companies of 60 men each.

25.--A "grand operatical romance," entitled "The Forty Thieves," was
produced for the first time at Norwich Theatre, with scenery specially
painted by Dixon.

28.*--(Advt.)  "A card.  Mr. Lambert, from Leicester, respectfully
informs the ladies and gentlemen of Norwich and its vicinity that he
arrived on Sunday at Mr. Leeche's, at the King's Head, where he will see
company from 11 to 2, from 3 till 6, and from 7 till 9 each day.
Admission one shilling each."  Lambert died on Wednesday, June 21st,
1809, at Stamford.  He was in his 40th year, and weighed 52 stones 11
lbs.

28.--In consequence of a rapid thaw, the low lying parts of Norwich were
flooded.  "Some of the houses were six or seven feet under water," and
boats were rowed in the street at St. Martin-at-Oak.  The marshes below
Norwich were so inundated that the course of the river could not be
traced, and the barge proceeding to Yarmouth had to return, in
consequence of the men being unable to find the channel.

30.--During a violent gale a stack of chimneys fell on the roof of an old
house in Cockey Lane, Norwich.  Mr. and Mrs. Graham were buried in the
ruins and killed.  On the same night a large tree in Sprowston Park was
blown down.  It was planted the day King Charles was beheaded, January
30th, 1649.


FEBRUARY.


3.--Mr. S. Mitchell (as nominee for the Wymer Ward, Norwich) obtained
judgment in the Court of King's Bench, by which it was ruled that
Militiamen out on duty, but having dwellings in the city in which their
families lived, had a right to vote at ward elections.

7.--A stage coach, owned by Mr. Wm. Funnell, and known as the Lynn and
Norwich Telegraph, commenced running.  It left the Star Inn, Lynn, on
Tuesdays and Fridays at eight a.m., and arrived at the Woolpack Inn,
Norwich, at eight p.m.  It ran by way of Grimston, Great Massingham,
Rougham, Litcham, Mileham, Stanfield, Brisley, Elmham, Billingford,
Bawdeswell, Lenwade Bridge, Attlebridge, and Drayton.  The return journey
was on Wednesdays and Saturdays.

24.--Died, at his house in Bruton Street, London, aged 85, the Right Hon.
the Earl of Orford.  His lordship was the nephew of the famous Sir Robert
Walpole, afterwards Earl of Orford.  For many years he sat in the House
of Lords as Baron Walpole of Wolterton.  On the death of Horace, Earl of
Orford, he succeeded to the Barony of Houghton, the Earldom becoming
extinct, but he was afterwards created Earl of Orford.  He was succeeded
by his eldest son, Lord Walpole, who was for many years member for Lynn.
General Walpole, who concluded the treaty with the Maroons in Jamaica,
who seconded Mr. Tierney in his duel with Mr. Pitt, and who was one of
Mr. Fox's secretaries, was a younger son of the deceased Earl.  The
remains were brought from London for interment in the family vault at
Wolterton.  The funeral procession passed through Norwich on March 10th
in the following order:--"Four horsemen preceding the Earl's coronet,
borne on a cushion of crimson velvet by a person on horseback, bare
headed; then the body in a hearse, surmounted with plumes and drawn by
six horses, followed by a mourning coach and six; his lordship's coach
and six, with blinds up, and servants on horseback closed the
procession."  The great bell of St. Peter Mancroft, and the bells of
other churches tolled as the procession passed through the city.

28.--The Norwich Squadron of Light Horse Volunteers had just concluded
their drill on Mulbarton Common, when Capt. Darell's hounds drove a stag
across the parade ground.  The Volunteers at once joined in the chase,
"to which it will readily be conceived their numbers and appearance gave
a great _eclat_."  The stag was taken alive in a shed at Mangreen, after
a run of 3 hours 10 minutes.

Died, this month, Mr. John Wagstaffe, of Bawburgh.  He was the author of
a poem, entitled "Stonehenge," dedicated to his friend and neighbour, Mr.
Edward Jerningham.


APRIL.


3.--A trotting match took place between Young Adonis, a colt belonging to
Mr. James Neeve, of Terrington St. Clement, and an eight year old horse,
Hue and Cry, owned by Mr. James Mathew, of the same place.  The stakes
were 20 pounds a side, and the distance five miles.  The colt, which
carried 13 stones, covered the distance in 19 minutes, and won.

10.--A meeting was held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, at which
resolutions were passed, thanking Col. Wardle and his supporters for
their conduct in Parliament, respecting the charges preferred against the
Duke of York.

21.--A new peal of bells was opened at Wiveton.  The tenor, weighing
upwards of 11 cwts., was cast and hung by Mr. Wm. Dobson, of Downham
Market.

22.--The postmasters announced that "from the wonderfully high prices of
horses, hay, corn, &c.," they were "under the disagreeable necessity of
charging eighteen pence per mile from this date."

27.--Died, aged 32, in Arras prison, John Rising, sixth son of Mr. Robert
Rising, of Somerton Hall.  He commanded the Vanguard letter of marque,
which was captured, on her return from Trinidad, off Beachy Head, by the
Ambuscade, after a desperate resistance.  The remains of the deceased
were followed to the grave by upwards of 200 Englishmen.


MAY.


9.--The six regiments of Norfolk Local Militia assembled for 28 days'
training at Norwich, Yarmouth, Lynn, and Swaffham.

11.--Notice was issued of an intended application to Parliament for an
Act for erecting a bridge over the river Wensum, at or near the Foundry,
in the parish of St. Peter per Mountergate, Norwich, for making roads for
connecting the bridge with the Thorpe turnpike road and the Castle Hill,
and for raising money to carry the Act into execution.  A petition for
leave to bring in a Bill was presented in the House of Commons in
February, 1810, and on March 13th the Bill was read a second time, and
committed.  It was announced on April 14th that the measure had passed
the House of Commons, and been read a first time in the House of Lords.
On April 18th, the Bill received the Royal assent.  The first stone of
the bridge was laid on August 6th by Alderman Jonathan Davey, the
projector of the undertaking.  The contractor was Mr. Mendham, of Holt.

12.--On this day the thermometer stood at 80 degrees in Norwich.

13.--The Rev. Charles Millard appointed Chancellor of the Diocese of
Norwich, on the resignation of the Rev. Henry Bathurst.

19.--The officers of the Lynn Freebridge Legion presented a sword to
their commanding officer, Lieut.-Col. Taylor.


JUNE.


3.--Died, aged 49, John Christmas Beckwith, Mus. Doc., organist of
Norwich Cathedral and St. Peter Mancroft.  On the 7th, "the remains of
this eminent musician were interred in St. Peter's Church under the
organ, agreeable to his own desire."  His son, Mr. John Beckwith,
succeeded him in both appointments.

7.--Died, in his 68th year, at his house in St. Saviour, Norwich, Mr.
Thomas Watson, who served the office of Sheriff in 1789, and of Mayor in
1790.

17.--Mr. Bannister appeared at the Theatre Royal, Norwich, in his
entertainment, "Bannister's Second Budget for 1809."

18.--Miss Booth, a well-known Norwich musician, elected organist at the
Octagon Chapel, in the place of Mr. John Beckwith.

19.--Holkham Sheep Shearing commenced.  An improved turnip drill, made by
Mr. Coke's blacksmith (Mann), was exhibited.  "By this drill the oilcake
dust and turnip seed are kept separate till they come into the funnels,
from which they combine and fall into the drills."  A manure drill cart,
invented by Blyth, of Norwich, was also shown.  "This implement first
ploughs the soil, deposits the manure, and sows the seed after it, and
both are instantly buried up."  It was worked by two horses and three
men.  Mr. Lester, of Paddington, exhibited a working model of a
newly-invented machine for separating the corn and seeds from the straw
and chaff.

20.--Guild Day at Norwich.  Mr. Thomas Back was sworn in as Mayor, and
entertained 640 guests at the Guild feast in St. Andrew's Hall.  At the
ball at Chapel Field House the dancing was opened by the Mayor and Mrs.
William Jerningham.  The prisoners in the city gaol thanked the Mayor
"for one guinea on the Guild Day, and for a plentiful basket of meat from
the hall, which was equally divided amongst them."

26.--The Bishop of Norwich confirmed 800 persons at the Cathedral.

27.--Swaffham Races re-established with great success.  Four plates were
run for on this and the next day, and several of the horses were from
Newmarket.  "Public ordinaries were provided at the different inns; that
at the Crown was attended by a select party of 68 ladies and gentlemen.
At seven the former retired to their toilettes, and at about nine o'clock
proceeded to the assembly-room, where the company numbered 200 persons.
The ball was opened by Mr. P. Hamond and Miss Upcher."

Brooke House (with 170 acres of land), formerly the residence of Sir
Roger Kerrison, was this month purchased by Mr. Thomas Kett, of Seething,
for 16,010 pounds.


JULY.


5.--Arrived, at Yarmouth, part of the 40 sail of transports, for the
purpose of receiving on board the 2nd Battalions of the 11th and 59th
Regiments of Foot, the 1st Battalion of the 79th, and other regiments for
the Expedition.

11.--At Norwich Quarter Sessions, George Hubbard was indicted for
stealing a pair of velveteen breeches.  "The offence being for a grand
larceny the prisoner was allowed to plead the benefit of clergy."  He was
sentenced to six months' solitary confinement and to be publicly whipped.

12.--A curious case was tried at the Norfolk Quarter Sessions.  In the
course of the inquiry into the conduct of the Duke of York in September,
1808, it was stated that a Mrs. Sinclair Sutherland had written to his
Royal Highness to induce him, "for certain reasons," not to permit Major
Turner, 3rd Dragoon Guards, to sell out in favour of Lieut. Sitwell until
the following March.  In consequence of this communication, Major
Turner's resignation was not accepted until some months after it had been
sent in.  Major Turner went to reside at Buckenham, in this county.
Owing to the annoyance to which he was subjected by Mrs. Sutherland, who,
it was alleged, had been under his protection, he appeared in court and
moved to exhibit articles of the peace against her.  The court ordered
the defendant to enter into her own recognisances of 100 pounds and to
keep the peace for one year.  At the Quarter Sessions on October 4th,
Major Turner exhibited fresh articles against Mrs. Sutherland, and stated
that seven days after entering into her recognisances she again appeared
at his house and committed a breach of the peace.  The court thereupon
ordered Mrs. Sutherland to find two sureties of 100 pounds each, and to
keep the peace for twelve months.  Not being prepared with her bond, she
was committed to Norwich Castle, but was afterwards released upon two
Norwich gentlemen agreeing to be bound for her.

15.--Mr. Incledon appeared at the Theatre Royal, Norwich, in his
entertainment, in three parts, entitled, "A Voyage to India."  A
recitation was given by Mr. Powell, formerly of Norwich Theatre, and of
Drury Lane Theatre.

22.--A duel was fought, "in a grove near Norwich, between Mr. B . . . n
and Mr. L . . b . . t, both of Norwich, in consequence, we understand, of
their paying their addresses to the same young lady.  The parties fired,
but neither received any injury, after which a reconciliation took place,
and Mr. L. resigned his pretensions to the fair lady."

24.--A letter was received by the Commandant of the Norwich Volunteer
Infantry, from the Lord Lieutenant of the County, "signifying his
Majesty's intention not to make any further allowance for clothing to
Volunteer corps, and desiring to know whether the Norwich Volunteers
would consider themselves a corps, or transfer their services to the
Local Militia?"  The Colonel replied "that they would continue their
services as long as his Majesty would be pleased to accept them and their
present clothing held out."

29.--It was announced that Mr. Henry Aston Barker, "who painted the
pictures of London, Paris, Constantinople, Edinburgh, Dublin, Cairo,
&c.," exhibited in Leicester Square, London, had drawn "a panoramic view
of Norwich and the surrounding country, as seen from the Castle Hill,
accompanied by a perspective view of the Castle, engraved in stroke by
Mr. Williams."

31.--The annual exhibition of the Norwich Society of Artists was opened
in Sir Benjamin Wrenche's Court.

--At the Norfolk Assizes, held at Norwich, the case of the King _v._
Larke, Mileham, and others was tried.  This was a prosecution for rioting
in a Dissenting meeting-house at Aylsham, and for an assault upon a
preacher, named Joseph King, on Sunday evening, March 13th, 1808.  The
defendants behaved in a very disorderly manner in the chapel, and carried
off the minister by force to the Dog Inn.  The case was settled by the
defendants apologising to the prosecutor in open court, and by paying the
costs of the prosecution.

--At the same Assizes, Lord Chief Justice Mansfield had before him the
action, Leathes, clerk, _v._ Baker.  It was brought by the Rector of
Reedham, under a statute of Edward VI., to recover treble the value of
the tithes of corn grown on the defendant's farm there, in 1808, and
involved in dispute a sum of between 300 and 400 pounds.  The two main
points which the plaintiff endeavoured to substantiate were, first, that
the tenant had not set out the tithes according to law; and, secondly, if
set out, it was done fraudulently and unfairly.  It was proved that in
one field defendant cut the whole crop, tithed and carried a part on one
day, and the remainder on the following day.  The Judge ruled that this
mode of tithing was contrary to law, and said he was sorry to be obliged
to direct the special jury to find for the plaintiff.  The jury, after
requesting his lordship to inform them what was the lowest sum they could
award, so as not to subject the defendant to costs, assessed the amount
at 8 pounds.  A similar action was brought by the same plaintiff at the
Lent Assizes at Thetford, on March 19th, 1810, against a farmer, named
Maddison, when the jury found for the defendant.  At the Norfolk Assizes,
held at Norwich, on August 13th, 1810, before the Lord Chief Justice,
Baker brought an action against Mr. Leathes, to recover damages for
inconvenience and loss sustained by him in 1808, by reason of the
defendant allowing his tithes to remain and rot on the plaintiff's land.
A verdict was given for Baker, damages, 150 pounds.  At the same Assizes,
Mr. Leathes brought an action against a farmer, named Long, for not
setting out his tithes according to law.  Verdict for the plaintiff,
damages, 12 pounds.

31.--The Grand Jury for the County held a meeting, at which renewed
efforts were commenced to procure the removal of the Lent Assizes from
Thetford to Norwich.  It was decided to petition Parliament with that
object.  At Norwich Quarter Sessions, on October 3rd, the Grand Jury made
a presentment, asking the city magistrates to co-operate with the county
justices.  On October 11th, the Norwich Corporation resolved to aid the
county in the application to Parliament, and in February, 1810, a
petition in favour of the removal was presented in the House of Commons
by Mr. Patteson.


AUGUST.


6.--A wedding "of an unusual kind was celebrated at Swaffham.  The bride
and bridegroom, young persons, were both quite blind."

10.--Races took place at Mattishall.  A purse, "given by the town," was
won by a horse, named Lord Paget, owned by Mr. Carter, a well-known
leader of sport in the district.

14.--Died, at his seat at Costessey, aged 74, Sir William Jerningham,
Bart., ("subject to the decision now pending in the House of Lords")
Baron Stafford, of Stafford Castle.  He was succeeded in his title and
estate by his eldest son, Mr. George Jerningham, Haughley Park.

15.--News was received at Norwich of the victory of the British Army in
Spain, under Sir Arthur Wellesley.

16.--The first division of the West Norfolk Militia marched into Norwich
from Colchester, under the command of Lieut.-Col. Nelthorpe.  The second
division, commanded by Capt. Barnham, arrived next day.  The regiment,
which had not been stationed in Norwich for nearly 30 years, had the Earl
of Orford as its colonel-in-chief.


SEPTEMBER.


4.--One hundred prisoners of war, from Flushing, arrived at the Cavalry
Barracks, Norwich, from Yarmouth, and next day proceeded on their route
to Norman Cross.  Among them were several officers, and their wives and
families, who were sent to Northampton and Chesterford.  They expressed
their gratitude to the Mayor, magistrates, and citizens, for the humane
treatment they had received in Norwich.

13.--Overstrand Hall was purchased by Lord Suffield for 16,510 pounds.

16.*--"Mr. Laverock Love, a young officer of the Aboukir, only 18 years
of age (son of Mr. Love, surgeon, of East Dereham, in this county), had
the command of a launch at the bombardment of Flushing, and was the first
who fired a shot.  Letters have been received from several of his brother
officers, speaking in the highest terms of his intrepid gallantry."

21.--A plan for the regulation of the Cattle Market was adopted by the
Corporation of Norwich.


OCTOBER.


3.--H.R.H. the Duke of York left Buckenham Lodge, the seat of General Sir
J. Pulteney, to whom he had been on a visit for the shooting.

7.*--(Advt.)  "This day the 'Norwich and Yarmouth Courier' will be
published and ready for delivery on the arrival of the mail, at the
'Courier' Office, late Post Office, Market Place, Norwich, containing the
same news as the London papers delivered on Saturday in Norwich, and, of
course, such as cannot appear in any country paper till the following
week.  A newspaper, gratis, sent post free to every advertiser."

11.--The Corporation of Norwich voted a loyal address of congratulation
to his Majesty, on his entering, on October 25th, upon the 50th year of
his reign.  It was decided by nine votes to eight not to celebrate the
Jubilee "by roasting a bullock in the Market Place and giving away 10
barrels of beer"; and the aldermen negatived a proposal to appropriate a
sum out of the Corporation revenues to secure the discharge of certain
debtors, as a means of commemorating the event.

17.--Three newly-erected paper mills at Elsing "were set to work on an
entirely new principle."

19.--Died, in an obscure apartment in the White Hart Yard, St. Peter
Mancroft, Norwich, Mr. Robert Fenn.  "In the early part of his life his
company was sought after and welcomed by persons of high rank in the
sporting line.  He possessed great skill as a marksman, and had the best
method of training dogs.  As a tavern companion he was jocular,
facetious, and replete with anecdote, entertaining the company, and
inspiring mirth with his oddities and eccentricities."  He was in his
75th year.

20.--The worsted and silk and worsted manufacturers of Norwich granted
the weavers an increase of wages, involving an additional expenditure of
5,000 pounds per annum.

22.--A new altar-piece, of Gothic design, the work of Mr. Copping, of St.
Stephen's, Norwich, was erected in Braconash Church.

25.--Celebration of the Jubilee of George III.  The Mayor (Mr. Thos.
Back) and the Corporation of Norwich attended service at the Cathedral.
At the conclusion of the service the civic procession returned to the
Guildhall, and the garrison and Volunteers fired a _feu de joie_ on the
Castle Ditches.  The Mayor entertained 340 guests at dinner at St.
Andrew's Hall.  A baron of beef, weighing 172 lbs., surmounted by the
Union flag, was brought in by four grenadiers, who bore it twice round
the hall to the air of "The Roast Beef of Old England," and then placed
it upon the head table.  Before the company separated it was resolved
"that, as a testimony of respect for the Mayor and particularly for his
conduct on this day, he be requested to have his portrait painted."
Numerous benevolent movements were instituted in celebration of the
Jubilee.  One was the relief of about thirty poor citizens, with large
families, who were liable to have their persons and effects seized under
an execution of the Court of Requests, for various small debts, ranging
from 5s. to 40s., and the whole amounting to between 26 and 27 pounds.
The day was celebrated at Yarmouth, Lynn, and other towns in the county.

28.*--"A lover of improvements requests us to hint that what has been
improperly termed Cockey Lane (Norwich) for a long time, should, in
consequence of the recent alterations, assume a new appellation, by
terming it Market Street or some other appropriate name."  (The
thoroughfare here referred to is now known as London Street.)

--*"The harriers belonging to Mr. T. Thompson, of Bergh Apton, had last
week one of the severest and longest chases they have yet experienced.
Mr. Dyke's famous horse died in the field long before the death of the
hare, and three other capital horses were very badly knocked up at the
same time.  Only a few of the most dashing sportsmen could keep within
sight of the hounds."

29.--Died, at Earlham Hall, in his 60th year, Mr. John Gurney.  His
remains were interred on November 3rd at the Gildencroft burial ground,
Norwich, in the presence of an immense concourse of citizens.


NOVEMBER.


2.--After the interval of seven years, a Musical Festival was held at
Norwich.  The opening performance on Thursday, 2nd, consisted of the
production of the "Messiah" at the church of St. Peter Mancroft; and in
the evening a grand miscellaneous concert was given at the Theatre.  On
Friday, 3rd, "Sampson" was performed at the church, where also in the
evening were rendered selections from various oratorios.  The Festival
concluded on Saturday evening, the 4th, with a miscellaneous concert at
the Theatre.  The principal vocal performers were Mr. and Mrs. Vaughan,
Miss Booth, Mr. Gross, and Mr. Elliott.  Professor Hague, of Cambridge,
led the band, and Mr. Beckwith was conductor.  The admission to the
church was:--Middle aisle, 5s.; side aisles, 3s. 6d., but no money was
taken at the door.

11.*--"The pleasant town of Diss has lately undergone so much improvement
as is scarcely to be conceived, the streets having been entirely new
paved, the roads much improved, and all obstructions by the projection of
houses and shops removed.  It will also be shortly lighted in such a
manner as to render it as complete a town as any in the county."

18.*--"Died, lately, at Warham, in his 73rd year, Capt. Isaac Eglis
Warren.  He was a volunteer in the siege of Quebec, and it was his solemn
task to support on the rock and witness the last moments of the immortal
Wolfe."

20.--Died, Sir Philip Stephens, Bart., of Horsford, in his 80th year.  He
was 52 years secretary to the Admiralty Office, and was afterwards one of
the Lords of the Admiralty.  He possessed large estates in Norfolk,
Suffolk, Essex, and Middlesex.

25.*--"Some idea of the extent of Norfolk farms may be formed when it is
known that one occupier in the western district last year expended more
than 1,100 pounds for only one sort of manure (brought many miles),
notwithstanding the immense quantity made at home, and the great number
of sheep annually folded on the grounds.  On another farm, 25 acres are
consumed in roads crossing the lands."


DECEMBER.


2.--At the King's Head Inn, Norwich, an estate near Harleston, consisting
of 120 acres of moderate land, was sold by auction for 5,990 guineas.
The purchaser had also to pay a considerable sum for timber growing upon
the estate.  A short time previously 22 acres of "unmixed and widely
lying land" near Aylsham, and by no means of the best quality, fetched
nearly 2,000 guineas; the timber was taken by valuation.

12.--Died, in his 80th year, Mr. John Dalrymple, formerly a merchant in
Norwich.  "He was a native of Scotland, and descended of an honourable
family, set immediately at Thornhill, in Dumfries.  His manly body was
inhabited by a noble soul, for he was a model of probity, constancy,
fortitude, and disinterestedness.  To his fellow-citizens he presented,
during a long and difficult career, an example of zealous and unshaken
adherence to the cause of liberality."  Mr. Dalrymple was a steward of
the Scots Society, founded in Norwich by Dr. John Murray.

19.--Mr. Saunder's Equestrian Company opened their season's engagement at
the Pantheon, Ranelagh Gardens, Norwich, "with a stud of horses, all
cream coloured, late the property of his Majesty."

23.--Accounts were received at Yarmouth of the evacuation of the island
of Walcheren by the British troops, 5,000 of whom died of fever after the
capture of Flushing.

--Intelligence was received of the successful attack on the enemy's forts
at Cortelasso, between Venice and Trieste, by Capt. Hoste, of the Amphion
frigate, who on August 24th captured ten Venetian gun boats and other
prizes.

--News reached Norwich of the loss of the Glory, outward bound East
Indiaman, Capt. Horatio Beevor, with all the officers, crew, and
passengers.

30.*--"The quantity of turkies sent up to town from Norwich within the
last ten days amounted to no less than 30 tons weight, which, averaging
each bird at 12 lbs., the number would amount to 6,000."



1810.


JANUARY.


6.--The estate of Sir R. Kerrison, deceased, at Thorpe, was sold for
38,219 pounds.  Carrow Abbey House, with 32.5 acres of land, was
purchased by Mr. P. M. Martineau for 2,020 pounds.

8.--A prize fight took place at Thorpe, between Chapman and Pegg, "noted
bruisers."  It ended in the defeat of Pegg, who sustained a broken jaw.

9.--His Majesty's ship Nemesis struck on Happisburgh Sand.  On the
following day her guns were thrown overboard, and she was floated off.

18.--Died, in his 76th year, Mr. John Mitchell, of New Houghton.  "His
favourite mule, over 34 years old, at the request of the deceased, went
in procession to the grave, and was to have been shot immediately after
his return, but through the humane intercession of his granddaughter,
Miss Young, the life of this excellent animal was saved, with the promise
never to suffer it to be again used."  By a singular coincidence, Mr.
Reynolds, surgeon, of Massingham, while in the act of attending on Mr.
Mitchell, died suddenly of the same complaint to which the patient
succumbed.

20.--A reconciliation dinner was held by the corn growers and buyers at
the King's Head Inn, Norwich.  Mr. Crisp Brown presided.  Among the
toasts were "May the Buyers and Sellers in future meet together in
friendship," and "May the enemies of reconciliation keep a cold water
club by themselves."  A second dinner was held at the King's Head on
March 3rd, under the presidency of Mr. Fellowes.

--*(Advt.)  "To be seen at the Angel Inn, Market Place, Norwich, where he
will arrive this day, that most wonderful and surprising Yorkshire youth,
17 years of age, 7 ft. 6 ins. high, and who weighs upwards of 24 stones,
who has had the honour to be introduced to their Majesties and the Royal
Family at Windsor, where he was most graciously received and
entertained."

25.--At a meeting of corn and coal merchants, held at the King's Head
Inn, Norwich, it was resolved, in consequence of the numerous
depreciations committed on the river between Norwich and Yarmouth, not to
employ any vessel after March 1st, the hatches of which were not secured
by locks and iron bars.  It was further resolved that every lock be
sealed by the merchant before the vessel started upon its voyage.


FEBRUARY.


1.--Died, the eccentric John Fransham, of Norwich.  He was well versed in
Latin, Greek, and mathematics, of which for many years he was a teacher.

--Died, in her 59th year, Mrs. Martineau, wife of Mr. Philip Meadows
Martineau.  (Mr. Martineau was re-married on February 18th, 1811, at St.
Peter Permountergate Church, Norwich, by the Rev. C. Elwin, to Mrs.
Somers Clarke, of Tasburgh.)

3.--Bagshaw's menagerie was exhibited on the Castle Ditches, Norwich.

4.--Died, at Gunton, in his 77th year, the Right Hon. Lord Suffield, who
represented Norwich from 1756 to 1786.

10.--Mr. and Mrs. Bowles terminated their theatrical career at Norwich
Theatre, and took their farewell benefit.  There was a crowded audience,
and the receipt of the house amounted to 160 pounds 15s. 6d.  "Equally
respectable in private as in public life," said the newspaper notice,
"their success in the scholastic line will, we trust, be as flattering
and substantial as that of the drama."  On March 10th, Mr. Bowles
advertised the academy conducted by himself in Queen Street, Great
Yarmouth.  On July 27th, 1811, it was announced: "Mr. Bowles, of Yarmouth
and late of the Theatre Royal, Norwich, qualified as a dissenting
minister at the last Quarter Sessions."

14.--The East Dereham Troop of Yeomanry Cavalry presented to Capt. John
Crisp a silver cup, "as a mark of respect for his conduct during the
twelve years he had commanded them."

20.--At a general meeting of the Norfolk Agricultural Society, it was
resolved to petition Parliament against the Bill for prohibiting
distillation from grain.

22.--Died, at his house on Castle Meadow, Norwich, aged 74, Mr. William
Foster, attorney.  "He was a promoter of most of the public charities in
the city, and the founder of many of them."

24.*--"A farm near Norwich, belonging to the Corporation, and containing
not more than 77 acres of profitable land, was lately hired at the
astonishing sum of 263 pounds per annum; and the tithes, being all arable
land, have long been 7s. 6d. per acre."

28.--This day was observed as one of solemn fast and humiliation.  At
Norwich, "nearly all the shops were shut up, and Divine service performed
at all the churches.  The market was held on Tuesday, instead of
Wednesday."


MARCH.


3.*--"There is now living at Oxburgh, in this county, William Durrant, a
gardener, who yearly eats 1,095 red herrings, chews 18 lbs. of tobacco,
and, to give his nose pleasure, takes 365 ozs. of snuff.  The total sum
of tobacco, snuff, and red herrings is 13 pounds 18s. 10d."

--*(Advt.)  "A main will be fought at the Fleece Inn, Wells, on Monday
and Tuesday, the 19th and 20th inst., between the gentlemen of Norfolk
and Wells.  To show 31 cocks and 10 byes, and to fight for 10 gs. the
battle and 100 the odd; to make four in goes.  Feeders: Fisher for
Norfolk, Lamb for Wells."

10.*--"During the last eleven months, the period of Miss Harriett
Howell's visits to this city, three schools have been established in
Norwich, in which no fewer than 294 children are now educated on the plan
advocated by Mr. J. Lancaster."

--*"A drover, near Norwich, has attended the market at Smithfield for 25
years, in which time he has ridden on those journeys alone 126,000
miles."

--A court martial was held on his Majesty's ship Utile on a seaman
belonging to the Desiree, "at his own request," for striking an officer
and using mutinous language.  He was sentenced to death.

19.--At the Norfolk Assizes, held at Thetford, Thomas William Middleton,
for embezzling money the property of Messrs. Gurney and Co., by whom he
was employed as clerk, at Fakenham, was sentenced to 14 years'
transportation.

--The panorama, by Serries, of the town and port of Boulogne "with the
flotilla, designed to invade this country, at anchor in the outer road,"
was exhibited at Harper's Pantheon, Norwich.

22.--Died in St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich, aged 57, Nathaniel Eastaugh,
the common crier, and one of the Mayor's beadles, "who except one year
held the bell from 1780 up to the time of his death."  He was succeeded
by Anthony Bailey.

23.--Mr. Joseph Lancaster visited Norwich, and at the Theatre gave
lectures on his system of education.  At a meeting at the Guildhall on
April 17, a free school for boys, on Mr. Lancaster's plan, was
established by public subscription.

--Died in St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich, aged 72, David Kinnebrook, for 40
years master of one of the charity schools, "who never till his last
illness absented himself from the school for a single day."

24.--A large meeting of landowners, occupiers, and Scottish drovers was
held at the Rampant Horse Inn, to discuss the right of the Corporation of
Norwich to levy tolls upon cattle sold or exhibited for sale at the
weekly mart on the Castle Hill.  A deputation waited upon the Mayor and
the Market Committee, and on April 11th a further meeting, presided over
by Sir James Beevor, was held for the purpose of defending any action
that might be brought by the Corporation to recover tolls.


APRIL.


3.--For the benefit of the Norwich Theatrical Fund, a performance of "The
English Fleet in the year 1342," and of "the grand seriocomic pantomime,
called 'Don Juan, or the Libertine destroyed,'" was given at the Theatre
Royal.

12.--Died, aged 60, Mr. Thomas Barber, attorney, 27 years secretary of
the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital.

19.--Tombland Fair took place.  It was stated to be customary on the
occasion of this annual event for military bands to play in the Upper
Close, which was used as a fashionable promenade.  The bands of the 5th
Dragoon Guards and the Wiltshire Militia were present on this occasion.

23.--The Norwich, Aylsham, and Cromer coach commenced running from 21,
Lobster Lane, Norwich, to the Red Lion Inn, Cromer.  It left Norwich on
Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, and returned on Tuesdays, Thursdays,
and Saturdays.  The proprietor was Mr. W. Spanton.

28.*--(Advt.)  "Cocking.  A main will be fought at the Maid's Head Inn,
Norwich, on the 14th and 15th days of May next, between the gentlemen of
Norfolk and the gentlemen of Ipswich, to show 27 mains for six guineas a
battle and 100 guineas the odd; likewise six byes and two turn-outs for
five guineas a battle, to make four in goes.  A pair of cocks in the pit
precisely at 12 o'clock.  Feeders: Lamb for Norfolk, Smith for Ipswich."

30.--A rare fish called the Opah or King-fish (Chaetodes of Linnaeus) was
found on Mundesley beach.

--Mr. Patteson presented in the House of Commons a petition from the
Mayor, Alderman, and Justices of Norwich, against the Bill to alter,
explain, and amend the laws in force respecting bread, and for better
regulating the mode of setting the price thereof out of London.  The
petition stated that the proposed Bill would add 4s. to the then
allowance of 12s. for every quarter of wheat, and the baker for his
labour, salt, &c., which would tend to raise the price of bread.  The
magistrates had consulted the master and wardens of the Norwich Bakers'
Company, who declared that the bakers were perfectly satisfied with the
mode of regulating the assize and with the allowance of 12s. per quarter.


MAY.


2.--At the Norfolk Quarter Sessions, a man named Stebbing, of Wymondham,
was indicted for using seditious language in the presence of several
persons, some of whom were Militia men.  The prisoner was alleged to have
asserted that "if Buonaparte would come he would be the first man to join
him" and that "Buonaparte was a better man to his country than King
George was to this."  The jury, "to the surprise of the whole court,"
returned a verdict of not guilty, "and several gentlemen on the bench
expressed their strongest reprobation."  Sergt. Money, of the Militia,
one of the principal witnesses for the prosecution, was afterwards
appointed to an ensigncy in the 4th Garrison Battalion.

10.--The Victory, 100 guns, Vice-Admiral Sir J. Saumarez, and seven other
sail of the line, sailed from Yarmouth for the Baltic.

16.--The First Eastern Regiment of the Local Militia, commanded by Lord
Suffield, assembled at Aylsham and marched thence to Yarmouth for 20
days' training.  The dates and places of assembly of the other regiments
were as follow:--2nd Eastern Regiment, Col. Patteson, Norwich, May 22nd;
1st Western Regiment, Col. Petre, Norwich, May 17th; 2nd Western
Regiment, Col. Edmund Wodehouse, Lynn, May 21st; 3rd Western Regiment,
Col. Chad, Swaffham, May 10th, whence they marched to Norwich.  In
consequence of insufficiency of accommodation at Norwich, three companies
of the 3rd Western Regiment marched to Dereham, where the course of
training was completed.

19.*--"One day last week, a young woman, of Dereham, being strongly
attached to a soldier in the 24th Regiment of Foot, resolved to follow
him to the wars, and habiting herself in man's attire enlisted by mistake
into the 54th Regiment of Foot recruiting in Norwich.  Her sex was
discovered and her intentions frustrated."

20.--Died in London, aged 81, the Right Hon. Charles Lord Bayning, of
Honingham Hall, a Privy Councillor, and High Steward of Great Yarmouth.
He was succeeded by his son, the Hon. Charles Frederick Pawlett
Townshend.

28.--The birthday of William Pitt was celebrated by the members of the
Castle Corporation, Norwich, and other gentlemen to the number of 130, in
Mr. Bailey's great room.


JUNE.


2.*--(Advt. )  "A stage waggon sets out from the warehouse, Tombland,
Norwich, every Friday evening, and arrives at Bury every Saturday,
returning from Bury every Wednesday, and arrives at Norwich early on
Friday morning.  The London waggons through Cambridge every Tuesday and
Friday.  The Yorkshire waggons come regularly twice a week."  (Messrs.
Marsh were the proprietors of the Norwich waggons.  A similar service of
waggons was also run at about this date by Mack, of Norwich. )

4.--The King's birthday was observed as usual.  "The prisoners of the
city gaol return thanks to the Mayor and Corporation for the excellent
dinner of roast beef and plum puddings, with plenty of strong ale.
Likewise to numerous unknown passengers for their gifts to the box which
is carried about every Saturday afternoon by a man appointed by the court
to attend on them.  And they humbly request the charitably disposed to
put their contributions into the box themselves, which is locked up by
the governor, and its contents equally distributed by him.  They have
also another box outside the gaol which is opened every quarter."

--Died at his house in Pall Mall, aged 60, the Right Hon. William
Windham, of Felbrigg.  Three days before the event he predicted that he
would expire on the King's birthday.  He represented Norwich in three
successive Parliaments--from 1784 to 1802.  The remains of the deceased
statesman arrived in Norwich on their way to Felbrigg on the 10th.  The
body lay in state at the Maid's Head Inn until the morning of the 11th,
when the journey to Felbrigg was resumed, and the funeral took place
there in the afternoon.  In the funeral procession at the church was "a
man bearing a false coffin."

5.--A cricket match was played between the Norwich Club and the officers
of the Wiltshire Regiment, on the Town Close ground, Norwich.  Norwich,
134; Wiltshire Regiment, 49-43.  The return match was played on the same
ground on the 14th.  Norwich, 71-150; Wiltshire Regiment, 57-53.

10.--At the burial of a woman, named Bumpstead, at Thurlton, "it was not
a little singular that the husband and an ass walked to church next the
corpse, and also back again to the house, as chief mourners."

11.--A prize fight took place at Limpenhoe between John Green, of
Beighton, and David William Rushmer, of Thurlton.  "In the first seven
rounds the latter received seven knock-down blows; but in the eighth he
gave the other such a violent blow that he knocked him out of time and
won."

16.*--"Mr. Alderman Yallop, of Norwich, is the fortunate holder of an
eighth of the ticket, 1,537, which drew a prize of 1,000 pounds on Friday
last.  This is the fourth capital prize Mr. Yallop has had a share of in
the different lotteries."

19.--Guild-day at Norwich.  The Mayor, Mr. John Steward, entertained 750
guests at dinner at St. Andrew's Hall, and 400 attended the ball at
Chapel Field House, where dancing was kept up until two o'clock next
morning.  "Several friends of conviviality kept the jovial spirit alive
at the hall till after that late or rather early hour."

25.--Holkham Sheep Shearing commenced.  One of the implements exhibited
was "a fumigating machine on two wheels which, in turning, worked a pair
of bellows that blew into an iron cylinder filled with burning sulphur,
and shavings or sawdust, and perforated at the bottom, which, when pushed
over the land, suffocated the turnip flies, cankers, &c., or caught them
on a tarred cover fixed over the head of the cylinder."  This remarkable
contrivance was exhibited by a Mr. Plenty, of London.


JULY.


16.--A cricket match was played on the Town Close ground, Norwich,
between eight of the Norwich Club and thirteen of the Wiltshire Regiment.
Wiltshire Regiment, 72-78; Norwich, 32-69.

20.--A cricket match, for 50 guineas a side, was played at Swaffham,
between the Norwich and Swaffham clubs.  Norwich, 42-26; Swaffham, 67.
The return match took place on the Town Close ground, Norwich, on August
20th.  Norwich, 35-51; Swaffham, 55-30.

25.--Mr. Alderson, the City Steward, entertained the Common Council of
Norwich at dinner at his house in St. Helen's.  The Commons returned the
compliment by entertaining the Steward at the Maid's Head Inn the
following week.

26.--Died, aged 70, the Rev. William Sheepshanks, rector of Ovington, and
Prebendary of Carlisle.  He had been tutor to Lord Ellenborough, Sir S.
Lawrence, the Bishop of Lincoln, &c., and was the intimate friend of Dr.
Paley.

29.--Died in his 73rd year, Mr. John Crisp, of East Dereham, attorney,
clerk to the magistrates, the commissioners, the deputy lieutenants, &c.
He was captain of the Dereham Yeomanry Cavalry, and his remains were
interred with military honours, at Shipdham, his native place.


AUGUST.


2.--Earl Moira and the Countess of Loudon arrived at Cromer for the
bathing season, and on the following day witnessed a demonstration of the
capabilities of Capt. Manby's life-saving apparatus.

3.--At a special meeting of the Norwich Corporation it was resolved
"that, having taken into consideration a paper called 'Roope's Weekly
Letters,' No. 9, and being of opinion that it contains gross libellous
matter against Thomas Back, Esq., late Chief Magistrate, this assembly
direct a prosecution."  On August 18th a meeting of freemen was held to
take such measures "as will best ensure the election of Mr. Roope as
Sheriff for the ensuing year."  It was announced on August 25th that Mr.
Mills, of Thetford, had been "persuaded" to discontinue printing the
"Weekly Letters."  At the election of Sheriff on August 28th, Roope was
put in nomination in opposition to Mr. Troughton.  The latter was
returned with 625 votes to the former's 313.  Roope afterwards challenged
the City Steward, Mr. Alderson, to fight a duel, in consequence of his
having called him a rascal as he was leaving the court after the
election.  An information was laid against Roope for endeavouring to
incite Alderson to commit a breach of the peace; and at the Quarter
Sessions on October 2nd, application was made that his recognisances of
100 pounds in respect of the libel case be estreated on the ground of his
having committed a fresh breach of the peace by public comments on Mr.
Alderson's conduct.  He was ordered to enter into fresh recognisances,
himself in 200 pounds and to find two sureties of 100 pounds each, and to
keep the peace towards Mr. Alderson and the public generally.  At the
Quarter Sessions on January 15th, 1811, the defendant, for inciting Mr.
Alderson to fight a duel, was fined 40s. and sentenced to one month's
imprisonment.  On June 29th Roope appeared before the Court of King's
Bench for the libel on Mr. Back, and was committed to the custody of the
Marshal for three months, and ordered to find sureties for his good
behaviour.  Roope died, in his 37th year, on July 4th, 1812.  "He
sustained a lingering illness of nearly four months with a resignation
and fortitude highly exemplary, and met the approach of his last moments
with the utmost composure, leaving a widow and five young children."

--A trotting match took place between the celebrated horse Shales, the
property of Mr. John Chamberlain, of Magdalene, and Driver, owned by Mr.
Reuben West, of Gaywood.  They started from the South Gates, Lynn, at six
o'clock, and trotted to the ninth milestone on the Swaffham road and
back.  At the expiration of an hour Shales had trotted 17 miles, beating
the other by about 1.5 miles, "with the greatest of ease, notwithstanding
that he was the smaller horse and carried two stone more weight than the
other."  The stakes amounted to 200 pounds.

6.--At Wroxham Water Frolic about one hundred sail of boats were present.

22.--Mr. Chalmers, a comedian of considerable merit, and formerly a
member of the Norwich Company, was found speechless upon the doorstep of
a house in Worcester.  He was removed to the infirmary, where he died.

27.--A cricket match was played on Hardingham Common between the
gentlemen of Norwich and Swaffham.  Norwich, 32-72; Swaffham, 143.

29.--Died at Lynn, aged 85, Mrs. Middleton, "who resided 83 years in the
house in which she died."

30.--The Norwich Cricket Club played a match against the Wiltshire
Regiment.  Norwich, 88-93; Wiltshire Regiment, 73-92.


SEPTEMBER.


7.--Died at Cambridge, Mr. James Bunn, miniature painter, formerly of the
Pantheon and Gardens, Norwich, and for many years a performer in the
Norwich Company of Comedians.

15.*--(Advt.)  "Cocking.--To be fought on Thursday and Friday, the 20th
and 21st inst., a main of cocks, Yarmouth against Beccles.  Feeders:
Danes for Yarmouth, Caisey for Beccles.  Seven battles each night; five
guineas a battle and ten guineas the odd.  All cocks to be pitted at
seven o'clock precisely each night at Cooper's bowling-green, North Quay,
Yarmouth."

21.--Died, at Earsham Park, aged 71, Mr. Joseph Windham, distinguished as
a scholar and antiquary.

23.--Died, aged 71, Mr. John Herring, of Norwich.  He served the office
of Sheriff in 1786, was elected alderman October 20, 1798, and Mayor in
the following year.  He introduced a scheme for the employment of
workhouse children in spinning wool, by which many hundreds of pounds
were annually raised by them.  It was during Mr. Herring's mayoralty that
the British troops returned from the disastrous expedition to Holland,
and for his humane treatment of them he received the thanks of
Government.

29.--Mr. Francis Morse and Mr. Thomas Troughton were sworn into office as
Sheriffs of Norwich.  "Mr. Morse appeared in his shooting dress, namely a
short coat, leather breeches, &c., and on the Steward proceeding, as
usual, to invest him with the gold chain he refused to put on what he
termed 'a bauble'; nor would he wear the gown, he said, unless it was
absolutely necessary.  Mr. Steward Alderson observed that his refusal
seemed to convey some little disrespect to the court.  Mr. Morse
disavowed any individual disrespect, and said he would perform his office
irrespective of outward forms.  He denied having assumed the office.  It
was forced upon him in the expectation of obtaining a fine of 80 pounds,
as he was convinced there was not a gentleman on the Bench who believed
when the precept was sent to him that he would serve the office."


OCTOBER.


5.--Grand musical performances were given at St. Andrew's Church,
Norwich, on this and the following day.  The principal vocal performers
were Mr. Phillips, of the Lyceum, Mr. Clouting, and Miss Booth.  Mr. Fish
was leader of the band, and Mr. Beckwith was at the organ.  The first
part of the programme consisted of selections from "Judas Maccabeus,"
part two of the "Messiah," and part three of a miscellaneous selection.
On Saturday evening, the 6th, a miscellaneous concert was given at the
Theatre.

11.--Died at Fulham, aged 73, Mr. Nathaniel Kent, land agent, and
compiler of "The Agricultural Report of Norfolk."

17.--The first division of the West Norfolk Militia, commanded by Capt.
Barnham, and on the following day the second division, commanded by Major
Custance, passed through Norwich on their route to Yarmouth after nearly
seven months' duty over the French prisoners at Norman Cross.

18.--Died at Southbergh, near Hingham, Mrs. Ann Smyth, "one of the
nominees in the Irish Tontine established by Act of Parliament in 1773."

25.--The 51st anniversary of his Majesty's accession was celebrated in
Norwich by the ringing of bells and by a military demonstration.


NOVEMBER.


2.--During a severe gale many vessels were lost on the Norfolk coast.
"The beach from Wells to Yarmouth, covered with wrecks and strewed with
the bodies of unfortunates washed ashore, presented a scene of calamity
not easy to describe."  Another gale and high tide occurred on the 10th.
Capt. Manby's life-saving apparatus was instrumental in rescuing 18
seamen.

12.--Gustavus Adolphus, ex-King of Sweden, travelling under the title of
Count Gottorp, arrived at Yarmouth from the Baltic on board the Tartarus
sloop, Capt. Mainwaring.  He landed under a Royal salute, and at once set
out for London with Capt. Mainwaring.  The ex-King sailed from Yarmouth
on his return to the Continent on March 28, 1811.

13.--The bells of the Norwich churches were tolled from seven p.m. to
nine p.m. on the occasion of the burial of the Princess Amelia at
Windsor.

17.*--"In the parish of Pulham Market are now living five men whose
united ages amount to 436 years, and what is extraordinary is the five
men now go to daily labour."

--Died, aged 58, Edward Castleton.  "He was the lineal descendant of Sir
William Castleton, of Hingham, created a baronet in 1641.  He died a
bachelor and never assumed the title.  For many years he followed the
very humble employment of breeches maker in Lynn, and latterly lived on a
small patrimonial allowance."

21.--A cause of divorce and separation promoted by Mrs. Beevor against
her husband, came on for further hearing in the Court of Arches, Doctors'
Commons, when, Mrs. Beevor having declared that she should proceed no
further, the court dismissed the suit.


DECEMBER.


8.--At the Norwich Court of Mayoralty the Rev. Edward Valpy, B.D., second
master of Reading School, and rector of Stanford Dingley, in Berkshire,
was elected by the casting vote of the Mayor, headmaster of the Free
Grammar School, Norwich.  The other candidate was the Rev. John Clarke,
M.A., Ingham.

15.--Died, aged 79, at Mortlake, Mrs. Coke, of Hanover Square, London,
mother of Mr. T. W. Coke, of Holkham.

22.--Norwich Market was "glutted" with turkeys.  "The same fowls for
which in the morning 14d. per pound was asked, in the afternoon when the
last coaches were going away 9d. per pound would have gladly been taken.
At one coach office 800 hampers were received.  Twelve carriages were
laden with poultry and game, and each carriage was drawn by six horses,
and having 10 stages 60 horses were employed by every coach, which will
amount to the astonishing number of 720 horses to draw poultry, sausages,
and game sent within three days from this city to the Metropolis."

25.--The Mayor and Corporation of Norwich attended service at the
Cathedral on "the feast of the Nativity, commonly called Christmas Day."
In the afternoon "most of the churches and chapels were lighted up and
decorated with holly and evergreens, according to antient custom."

This year was passed an Act for the better paving, lighting, cleansing,
and watching of Great Yarmouth, for removing nuisances and annoyances
therein, and for making other improvements in the town.



1811.


JANUARY.


19.*--"Greatly to the credit of the numerous population of Norwich the
Bridewell doors were thrown open several days during the present week,
there not being a single person confined for any misdemeanour, a
circumstance that has not before happened for a great number of years."

A piece of plate, value 100 guineas, was this month presented by the
principal inhabitants of East and West Flegg Hundreds to the Rev. B. U.
Salmon, for his public services as a magistrate, and as a mark of their
individual esteem.


FEBRUARY.


2.--A county meeting, presided over by the High Sheriff, was held at the
Shirehouse, Norwich, when resolutions, stating the injury that would be
sustained by a continuation of the prohibition of the use of grain in the
distilleries, were agreed to.  A committee of landowners and corn growers
was appointed to adopt measures for the protection of the interests of
agriculture.  (The Distillery Bill was thrown out by the House of Lords.)

7.--Died, at Norton Place, near Lincoln, in his 78th year, Mr. John
Harrison, twice member of Parliament for Thetford.

10.--Died, at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich, in his 79th year, the
Rev. Neville Maskelyne, Astronomer Royal, and rector of North Runcton.

12.--Died, the Rev. Philip Wodehouse, brother of Lord Wodehouse, and a
Prebendary of Norwich Cathedral, aged 66.  In digging the grave for the
interment of the deceased, beneath the organ loft at the Cathedral, the
workmen found, two feet beneath the surface, a stone coffin enclosing a
wooden shell containing the body of Dean Croft, who died in 1670.  "His
remains were found apparently in a perfect state, excepting the tip of
the nose, and the shroud was a little discoloured."

16.--Robert Waller and John Kerrison, who were in the permanent
employment of Mr. Lindley, of Catton, were committed to Aylsham Bridewell
for one month's hard labour, for "illegally combining to alter and lessen
the usual time of his labourers going and being at work."

17.--Died, aged 62, John Thompson, lamp lighter of Norwich.  "His lamp of
life being out, and all his oil consumed, he was by his own request
buried at St. Martin-at-Palace at night, all his brethren of the ladder
and torch attending in the funeral procession with their flambeaux to
light him to his long home, in the presence of thousands assembled on the
plain."


MARCH.


14.--Died, at his seat at Euston, in his 76th year, the Duke of Grafton.
His Grace had been Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, and
Recorder of Thetford and Coventry.

16.--A complaint was published that the posting masters in Norfolk
charged at the rate of 1s. 9d. per mile, when nowhere else was the charge
more than 1s. 6d.

17.--A disastrous fire occurred at the warehouse of Messrs. R. and S.
Culley, grocers, the Upper Market, Norwich.  The fire engines were
inefficient, and the appliances out of repair.  Notwithstanding the
exertions of a detachment of the Royal Artillery, under Capt. Cockburn
and Lieut. Day, the fire communicated with the adjoining premises of Mr.
Freeman, and the two upper storeys of his house were destroyed.  "The
Pope's Head had a wonderful escape, almost surrounded as it was by fire."
The damage was estimated at upwards of 5,000 pounds.

20.--A general fast was observed.  Business was suspended in Norwich,
where the churches and chapels were numerously attended, and collections
made for the relief of British prisoners in France.

23.--The county magistrates examined plans for the erection of a lunatic
asylum, and accepted those of Mr. William Brown, architect, of Ipswich.

25.--At the Norfolk Assizes, which commenced at Thetford, before Mr.
Justice Grose, William Charles Fortescue, Lord Viscount Clermont, was
charged with an assault on Sarah Lumley, a widow, residing at Saham
Toney.  His lordship was ordered to pay a fine of 50 marks to the King.

--At the same Assizes the tithe case, Royle, clerk, _v._ Parsley, was
heard.  The plaintiff, who was rector of Hilgay and proprietor of the
tithes, sought to recover treble the value of the tithes on eight acres
of wheat grown on the defendant's farm.  The defendant was the only
occupier in the parish who paid the tithes in kind, and it was alleged
that he had not fairly set them out.  The jury returned a verdict for the
defendant.

28.--Died, aged 43, Lady Elizabeth, wife of Lieut.-General Loftus, and
daughter of the Marquis Townshend.

30.*--"This week a main of 41 battles (of which 31 came in fray) was
fought at the King's Head Inn, Norwich (Norwich against Cambridgeshire)
for 10 guineas the battle, and 100 the odd.  Neither, however, were
winners, each having won 15 battles, and the odd battle being a draw."


APRIL.


2.--Miss Greenfield, an actress, made her first appearance at the Theatre
Royal, Norwich.

2.--A Lancasterian free school was opened in College Court, St.
Martin-at-Palace, Norwich, for 420 boys.

6.--The receipts at Norwich Theatre on the occasion of the benefit of the
manager, Mr. Hindes, amounted to 177 pounds 15s.

9.--Mr. J. Moreton, formerly of the Norwich Theatre, died at Woolwich, in
his 62nd year.

11.--Miss Biffin, born deficient of arms and legs, was exhibited in a
booth at Tombland Fair, Norwich.  She had previously displayed her powers
in miniature painting and needlework at the Angel Inn.

15.--Died in St. Simon's, Norwich, aged 86, James Fuller, who was for 51
years clerk of that parish.  His funeral was attended by all the parish
clerks in the city.

21.--Interred at St. Saviour's Church, Norwich, the remains of William
Andrews, aged 85, many years sexton of the parish.  The funeral was
attended by 22 sextons of the city.

26.--Died, at Buckenham, General Sir James Pulteney, Bart., from the
effects of an accidental explosion of a flask of gunpowder six days
previously.  He was colonel of the 18th Regiment of Foot, and had
distinguished himself in the American War.  He served on the Continent
under the Duke of York, and was Commander-in-Chief of the unsuccessful
expedition against Ferrol.  He was afterwards appointed Secretary of War.
The interest of the money left him by his wife, the Countess of Bath,
amounting to 50,000 pounds per annum, devolved at his death upon the four
children of Mrs. Monkham, who had been divorced from her husband, a son
of the Archbishop of York.

30.--Died in St. Peter Permountergate, Norwich, aged 63, William Harwin,
nearly 40 years superintendent of the Unitarian Free Schools.  "He had
published a remarkably concise system of Stenography."


MAY.


4.*--"Lieut. Richard Brunton, of the 43rd Regiment, son of J. Brunton,
Esq., late manager of our Theatre, is appointed Captain in the 6th
Regiment of Portuguese Cacadores."

21.--Intelligence received of a brilliant achievement in the Adriatic by
Capt. William Hoste in the Amphion, who with two frigates and a sloop
defeated the combined French and Italian squadrons of five frigates, a
corvette, &c.  He captured and destroyed four of the enemy's frigates.
The action took place on March 13th.

25.--A Royal license was granted to Elizabeth Barber Bulwer, widow of
Brigadier-General Bulwer, of Wood Dalling and Heydon, and only child of
Richard Warburton Lytton, late of Knebworth Place, Herts., to take and
use the surname and arms of Lytton in addition to and with those of
Bulwer.

--*"This week the churchwardens and officers, and many of the inhabitants
of St. John Maddermarket, St. Stephen's, St. Augustine's, and St. John
Timberhill, went the bounds of their respective parishes, when the usual
ceremonies of bumping and ducking (inside and out) took place amid the
ringing of bells, &c."

A census was taken in Norwich during this month.  The population was
returned as 37,256, an increase since 1801 of 424.


JUNE.


8.--A thunderstorm of great severity occurred in Norwich.

15.*--"General Money has made an offer to the Commander-in-Chief to raise
400 rough hussars mounted on Welsh horses, by men below the army
standard, to be embarked in four months.  The object of this corps is to
relieve the fine regiments of Cavalry in the Peninsula from all the
harassing duties of the camp."

18.--A new Methodist Chapel was opened in Calvert Street, St. George's
Colegate, Norwich, by the Rev. T. Cooke, LL.D., successor to the Rev.
John Wesley.

--Guild Day at Norwich.  "St. Giles' Broad Street was decorated with
streamers, garlands, and evergreens, whilst old Snap displayed his
glittering wings and gilt tail, and cleared the way for the civic
procession to the Cathedral."  After the service Robert Burrage, senior
pupil at the Free Grammar School, and a "plebeian," delivered the
customary Latin oration at the school porch, and Mr. John Hamond Cole,
having been sworn in at the Guildhall as Mayor of the city, entertained a
company of 650 at the Guild feast at St. Andrew's Hall.

20.--Died, at Athlone, Ireland, aged 38, James Wheeler, formerly of the
Norwich Company of Comedians.

24.--Holkham Sheep Shearing commenced.

29.--A cricket match was played on Mulbarton Common between the
Ashwelthorpe and Mulbarton teams, "for 22 bottles of cyder and 22 lbs. of
cherries."  The Ashwelthorpe players won.

The East Norfolk Militia, commanded by Col. Wodehouse, volunteered to
serve in Ireland.  The Government accepted their services, and the
regiment arrived in Cork in the following November.


JULY.


15.--Died, in his 69th year, at his house at Keswick, Mr. Richard Gurney.
The interment took place at the Gildencroft burial-ground, Norwich.

18.--A cricket match was played on Swaffham race-course between the
gentlemen of Swaffham and the gentlemen of Terrington for 50 guineas a
aids.  The match lasted two days.  Swaffham, 122-110; Terrington, 100-69.
The return match was played at Terrington on July 22nd.  Swaffham, 44;
Terrington, 22-20.  "Even betting on the match."

22.--A cricket match was played on the Town Close ground, Norwich,
between the 2nd and 3rd Norwich clubs.  3rd club, 47; 2nd club, 19-42.

--An inquest was held in St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich, on the body of Ann
Hammont, aged 28.  "She destroyed herself in a manner very uncommon.  She
wound a piece of tape three times tight round her neck, and, finding it
insufficient to effect her purpose, she resolutely put her head into a
tub of water and so completed her suffocation."

26.--The anniversary meeting of the Norfolk Agricultural Society was held
at East Dereham.  In consequence of the increase of the members (nearly
200) new regulations were made for conducting the society.

27.--Died at Richmond, Surrey, the Marquis Townshend, Earl of Leicester,
&c., of Rainham.  He was President of the Society of Antiquaries.


AUGUST.


3.--Polito's menagerie was exhibited on the Castle Hill, Norwich.

6.--The portrait of Mr. Thomas Back, ex-Mayor of Norwich, was placed in
St. Andrew's Hall.  It was painted by Clover, a native of the city.

8.--After the lapse of half a century Heigham Water Frolic was revived in
Norwich.

10.--A prize fight took place at Fakenham between "the noted" Christopher
Cox, of Sculthorpe, and J. Withers, "the blind boy," servant to Mr. E.
Holman, of the former place.  "After two rounds in which Cox was
confronted by his adversary, the conceit was pretty well taken out of
him.  Some little sparring then took place, when Cox was knocked down by
a right hand facer, and after several other rounds, which were all in
favour of Withers, Cox was completely beat off his legs."

12.--Between six a.m. and five p.m. two persons caught by angling near
Buckenham Ferry 132 lbs. of perch, bream, and roach.

13.--At the Norwich Assizes, before Mr. Justice Heath, William Charles
Walker, aged 26, was sentenced to death for a burglary at the shop of
Messrs. Dunham and Yallop, silversmiths, the Market Place.

19.--A cricket match was played on the Town Close ground between the
Norwich club and "the two new ones united."  Norwich club, 128; united
clubs, 84-65.

Molineux, Richmond, and Belcher, "the noted pugilists," visited Norwich
this month, and "gave lessons in the science of self-defence."


SEPTEMBER.


3.--Married at North Elmham, Mr. Frost to Miss Copsey.  "The marriage
ceremony suffered a delay of two hours in consequence of the bride not
having fully made up her mind, which occasioned a large assembly of the
inhabitants at the church, before whom at last the knot was tied."

5.--A comet appeared and remained visible until October 24th.

11th.--The Norfolk and Norwich Auxiliary Bible Society was instituted at
a numerous meeting held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich.  The Mayor (Mr. J.
H. Cole) presided.  The Bishop of Norwich was appointed president of the
Society.

16.--At a meeting held, under the presidency of Lord Suffield, at the
King's Arms Inn, North Walsham, it was resolved that the county members
be requested to petition Parliament for a Bill for making a canal from
Wayford Bridge to Lingate Common, North Walsham.

23.--Yarmouth Races commenced, and were attended by 20,000 people.


OCTOBER.


8.--A grand Musical Festival commenced in Norwich, when a miscellaneous
concert was given at St. Andrew's Hall.  On the 9th a selection of sacred
music was performed in the church of St. Peter Mancroft.  The "Messiah"
was produced on the 10th, selections were given from various composers on
the 11th, and on both evenings concerts took place in St. Andrew's Hall.
The principal vocalists were Madame Catalani, Miss Booth, Mrs. Branchi,
Mr. Braham, Mr. Goss, and Mr. Bellamy.  The prices of admission were:
Single tickets for the church from the orchestra to the altar, 10s. 6d.;
side aisles, 7s.  Single tickets for the hall, for the division west of
the orchestra, 10s. 6d.; other parts, 7s.  The receipts amounted to 1,800
pounds.

Died, this month, Mr. Thomas Cooke, of Pentonville, a native of Norfolk.
He bequeathed 6,600 pounds three per cent. Consols to Doughty's Hospital,
Norwich, expressly to augment the weekly allowance to the inmates; 1,750
pounds to Cook's Hospital; 1,000 pounds to the Norfolk and Norwich
Hospital; and a like sum to the Blind School.  He also gave 2,100 pounds
three per cents. to Framlingham Hospital; 700 pounds to Valinger's
Hospital; and 2,300 pounds to St. James's Hospital at Lynn, where the
testator resided some years previously.  Mr. Cooke was an eccentric
character, and was known as the "Pentonville Miser."


NOVEMBER.


9.*--"Died, lately, at Scarborough, Mr. Bramwell, formerly of the Theatre
Royal, Norwich."

16.*--"The Master of the Rolls has appointed Mr. Charles Knight Murray,
eldest son of Mr. Charles Murray, and grandson of Dr. John Murray, of
Norwich, to be second secretary to his Honour."

18.--At a special assembly of the Corporation of Norwich it was resolved,
in consequence of the increased prices of grain, to petition the Prince
Regent to cause the distillation of spirits from corn to be suspended
until the sense of Parliament could be taken thereon.  Wheat at that time
was quoted at 45s. to 63s.; barley at 20s. to 26s.; oats, 13s. to 17s.
per coomb; malt, 44s. per coomb; and flour, 95s. per sack.  Prices
declined soon afterwards.

27.--In the Court of King's Bench, before Lord Ellenborough, a rule
against Mr. Thomas Hoseason, a magistrate for the county of Norfolk, for
having acted in his own cause in committing to the house of correction
his servant, General Batterby, there to be kept to hard labour, and
publicly whipped, was discharged on payment of costs.

30.*--"Mr. Angerstein has completely wound up his extensive mercantile
concerns, and retired from business with an immense fortune, most
honourably acquired.  One of the last purchases which he made was a
Government annuity of 3,000 pounds on his own life.  Weeting Hall,
formerly Lord Montrath's, was also a recent purchase."

H.R.H. the Duke of Gloucester this month visited Holkham, as the guest of
Mr. T. W. Coke.


DECEMBER.


10.--At a meeting of the Trafalgar Lodge of Oddfellows, held at the Three
Tuns, St. Andrew's, Norwich, the floor of the upper room gave way and
precipitated the members into a lower apartment.  "One of the members on
finding himself sinking laid hold of the bars of the fire grate, but he
soon relinquished his hold and dropped on his companions."  No one was
injured.  The meeting, at the time of the accident, had under discussion
the question of the desirability of removing the lodge to other quarters.

28.--An equestrian troupe, under the management of Mr. Moritz, opened for
the season at Harper's Pantheon, Norwich.

--Bullock's Museum of Natural History and productions of the fine arts
was exhibited in the large room at the Angel Inn, Norwich.

Prices were very high this month.  Wheat was quoted at 100s. to 110s.;
rye, 46s. to 48s.; barley, 36s. to 47s.; and oats, 28s. to 32s. per
quarter.  The average price of wheat was 53s. 4d. per coomb, and the
average price of flour 4 pounds 11s. 6d. per sack.  Coals were 46s. 4d.
per chaldron.



1812.


JANUARY.


2.--A silver vase, of the value of 200 guineas, was presented to Sir
Edmund Bacon, premier baronet, of Raveningham, at the Swan Inn, Loddon,
by the inhabitants of the Loddon and Clavering Hundred, as a token of
their respect for him as a magistrate, and in recognition of his valuable
services in the improvement of the roads in the district.

11.*--"The East India Company, on a representation from the manufacturers
of camblets in Norwich, have raised their order from 16,000 to 22,000
pieces this season, and the manufacturers have lately advanced the wages
of the journeyman weavers."

20.--A two days' cocking match commenced between the gentlemen of
Yarmouth and the gentlemen of Blofield, for 5 pounds a battle, 20 pounds
the odd, and two byes for 10 pounds each.  On the first day Blofield won
four battles, and Yarmouth three battles and a bye.  On the second day
Yarmouth won four battles, and Blofield three battles and a bye.  "The
pit was filled each night, and there was much betting between the
parties."

30.--A deputation of the citizens waited upon the Lighting and Watching
Committee of the Norwich Corporation to complain of the inadequate
provisions for the public safety.  The committee gave an assurance that
the watchmen should be periodically inspected and an inquiry made whether
the funds of the committee would enable them to give an increased
allowance to watchmen whereby more able men might be appointed, and the
time of watching extended to a later hour.


FEBRUARY.


4.--Died, at the age of 104, John Brown, carpenter, of Wymondham.  "He
retained his faculties to the last, and till within a week or two of his
death frequently walked twenty miles a day."

5.--A general fast was observed in Norwich.

13.--A Lancastrian school was established on the Denes at Yarmouth.

27.--Died at Worstead, Mr. Thomas Deeker, "and on the same day in Pall
Mall, London, his brother, who in 1785 twice ascended in his balloon from
Norwich."


MARCH.


28.*--"The partnership between Messrs. Fisher and Scraggs having expired
the theatre at Thetford was opened for the season commencing with the
Assize week, under the direction of Mr. Fisher only, with that success
which diligence and long-established integrity merit."

This month the public lighting of Thetford by voluntary subscription was
inaugurated.


APRIL.


6.--The first annual meeting of the Norwich Association against Felonies
was held at the Guildhall.

7.--Died from the effects of a wound received in the storming of Badajoz,
in his 25th year, Lieut. W. S. Unthank, of the 44th Regiment, eldest son
of Mr. William Unthank, of Norwich.

15.--Died at Scoulton, Lieut.-General James Hethersett, in his 77th year.
"He was the last surviving officer who fought by the side of the immortal
Wolfe on the day that he fell."  General Hethersett possessed property of
the value of 80,000 pounds.

18.*--"A few days since at Corpusty, aged 102, Samuel Mog, one of the
last survivors of that British Army which fought under the celebrated
General Wolfe at the battle of Quebec."


MAY.


1.--Election of Mayor at Norwich.  Mr. Starling Day was nominated for the
office, but asked to be relieved on account of his advanced age (78).  A
poll resulted, and on the 2nd the numbers were declared as follow:--Mr.
Day, 761; Mr. R. Harvey, jun., 757; Mr. Alderman Davey, 566; Mr. Alderman
Leman, 507.  "Mr. Day sent a message to St. Peter's ringers ordering them
to cease their triumphant peal, on the ground that he had declared his
intention not to serve."  Guild Day was fixed for June 16, and the usual
quarterly assembly of the Corporation on the day preceding it had to be
abandoned because the attendance was insufficient to form a quorum.  Mr.
Day was sworn into office on the 16th, but "there was no church, no
dinner."  Mr. Alderman Davey invited the freemen of the Blue and White
interest to dine with him beneath the trees at Eaton Hall.  The guests,
500 in number, "were refreshed on their dusty march by Mr. Alderman
Yallop, at his cottage, with a pint of beer each, 600 of which were
swallowed in twenty minutes."

11.--Died, Mr. Johnson, the venerable parish clerk of St. Peter Mancroft,
Norwich, after about 35 years' service.  He was succeeded by James
Twiddy, a hairdresser, who possessed considerable literary ability, and
was the author of many poetical productions and pamphlets on various
subjects.


JUNE.


22.--Holkham Sheep Shearing commenced.  Mr. Mann, of Thornage, was
awarded the prize for the best implement of husbandry, namely, an
improved drilling machine.

27.--In the Court of Exchequer, before the Lord Chief Baron, a
prosecution was instituted by the Board of Taxes against Daniel Morling,
of Yarmouth, for having obstructed Mr. Hunter, the inspector for that
district, when surveying the windows of his house.  A penalty of 50
pounds was asked for, and a verdict was given for the Crown for that
amount.


JULY.


2.--A wrestling match took place at Blofield Globe between William
Benstead, of that parish, and Charles Layton, "the famed wrestler, who,
for his invincible skill in that science, had been declared the 'Reedham
Game Chicken' at the late wrestling match at Lingwood, and who has since
challenged all England."  Benstead succeeded in beating the champion.

9.--Died, at Ashfield, Suffolk, Mr. James Mingay, for many years
eminently distinguished as a King's Counsel, Recorder of Aldborough, and
one of the capital burgesses of the borough of Thetford.

14.--Died, aged 71, Simon Watling, "many years master of the Eight
Ringers public-house, St. Michael-at-Coslany, Norwich, and one of St.
Peter's ringers.  He was one of the company that rang at St. Peter's in
York in 1772."

17.--At a meeting held at the Shirehouse, Norwich, at which Lord Viscount
Primrose presided, the Norfolk and Norwich Society for the Education of
the Poor in the Principles of the Church of England was established.
Upwards of 3,000 pounds was subscribed; and the Bishop of Norwich became
Patron, and Lord Suffield, President.

20.--Died, at the age of 101, Mrs. Jane Fair, of St. Mary's, Norwich.

23.--Died, Mrs. Coppin, wife of Mr. Daniel Coppin, of St. Stephen's,
Norwich.  "She possessed a refined taste for the polite arts, and great
skill in imitating the works of the old masters."

25.--Mr. Scraggs and his company of comedians concluded a theatrical
season at Holt.  "There is ground to hope that the patronage which was so
liberally conferred by the county on the late Mr. Scraggs, will be
continued to his son and family."  The company was advertised as "The
Original Norfolk and Suffolk Company."

27.--General Viscount Cathcart, Ambassador Extraordinary to the Court of
Russia, passed through Norwich and embarked on board the Aquilon frigate
at Yarmouth.  Lord Walpole, one of the Lords of the Admiralty, sailed in
the Calypso, on his appointment as Secretary of Legation to Lord
Cathcart, who proceeded to the headquarters of the Russian Army.


AUGUST.


15.--It was reported that small-pox had broken out in Norwich.  Many
children were vaccinated, and by the end of the year the operation had
been performed on 1,400 persons.

17.--The mail coaches arrived at Norwich, with colours flying, bringing
intelligence of Lord Wellington's brilliant victory near Salamanca.

19.--William Flaxman, of Gorleston, was placed in a pillory erected in
Yarmouth Market Place, and after standing the usual time was removed to
the gaol to complete a term of three months' imprisonment.

20.--The old custom of a country excursion was revived by the foreman of
the Headborough Inquest at Yarmouth.  "A wherry was fitted out for the
purpose, and several officers of the Royal South Lincoln Regiment, with
other gentlemen, were invited to accompany the inquest.  The wherry was
attended by several boats, and went as far as the Beccles river, where a
convivial meeting was held, and the party returned at nine o'clock at
night."


SEPTEMBER.


5.*--(Advt.)  "Windham Petty Sessions will be held at the King's Head Inn
on Monday, 28th September, 1812, for hiring and retaining servants.
There will be another Sessions, as usual, on Monday, October 12th.  John
Syder, John Cullyer, chief constables."

6.--Intelligence received of the capture of Madrid by the Marquis
Wellington.  The bells of St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich, were rung all day,
and at East Dereham on the 22nd a ball was held in celebration of the
event.

--Died, at Upper Fitzroy Street, London, aged 68, Major-General Robert
Bowles, an officer on the Bombay Establishment.  He served in the East
India Company 35 years, and was a native of Norwich.

14.--The first stone of the new chapel in the Black Boys Yard, St.
Clement, Norwich, laid by the Rev. Mr. Wilkes and Mr. Alderman Davey.
The chapel was opened for public worship on May 5th, 1814.

21.--Yarmouth Races commenced.  There was an attendance of about 18,000.
Most of the county families were present at the assembly, where the
dancing was opened by Sir George Jerningham and Lady Hoste.

22.--Died at Yarmouth, aged 73, Mr. Robert Warmington.  He served the
office of Mayor in 1790 and 1808, and was Prussian, Swedish, Danish,
Hamburgh, and American Vice-Consul, and Naval Store Keeper at that port.

25.--At the Norwich Court of Trials a motion was made by Mr. Cooper that
the attornies, who then held briefs on behalf of clients, be not allowed
the privilege of pleading.  It was urged that the actual right of
pleading existed in favour of barristers to the exclusion of attornies.
The City Steward (Mr. Alderson) thought that the exclusive right of
counsel rested more upon courtesy than upon any positive right, and as no
authority had been cited he declined to give any decision upon the point.


OCTOBER.


3.--A correspondent in a letter to the NORFOLK CHRONICLE expressed the
hope "that now Parliament is dissolving, the ancient custom of nominating
the members in St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, previously to the day of
election, may be revived.  This used to be done formerly in order to give
the old members an opportunity of explaining and justifying their past
conduct as representatives, and of each candidate stating his pretensions
to popular support."  The Mayor refused to grant the use of the hall for
the purpose.

6.--Yarmouth Election: Capt. Lacon, 607; General Loftus, 387; Mr. Giffen
Willson, 329.  The two first-named were returned.

7.--Norwich Election commenced on this date and concluded on the 8th: Mr.
W. Smith, 1,544; Mr. Charles Harvey, 1,349; Mr. John Patteson, 1,221.

--Thetford Election: Lord John Fitzroy and Mr. Creevey returned
unopposed.

14.--Norfolk Election: Sir J. H. Astley and Mr. T. W. Coke were
re-elected unopposed.

17.--St. Faith's Fair commenced.  "John Dunn, the clerk of St. John
Maddermarket, Norwich, and who for the last 46 years acted as the leader
of the men who chaired the Whig members at their election, attended St.
Faith's Fair for the 76th time, without intermission, having been carried
to St. Faith's when he was two years old."  Dunn died January 20, 1813.

24.*--(Advt.)  "Norwich and Ipswich New Post Coach through Scole, Eye,
Debenham, and Helmingham, by W. Norbrook, sets off from the Greyhound, in
Norwich, on Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday mornings at eight o'clock,
arrives at the Old White Hart Inn, Ipswich, the same evening, whence it
sets off every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday morning at eight o'clock,
and arrives at Norwich the same evening."

29.--A branch of the Norfolk and Norwich Auxiliary Bible Society was
formed at Yarmouth; branches were established at about this date at
Wymondham, Downham Market, and other towns.

31.*--"A few days since the Norwich Expedition Coach was robbed of bank
notes to the amount of 500 pounds."  A man, named Silvester, who
presented 140 pounds worth of the notes at a London bank, was arrested on
suspicion.


NOVEMBER.


1.--James Parsons, a farrier, in the employment of Mr. Richard Watson,
veterinary surgeon, Norwich, was buried with "veterinary and masonic"
ceremonies at St. Gregory's Church, in the presence of 2,000 persons.
The procession was headed by two farriers with white aprons, and their
implements bound with white ribbons and reversed.  "The corpse was
carried by six brethren of a lodge called the Stags Lodge, in their
regalia, the sword, middle apron, and collar laid on the pall.  His
favourite horse which he rode for many years, covered with black velvet,
the boots and spurs across, was led behind.  The head stall and bridle
were adorned with white roses and facings, he dying a bachelor."  At the
conclusion of the service "a solemn dirge was sung which much gratified
many hundreds of persons."

5.--Died, Thomas Gill, aged 86, fifty-two years sexton of St. Margaret's,
Norwich.  "He had been five times married, never had any children, and
buried all his wives."

13.--Whilst the bells of St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich, were ringing on the
occasion of the receipt of the intelligence of the defeat of the French
by the Russians, and of the recapture of Moscow, the Prince Regent passed
through the city from Houghton on his way to Saxmundham.  His Royal
Highness changed horses at the Angel Inn, but did not alight.  On the
14th the Duke of Clarence, accompanied by the Earl of Yarmouth, arrived
at Norwich, and after dining at the Angel Inn, proceeded to join the
Prince Regent at Saxmundham.

15.--The Duke of Cambridge passed through Fakenham, from Houghton, on his
way to join a shooting party at Blickling, the seat of Lord Suffield.

17.--Died, at Green Street, Grosvenor Square, London, in his 75th year,
Mr. Edward Jerningham.  "Although all his family were of the Roman
Catholic religion he very early conformed to the Protestant faith, and
remained in it till his death, having received the sacrament according to
the rites of the Church of England.  He was a good scholar and an elegant
poet."

21.--A fully-rigged vessel, built for Mr. John Bloom, was launched from
the ship-yard of Mr. Parker at Wells-next-the-Sea.  "Seven ships in the
harbour belonging to Mr. Bloom, dressed in their colours, fired a royal
salute as the ship went off."

23.--Died at his house, Tombland, Norwich, Mr. Edward Colman, one of the
surgeons of the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital.  He served the office of
Sheriff in 1795.  "Having been for twenty-four years a member of the
Friars' Society the brethren held a special conclave, when appropriate
compositions in prose and verse were delivered, and his obituary medal
was deposited in the sepulchral urn."

28.--Died at Cheltenham, in his 74th year, the Rev. George William Lukin,
LL.D., Dean of Wells, forty-nine years rector of Felbrigg and Aylmerton,
and half-brother to the Right Hon. William Windham.

--Equestrian entertainments commenced at Harper's Pantheon, Norwich,
under the management of Mr. R. Key.


DECEMBER.


3.--Intelligence received at Yarmouth of the defeat of the French Army in
Russia.  On the arrival at Norwich of the coaches conveying the news, the
bells of St. Peter Mancroft were rung.

17.--Further celebrations took place at Norwich on the receipt of the
intelligence of the victories obtained by the Russians over the two
divisions of the French Army, commanded by Marshals Daoust and Ney.

20.--Died, aged 101, Thomas Armstrong, of West Dereham, upwards of 40
years clerk of the parish.

25.--On Christmas Day "the Corporation of Thetford assembled, according
to custom, at the house of the Mayor (Mr. L. S. Bidwell), and after
partaking of an elegant cold collation, attended divine service at St.
Peter's Church."

26.*--"In the Court of King's Bench last week an action was brought by
Mr. Bignold, banker of Norwich, against Mr. Waterhouse, one of the coach
proprietors, at Lad Lane, for the loss of a parcel containing bills and
notes to a considerable amount.  The Solicitor-General, for the
defendant, produced a notice in which he stated that he would not hold
himself responsible for parcels above the value of 5 pounds.  The judge
held this to be a good defence, and non-suited the plaintiff."

In the course of this year upwards of 1,400 persons were vaccinated in
Norwich.



1813.


JANUARY.


2.--Polito's menagerie was exhibited on the Castle Ditches, Norwich.

--*"A smuggling cutter, with 600 casks of Geneva on board, was last week
captured off Salthouse by the Sheringham Revenue boat.  The vessel was
taken to Blakeney harbour, and her cargo deposited in the King's
warehouse, at Cley."

13.--A Methodist Chapel, erected in Tower Street, King's Lynn, and
estimated to hold 3,000 persons, was opened.

17.--Upwards of 1,000 persons attended evening service at St. Andrew's
Church, Norwich, when the sermon was preached by the Rev. Robert Walpole.
This was one of a series of services arranged under a scheme of "evening
lectures" by clergymen who had "volunteered to officiate alternately at
the churches of St. Stephen, St. Andrew, and St. Lawrence."  The churches
were "excellently lighted with lamps," and the "accommodation of
strangers particularly attended to by parish officers and other
gentlemen."

19.--Mr. Steward Alderson, at the Norwich Quarter Sessions, called
attention to "a species of nuisance existing in various parts of the town
which not only endangered the public peace but also the public health and
morals.  He referred to the species of houses commonly called gin shops.
If the magistrates had signed the licenses of such houses, it was wholly
through ignorance of the sort of houses to which they were giving their
sanction."

--At the Duke's Head Inn, Lynn, a committee of barley growers of the
county presented to Mr. Wm. Becher, of Docking, a valuable piece of plate
in recognition of his exertions in promoting the success of agriculture,
and in opposing injurious restrictions on the corn trade.

25.--Died, aged 45, Mr. William Money Hill, of Waterden, an agriculturist
of great repute in the breeding and selection of stock, and the winner of
many prizes at the Holkham Sheep Shearings.

--The third great main of cocks between the gentlemen of Norwich and the
gentlemen of Cambridge commenced at the White Swan Inn, Norwich, and was
continued on the 26th and 27th.  The conditions were: to show 41 mains
for 10 guineas a battle, and 100 guineas the odd, and ten byes for five
guineas a battle.  The feeders were Dean for Norwich, Flemon for
Cambridgeshire.  Cambridge won by five battles.

30.*--"A small farmer, who a few years since resided in the neighbourhood
of Norwich, has written from Botany Bay to his former landlord, stating
that Cabel, who about 25 years since was sent from Norwich Castle, is now
become a very great merchant and the owner of twenty-five ships."  (In
the year 1786 Cabel and a female prisoner were in Norwich Castle under
sentence of transportation.  During the two years that elapsed between
the trial and the departure of the first batch of convicts, the woman
gave birth to a child.  Cabel, the father, was passionately fond of the
infant, and appealed to the authorities to allow him to marry the mother.
This was refused.  The female and her infant were sent with the first
contingent of convicts, and after a wearisome journey by coach in the
depth of winter arrived at Plymouth in charge of Simpson, the turnkey of
the prison.  When Simpson handed over his prisoners to the captain of the
transport that officer refused to take the child on board, alleging that
he had no authority to do so.  The mother was distracted by the
separation.  Simpson acted with great humanity.  Taking with him the six
weeks old child he proceeded to London by coach, and with much difficulty
obtained an interview with the Secretary of State, to whom he related the
story.  The result was that not only was an order issued for the
restoration of the child to its mother, but Cabel was permitted to sail
by the same transport to the land of their exile.)


FEBRUARY.


2.--Mr. Charles Harvey presented to the House of Commons a petition
against the claims of the Roman Catholics, which was extensively signed
by the clergy of the archdeaconries of Norwich and Norfolk.

--Mr. James Webb, known as the "Benevolent Stranger," distributed
considerable sums of money among the public institutions and the
necessitous poor of Norwich.  "For three days the Angel Inn yard was
thronged with applicants who seemed unwilling to quit the spot even till
some time after the philanthropist had taken his departure."  Mr. Webb
made similar distributions at Yarmouth, Bungay, and other places.

--Died, Major John Bland, aged 77, many years in the 46th Regiment.  "He
had been in 42 engagements, among which was the memorable battle of
Quebec."  He gave various bequests to the Norwich charities.

6.--It was reported that small-pox had appeared in St. Stephen's,
Norwich.  Six unvaccinated children died from the effects of the disease.
The Court of Guardians offered a reward of 2s. 6d. to parents for each
child vaccinated.  During the month unvaccinated children continued to
suffer.  On March 27th it was stated that Letton, Cranworth, West and
East Bradenham, and Shipdham, were among the parishes of the county "who
had set a most laudable example in vaccination."

20.*--"The second cousins of Mr. Henry Kett, late of Norwich, have
generously presented the sum of 500 pounds towards the establishment of a
Lancasterian school at Dickleburgh, the native place of the deceased."

26.--A trotting match took place between a mare, the property of Mr.
Crisp, of Stow, Downham Market, and a mare belonging to Mr. Brett, of
Fordham, on the turnpike road from the Chequers at Downham Market to the
toll-bar at Fincham.  The stakes, 20 pounds a side, "were won by the
former by a furlong, the latter having broke eleven times during the
journey."  The winner was ridden by Mr. Abraham Spinks, of Magdalen.

27.--"Died, few days since in his 105th year, Mr. Ling, of Woodbastwick."


MARCH.


4.--At a meeting held at the Guildhall, Norwich, it was resolved to open
a subscription for the relief of the inhabitants of the Russian provinces
suffering from the invasion of their country by the French.

5.--Died in London, William Noble, formerly a member of the Norwich
Company.

6.*--"We hear the Society of the Antient Order of Stagorians is now
reviving in this city, and is likely to become a very respectable one."

7.--Downham Church was re-opened for service after being closed some
months for restoration.

10.--A general fast observed at Norwich.  The shops were closed, and
services held at the churches and chapels, at which collections were made
for the relief of the poor.

12.--Died, aged 69, Mr. Edward Sharpe, for upwards of 22 years keeper of
the Norwich city gaol.

24.--In consequence of the establishment of the Local Militia, the
Volunteer corps of Infantry in Norwich and Norfolk were disbanded and
deposited their arms.  Each corps received the thanks of the Prince
Regent for their patriotic services.

27.*--"The Amelia frigate, the Hon. Captain F. P. Irby, has arrived at
Portsmouth after a night action with L'Arethuse, French frigate, one of
the most desperate that has been fought during the present war.  This
excellent officer, who has been severely wounded, has been so actively
employed during the last five years that he has not been resident at his
seat, Boyland Hall, more than five days during that period."

31.--Died at Weasenham, aged 74, Mr. Thomas Sanctuary.  "For many years
he was an extensive and opulent farmer.  He left his property among his
relatives, with a legacy of 2,000 pounds to Miss Coke out of respect and
gratitude to his worthy landlord, Mr. T. W. Coke, under whom he acquired
his handsome fortune."


APRIL.


5.--The West Norfolk Militia marched in three divisions from
Berwick-upon-Tweed to Edinburgh Castle, where they entered permanent
quarters.

10.--Charles Harper, 26, and Edmond Impeon, 21, were executed on Castle
Hill, Norwich, for a burglary at the dwelling-house of Mr. John Butler,
of Barney.  "After hanging the usual time their bodies were delivered to
their afflicted relatives, and by them conveyed home for interment."

17.--Mary Turrell, apprehended on suspicion of being the mother of a
newly-born child, whose dead body was found in Vipond's pond at
Harleston, committed suicide by poisoning.  The coroner's jury returned a
verdict of _felo de se_, "and on the same evening about seven o'clock she
was buried in the high road with a stake driven through her body in the
presence of a vast concourse of people."

25.--Died, in his 67th year, Mr. James Bullard, many years master of the
Bethel Hospital, Norwich.  His death resulted from a wound in the
stomach, inflicted with a scythe by a patient named Jonathan Morley, who
was engaged in mowing the lawn in the inner court.  The coroner's jury
returned a verdict of wilful murder, and Morley was committed for trial
at the Assizes, when he was ordered to be kept in custody, "being insane
at the time he committed the act."  In December, 1816, an order was
received from the Secretary of State for the Home Department for the
removal of the prisoner from Norwich gaol to the new Criminal Lunatic
Asylum in St. George's Fields, London.

27.--The "light machine" commenced running between Wells and Norwich.  It
set out from Wells on Tuesdays and Fridays at nine o'clock in the
morning, and travelled through Fakenham and Bawdeswell to the Bell Inn,
Orford Hill, Norwich.  The coach returned by the same road on Wednesdays
and Saturdays.  Mr. J. Sizeland was the proprietor.

29.--The Duke of Cumberland arrived at Yarmouth, and embarked on board
the Nymphen frigate for the Continent.


MAY.


1.*--"The commanding officers of the Norfolk Regiments of Local Militia
and the Norfolk and Norwich Volunteers have received orders to send the
accoutrements of their respective regiments to the nearest ports for the
use of the German levies against the common enemy.  The arms have this
week been sent to Yarmouth."

1.--A contested election took place for the mayoralty of Norwich.  The
candidates were Alderman R. Harvey, jun., Alderman J. Harvey, and
Alderman Davey.  The freemen demanded a poll for Mr. R. Harvey, sen., and
Mr. J. Ives Harvey.  Mr. Harvey, the elder, strongly opposed his
nomination in consequence of his infirm state of health.  The polling
commenced at once, and continued till six p.m.  The contest was resumed
on the 2nd (Sunday) at ten o'clock, and at the close the voting was
declared as follows:--Davey, 764; J. Harvey, 730; R. Harvey, jun., 717;
R. Harvey sen., 9.  The two first-named were returned to the Court of
Aldermen.  At a Court of Mayoralty held on the 3rd, Mr. John Harvey was
objected to on the ground that he was not an inhabitant of the city as
required by the Charter.  This objection was upheld by Mr. Serjeant Lens,
to whom the case was submitted, and on May 20 it was resolved at a
Special Assembly to apply to the Court of King's Bench for a mandamus to
elect a Mayor.  A writ was granted, and the election took place on June
7, when the candidates were Mr. Davey, who polled 801 votes; Mr. Barnabas
Leman, 797; and Mr. J. Harvey, 749.  The two first-named were returned to
the Court of Aldermen, who elected Mr. Leman, and he was sworn into
office on June 22.

6.--A rowing match took place between four 4-oared boats from Carrow
Bridge to Whitlingham and back, for a silver cup.  The Zephyr (Mr.
Yarrington) won.  Distance, four miles; time, 36 minutes.

15.--A historical drama, entitled "The Siege of Sarragossa, or Spanish
Patriots of 1808," by Mr. Bennett, a member of the company, was produced
at Norwich Theatre.

17.--The birthday of the Princess of Wales was observed in Norwich for
the first time by the ringing of the church bells.

23.--Died at Bangalore, in his 26th year, Capt. Robert Beauchamp, of the
Hon. East India Company's Horse Artillery, Madras Establishment, third
son of Sir Thomas Beauchamp Proctor, Bart., Langley Park.

24.--The Bishop of Norwich commenced his ordinary visitation of the
diocese, at Thetford, and on the following day at St. Peter's Church,
confirmed upwards of 700 persons.  At St. James's Church, Bury St.
Edmund's, his lordship confirmed 2,700 young persons; at Ipswich, 1,300;
Woodbridge, 600; Framlingham, 700; Downham Market, 1,000; St. Nicholas'
Chapel, Lynn, 1,000; Redenhall, 662; at Norwich Cathedral, 800; and in
the city and hamlets, 1,000.  The Bishop expressed the opinion "that the
number confirmed in the diocese, which was much increased since the last
confirmation, was decisive of the laudable exertions of the clergy."

--The bounds of the parish of St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich, were
perambulated, "the officiating individuals being saluted at every part of
the parochial confines by sprinklings as memorials of the occasion.  The
water ordeal being gone through, the gentleman repaired to a good dinner
and the cheerful glass."  On the 26th "the bounds of St. Andrew's were in
like manner ascertained."

30.--Three African youths taken out of a Portuguese slave ship by Capt.
the Hon. P. F. Irby, of the Amelia frigate, and sent by him to Norwich
for education, were baptised at St. Peter Mancroft Church.


JUNE.


4.*--"At Gretna Green, Mr. Thomas Bunn, corn merchant, to Miss Sarah
Cobb, second daughter of Mr. John Cobb, of Yarmouth."  The parties were
re-married at Gorleston by the Rev. Mr. Forster, on June 4.

7.--Mr. J. Youngs, of St. Peter Hungate, Norwich, was carried in a sedan
chair to record his vote at the Mayor's election.  On his return home he
immediately expired.  He was 85 years old.

8.--Died, at the Grotto, Thetford, Mr. John Ellis, "long known as an
industrious collector of antiquities, fossils, foreign birds, &c., of
which he had a large and very curious cabinet."

17.--The first recorded "speech day" at Norwich Grammar School.  It was
described as "the first speech day of the kind ever held at Norwich or at
this school," and its inception was due to the fact that "the Latin
oration which in former times used to be delivered at the school porch on
Guild Day," had been "for the last two years superseded by the
non-observance of that annual festival."

19.*--"Died, last week in St. Clement's, the Widow Herring, in her 106th
year."

--The officers of the Norwich Court Leet seized the defective measures of
Edward Phillipps, a retail corn dealer, in King Street.  The offender was
fined by the court, who ordered the forfeiture of two of the measures.

20.--Mr. Bowles, "formerly a respectable performer in the Norwich Company
of Comedians," preached at the Octagon Chapel to a numerous congregation.

21.--Opening day of Holkham Sheep Shearing.  It was stated in the course
of the proceedings, that "a very large quantity of bones is collected in
Norfolk and exported from Yarmouth to distant counties, where, after
being ground or crushed, they are used as manure by farmers."  "Why," it
was asked, "should not Norfolk and Suffolk farmers lay their bones in
their own counties?"


JULY.


1.--A rowing match for pair-oared boats took place at Whitlingham.
Distance, one and a half miles; the best two heats out of three.  The
winner of the silver cup was the Achilles, owned by Mr. Homer.

4.--The Expedition coach entered Norwich, with colours flying, and with
the intelligence of the great victory of the Allied Army at Vittoria
under Lord Wellington on June 21.  "Mr. Coldwell, the proprietor of the
coach, himself brought down from London a copy of the 'Gazette
Extraordinary,' and read its glorious contents from the coach box to his
fellow citizens assembled in the Market Place."

7.--The Mayor of Lynn (Mr. John Hemington) laid the foundation stone of
the new Theatre in that town.

10.*--"Among the officers promoted to be lieutenant-colonels in the army
in consequence of the victory at Vittoria is Major Robert John Harvey,
assistant Quarter-Master-General of the Portuguese Army, son of Mr. John
Harvey, Thorpe Lodge, Norwich.  This gallant young officer had two horses
severely wounded under him in the battle."

13.--Died, in this 70th year, Mr. Edward Barrow, of St. Saviour, Norwich.
"A native of Manchester, and a yarn factor, Mr. Barrow was the first
person who undertook the manufacture of cotton in this city; but what in
a peculiar manner consecrates his memory is the merit of his having also
been the first manufacturer of the shawl in this city, or perhaps in the
kingdom.  This brought in a new history in the era of the loom."

14.--At the Norfolk Quarter Sessions the Rev. Augustus Beevor appeared to
try his traverse for an assault on Daniel Turner on June 4th, 1812.  The
Rev. James Carlos had, in consequence of the absence of the rector (the
defendant), gone to officiate at Berghapton, by virtue of the license of
the Bishop of Norwich.  Mr. Carlos also farmed the glebe lands, and
Turner was one of his tenants.  Turner received a message from the
defendant that he was about to clear the premises of stock belonging to
Mr. Carlos, and on his going to the parsonage he was met by Mr. Beevor,
who "scientifically fibbed him" about the head and face that plaintiff
shrieked aloud for assistance, and two men rescued him from the clutches
of his assailant.  The defence was that it was "a square stand-up fight."
The jury returned a verdict of guilty, upon which an arrangement was made
between the parties before the court pronounced judgment.  Defendant was
then fined one shilling, and discharged.

17.*--"We are happy to hear that the good effects of the victory of
Vittoria were immediately felt in Norwich, as several manufacturers
received large orders for broad bombazines which are made for the Spanish
market, and which were ordered upon the idea of the whole of the
Peninsula being now open to our trade."

--*"Died, lately, in his 59th year, that ingenious artist, Mr. Henry
Neale.  He was the inventor of a model of machinery to represent a cotton
manufactory."

19.--A trotting match, attended with much cruelty, took place between two
ponies belonging to Mr. Howlett, of Fakenham, and Mr. Burgess, of the
same town.  They were matched to trot twice to and from Norwich, a
distance of 100 miles, in the least time.  "They both performed the first
50 miles in five and a quarter hours.  Howlett's pony, however, became
quite exhausted when it reached the sixth mile-stone coming to Norwich on
the second time and gave in.  Burgess pursued his journey to Norwich, and
returned as far as Morton, where the poor beast died almost immediately.
Howlett's reached Fakenham much injured."

21.--The annual meeting of the Unitarian Society was held at Norwich.
The Rev. Robert Aspland, of Hackney, preached at the Octagon Chapel, and
the members dined at the Swan Inn, under the presidency of Mr. John
Taylor.

24.*--"Mr. Powell, of Weeting (familiarly called 'Pogey Powell'), who
shot the late Lord Falkland in a duel, was killed a few days ago by a
fall from his horse, near Worwell, Hampshire."

27.--Died at her house in Pall Mall, in her 79th year, the Hon. Mrs.
Keppel, widow of the late Hon. Dr. Keppel, Bishop of Exeter, aunt of his
Royal Highness the Duke of Gloucester, and mother of Mr. Frederick
Keppel, of Lexham Hall.

31.*--"Died, lately, Susanna, the wife of Thomas Bolton, of Bradenham,
eldest daughter of the late Rev. Edmund Nelson, of Burnham Thorpe, and
sister of our immortal Nelson, still more happy in her virtues than in
her lineage."


AUGUST.


2.--This day was played "a grand cricket match in a field opposite the
Prussia Gardens, Norwich, for 100 guineas, between eleven gentlemen of
Norwich and eleven gentlemen of Bungay."  Norwich, 37-46; Bungay, 74-10,
and eight wickets to go down.  "Bungay refused to allow Messrs. Bredwell,
Clabburn, and Pooley, three expert cricketers, to play in this match."
The return match took place, at Bungay on August 23.  Norwich, 36-30;
Bungay, 116.

4.--A piece of plate was presented by the officers of the late City of
Norwich Regiment of Volunteers to Mr. Elisha De Hague, their former
Lieutenant-Colonel Commandant.

5.--A six-oared rowing match took place from Carrow Bridge to Whitlingham
Point and back, distance upwards of four miles, between the Sylph (Mr. J.
Harvey, jun.), and the Aurora (Mr. Lowe).  The Sylph won by 50 yards in
34 minutes 8 seconds.

7.--At this date was published the statement "Norfolk grows the finest
barley, and makes the worst ale of any county in the kingdom."

--An official notice was published announcing that it was in
contemplation to demolish "the public-house called St. Andrew's Steps,
and the tenements adjoining in London Lane, Norwich, to lay a small part
of the site into the street for the better convenience of the public, and
to erect new houses thereon."

9.--A steam packet, intended for traffic between Yarmouth and Norwich,
had her trial trip to Breydon.  On her return "the boat went through the
bridge amidst the acclamations of thousands of spectators."  This vessel,
which was built near Leeds, plied regularly upon the Yare, leaving
Turner's bowling-green, Yarmouth, at seven o'clock in the morning, and
returning from Norwich at three in the afternoon.

17.--News was received at Norwich of the defeat of Marshal Soult by the
Marquis of Wellington.

--The High Sheriff, Mr. Thomas Trench Berney, arrived at Norwich from
Bracon Hall, "preceded by a numerous cavalcade, his carriage drawn by
four beautiful bays richly caparisoned, the attendant pages, one on each
side, mounted on grey ponies and decorated with silk scarves and favours
in the ancient style.  The High Sheriff, in full court dress, proceeded
to the Rampant Horse Inn, where he entertained a large company at
dinner."

18.--At the Norfolk Assizes at Norwich, before Lord Chief Justice
Mansfield and a special jury, an indictment was preferred against the
keeper of the county gaol for suffering a prisoner to escape.  The
indictment had been moved by _certiorari_ from the Court of King's Bench,
and was tried at _nisi prius_.  The main question was whether or not the
magistrates of the borough of Castle Rising had legally the power of
commitment to the county gaol.  They had in this case exercised such
power, and the gaoler had accepted the delinquent into his custody and
given a receipt for him, but afterwards, on the advice of one of the
visiting justices, had suffered him to go at large.  The Lord Chief
Justice thought it a question for decision in Westminster Hall rather
than for an Assize of _oyer_ and _terminer_.  Prosecuting counsel
disclaimed all intention of enforcing the punishment of the gaoler, and
the facts were all admitted on the part of the county, whereupon the
special jury, _pro forma_, found the defendant guilty.

Lord Wodehouse, this month, presented to the parish church of Hingham a
stained glass window, in which were represented the subjects of the
Crucifixion, the Descent from the Cross, the Resurrection, and the
Ascension.


SEPTEMBER.


1.--Killed at the siege of San Sebastian, in his 21st year, whilst
gallantly fighting with his regiment, Lieut. George Norris, of the 47th
Regiment, eldest son of the Rev. George Norris, of Foulsham.

2.--Died, at the house of her nephew, Mr. C. P. Herbert, at Setch Bridge,
near Lynn, in her 85th year, Mrs. Stevens, "widow of Mr. George Alex.
Stevens, of facetious memory, well known as the author and performer of
the celebrated 'Lectures upon Heads,' and other pieces."

3.--At Yarmouth General Sessions and gaol delivery, before the Mayor and
Sub-Steward (Mr. W. Adair), John Boult Hannah, aged 70, was indicted for
the wilful murder of his wife by strangling her on April 14th.  "After
the murder he washed the woman's face, laid the corpse out, and was found
sitting by the fire smoking his pipe with the body near."  He was hanged
at Yarmouth on the Monday following the trial.

18.*--"The Earl of Kingston one day this week, at Heydon, bagged 56 brace
of birds for a wager with the Earl of Yarmouth for a large sum."

28.--Died, aged 80, Edward Whetstone, 44 years clerk of the parish of
Trowse Newton.  He was originally a journeyman weaver, and had acquired
some property.  He purchased and presented an organ which was placed in
the church in 1803, and his remains were interred beneath the instrument.

29.--A meeting was held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, for the purpose of
forming an association in aid of the Church Missionary Society.  The Rev.
H. J. Hare, of Docking, presided, and it was resolved that such
association be formed, and "that it be known as the Norfolk and Norwich
Church Missionary Society for Africa and the East."  Upwards of 800
pounds was subscribed.


OCTOBER.


2.--Died at Yarmouth, Mrs. Martha Biggs, widow, aged 103.

--Bannister's Equestrian Company, from Astley's Royal Amphitheatre,
commenced a season at the Pantheon, Norwich.

5.--A grand Musical Festival commenced at Norwich, under the direction of
Mr. Pettet, with a miscellaneous concert in St. Andrew's Hall.  On the
morning of the 6th, 7th, and 8th, the "Messiah," the "Creation," and the
"Redemption," were rendered in St. Peter Mancroft Church, and concerts
were given in St. Andrew's Hall on the evenings of the 7th and 8th.  The
principal performers were Mrs. Dickons, Mrs. Bianchi Lacy, Miss Booth,
Master Hobbes, Mr. Braham, Mr. Goes, Mr. Hawes, and Mr. Bellamy; leader
of the band, Professor Hague; organ and pianoforte, Mr. Pettet.

11.--Seventy of the supporters of Mr. William Smith dined at the Swan
Inn, Norwich, to celebrate his return as member for the city.

16.*--"Mrs. Faucit and Mr. Vining, both late of the Norwich Company, have
made their appearance on the boards of Covent Garden Theatre, and have
been very favourably received."

17.--The Duke of York, accompanied by the Earl of Yarmouth, passed
through Dereham on his way from Heydon, where has Royal Highness had been
shooting with the Earl of Kingston.

23.*--"In consequence of the numerous robberies which have lately been
committed in the vicinity of Norwich, it is in contemplation to establish
a horse patrol to act in various directions for the protection of
property and persons."

25.--The festival of St. Crispin and Crispianus was revived by the
journeymen shoemakers of Norwich, "who paraded the streets with music,
and celebrated the day, through the liberality of their masters, at
various houses."

28.--Died, aged 65, Mr. Edward Billingsley, of Hockwold-cum-Wilton.  He
served the office of High Sheriff in 1787.

31.--Died at New Buckenham, in her 101st year, Mrs. Mary Gibbs.  "She was
born the 5th day of May, 1713, being the day peace was proclaimed with
France in the reign of Queen Anne."


NOVEMBER.


1.--Died, at East Dereham, Dame Eleanor Fenn, widow of Sir John Fenn,
knight.  "Under the names of Mrs. Teachwell and Mrs. Lovechild, she wrote
several books for the benefit of the rising generation."  Her remains
were interred at Finningham, Suffolk.

4.--News was received at Norwich of the defeat of Buonaparte near
Leipsic.  St. Peter Mancroft bells were rung, and a bonfire lighted in
the Market Place.  There were further celebrations on the 10th on receipt
of the news of the successes in Germany, and of the surrender of the
fortress of Pamplona.

14.--A new organ was opened at Holt Church.

15.--This day was fixed for the celebration of the victories gained over
France in Spain and Germany.  At Norwich a bullock was roasted whole in
the Market Place.  The roasting commenced at nine o'clock the previous
evening (Sunday, 14th).  At noon a grand procession started from the
Castle Meadow, and, passing through the principal streets, entered the
Market Place.  "At one o'clock Mr. Lowden, the butcher, commenced to
carve the bullock, but the crowd broke over the barriers, and there was a
disgusting waste of good provision."  Six hundred 2d. loaves and ten
barrels of stout were given away.  A public dinner took place at the
Angel Inn, and in the evening a huge bonfire was lighted in the Market
Place.  Great depredations were committed in obtaining materials for the
fire, and several offenders were committed to Bridewell.  There was also
a procession of stage coaches, and an effigy of Buonaparte was burned.  A
general illumination followed.  Celebrations also took place in nearly
every town and village in the county.

16.--Died at Worlingworth, Suffolk, aged 81, Lewis Johnson, 35 years
parish clerk of St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich.  He resigned the office in
1812.

23.--Intelligence received in Norwich of a counter Revolution in Holland.

29.--Capt. Cockburn, commanding Royal Artillery in Norwich, sent to
Yarmouth 500,000 ball cartridges for the use of the Orange Patriots in
Holland.

30.--A wrestling match took place at Barford between "the noted Game
Chicken" and "the East Tuddenham champion.  There was a vast concourse of
spectators, and the odds were seven to one on the Game Chicken, who won
with the greatest ease, and was offered to be backed for 100 guineas
against any 11 stone man in England."


DECEMBER.


4.*--"Among the officers severely wounded in the late action in Bayonne
were Lieut. James Day, of the Royal Horse Artillery, son of Mr. M. S.
Day, jun., of Norwich, and Lieut. Charles Eaton, second battalion, 95th
Regiment, son of the Rev. Eaton Browne, of Elsing."

18.--Eight French officers, taken prisoners at Cuxhaven, arrived at
Norwich by steam barge from Yarmouth, on parole, and on the 20th left for
Chesterfield.  In a letter to the Mayor they acknowledged, in warm terms,
the kindness they had received from the citizens of Norwich.

19.--The Expedition coach arrived at Norwich with the intelligence of the
defeat of Marshal Soult by the Marquis Wellington.



1814.


JANUARY.


1.--A remarkable funeral took place at Shelfanger.  The body of Mr.
Smith, a farmer, was conveyed from Fersfield in a waggon drawn by his own
team.  The coffin was covered with a waggon tilt, and sacks of straw
served as seats for his children and grandchildren.  Behind the waggon
walked his riding horse as chief mourner, and the singers of the
congregation chanted a funeral dirge.  "He was a person who in habits,
manners, and opinions exhibited a singularity that was not easily
paralleled."

4.--Died at St. Gregory's, Norwich, aged 61, Mrs. Chesnutt, wife of Mr.
John Chesnutt.  For many years she was a favourite dancer on the Norwich
stage.

--At a special assembly of the Corporation of Norwich, it was decided to
present to the Prince Regent an address, congratulating him upon "the
late glorious victories with which the Almighty had been pleased to crown
the arms of his Majesty and his Allies."

5.--Died, of wounds received at Bayonne, Ensign Hardy, 31st Regiment of
Foot, son of Mr. James Hardy, of Hethersettt.

6.--Died, at his house at Catton, Mr. Jeremiah Ives Harvey, Alderman of
Conisford Ward, Norwich.  He served the office of Sheriff in 1779, and
was Mayor in 1783.  He was in his 69th year.

7.--A curious incident occurred at the funeral of Benjamin Edwards, for
20 years coachman to Lord Suffield at Blickling.  "The corpse was
conveyed from the house to the church for interment, followed by thirty
servants in their liveries.  After the Rev. Mr. Churchill had retired
from the grave an old acquaintance came forward and performed a promise
which had been made by each party, which was done as follows:--He
enquired his age, and was informed it was 64.  He then took a bottle of
rum from his pocket and threw it upon the head of the coffin.  From the
fall the bottle broke and the rum was distributed upon the lid of the
coffin.  He said 'God bless him.  I have performed my promise as I am
sure he would have done had I gone first.'"

8.*--"A few days since the harriers of Mr. J. Gooch unexpectedly found an
outlying deer in Hempnall Wood, which they immediately drove from covert,
and it afforded a most capital chase without a break for an hour and
forty minutes, through sixteen parishes and a hard run of 28 miles."

--*"Lieut. Robert Blake, of the 3rd Regiment of Foot, was so severely
wounded in the action near Bayonne that he had his leg amputated."

9.--Very severe weather was experienced this month.  On the 9th at nine
p.m. the thermometer fell 20 degrees below freezing point, and the
severity of the frost rendered the river impassable between Norwich and
Yarmouth.  On the 19th occurred a heavy fall of snow, which blocked the
roads and prevented traffic.  The mail bags were brought to Norwich on
horseback; the London waggons which should have arrived on the 19th came
in on the evening of the 20th, drawn by teams of twelve or fourteen
horses.  Carriers who had arrived in the city were unable to return; the
Yarmouth coach was preceded by an empty waggon which, drawn by six
horses, made a road for it.  A second sharp frost occurred on February
15th, and continued to the 25th, when the thermometer registered 17
degrees below freezing point.

10.--Mr. Crisp Brown was elected an Alderman for Coslany Ward, Norwich,
in place of Mr. Jeremiah Ives Harvey, deceased.

13.--A general thanksgiving took place for the late victories.  The Mayor
and Corporation of Norwich attended service at the Cathedral, and at the
various churches and chapels in the city collections were made for the
poor.

--The portrait of Mr. T. W. Coke, M.P., painted by Sir Thomas Lawrence,
was presented to the county magistrates by the subscribers, and placed in
the Grand Jury chamber at the Shirehouse, Norwich.

26.--At a meeting held at the Guildhall, Norwich, presided over by Mr.
Steward Alderson, it was decided to establish a similar society to the
Norwich Benevolent Society, but upon a more extensive and permanent plan.
Visitors were appointed for each parish, and 2,400 pounds was raised.

--News was received at Norwich of the conclusion of Peace between this
country and Denmark, and St. Peter Mancroft bells were rung in
celebration.

29.--A main of cocks was fought at the Swan Inn, Norwich, between the
gentlemen of Cambridgeshire and the gentlemen of Norwich, for 10 guineas
a battle and 100 guineas the odd.  Cambridgeshire won with five battles
to the good.


FEBRUARY.


5.--Died at Scratby Hall, the Countess Dowager Home, aged 68.

--*"At the last General Quarter Sessions of the peace for the borough of
Lynn, before Mr. Robert Bevill, Recorder, Mrs. Ann Clarke received the
awful sentence of death for wilfully and maliciously attempting to stab
her husband, Mr. W. Clarke, a ship master, with intention to murder him."
The prisoner was afterwards reprieved, and the sentence commuted to
transportation for life.

--Arrived at Yarmouth, Capt. Spencer, of that port, who had escaped from
France, where he had for four years been a prisoner of war in the
fortress of Bitche.

18.--Died, at Hethel Hall, in his 89th year, Sir Thomas Beevor, Bart.  An
active magistrate for more than half a century, he was created baronet
during the Whig administration of the Duke of Portland in 1783.

--Died, at Walsham, Suffolk, aged 69, the Very Rev. Coombe Miller, Dean
of Chichester and rector of Winfarthing and Snetterton.  He was buried at
Eccles, near Attleborough.

22.--The Corporation of Norwich subscribed 100 pounds to the fund for
relieving the distresses of the unfortunate sufferers in Germany.

26.--In the Arches Court, Doctors' Commons, was heard a cause for the
restitution of conjugal rights promoted by Mr. (afterwards Sir) Thomas
Beevor, of Mangreen Hall, against Ann Beevor.  The parties were married
at the parish church, Hargham, on August 24th, 1795, and cohabited
together until June 30th, 1802, when Mrs. Beevor left her husband's
house, and some time after promoted a suit of divorce or separation by
reason of his cruelty.  In that suit Mr. Beevor was dismissed from the
cause.  In this case the court admonished Mrs. Beevor to return again to
the society of her husband.

28.--Died at Cardiff, Lieut. W. H. Clifford, husband of Mrs. Clifford, of
the Norwich Theatre.


MARCH.


1.--On the information of Joseph Stannard, a Norwich printer, named
Stewardson, was fined "for omitting to affix his name to a song printed
by him."  (See July 12th, 1814.)

11.--Died, at his house in Welbeck Street, London, Mr. Henry Jodrell, of
Bayfield Hall, who was for many years Recorder and Member of Parliament
for Yarmouth, and one of the chairmen of Norfolk Quarter Sessions.

12.*--"Died, last week, at Woodbridge, Mrs. Fisher, wife of Mr. Fisher,
manager of the Norfolk and Suffolk Theatrical Company."

15.--Died, at Bath, aged 34, Mr. R. Harley Cushing, comedian, a native of
Norwich.

18.--The Newmarket mail arrived at Norwich, with the horses decorated
with laurel, bringing confirmation of the intelligence in the "Hague
Gazette," of Marshal Blucher's victory over the French on March 9th.  The
bells of St. Peter Mancroft were rung.

21.--At the Norfolk Assizes, held at Thetford, before Mr. Justice Heath,
the action Mann _v._ Carroll and others was tried.  The plaintiff was
master of the Red Lion Inn, Thetford, and the defendants executors of the
late Mr. James Mingay, Member of Parliament for the borough.  The claim
was for 338 pounds 15s. 5d., the amount of certain expenses incurred at
plaintiff's house at the General Election of 1806, including a dinner on
the polling day, and a ball and supper on the following evening.  Mr.
Mingay and Lord William Fitzroy were returned, but the former had been
unseated, and several questions arose as to his personal liability:
first, whether or not any assumpsit could be fixed upon him at all;
second, whether or not he was liable for the whole; third, whether he was
or not jointly liable with his colleague; and fourth, whether or not upon
the event of his death such liability vested in the survivor, absolving
the personal representatives of the deceased.  The defendants endeavoured
to show that the expense of the entertainments was incurred by the
Corporation of Thetford, and that Mr. Mingay took part as a guest and not
as lord of the feast.  The Judge held that Mr. Mingay "was personally
liable from having partaken of the entertainments, it having been decided
in many cases that in all public feasts the individuals present were
jointly and severally liable for the whole expense incurred."  A verdict
was given for the plaintiff for the full amount, subject to a reference
as to the items of the bill.

--At the same Assizes Robert Trundle and Rosetta Trundle were criminally
indicted for forging a writing purporting to be the will of Mary Inalls,
of Great Dunham, and for suborning witnesses to prove the due execution
of such writing to affect the disposition of the property of the deceased
with intent thereby to defraud the next of kin.  The document had been
proved as a will in the Archdeaconry Court of Norwich on July 17th, 1812,
and was drawn in favour of the prisoners.  The Judge thought there was
not sufficient evidence of forgery, and under his direction the jury
acquitted the accused.

24.--The Dutch Regiment, about 600 strong, which had been formed at
Yarmouth, embarked in three transports from that port for Holland.

25.--Died, at Barnbougle Castle, his lordship's seat in Linlithgow, in
his 86th year, the Right Hon. Neil Earl of Rosebery, K.T.  He married
first, in 1764, Susan, only sister and heiress of Sir Randal Ward, Bart.,
of Bixley, who died in 1771, without issue, and secondly, in 1775, Mary,
daughter of Sir Francis Vincent, Bart., by whom he had two sons and three
daughters.

26.*--"Lieut.-Col. Harvey, acting Quarter-Master-General of the column of
Lord Wellington's army which fought in the battle of St. Boes, and had
the brunt of the late actions, escaped unhurt.  Lieut.-Col. Kerrison, of
the 7th Hussars, greatly distinguished himself in the late actions.  He
seized the opportunity of charging the French infantry in disorder and
flight, taking a great many of them.  This regiment took about 600
prisoners.  The whole army was witness of this affair with whom it is a
subject of admiration."


APRIL.


2.*--"Mr. William George Daniel, of Folly House, Kent, and of Foulden
Hall, in this county, a captain in the Army, and lord of the manor of
Hackney, in the county of Middlesex, takes the surname and arms of
Tyssen."

6.--With colours flying and the passengers decorated with the white
cockade, the Newmarket mail brought to Norwich news of the entry of the
Allied Army into Paris on March 31st.  The church bells were rung, and a
bonfire lighted in the Market Place.  The rejoicings were renewed on the
9th, 10th, and 11th, upon the receipt of the intelligence of the counter
Revolution, Buonaparte's abdication, and the restoration of the Bourbons.
On the last mentioned day the horses were removed from the mail coach,
and the people dragged it thrice round the Market Place.  The Chevalier
De Bardelin, a French emigrant gentleman, formerly in the service of the
King of France, left Norwich, where he had resided 15 years, to accompany
Louis XVIII. to Paris.

9.--The Rev. T. C. Munnings, of Gorgate Hall, East Dereham, exhibited at
Norwich Market specimens of his "preserved turnips."  He introduced the
plan of earthing up the roots in November and December for consumption in
March and April.

11.--Miss Binfield, of the Norwich Theatre, was elected organist of St.
Mary-le-Tower Church, Ipswich.

16.*--"Mr. G. G. Lowne, a native of Norwich, who was taken prisoner on
board his Majesty's ship Shannon, when that frigate was wrecked on the
rocks of La Hogue in December, 1803, lately arrived here, having made his
escape from close confinement at Cambay on the approach of the Allies to
that part of the French frontiers."

19.--A grand _fete_ was held at Yarmouth in honour of the victories.  It
commenced with a pageant called "The Triumph of Neptune."  The "sea god"
landed upon the beach and headed a procession round the town.  In the
procession was an effigy of Buonaparte in fetters.  "Afterwards 58 tables
were laid on the Quay from north to south, each accommodating from 120 to
150 persons, to whom roast beef and plum pudding were served."  After
dinner there was a naval procession to the Denes, where donkey races and
other sports took place; a bonfire concluded the day's rejoicings.  The
public subscription to defray the cost of the celebration exceeded 1,000
pounds.

23.*--"The Earl of Home takes the surname of Ramey in addition to that of
Home, in compliance with a condition contained in the will of his
maternal grandfather, Mr. John Ramey, of Yarmouth."

--*"Died last week, aged 83, Mr. William Cutting, formerly a
manufacturer, of Norwich, who served the office of Sheriff in 1790."

--*"Died last week, at Oakingham, Berks., aged 63, John Waddy, late of
Covent Garden, and formerly of Norwich Theatre."

29.--An organ erected in St. Stephen's Church, Norwich, by Mr. England,
was opened by Mr. Pettet.  Mrs. Solomon and Mr. C. Smith were the
vocalists, who also took part in a concert held in the evening at
Noverre's Room, St. Michael-at-Plea.


MAY.


1.--This day (Sunday), being May Day, "came on agreeably to charter," the
election of Mayor of Norwich.  The polling continued throughout Sunday
and Monday.  At seven o'clock on Sunday evening the votes recorded were:
Alderman Robberds, 762; Alderman Davey, 616; Alderman Back, 508; Alderman
Patteson, 170.  "The majority for Alderman Davey over Alderman Back being
108, the friends of the latter demanded that the books should be opened
again next morning."  The second day's poll was closed by agreement at 12
o'clock, when the result was declared as follows: Davey, 757; Robberds,
919; Patteson, 180; Back, 763.  A scrutiny was demanded on behalf of Mr.
Davey.  It commenced on the 12th and continued till the 19th, when Mr.
Davey withdrew.  Mr. Robberds and Mr. Back were then returned to the
Court of Aldermen, by whom the former was elected to the office of Mayor.

5.--Mr. Fitzgerald, a favourite actor in the Norwich Company, appeared as
Shylock, and delivered a farewell address, on leaving the circuit for the
Theatre Royal at Hull and York, of which he was appointed patentee.

7.*--(Advt.)  "Stoke Mills near Norwich.  Jeremiah Colman having taken
the stock and trade lately carried on by Mr. Edward Ames, respectfully
informs his customers and the public in general that he will continue the
manufacturing of mustard, and he takes leave to assure those who may be
pleased to favour him with their orders that they shall be supplied in
such a manner as cannot fail to secure their approbation."

17.--At a special assembly of the Corporation of Norwich it was resolved
to petition Parliament against the proposed alteration in the Corn Laws.

18.--Thorpe Asylum was opened for the reception of forty male pauper
lunatics.

19.--The minister, churchwardens, and principal inhabitants of St.
Giles', Norwich, went the bounds of the parish, and afterwards dined at
the Woolpack Inn.  "Ale, buns, and bumps were distributed among the
attendants, one of whom swam across the basin in Chapel Field to observe
the line of demarkation between St. Peter's parish for which he received
half a crown."

21.*--"The long depending wrestling match between Lock and the Game
Chicken was lately decided in favour of the former after a severe contest
of a quarter of an hour."

24.--A _fete_ in celebration of the victories commenced at Thetford.  A
procession escorting an effigy of Buonaparte "loaded with irons" went
round the town, and a ball took place in the evening.  On the 26th 1,500
persons were entertained at dinner in a paddock.  The Mayor presided, and
the Bishop of Norwich witnessed the proceedings.  Sports were held, and
at night a bonfire was lighted, and the effigy of Buonaparte consumed in
the flames.

The death took place at Oulton, this month, of Mrs. Margaret Dent, at the
age of 100.


JUNE.


1.--Died in London, aged 53, Mr. Robert Herring, of Bracondale, Norwich.
He was alderman for South Conisford Ward, served the office of Sheriff in
1791, and was Mayor in 1807.  Mr. Thomas Thurtell, of Lakenham, was
elected to the vacant aldermanship on June 6th.

--A public meeting was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, when resolutions
were moved by Mr. E. Taylor in opposition to the Corn Bill.  The
resolutions, which were unanimously adopted, represented that the
citizens had for twenty years suffered great privations and hardships
from the advance in price of all necessaries of life, and particularly of
"bread corn," that they viewed with alarm the measure introduced in
Parliament as calculated to raise the price of grain; and that the
proposed alterations in the Corn Laws were ill-timed, unwise, and
oppressive.--The "Bill for Regulating the Importation Duties" was
defeated in the House of Commons by a majority of ten on June 6th, and on
the arrival of the intelligence by the Newmarket mail on the 8th, the
horses were removed from the coach, which was drawn for three hours
through the streets.  Persons with large loaves of bread on their heads
were on the box seat, bells were rung, and pistols fired, and at midnight
a bonfire was lighted in the Market Place, and many depredations were
committed by those who obtained the materials with which to feed the
flames.

3.--The Expedition coach arrived at Norwich with news of the definite
Treaty of Peace, which was signed in Paris on the 30th ult.  Amid great
rejoicings the people dragged the coach four times round the Market
Place, and through the principal streets.  On the 15th 500 freemen of the
Long Ward were entertained by Mr. S. Mitchell to a dinner of roast beef
at Harper's Gardens; on the 16th the Mayor entertained the parochial
poor, and there was a grand illumination in the evening.  Peace was
formally proclaimed on the 27th by the Mayor and Corporation walking in
procession to various parts of the city.  Before being admitted to the
Close the Mayor knocked thrice at the gate, and informed Mr. J. Kitson,
the Bishop's registrar, that admittance was asked by virtue of his
Majesty's writ.  The proclamation was then made in the Cathedral
precincts, and on returning to the Guildhall the Corporation partook of
refreshments.  Mr. Sheriff Higgins entertained the company to dinner at
his house in Pitt Street, and also feasted the poor.  Thanksgiving
services were held on July 7th, and 723 charity children were entertained
in St. Andrew's Hall.  On the 20th at a quarterly assembly of the
Corporation an address was voted to the Prince Regent congratulating him
on "the highly honourable and auspicious Peace concluded with France."

20.--Mr. Robert Partridge, alderman, presented to the Corporation of
Norwich "an elegant tripod in the Grecian style, to support a silver
candelabrum of three lights, surmounted with the figures of St. George
and the Dragon," given by him in 1786.

21.--Guild Day was held in the "old style" at Norwich by Mr. J. W.
Robberds on his being sworn in as Mayor.  The feast at St. Andrew's Hall
was attended by upwards of 500 guests, and a ball took place in the
evening at Chapel Field House.

22.--A Musical Festival, "in celebration of the Peace," commenced at the
church of St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich, with a performance of "Judas
Maccabaeus."  The "Messiah" was given on the 23rd, and a selection of
sacred music on the 24th.  On each evening a miscellaneous concert took
place in St. Andrew's Hall.  The principal performers were Madame
Catalani, Miss Stephens, Miss Booth, Mr. Braham, Mr. Garbett, Mr. Turner,
and Mr. Welsh; leader of the band, Dr. Hague; organ and pianoforte, Mr.
Beckwith.


JULY.


1.--A meeting, presided over by the Mayor, was held at St. Andrew's Hall,
Norwich, when resolutions were passed in favour of the abolition of the
African slave trade, and it was decided to petition the House of Commons
to the same effect.  The opponents of the resolutions moved, as an
amendment, that the Prince Regent was the only person to be addressed
pending the negociations with France upon the subject.  The resolutions
were adopted by large majorities.

2.*--"Capt. Matthias, of Stanhoe Hall, has returned to his family in
perfect health after being a prisoner in France ten and a half years."

4.--Holkham Sheep Shearing commenced on this date, a fortnight later than
usual owing to the Peace celebrations in Norwich and the county.  "None
of the implements possessed sufficient merit to entitle the inventor to
the handsome premium offered by Mr. Coke."

6.--Peace was proclaimed at Yarmouth by the Mayor and Corporation going
in procession through the town.  At night there was a general
illumination.

7.--Peace was proclaimed at King's Lynn.

12.--At the Norwich Quarter Sessions the case of the King _v._ Griggs was
tried.  This was a prosecution at the suit of Mr. Joseph Stannard, a pork
butcher, against the defendant, a dealer, for the publication of a libel
in the form of a song, entitled "Soup Meagre Joe."  The song reflected on
the quality of the soup made by Mr. Stannard, at the request of a Mr.
Mitchell, for distribution among the poor of the city during the severe
weather in February, 1814.  It was stated that the prosecutor neither
received nor expected remuneration.  His beneficence was rewarded by
gross insults from the mob, by assaults, by placards in the streets, by
anonymous letters, and by songs which were sung by "Blind Peter" and
another ballad singer.  One of these songs was printed by Mr. Stewardson
from MS. furnished by the defendant.  The jury, after four hours'
deliberation, returned a verdict of guilty, and the defendant was fined
10 pounds.

13.--The first division of West Norfolk Militia, under the command of
Col. Nelthorpe, marched into Norwich, from Yarmouth, where they had
landed the previous morning from the Tickler cutter, and four Berwick
traders from Leith.  St. Peter's bells were rung, and the men received
the hearty congratulations of the citizens.  The second division arrived
on the 16th, commanded by Major Barnham.  On the 18th the Earl of Orford,
colonel of the regiment, entertained the officers and their friends at
the Maid's Head Inn.  The regiment on the 19th received the thanks of the
House of Commons for their services.

19.--Died at Long Stratton, aged 60, the Rev. William D'Oyly, for more
than 20 years curate of Stratton St. Michael and Flordon with Hapton.  He
raised a fund of nearly 500 pounds by small subscriptions for widening
and improving Briggs' Lane, Norwich.

23.--Capt. William Hoste, R.N., was created a Baronet.

28.--Dr. James Edward Smith, of Norwich, founder and President of the
Linnean Society, presented to the Prince Regent a set of the Transactions
of the Society, and received, on the recommendation of Lord Sidmouth, the
honour of knighthood.

30.*--"The four sons of Mr. C. E. Bagge, M.P., late of Quebec House,
Dereham, are authorised to take the name and arms of Lee Warner instead
of Bagge."


AUGUST.


8.--The Mayor and Court of Aldermen visited the annual exhibition of the
Norwich Society of Artists.

11.--The Hon. John Wodehouse, as foreman of the Grand Jury at the Norfolk
Assizes, proposed, and Mr. T. W. Coke, M.P., seconded, resolutions
recommending that a subscription be opened for the erection of a monument
to the memory of Lord Nelson.  At a meeting of the Norwich Corporation on
October 22nd it was resolved that the city subscribe 200 pounds, and the
Speaker was requested to attend the county meeting, and urge that the
monument be erected on the Castle Hill "or some other commanding
situation in or near the city."  At the county meeting, held the same
week, it was announced that the subscriptions amounted to 5,138 pounds.
At a meeting held at the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, on January 14th, 1815,
it was resolved that the monument be erected at Yarmouth.  The committee,
at a meeting held during the Norfolk Assizes at Thetford on March 29th,
1815, after inspecting 44 plans and designs, "selected an Athenian Doric
column sent by Mr. William Wilkins, architect, of London, a native of
Norwich, and author of 'Magna Graecia.'"  Nearly 7,000 pounds was
subscribed.

14.--Died, in Parliament Place, London, aged 85, Mr. E. H. Delaval, of
Seaton Delaval, Northumberland, and of Hoddington, Lincolnshire.  "By his
death the mansion house of Seaton Delaval, and the family estate of the
late Lord Delaval, has devolved upon Sir Jacob Henry Astley, Bart., M.P.,
for Norfolk, whose mother was his lordship's eldest sister."

20.*--"The officers of the 7th Hussars have presented Col. Kerrison with
a piece of plate, of the value of 200 guineas, in testimony of their
admiration of his gallantry at the battle of Orthes."

22.--Races were held at Cromer, which at the time was very full of
company, and the "new subscription room" and dances a great attraction to
many distinguished visitors.  "From the course being in the immediate
neighbourhood of Gunton and Blickling," it was expected that Cromer races
would "soon vie with those of Yarmouth, &c."

30.--Mr. William Burt and Mr. R. Hawkes were candidates for the office of
freemen's Sheriff at Norwich.  The former was returned with 810 votes as
against 726 polled by his opponent.  It was stated that "so severe a
contest at the election of Sheriff had not taken place since 1781."


SEPTEMBER.


11.--Died, at Hoveton House, aged 85, Mr. Anthony Aufrere, for fifty
years an active magistrate in the county.

13.--The portrait of Mr. William Smith, M.P. (painted by Thompson), was
placed in St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich.

17.--Capt. Robert D. Patteson, 6th Regiment of Foot, second son of Mr.
John Patteson, of Norwich, was killed during the sortie made by the
American troops from Fort Erie.

--*"Last week a single wicket match was played at Downham Market for a
considerable sum between Mr. William Griggs, of Stow Bardolph, and Mr.
James Hall, of Downham.  Griggs, 8-37; Hall, 11-9."

26.--Died at Hadleigh, aged 34, Henry Reeve, M.D., one of the physicians
of the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital, and of the Bethel Hospital, Norwich.

28.--A peal of six bells, purchased by public subscription in celebration
of the Peace, was opened at New Buckenham.  The bells were cast by
Dobson, of Downham Market, and the tenor weighed 12 cwt.  "A prize of six
hats, value 10s. each, was given to the company who gave proof of their
skill in ringing the best peal."  The Hopton company were declared
winners, a distinction which was warmly contested by the Norwich men.

29.--Died, in St. Giles', Norwich, aged 85, the Rev. Thomas Howes, rector
of Morningthorpe, and of Thorndon, Suffolk.  "He was a profound scholar,
and a formidable antagonist with Bishop Horsley of Dr. Priestley in the
Tractarian controversy in 1781.  He was also the author of several
theological works."


OCTOBER.


17.--Mr. Thomas Coldwell, coach proprietor of Norwich, was presented by
the Corporation with the freedom of the city in recognition of his
services in forwarding the mails to and from Norwich during the severe
weather of the previous winter.

19.--At the Norfolk Quarter Sessions, "the justices having regard of the
present high price of hay and oats," ordered the following additional
rates of allowance to be made in the county to persons who provided
carriages for the conveyance of his Majesty's forces in their marches, or
for their arms, clothing, or accoutrements: 1s. for every mile any waggon
with four or more horses, or any wain with six oxen, or with four oxen
and two horses and their driver; 9d. for every mile any cart with four
horses, or carrying not less than 15 cwt.; and 6d. for every mile any
cart or carriage with less than four horses, and not carrying 15 cwt.

20.--Mr. Samuel Wesley, the eminent organist, gave a recital at the
church of St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich.

21.--The Castle Corporation at Norwich celebrated its jubilee.  The first
meeting was held at the Bell Inn, Orford Hill, in 1764, under the name of
the Bell Corporation, and "was governed by a Mayor, Sheriffs, and
Aldermen, and the usual officers attached to a Corporation."  In 1793 the
members were "much divided on the politics of the day, and particularly
upon the French Revolution."  The society then separated into two
political parties, "when those who viewed with horror the proceedings of
the French Convention, and the attempts made by the correspondents to
bring about a revolution in this country," removed to the Castle Inn,
assumed the name of the Castle Corporation, and espoused the principles
of Pitt.  At this dinner Mr. Charles Harvey, M.P., presented to and
invested the "Mayor" (Mr. Crisp Brown) with a medallion containing a
cameo likeness of Pitt.

22.--Four troops of the 5th Dragoon Guards marched into Norwich and
occupied the Cavalry Barracks, whence the detachment of Royal Artillery
was removed to the Infantry Barracks in St. Michael at Coslany.

29.--For an attempted felony, Charles Pegg stood in the city pillory in
Norwich Market Place for one hour.  "The hoary-headed culprit was taken
back to the City Gaol."


NOVEMBER.


20.--Died, aged 74, James Church, sexton of St. Peter Permountergate,
Norwich.  "He had held the situation near fifty years, and buried upwards
of 3,000 persons."

22.--Died, at Eaton Hall, in his 55th year, Mr. Jonathan Davey, alderman
of Norwich.  Mr. Nathaniel Bolingbroke was elected in his place alderman
of Colegate Ward.

23.--Died, at Costessey (at the seat of his nephew, Sir George
Jerningham), General Jerningham, who was born in 1742, entered the
service of France, and became colonel commandant of several of the Irish
regiments.  At the Revolution he returned home, where he remained until
the Peace of Amiens in 1802, when he again proceeded to France.  Unable
to recover his property there, he was, on the renewal of hostilities in
1803, by order of Bonaparte, detained a prisoner with the rest of his
countrymen, and it was only on the King's restoration that he was
released.

26.*--"Tower half-pence being refused to be taken in exchange, Mr. Smith,
M.P., has written to the Mint, who have agreed to accept them under
certain conditions."

28.--Four troops of the 5th Dragoon Guards marched from Norwich for
Ipswich.  A troop of the Duke of Brunswick's Oels marched in on December
2.


DECEMBER.


9.--A riot was occasioned at King's Lynn by sailors who, with a number of
other persons, forcibly took a portion of the crew from a vessel about to
sail, and demanded a general rise of wages.  The Brunswick Hussars from
Norwich and the Freebridge and Lynn Legion speedily put an end to the
tumult, and three of the rioters were taken to Norwich Castle under
cavalry escort.  At the Norfolk Assizes, held at Norwich in July, 1815,
the offenders were sentenced to two months' imprisonment.

12.--The Duke of Gloucester left Holkham Hall after a week's visit to Mr.
T. W. Coke, M.P.

13.--The new tenor bell for St. Peter Mancroft church, Norwich, was
deposited in the tower preparatory to its being hung in place of the old
one, which had been taken down and broken up.  The new bell was
inscribed, "To the King, Queen, and Royal Family, this harmonious peal of
12 bells is dedicated.  Thomas Mears, London, fecit, 1814."  The weight
was 42 cwt., 2 qrs., or about 28 lbs. heavier than its predecessor.

21.--Gas light was introduced at the shop of Mr. Harrison, the Market
Place, Norwich.  "Sixteen brilliant lights were kept burning for five
hours at the trifling expense of 9d. in coals.  The gas is conveyed from
a small fireplace in the kitchen through tubes into branches."

31.*--"The Prince Regent has been pleased to grant the dignity of a
baronet to Mr. Thomas Preston, of Beeston St. Lawrence."



1815.


JANUARY.


6.--At Brighton Pavilion the Prince Regent conferred the honour of
knighthood on Colonel Kerrison, 7th Hussars.

12.--Mr. Crisp Brown, as "Mayor" of the Castle Corporation, Norwich,
presented to Mr. Thomas Back a silver vase in recognition of his "zealous
and liberal support of the loyal and constitutional principles of the
society."

13.--At a public meeting held at the Guildhall, Norwich, presided over by
the Mayor, it was unanimously resolved to petition Parliament against the
continuance of the Property Tax under any modification whatever.  Both
Members for the city supported the resolutions.  A meeting of the owners
of estates, and other contributors to the Property Tax, in Norfolk, took
place at the Shirehouse under the presidency of the High Sheriff.
Similar resolutions were adopted on the ground that the tax was "unjust,
unequal, and inquisitorial."  At Yarmouth, Lynn, and other towns in the
county like protests were made.

14.--Equestrian performances were given at Norwich Theatre for a short
season, commencing on this date.  The "beautiful and surprising troop of
horses" appeared in the dramatic spectacles of "Timour, the Tartar,"
"Blue Beard," "The Tiger Horde," and "Lodorska."

--*"All those who have witnessed the performance of Mons. du Pain, at the
Angel Inn, Norwich, particularly his emersing his hands and feet in
boiling lead, express their astonishment at his feats, and the room is
crowded every day."

--*"Died, lately at Lynn, aged 70, Mr. William Munsen, who pursued the
employment of a shoeblack.  He was reported to be the illegitimate son of
a nobleman, and would never accept offers of pecuniary assistance which
were secretly made to him by his unknown parents.  He supported himself
for 50 years by his humble employment, and was generally known as "Billy
Boots."  (A detailed account of this individual was compiled by Hone from
the notice in the NORFOLK CHRONICLE.)

16.--The fifth great main of cocks between the gentlemen of Norwich and
the gentlemen of Cambridgeshire commenced at the White Swan Inn, Norwich,
and after a sharp contest, which lasted the two following days, was won
by the home representatives by a single battle.  Betting was in favour of
Cambridgeshire.

21.*--"The game bull which has been frequently baited near Carrow Abbey
is a very gentle animal, but no dog has yet been found that can pin him
down."

24.--A prize fight took place between Pegg, "the noted bruiser," and Fox,
a horse dealer, of Costessey.  "It lasted an hour, when the former
received such a 'pegging' that he was carried off in a state of
insensibility."

--A sea eagle, measuring seven feet six inches from tip to tip of its
expanded wings, and three feet from the crown of its head to the end of
its tail, was killed at Rollesby.


FEBRUARY.


4.*--"Messrs. Mackie, of Norwich, in a very handsome and public-spirited
manner, have presented the trustees of Carrow Bridge with nearly 500
plants of the Coerulean willow, and have also been at the whole expense
of planting them on each side of the road leading towards Thorpe."

7.--The new Theatre at Lynn was opened under the management of Mr. John
Brunton with "Lovers' Vows" and "Raising the Wind."  In addition to the
manager, the company included Mr. Foote, of the Theatre Royal, Dublin;
Mr. and Mrs. Hall, from the Theatre Royal, York; Mr. Tokeby, Mr. Renaud,
Mr. Gomery, and Mrs. Grove, of the Theatre Royal, Haymarket.  On the 9th
Mr. C. Kemble appeared as Macbeth; on the 11th, Miss Eliza Brunton made
"her first appearance on any stage" as Desdemona to Mr. Kemble's Othello;
and on March 25th Mrs. Jordan appeared as Widow Cheerley in "The
Soldier's Daughter," and on succeeding evenings as Miss Hoyden in "The
Trip to Scarborough," as Widow Belmour, and as Nell in "The Devil to
Pay."  A brilliant season terminated on April 18th.  It was said that "in
beauty, simplicity, and correctness of style" this house could "hold
competition with any theatre out of the Metropolis."

9.--Fifty thousand persons assembled to witness a balloon ascent by a Mr.
Steward from the Prussia Gardens, Norwich.  The balloon rose a short
distance and fell in Messrs. Mackie's nursery grounds, went up again and
descended in a garden.  The mob rushed in, tore the balloon to pieces,
and would have roughly handled the aeronaut but for General Money taking
him into his carriage and conveying him to a place of safety.  A public
subscription had been opened for some weeks previously to defray the cost
of the ascent; and another list was started to recoup Mr. Steward his
loss.

27.--A cocking match took place at the Lobster Inn, St. John
Maddermarket, Norwich, between North Walsham and Norwich.  Feeders: Lamb,
for North Walsham; Stafford, for Norwich.


MARCH.


1.--The poor freemen of Great Wymer Ward, Norwich, presented a silver
cup, of the value of 50 guineas, to Mr. Samuel Mitchell, one of the
nominees of the ward.

--A match was decided at Blickling Park between three horses belonging
respectively to Mr. Sheppard and Mr. Roper, of Coleby, and Mr. Wright, of
Aylsham.  The best of three one mile heats was won by Mr. Sheppard's
horse.  A second race between two horses, the property of Mr. Gay, of
Oulton, and Mr. Smith, of Aylsham, was won by the former.

4.--Died, at Drayton, Sarah Codenham, aged 105.  "This poor woman had
been so long in poverty and affliction that, according to the overseer's
calculation, she had cost them 500 pounds."

8.--At a meeting held at the Guildhall, and presided over by the Mayor,
it was resolved to petition the House of Lords against the Corn Bill,
which had been passed by the House of Commons by a majority of 119.  (The
Bill was passed by the Lords and received the Royal Assent on the 23rd.)

15.--The Expedition coach arrived in Norwich "with the gratifying account
displayed in large letters on its panels" of the ratification of the
Treaty of Peace with America.  The bells of St. Peter Mancroft were rung,
and a bonfire was lighted in the Market Place.

17.--Mr. T. W. Coke, M.P., Lord Albemarle, and other gentlemen, while
attending a cattle show held on the Castle Ditches, Norwich, by the
Norfolk Agricultural Association, were attacked by a mob in consequence
of their supposed support of the Corn Bill before the House of Commons.
The mob drove them into the Angel yard, and it was not until the
Brunswick Hussars had been called out, and the Riot Act read, that the
disturbance was quelled.  By strategy Mr. Coke and his friends escaped
through the back gate of the Angel Inn and drove to Quidenham Hall.  Some
of the rioters were apprehended, and one of the Brunswickers was wounded
by a stone.  The Mayor and magistrates of Norwich received the
commendations of Government for their activity and exertions in
suppressing the disturbance.  The Grand Jury at the Norfolk Assizes, held
at Thetford on March 29th, resolved "to enter into a subscription to
bring to justice the instigators of the late premeditated attack on Mr.
Coke and other gentlemen."  On May 2nd the Corporation of Norwich
accorded their thanks to Col. Von Tempsky and the officers and privates
of the Brunswick Hussars for their prompt assistance in quelling the
riot.

--A curious race took place in Chapel Field, Norwich.  The competitors
were Thomas Jenner and William Palmer, "two men with two wooden legs
each."  The wager of 1 pound was won by the former.

25.--In the official year, ending this date, Norfolk (including Norwich)
raised the sum of 219,238 pounds 10s. 1d. for the poor, church rate,
highway rates, &c.

27.--At the Norfolk Assizes, which commenced at Thetford on this date,
before Mr. Justice Heath, a curious case, the King _v._ Garratt, was
heard.  This was a criminal indictment which had been moved by
_certiorari_ into the Court of King's Bench, and was tried at _nisi
prius_.  "It was for a nuisance complained of by the exposition of a
stallion in the public market of East Dereham."  The Judge was of opinion
that the mere fact of leading a stallion to market was not an offence
indictable at law, and the defendant was acquitted.

A number of human bones and upwards of 20 urns, containing bones in a
calcined state, were this month dug up at a farm at Markshall, adjoining
the Roman camp at Caister, near Norwich.


APRIL.


6.--A new farce ("written by an eminent artist resident in the city"),
founded upon the story of "John Gilpin," and interspersed with music, was
produced at the Theatre Royal, Norwich.  On the 17th another new
production was staged, "an historical operatic drama in two acts, called
'The Rebellion, or Norwich in 1549,'" by Mr. George P. Bromley, a member
of the Norwich Company.

22.--Died, at his son's house in Weymouth Street, London, aged 67, Mr.
William Wilkins, of Newnham, near Cambridge, patentee of the Norwich
Theatre Royal.

--The staff of the West Norfolk Militia, stationed in Norwich, received
orders to raise men by beat of drum instead of by ballot.  Recruiting
parties were sent out for that purpose.  It was announced on May 13th
that these parties, under the direction of Capt. Borrow, had been very
successful in obtaining men.

24.--A smuggling lugger was captured off Hunstanton by the Tiger revenue
cutter with 840 tubs of Geneva on board.

26.--Died, at Norwich, aged 89, Dr. John Beevor, an eminent physician.


MAY.


2.--The Norwich Court of Guardians having employed surveyors at a great
expense to make new assessments of property in the several parishes
within the walls of the city for the purpose of equalising the
poor-rates, St. Saviour's Vestry meeting passed a resolution protesting
against it on the ground that it would have the effect of increasing both
general and local taxes.  The vestries of other parishes passed similar
resolutions.  At this time the Norwich Guardians raised about 20,000
pounds annually for the relief of the poor.

11.--Early in the morning a boat's crew from his Majesty's ship Cadmus,
at Yarmouth, when passing down the river to the harbour's mouth with
impressed seamen, were attacked by a mob on both banks, and several of
the sailors were severely wounded with stones.  The mob seized the gig
belonging to the Cadmus and destroyed her.  The Admiralty offered a
reward of 20 pounds for the conviction of the offenders.  At the Norfolk
Assizes held at Norwich on August 14th, 1816, before Lord Chief Justice
Gibbs, seven persons were indicted for riotously assembling and rescuing
from the press gang, legally authorised, a person who had been impressed.
The defendants, with one exception, were found guilty.  In the following
December they were sentenced in the Court of King's Bench to nine months'
imprisonment each.

13.--Died, in St. Giles' Street, Norwich, aged 20, Mr. H. Fisher, son of
Mr. David Fisher, manager of the Norfolk and Suffolk Company of
Comedians.

18.--At this date a series of disturbances occurred at Norwich Theatre.
Mr. F. A. Vining, a member of the company, in a letter dated May 18th,
and addressed to the patrons of the Theatre, referred to the "injustice
and cruelty which had been heaped upon him within its walls."  He had
left Norwich to accept an engagement at Covent Garden Theatre and
appeared there with success for 90 or 100 nights.  At the end of the
London season he accepted a further engagement at Norwich, when, it was
alleged, that Mr. Vining, "being found unworthy of a situation in another
theatre," Mr. Jones, a member of the Norwich Company, was "discharged to
make room for him."  Mr. Vining denied any personal knowledge of the
matter.  On May 29th several friends of Mr. Jones were committed for
trial at the Quarter Sessions for creating disturbances at the Theatre.
At the Quarter Sessions on July 11th the recognisances of the sureties
who had been bound over for the accused were discharged, "it being the
intention of the prosecution to prefer an indictment at the ensuing
Assizes."  At the Assizes held on July 25th the Grand Jury found true
bills against the defendants, when the indictments were traversed and the
accused discharged till the next Assizes.  On that occasion the
defendants entered into recognisances to appear at the next ensuing
Assizes, and no further record is given.

20.*--"The diversion of hawking, a sport antiently much used, has been
revived in this country on a considerable scale by Lord Rivers, Major
Wilson, of Didlington, and Mr. Downes, of Gunton.  Their subscription
hawks, under the management of German falconers, have afforded much
amusement to numerous spectators.  Last week they were exhibited at
Newmarket after the races, and flown off at some rooks in the Flat, which
they speedily brought down."

25.--A Methodist Missionary Society for the Norwich District was formed
at a meeting held at Calvert Street, Norwich.

29.--The prisoners in the City Gaol, Norwich, returned thanks to the
Mayor and Corporation "for 10s. worth of beer given them on the
anniversary of King Charles Restoration."


JUNE.


4.--King George III. attained his 78th year on this day (Sunday).  The
Corporation of Norwich attended service at the Cathedral, the Brunswick
Hussars fired a _feu de joie_ in the barrack square, and the Light Horse
Volunteers, commanded by Major J. Harvey, marched into the Market Place,
and after thrice discharging their pistols gave three cheers for the
King.  "The children belonging to the Sunday School of the Independent
Chapel at Lynn, about 800 in number, were regaled with cake and wine."
On the 5th a society at Norwich, known as "The Loyal Heroes," celebrated
the Royal birthday by dining at the Pigeons, Charing Cross.

6.--Married at St. Peter Mancroft church, Norwich, Lieut.-Col. Robert
John Harvey to Charlotte Mary, only daughter of Mr. Robert Harvey, of
Watton.  After the service "the wedding party returned to their
carriages, a wedding peal was rung, and the Norwich Light Horse, forming
a guard of honour, acted as escort to the bride and bridegroom, and fired
a _feu de joie_ in front of their house."

12.--A grand camping match took place at Ranworth.  "They played 24 a
side, but neither party goaled the ball, and it was decided by a bye."
Between 2,000 and 3,000 persons were present.

--A wrestling match for a subscription purse of 5 pounds took place at
the Bird-in-Hand, Kirby.  The prize was won by a Reedham man.  "A grand
milling afterwards took place between Chapman and Ellis, the Newmarket
Lad.  It was strength and ferocity against science and steady courage,
and was won by the latter, who blinded his opponant in 25 minutes."

17.--The Brunswick Hussars, commanded by Col. von Tempsky, left Norwich
on their route to Harwich to embark for the Continent.

23.--News was received at Norwich of the battle of Waterloo, fought on
June 18th.  Cannon were fired, and bells rung in celebration of the
victory.  The rejoicings were renewed on the 27th, when the Expedition
and other coaches brought intelligence of the second abdication of
Buonaparte.  The Expedition coach, decorated with laurel and flags, was
dragged through the streets to the singing of "God save the King" and
"Rule Britannia," and a bonfire, fed with the stalls from the
fish-market, and with other stolen material, was lighted at night.

24.*--"That long and justly complained-of nuisance, St. Stephen's pit, is
about to be removed.  The Corporation of Norwich have ordered a lease of
it to be granted to Mr. Edward Bacon, builder, and four houses are to be
erected on its scite agreeable to a plan delivered by him for that
purpose."


JULY.


3.--Holkham Sheep Shearing commenced.  Among the implements exhibited was
a machine for spreading hay.  "It was drawn by one horse, and by means of
strong iron rakes affixed to an axle or centre completely spread a number
of swathes (three or four according to the length of the rakes) as fast
as the horse could walk."

6.--A "long and scientific battle" took place between Chapman and Ellis
on a meadow on the Suffolk side of the Waveney, near St. Olaves Bridge.
"From the first to the 17th round the superior size and strength of
Chapman carried him through, and betting was two and three to one in his
favour; but, in the 18th, Ellis went in and gave his opponent three
desperate facers, which brought the betting even till the 31st round,
when Chapman beginning to show evident marks of severe punishment, had
his right eye closed; betting, two to one on Ellis.  In the 54th round
the left eye was closed, and his head became truly terrific, and had from
its swollen state a giant-like appearance."  Ellis was the winner after a
contest of one hour, 12 minutes, for a subscription purse of 7 pounds!

8.--Died at Swaffham, aged 88, Thomas Chesney, gardener.  "What is very
remarkable he never was more than four miles from Swaffham."

--The following names were published as those of local officers present
at the battle of Waterloo:--Lieut.-Col. Charles West, 3rd Regiment of
Guards; Lieut. the Hon. Horace G. Townshend, 1st Regiment of Guards;
Lieut. Sigismund Trafford, 1st Royal Dragoons, eldest son of Mr. S.
Trafford Southwell; Ensign Alfred Cooper, 14th Regiment, youngest son of
Mr. C. Cooper, Norwich; Col. Sir Edward Kerrison, 7th Dragoons (?
Hussars); Lieut.-Col. Archibald Money, 11th Light Dragoons; and Major Sir
George Hoste, Royal Engineers.

11.--At Norwich Quarter Sessions, John Watson was indicted for conspiring
with two other persons unknown to fraudulently obtain a bank note for 10
pounds from Thomas Starling.  The prisoner and two persons, apparently
strangers, were boasting at a public-house how much money they possessed,
when the accused taking prosecutor aside told him that if he could lend
him a 10 pounds note it would enable him to win a wager.  The prosecutor
went out, borrowed the money, and placed it in the hands of the prisoner,
who with the other conspirators went away, taking the money with them.
The prisoner was sentenced to seven years' transportation.

13.--Arrived at Yarmouth two transports from Ostend with 300 sick and
wounded soldiers of the Duke of Wellington's army.  They were removed in
keels from the ships to the hospital on the Denes.

15.*--"The Postmasters-General have established a penny post six days a
week to Stalham, with open letter boxes for the receiving of letters at
that place, Neatishead, and Hoveton, near Wroxham Bridge."

28.--The High Sheriff, in compliance with a requisition signed by the
county justices in Quarter Sessions, convened a meeting at the Shirehall,
Norwich, when, on the motion of Mr. Robert Fellowes, seconded by the Hon.
Col. Wodehouse, a subscription was opened for the relief of the wounded
survivors, and the widows and children of the soldiers who fell at
Waterloo.  This subscription amounted to 7,000 pounds.  Collections were
also made in the city and county churches.

29.--A balloon ascent was made from the Ranelagh Gardens, Norwich, by Mr.
Sadler.  "All night long hundreds continued to flock into town, and at
daybreak the roads were literally thronged with people.  Some hours
before noon the principal avenues to the Market Place were blocked up
with vehicles for which accommodation could not be found in the inn
yards, and horses were picketed in the streets.  Lodging and
accommodation at the inns were very difficult to obtain, and in many
instances a guinea was given for a bed."  Miss Bathurst, daughter of the
Bishop of Norwich, presented the aeronaut with a banner previous to the
ascent.  The balloon rose at 3.35 and descended at 4.30 p.m., in a field
near Sprowston Hall.  "Among the company present in the Ranelagh Gardens
was General Money, who 30 years previously, namely on Saturday, July
23rd, 1785, made a similar ascent, and was blown out to sea, where he was
rescued by the Argus Revenue cutter."

31.--A baker was fined before the Mayor of Norwich for "exposing bread to
sell on the Lord's day before the hour of ten o'clock in the morning."
Shortly afterwards 15 persons were summoned for like offences, and the
Master and Wardens of the Bakers' Company applied that the fines might be
strictly enforced.


AUGUST.


1.--A cricket match was played on Hempton Green between the united
parishes of Litcham, Dunham, and Brisley, and of Walsingham and Fakenham.
"The latter team, although unparalleled in the annals of cricketeering,
did not get a single notch."

5.*--"Mr. Bellamy, the favourite comedian of the Norwich Company, is
engaged by the managers of Covent Garden Theatre at a liberal salary."
The London Press criticised his "provincial twang," and described his
performance of the part of Polonius as "somewhat outlandish."

8.--Died, at Downham Market, Mr. Zachary Clark, "one of the people called
Quakers."  He founded a Lancasterian school in the town, and in 1811
published an account of the different charities belonging to the poor in
Norfolk.

13.--A serious fire occurred near the church of St. Lawrence, Norwich.
Six houses were destroyed.  The fire originated at the house of a cabinet
maker named Hubbard.

15.--The first division of the West Norfolk Militia marched from Norwich
for Ipswich under command of Major Barnham; the second division, under
Lieut.-Col. Nelthorpe, marched on the 16th, and the remainder on the
17th.  The strength of the regiment was upwards of 500 rank and file,
chiefly raised in three months by beat of drum.  The corps embarked at
Harwich, and sailed for Ireland on August 28th.

--A division of the King's German Legion, under command of Capt. Meyer,
marched into Norwich from Harwich, where they had landed from Cuxhaven.

19.*--"Last week a well-contested battle was fought at Cley between John
Bell and the noted Matthew Randall, well known for his skill in gymnastic
exercises.  Betting was two and three to one in favour of Randall.  After
20 minutes' hard fighting Bell won.  The known bottom of Bell and the
tried science of Randall drew a considerable concourse of people, among
whom were noticed many distinguished characters of the neighbourhood.  A
handsome subscription was made for the conqueror, who was taken from the
ground in a gentleman's carriage."

--The Norfolk, Suffolk, and London Accommodation Coach, owned by John
Noller, was advertised to leave the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, every Monday,
Wednesday, and Friday morning at eight o'clock, and to travel through
Scole, Eye, and Debenham.  Fares: Insides, 18s.; outsides, 12s.

19.*--"Died, last week, aged 94, John Minns, worstead weaver, of St.
Paul's, Norwich.  He had anticipated the event 16 years ago, and had then
his coffin made, which he had ever since kept in an adjoining room, and
actually used as a cupboard."

22.--The Corporation of Yarmouth elected Mr. Robert Alderson, Steward of
Norwich, Recorder of that borough.


SEPTEMBER.


3.--A lad, named Henry Thirkettle, when nutting in Hempnall Wood, touched
the wire of a spring gun, and the charge entering his body inflicted
terrible injuries.  William Ebbage, in the service of Mr. Henry Usborne,
of Heydon Hall, was on October 28th similarly injured.  Mr. Gurney,
barrister, was consulted as to the legality of the use of spring guns.
His opinion was that their use was not lawful, and that in case of death
a verdict of murder might be returned against the master who authorised
the use of, and the servant who set a spring gun.  A contrary opinion was
expressed by another barrister.

6.--Died at Ber Street, Norwich, aged 68, Martin Drummee, a noted bird
fancier, "by which business he had accumulated considerable property."

9.*--"According to the Charter of the borough of Yarmouth, the Aldermen
and Common Councilmen are annually to assemble and choose _before they
separate_ 'the most discrete' alderman to be Mayor.  The election of Mr.
Cory did not take place until after a strong trial of patience and
abstinence on both sides.  The electors assembled on the _Tuesday_ noon,
and remained shut up (with only such provisions as they carried in their
pockets) until ten o'clock on the _Thursday_ night, when the six whose
supplies were first exhausted found themselves obliged to agree with the
other six who were better provided, and to surrender their votes to avoid
starvation, and a third night's confinement in the Church Hall."

16.--Equestrian performances commenced at the Pantheon, Harper's Gardens,
Norwich, under the management of R. Usher, "late clown at Astley's Royal
Amphitheatre, and J. Clarke, the celebrated equestrian of the Royal
Circus, London."

19.--At the Yarmouth Race Assembly on this date "it was the general
remark that there was too much display in the ball-room, attributed by
some to the ladies in the hurry of setting off having left, what ought to
be considered a necessary article of dress, behind them."

25.--Married, Mr. D. Fisher, manager of the Norfolk and Suffolk Company
of Comedians, to Miss F. B. Bane, niece to Mr. Aldrich, of Pulham.

--Died at Burnham Westgate, Sir Mordaunt Martin, Bart., aged 75.  He
passed the last 50 years of his life in retirement at Burnham Thorpe,
devoting his time principally to the study and practice of agriculture.

26.--Died at Yarmouth, aged 50, Mrs. Holland.  "Her death was occasioned
by her being frightened by the stories of a Mrs. Spaul, who pretended to
tell fortunes."  Mrs. Spaul was committed to gaol by the Mayor.

29.--Mr. Thomas Thurtell, alderman, and Mr. William Foster were sworn
into office as Sheriffs of Norwich, and entertained a large company to
dinner at Chapel Field House.


OCTOBER.


1.--Died at his house on Tombland, Norwich, Robert Dixon, aged 35.  He
studied at the Royal Academy, settled in Norwich as an artist in 1800,
and gave lessons in drawing.  "As a scene painter Mr. Dixon stood proudly
pre-eminent, and Norwich Theatre may boast of monuments of his
greatness."  A public exhibition of his works was held in the room of the
Norwich Society of Artists, and on January 22nd, 1816, a performance was
given at the Theatre, for the benefit of his widow and children.

17.--At the Norwich Quarter Sessions the Grand Jury made a presentment on
the defective state of the pavements, and expressed the opinion that, the
streets were inadequately cleansed and lighted.

19.--A grand musical performance was given at St. Stephen's Church,
Norwich, in aid of the Blind School.  The principal performers were Miss
King, Mr. Barrow, and Mr. French; leader of the band, Mr. Fish; at the
organ, Mr. Pettet.

21.--The Norwich, Ipswich, Colchester, and London Post Coach was
advertised to start from the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, at eight o'clock
every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday morning.


NOVEMBER.


4.*--"Died lately, aged 101, Mrs. Stockings, of East Harling."

11.--The Day Norwich and London New Post Coach was advertised to perform
the journey between Norwich and the Metropolis in 14 hours.  It started
from the Rampant Horse Inn every morning at six o'clock, and arrived the
same evening at the Black Bull Inn and Spread Eagle Inn, Gracechurch
Street.  It left London at six o'clock on the following morning.  The
proprietors were Richard Gurney, Ann Nelson and Sons, T. and J. Boyce,
Samuel Bright, and William Jones.

14.--The Duke of York arrived at Quidenham Hall on a visit to the Earl of
Albemarle for a week's pheasant shooting.

16.--In the Court of King's Bench, Benjamin Branford, Joshua Forby, James
Jessup, and William Quant, convicted at the Norfolk Assizes of conspiring
to falsely accuse Mr. Henry Goggs, of Whissonsett, of a serious offence,
were sentenced, Branford to twelve months', Forby to six months', and
Jessup and Quant to three months' imprisonment in Norwich Castle.

24.--Died, at Thursford, Sir George Chad, Bart., aged 84.

27.--The Marquis Cornwallis, Earl and Lady Chatham, and other
notabilities, passed through Norwich on their way from Blickling Hall to
Henham Park.

30.--The Duke of Gloucester, the Lord Bishop of Norwich, and the Earl and
Countess of Albemarle, visited Mr. T. W. Coke at Holkham.


DECEMBER.


1.--Lord Sydney visited Yarmouth and was presented with the patent of the
office of High Steward of the borough.  His lordship invited the
Corporation to dinner at the Nelson Hotel, and General Loftus, M.P., by
whom he was accompanied, gave a ball at the Town Hall.

7.--A sixteenth share of the lottery prize of 50,000 pounds three per
cent. consols was drawn by Mr. C. Davy, farmer, Great Plumstead.

16.--Died at his house in St. James's Square, London, in his 70th year,
Charles Howard, Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshal and Hereditary Marshal of
England.  He was succeeded in his titles, hereditary honours, and
principal estates, by Mr. Barnard Edward Howard, of Fornham, near Bury
St. Edmund's.

18.--Colombier's French Company of Equestrians commenced an engagement at
the Pantheon, Norwich.

24.--Died, Mrs. Mary Dye, of Elsing, aged 101.

--Lord and Lady Castlereagh arrived in Norwich, and after dining at the
Norfolk Hotel, proceeded on a visit to Lord Suffield, at Blickling Park.

30.*--"A fire engine completed by Mr. Jordan, an ingenious mechanic, of
this city (Norwich), and requiring only 18 men to work it, was tried
against one of Hadley and Co.'s patent engines in the Market Place
yesterday, and proved equal, if not superior, to it in power.  Messrs.
Hartley's engine cost 180 pounds and Mr. Jordan's only 80 pounds."



1816.


JANUARY.


5.--At a Provincial Grand Lodge of Freemasons held at Norwich, Sir Jacob
Henry Astley, M.P., was elected Grand Master.

6.--Mr. Thomas Coldwell was appointed postmaster at Norwich, in place of
G. Litchfield.

--*"One day this week a salmon trout measuring one yard four inches, and
weighing twenty-one pounds, was caught in Trowse River, near Norwich."

18.--Thanksgiving day for the restoration of Peace.  The Mayor and
Corporation of Norwich attended the Cathedral in state, and services were
held at most of the city churches.

20.--Died, aged 83, Mr. James Clabburn, many years keeper of the Close
Jail, at Norwich.

--*"An order has been received at Norwich for upwards of 10,000 pieces of
broad whites from the East India Company, and distributed among the
different manufacturers much in the same proportions as last year."

--*"There is now living in Forncett St. Mary a Mrs. Knights, who is 106
years old."

24.--Mr. Betty, originally known as the Young Roscius, commenced an
engagement at Norwich Theatre.  He appeared as Douglas, Sir Edward
Mortimer ("The Iron Chest"), and Rolla ("Pizarro").

25.--At the 51st anniversary meeting of the Castle Corporation, at
Norwich, Mr. Thomas Back presented to the society two medals to be worn
respectively by the "Recorder" and "Steward."  They were intended to
commemorate the battle of Waterloo.

25.--A memorial was sent to the Postmaster-General by the inhabitants of
Norwich, setting forth the great inconvenience occasioned by the late
delivery of letters by the mail.  Afterwards the coach arrived at twelve
o'clock instead of at one o'clock.

27.*--"Died, at Exeter, aged 63, Mr. John Bennett, formerly of the
Norwich Theatre."

29.--Died, in his 87th year, Mr. Robert Harvey, of Norwich.  He twice
served the office of Mayor (1770 and 1800), and at his death was "Father
of the City."  "He enjoyed the gratification of seeing his three
surviving sons holding high municipal positions, one of whom received the
additional honour of being its representative in Parliament."


FEBRUARY.


3.--Mr. Dowton commenced an engagement of four nights at Norwich Theatre.
He appeared as Sir Anthony Absolute, Abednego ("The Jew and the Doctor"),
Sir Francis Gripe ("The Busybody"), Scout ("The Village Lawyer"), and Old
Dorley ("Who's the Dupe?").

4.--Died at Hamilton Place, London, Robert, Earl of Buckinghamshire,
Baron Hobart, President of the India Board.  He was half brother to John,
Earl of Buckinghamshire, who resided at Blickling, and who was father of
Lady Suffield and Lady Castlereagh.

5.--Died in St. Stephen's, Norwich, aged 69, Sir John Odingsells Leake,
Bart., formerly of Quebec House, East Dereham.

12.--Mr. Elliston appeared at Lynn Theatre as Duke Aranza ("The
Honeymoon") and Rover ("Wild Oats").

16.--A high tide at Yarmouth.  The Denes and the west side of the haven
were inundated.  A similar occurrence had not been recorded since 1791.
A flood also took place at Lynn.

17.--Mrs. Davison, of Drury Lane, appeared at Norwich Theatre as Letitia
Hardy ("Belle's Stratagem"), and on succeeding evenings as Maria ("Of Age
To-morrow"), Peggy ("The Country Girl"), &c.

20.--A meeting was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, when resolutions
against the continuance of the Property Tax, and a petition to the House
of Commons, were adopted.  On the 9th a county meeting was held at the
Shirehouse, Norwich, at which a petition to both Houses of Parliament for
repealing some of the taxes affecting agriculture, was unanimously agreed
to.  The meeting was held in consequence of a requisition signed by
farmers only who confined their objection to the clause in the Property
Tax which related to the tenants' duty, and to the Agricultural Horse
Tax.  On the 23rd a second county meeting was held, when resolutions
congratulating the county on the rejection of the Property Tax and the
relinquishment of the War Duty on malt were passed.  A petition to
Parliament was also unanimously agreed to, recommending a reduction of
the military establishment, and the adoption of such a system of economy
as might render a further continuance of War Taxes unnecessary.

25.--Died at Ranworth, William Browne, in his 104th year.

26.--Mrs. Bartley, of Drury Lane, appeared as Isabella ("The Fatal
Marriage"), at Norwich Theatre.


MARCH.


4.--Mr. Incledon, accompanied by Mr. Collyer and Master Taylor, commenced
a four nights' engagement at Norwich Theatre.  He appeared as Capt.
Macheath ("Beggars' Opera"), Hawthorne, Tom Tug, and Steady ("The
Quaker").

9.*--"One day this week some men were opening in St. Peter Mancroft
Church, Norwich, a vault which had been closed nine years, when they
found three bats entirely covered with mould and dust.  They were in a
state of complete torpidity, but one of them immediately took flight."

13.--A severe thunderstorm, accompanied by rain and hail, occurred at
Yarmouth and other places in the neighbourhood.

18.--Miss L. Kelly, of Drury Lane, appeared at Norwich Theatre as Juliet.
She was joined on the 21st by her sister, Miss F. Kelly.

--At the Norfolk Assizes, held at Thetford, before Mr. Baron Wood, Robert
Lord, _alias_ Davies, and William Hardy were indicted for having forged
notes in their possession.  A curious circumstance led to the detection
of the first-named prisoner.  A parcel was sent from London by the
Fakenham coach addressed to "Isaac Davies, Tivetshall Ram, Norfolk."  The
address was so badly written as to be mistaken for "Swetshall Ram," and,
as no such place could be found, the proprietor of the coach opened the
parcel and discovered the forged notes.  Lord was found guilty, and
sentenced to 14 years' transportation.  Hardy was acquitted.

19.--Died, Nehemiah Haylett, of Kenninghall, aged 101.

21.--Died, at Lynn, Mr. Thomas Day, in his 87th year.  He was the oldest
burgess in that town, and the last of the officers of the West Norfolk
Militia, who, in 1759, volunteered their services to the Government.  In
1779, when the Lynn Volunteers were formed, Mr. Day was selected Colonel
Commandant.

23.*--"Died lately at Dunham, in his 85th year, Thomas Grounds, and about
an hour after, Jane, his wife, in her 83rd year.  They were both buried
in one coffin."

29.--At a public meeting held at the Guildhall, Norwich, it was resolved
on the motion of Mr. Robert Fellowes, seconded by the Rev. J. Ives, to
establish a Savings Bank.  The bank was opened, with offices in St.
Andrew's Hall, on April 29th, and on the first day 86 pounds 3s. 6d. was
received from depositors in sums of 1s. and upwards.

30.*--(Advt.)  "By desire of Thomas Thurtell, Esq., and William Foster,
Esq., Sheriffs of the City of Norwich, at the Theatre Royal, on Saturday,
April 6th, the Comedy of 'The Road to Ruin,' the Farce called 'The Lyar,'
and the Burlesque Opera 'Bombastes Furioso.'"

31.--Died very suddenly at an advanced age, in the pulpit of Hales
Church, the Rev. Valentine Lumley Barnard, rector of Stockton, Norfolk.


APRIL.


3.--A meeting of merchants, manufacturers, &c., was held at the
Guildhall, Norwich, when resolutions were passed to instruct the members
of Parliament for the city to watch and oppose the intended measure for
allowing the exportation of wool free of all restrictions.  The measure
was for the time relinquished.

4.--A public meeting was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, at which it was
unanimously resolved to petition Parliament for the repeal of the
Insolvent Debtors Act, as being in its operation injurious to trade and
commerce.

6.*--"A troop of the 1st Royal Dragoons arrived at Norwich from Ipswich
last week.  The officers and soldiers were wearing their Waterloo
medals."

--Edward Lea was executed on the Castle Hill, Norwich, for uttering
forged Bank of England notes.

15.--Sir Simon le Blanc, one of the judges of the Court of King's Bench,
and many years leading counsel on the Norfolk Circuit, died in London, in
his 68th year.

--Mr. and Mrs. Bartley, of Drury Lane Theatre, commenced playing a round
of characters at Norwich Theatre.

16.--The Rev. St. John Priest was instituted to the rectory of
Billingford, on the presentation of Mr. T. W. Coke, M.P., who
"acknowledged, in a very handsome manner, the obligation he felt to that
gentleman for his exertions in the cause of agriculture, and particularly
as secretary to the Norfolk Agricultural Association, which office he had
held for 13 years without emolument."

19.--A main of cocks of 21 battles was fought at the Feathers Inn,
Yarmouth, between the gentlemen of Norfolk and the gentlemen of Suffolk,
at five guineas the battle and ten guineas the odd.  Feeders: Layton for
Norfolk, Kersey for Suffolk.  The match was continued on the 20th.

23.--At Norwich Quarter Sessions John William Smith was charged with
stealing a silver spoon from the Waggon and Horses public-house, the
property of William Smith, and a coat, the property of Michael Callow,
from the Crown Inn, St. Stephen's.  The prisoner, a farmer, had occupied
300 acres of land, and resided on his own estate at Great Ellingham.  He
was sentenced to seven years' transportation.

24.--By the alteration introduced by Government in the Local Militia
establishment the pay of the permanent staff ceased, the accoutrements
were sent into store, and the non-commissioned officers and drummers
discharged.  The only officer retained was the adjutant, who was placed
on the reduced pay of 4s. per diem.

27.--Died, aged 85, Mr. Henry Thompson, one of the chief burgesses of
Thetford.  He had been a member of the Corporation more than half a
century, five times served the office of chief magistrate, and in 1806
was appointed one of the assistant justices of the borough.


MAY.


3.--At a quarterly meeting of the Norwich Corporation it was ordered that
the Hospital and City Committees be empowered to recommend to the next
assembly to make such abatements in the rents of the Corporation farms as
they might think necessary in consequence of the reduced price of grain,
wheat being from 36s. to 37s.; barley, 11s. 6d. to 13s.; and oats, 9s.
6d. to 10s. 6d. per coomb.

11.--The first division of the West Norfolk Militia, under command of
Col. Nelthorpe, marched into Norwich on their return from Ireland; the
second division, under Major Barnham, arrived on the 13th.  The regiment
was disembodied on June 17th.

--*"Died in September last at Allahabad, in his 32nd year, Richard
Turner, jun., Judge of the Provisional Court at Agra, and eldest son of
the Rev. Richard Turner, Great Yarmouth."

16.--A serious riot occurred at Norwich.  A crowd assembled in the Market
Place, threw fire balls and broke the windows at the Guildhall.  They
then broke into the New Mills, threw a quantity of flour into the river,
and carried some away in sacks.  On their return from the Mills they
smashed many windows in St. Andrew's, Bank Street, Tombland, Magdalen
Street, and other localities.  Dr. Alderson came out of his house to
remonstrate with them and was knocked down.  The Mayor and magistrates
assembled at the Guildhall, special constables were sworn in, and the mob
dispersed.  A picket of the West Norfolk Militia was stationed all night
at the Guildhall, and a party of the 1st Royal Dragoons patrolled the
streets.  The disturbances were renewed on the 18th, when the Riot Act
was read, and the mob dispersed by the military.

18.--The proprietors of the Norwich Expedition coach to London by
Thetford and Newmarket announced a reduction of fares to 1 pound 15s. for
inside, and 1 pound for outside passengers.  From this date the
Expedition started at three o'clock in the afternoon and reached London
at nine o'clock next morning.

20.--A riot took place at Downham Market.  The magistrates assembled at
the Crown Inn were publicly insulted, and so much disorder ensued that
the Upwell Yeomanry Cavalry were called out, and the Riot Act read, after
which the crowd gradually dispersed.  A demand had been made for wages of
2s. per day to be paid every Monday and Thursday.  In consequence of the
farmers having refused to comply, another disturbance took place on the
24th, when two women and several men were apprehended and committed to
Norwich Castle.  The prisoners were charged at the Norfolk Assizes, held
at Norwich in August, before Lord Chief Justice Gibbs, when sixteen were
found guilty and sentenced to death, but only two, Daniel Harwood and
Thomas Thody, were left for execution, which took place on the Castle
Hill on August 31st.  "The recollection of his wife and children and the
horror of immediate death overcame Thody's fortitude.  He was nearly
sinking down under the agony of grief and terror, which he expressed by
convulsive shrieks, and was obliged to be supported by several men."

22.--At a meeting of owners and occupiers of land, at Diss, a series of
resolutions was proposed by the Rev. Mr. Manning, rector, in favour of
the commutation of the tithes.  It was decided to petition the House of
Commons on the subject.  Similar meetings were held in other parishes in
the district.

27.--Mrs. Mardyn, of Drury Lane Theatre, commenced an engagement at
Norwich Theatre as Albina Mandeville in the comedy of "The Will."  On
succeeding evenings she appeared as Amelia Wildenham ("Lovers' Vows"),
Widow Brady ("The Irish Widow"), Miss Peggy ("The Country Girl"), and
Miranda ("The Busybody").

28.--At a "grand wrestling," which took place at Kirby, twenty-four
"professors" entered the ring, and "a finer display of science was never
exhibited."  A man named Starling was the winner.  "A smart milling took
place between Broughton and Ives, the former a regular descendant of the
great pugilist of that name.  Ives proved entirely destitute of science
and was badly beaten."

31.--Under the sanction of the Norwich magistrates and the Court of
Guardians the defective silver of the labouring poor of the city was
exchanged for current coin.


JUNE.


8.*--"Died last week at Reedham, in his 104th year, John Andrews, a
labouring brickmaker.  He married in the early part of his life, and had
six children, who are now old people.  He was left a widower at 55, and
at 64 married his present widow, who was but 22.  Notwithstanding the
disparity of years she proved the greatest blessing to him in his old
age, for she treated him with the greatest kindness and attention."

10.--A new theatre was opened at East Dereham by the Norfolk and Suffolk
Company of Comedians.  "It is fitted up in a style of neatness and
elegance scarcely to be met with in any country town.  The painting and
decorations of the interior were executed by Mr. D. Fisher, to whose
known taste they do ample credit.  Mr. Fisher has brought with him a most
respectable company."

15.--Died, Mrs. Cross, of Swaffham, aged 100.

17.--At a quarterly assembly of the Corporation of Norwich a
congratulatory address was ordered to be presented to the Prince Regent
on the marriage of the Princess Charlotte of Wales and Prince Leopold of
Saxe-Coburg.  A similar address was voted by the Court of Mayoralty on
July 10th.

--A three days cocking match between the gentlemen of Norwich and the
gentlemen of Norfolk commenced at the White Swan, St. Peter Mancroft,
Norwich, for 10 guineas a battle and 100 guineas the odd.  Norwich won by
six battles.

17.--The old people in the Great Hospital, St. Helen's, Norwich, having
been deprived of the dinner of roast goose on Michaelmas Day in
consequence of the death of the benefactor who provided it, Mr. Robert
Partridge on this date "signified to the Norwich Corporation his
intention to give 100 pounds as a benefaction that the Michaelmas dinner
of goose may be revived and continued in future."

18.--Guild Day at Norwich.  The Mayor (Mr. W. Hankes) entertained the
members of the Corporation at luncheon at the Guildhall; and on the 19th
"gave plenty of beer and plumb cake" to the poor of his own and of other
parishes.

--The first anniversary of the battle of Waterloo was celebrated at the
Cavalry Barracks, Norwich, by a dinner to the non-commissioned officers
and privates of the 1st Royal Dragoons, to other soldiers quartered in
Norwich, and to pensioners.  The wives and children of the soldiers were
also entertained.  The cost was defrayed by public subscription, of which
10 pounds was given by the Corporation.

29.*--"At Whaplode Drove feast last week Mr. John Goodger, aged 104
years, danced a hornpipe, sang a song, and played at four-corners, the
latter being his favourite amusement, to the great gratification of the
company present."


JULY.


1.--At Holkham Sheep Shearing, which commenced on this date, improved
horse hoes were shown by Mr. Blaikie, Mr. Coke's farm manager.

10.--George Wilson, the pedestrian, undertook to walk 50 miles in 12
hours at the Prussia Gardens, Norwich.  He commenced at eight o'clock and
finished the first mile in 11 minutes 35 seconds.  His pace was
afterwards a mile in from 12.5 to 13 minutes.  He completed the distance
at 7.45 p.m. with 15 minutes to spare.  On the 22nd a man named Skipper,
an ostler at the Barley Mow public-house, Norwich, backed himself to walk
over the same course in the same time, and completed his task in 11 hours
10 minutes.  On August 27th Wilson commenced a walk of 50 miles per day
of 13 hours for five successive days on the bowling-green of the Crown
public-house at South Lynn, and accomplished the task.  "What is very
remarkable he never perspired.  On the third day he lost his great toe
nail off the left foot, which he pulled out by the roots in the presence
of numerous spectators."

17.--At the Norfolk Quarter Sessions four labourers were indicted for
having riotously assembled with 100 other persons at Hockham, on May
19th, and destroyed a thrashing machine, the property of Mr. William
Burlingham.  Two of the prisoners were sentenced to twelve months', and
two to three months' imprisonment, and all were required to find sureties
for their future behaviour.  (This was the first machine breaking case
recorded in the county.)

18.--After a week's continuous rain, which greatly impeded the hay
harvest, a severe thunderstorm occurred.  On the 31st the crops were
beaten down by heavy rains, acres of turnips were washed away, and in
several villages the lanes were full of water.  On August 12th there was
another heavy rain, and on August 31st a hurricane blew, wrecking many
colliers between Blakeney and Mundesley.  The rains continued to the
month of October, when, in consequence of the low lying lands being under
water, all hopes were abandoned for the favourable termination of the
harvest.  Such wet weather had not been experienced since 1799, in which
year there were only 166 fair days.

20.--A public announcement on this date stated that the following coaches
started from the Angel Inn, Norwich:--The London Royal Mail, by way of
Newmarket, every afternoon at 3.45; the London Royal Mail, _via_ Ipswich
and Colchester, ditto; the Wells Prince of Orange Post coach (William
Sizeland and T. S. Coldwell), Wednesday and Friday at 12.45 p.m., Sunday
at 8.15 a.m.; Holt Duke of Wellington Post coach (T. Coldwell and J.
Love), _via_ Aylsham, every afternoon at 3.45.  From the Rampant Horse
Inn: The London Day coach (in 14 hours) every morning at six.  From the
Norfolk Hotel: The Telegraph London coach (in 13 hours) every morning at
seven o'clock, _via_ Newmarket.  The last two were opposition coaches.
The proprietors of the Day coach announced that, although the Telegraph
had been started in opposition, they would "not risk the lives of their
passengers by racing against time," but would continue to perform the
journey "with steadiness and regularity."

29.--One of the new steam packets plying between Norwich and Yarmouth got
aground on Breydon.  Mrs. Clifford and other members of the Norwich
Company of Comedians were on board.  "By their detention the performance
at the theatre could not take place, and the expectant audience had their
money returned."

30.--A two days cocking match commenced at Yarmouth, "in the large room
adjoining the Feathers Inn," between the gentlemen of Norwich and the
gentlemen of Yarmouth.


AUGUST.


10.--The annual exhibition of "The Norfolk and Norwich Society of
Artists" was advertised to open on this date at the "New Room," Theatre
Plain, Norwich.  It was announced that "this Society consists of the
principal part of the original artists."  On the same day was advertised
"The 12th annual exhibition of the Norwich Original Society of Artists,
established 1803."  The exhibition was to take place during the Assize
week, "in their great room, Sir Benjamin Wrenche's Court, Cockey Lane."
The NORFOLK CHRONICLE makes this comment:--"The schism which has taken
place among the exhibiting artists appears to have been productive of
increased exertions on the part of the respective members of both
societies.  Our sincere wish to promote their fame and prosperity, and to
heal rather than to ferment their differences, induces us earnestly to
recommend their performances to the attention and patronage of the public
which they highly deserve."

12.--Mr. Kemble appeared in the part of Cato at Norwich Theatre.  On
succeeding evenings he took the characters of Penruddock ("Wheel of
Fortune"), King Lear, Shylock, Sir Giles Overreach ("A New Way to Pay Old
Debts"), and Macbeth.

18.--The Judges of Assize on leaving Norwich passed through Attleborough,
and attended service at the parish church.  The Lord Chief Justice, Sir
Vicary Gibbs, in walking through the nave, discovered a stone on which
were his own crest and arms; the inscription thereon was to the memory of
Capt. John Gibbs, who died October 22, 1695.  "Mr. Le Neve," says
Blomfield, "calls him the famous Capt Gibbs.  He was a celebrated man on
the turf in King Charles the Second's time.  He laid a wager of 500
guineas that he drove his light chaise and four horses up and down the
deepest place of the Devil's Ditch on Newmarket Heath, which he performed
by making a very light chaise with a jointed perch, and without any pole,
to the surprise of the spectators."

24.*--"Her Royal Highness Princess Charlotte has graciously expressed her
determination not only to wear but to introduce and recommend the
coloured bombazins, manufactured in Norwich."  Mr. William Williment was
appointed manufacturer to her Royal Highness.

25.--A woman named Fox, 100 years old, walked from Norwich to Plumstead,
a distance of nearly five miles.  "She commenced her journey at eight
o'clock in the morning, rested three hours at her friend's house, and
walking home arrived at Norwich at seven o'clock in the evening."

31.*--"The stupendous undertaking of the tunnel of Tavistock canal,
communicating the Tavy and the Tamar, was engineered by Mr. John Taylor,
jun., of Norwich."

--Thomas Moy was executed on the Castle Hill, Norwich, for sheep
stealing.  "He was 33 years of age, farmed 100 acres of land at Binham,
and has left a wife and seven young children."


SEPTEMBER.


7.--Cromer Theatre was described as a place of entertainment "fashionably
attended."  "The house, or rather, barn, which is neatly fitted up, is
under the management of Mr. Eldred."

11.--At a meeting held at the Guildhall, Norwich, "the situation of
children employed in sweeping chimnies" was discussed, "and the means of
superseding the necessity for such employment by mechanical means" were
taken into consideration.  A committee was appointed to promote the use
of the sweeping apparatus, which, however, was but partially adopted.

16.--Intelligence was received at Norwich of the successful attack on
Algiers by the British fleet, under the command of Admiral Lord Exmouth,
on August 27th.  The bells of St. Peter Mancroft were rung in celebration
of the event.

23.--A silver cup and two drinking horns were rowed for by four-oared
boats, the best two heats out of three, from Carrow Bridge to Thorpe and
back, distance two and a quarter miles.  Five boats competed.  The cup
was won by the Cytherea (Mr. Joseph Stannard), and the horns by the
Friends (Mr. Garland).


OCTOBER.


4.--The third or "grand victory match" was played on Hempton Green,
Fakenham, between the Holt and Aylsham cricket clubs.  Aylsham won with
seven wickets to spare.

14.--A public meeting was held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, at which it
was agreed to petition the Legislature to effect a retrenchment of the
public expenditure, and a reform of the House of Commons.

17.--The new Concert Room in St. George's Bridge Street, Norwich,
purchased of the proprietors of the Steam Flour Mill, and fitted up by
the members of the Hall Concert (a musical society which had existed 30
years) was opened.  The room was capable of seating 300 persons.

23.--A pigeon shooting match took place on a field near the Town Close,
Norwich, between Mr. Nicholas Bacon, and the Rev. Mr. Pitman, of Oulton.
"They fired 21 shots each, but it proved a drawn bet, for they each
killed 14 birds.  Mr. Pitman brought down his 15th bird, but as it fell
two inches beyond the distance allowed, 100 yards, it could not be
reckoned.  There were many bets depending, which, of course, remained
undecided."  (This is the first recorded pigeon match in Norfolk.)

24.--Wheat was standing uncut in several parts of Norfolk, on the same
farm where corn was sown for next year's crop.

28.--A salmon trout, 57 inches in length and weighing 16.5 pounds, was
caught at the New Mills, Norwich.  On the 31st another of 26 pounds
weight was taken at the same place.

29.--At a special meeting of the Norwich Corporation an address was
ordered to be presented to the Prince Regent, praying for "the utmost
retrenchment of the public expenditure consistent with the welfare of the
State."


NOVEMBER.


2.--Died at Narford Hall, the seat of Mr. Andrew Fountaine, his
son-in-law, Mr. Thomas Penrice, of Great Yarmouth, to whom the eccentric
Lord Chedworth left the bulk of his large property.

9.*--"The wealth of Mr. Watson Taylor, the purchaser of Houghton Hall, is
immense.  For that mansion, and a large track of land around, he gave the
Marquis Cholmondeley 350,000 pounds.  Mr. Taylor, by the will of an
ancestor, is bound to spend 700,000 pounds in landed estates, and besides
the income which may arise from them he has 95,000 pounds a year."

10.--Buxoo, a Bengalese, a native of Calcutta, was publicly baptised at
Burnham Market church by the Rev. John Glasse, by the names of John Henry
Martin.  He was brought over to this country in a ship commanded by Capt.
Glasse.

14.--The Courier steam packet made its passage from Foundry Bridge,
Norwich, to Yarmouth in three hours twenty-five minutes.

28.--The Duke of Gloucester made his annual visit to Mr. T. W. Coke,
M.P., at Holkham Hall.  During the week's shooting Mr. Coke killed at
Warham a female _Falco Lagopus_, or rough legged falcon, measuring nearly
five feet across the wings, and two feet one inch in length.  The male
bird was afterwards caught in a trap at Wighton.  Two of these birds were
taken the following week at Wighton.

Died this month, Mrs. Tabitha Starling, of Brooke, aged 103.


DECEMBER.


7.--The Duke of Gloucester concluded his visit to Holkham.  On the last
day his Royal Highness proposed the toast, "Prosperity to those Whig
principles which placed the House of Hanover on the Throne of Britain."

14.*--"Died lately, regretted by all who knew him, in the 65th year of
his age, Charles Boyles, Esq., Vice-Admiral of the Blue, and a few years
since Colonel of the Royal Marines.  This distinguished officer commanded
the Windsor Castle man-of-war in the action off Ferrol, between the
English fleet, under Sir Richard Calder, and the combined fleets of
France and Spain.  During this engagement it fell to the lot of but few
ships to be advantageously opposed to the enemy.  The return to
Portsmouth of the crippled Windsor Castle with two Spanish 74's was a
triumph exultingly spoken of by Nelson as being principally the
achievement of a Norfolk man.  Admiral Boyles was a native of Wells in
this county, and eldest son of Charles Boyles, Esq., many years collector
of the customs at that port.  He commenced his naval career with Lord
Nelson in the Raisonnable, when commanded by Capt. Suckling."

21.--Wombwell's "Royal Menagerie of foreign beasts and birds" was
exhibited on the Castle Ditches, Norwich.

31.--A prize fight took place at Wickhampton between Samuel Smith and
James Rushmer.  One hundred and eleven rounds were fought in two hours
five minutes, when the ring was broken into, and owing to the confusion
it was impossible to renew the fight, which was declared drawn.



1817.


JANUARY.


1.--At a public meeting held at the Guildhall, Norwich, a subscription
was opened for the relief of the labouring and manufacturing poor.
Upwards of 3,050 pounds was contributed, and several works were commenced
for the improvement of the city.  At Yarmouth over 1,000 pounds was
subscribed, and 460 men were employed in forming roads to the bath-house,
jetty, &c.

4.--Several coach advertisements were published this month.  On the 4th
it was announced that the Norwich, Ipswich, Colchester, Chelmsford, and
London Accommodation coach (J. Noller and Co.) set out every Monday,
Wednesday, and Saturday from the Coach and Horses, Bethel Street,
Norwich.  The proprietors of the Expedition coach announced that a
"single body coach upon a now construction" would start from the White
Swan, St. Peter's, Norwich, every afternoon at three o'clock, and travel
by Thetford and Newmarket, to London, where it arrived on the following
morning at eight o'clock.  "For the better accommodation of outside
passengers the coach has a car attached to it with an awning and sliding
curtain."

4.*--"Died lately, at an advanced age, Mr. Christopher Jarvis, many years
a miller at Wendling, and was wounded at the memorable battle of Minden."

20.--Mr. Mathews, of Covent Garden Theatre, appeared at Norwich Theatre
as Goldfinch ("The Road to Ruin"), Somno ("The Sleep Walker"), and in his
sketch entitled "The Humours of the Playhouse."

--On the bells of St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich, were rung 5,016 changes of
Norwich Court Bob Maximus in four hours two minutes, the first length of
that intricate peal ever rung in England on twelve bells.  It was
conducted by Mr. R. Chesnut.

25.*--"Messrs. Squire, Son, and Hills, of St. Faith's Lane, Norwich, in
addition to the rectifying and vinegar departments have erected extensive
works for the purpose of making flour of mustard."

26.--Died at Grosvenor Place, London, Caroline, Dowager Countess of
Buckinghamshire, widow of John, Earl of Buckingham, of Blickling, and
mother of Viscountess Castlereagh.  "She requested in her will that none
of her family should wear mourning for her."  The funeral was at
Blickling.

--The church of St. Michael Coslany, Norwich, was opened for Sunday
evening lectures, in addition to those of St. Andrew and St. Stephen.

27.--Miss Kelly appeared at Norwich Theatre as Peggy ("The Country
Girl"), and Annette ("The Maid and the Magpie").


FEBRUARY.


1.*--"Died lately, aged 87 years, John Hoy, of Hackford, near Reepham.
He was a soldier in the 48th Regiment of Foot under General Wolfe, and
saw him fall on the plains of Abram, in North America.  When on saying
his noble commander was slain he was knocked down by a Lieut. Clarke with
the butt end of a musket.  Hoy was a soldier 18 years, 17 of which he
passed without once reposing on a bed."

4.--A loyal address was voted by the Corporation of Great Yarmouth
congratulating the Prince Regent upon his escape from the attack made
upon him on his return from the opening of Parliament on January 28th.
The Corporation of Norwich adopted a similar address on the 24th.

6.--The complete peal of 5,040 changes of Grandsire Triples was rung by
the ringers of Wells-next-the-Sea on eight bells in three hours seven
minutes.

13.--The new silver coinage of crowns, half-crowns, shillings, and
sixpences was exchanged for the old at the Guildhall, Norwich, and at the
Town Hall, Yarmouth.  The bankers to whom the new coins were sent
were:--Gurneys and Co., Norwich, Halesworth, Fakenham, Holt, Harleston,
Lynn, Wells, and Yarmouth; Bagge and Bacon, Lynn; Day and Co., Swaffham;
Willett and Son, Thetford; Payne, Tuffnell, and Co., Wells; Kett and
Back, Norwich; Harvey and Co., Norwich; and Day and Sons, Norwich.

14.--Died, aged 70, at his house in the Close, Norwich, Mr. Robert
Partridge, alderman for the Conisford Ward.  He was Sheriff in 1780 and
Mayor in 1781.

15.--Mrs. C. Kemble appeared at King's Lynn Theatre in the character of
Mrs. Oakley ("The Jealous Wife").  The proceeds of the performance were
in aid of a fund for the relief of the poor.

--*"On the secession of Mr. Hindes at the close of the Norwich theatrical
season, he will be succeeded by Mr. Smith, and the acting management will
devolve upon Mr. Bellamy."

--Great distress still prevailing among the poor of Norwich, the Relief
Committee granted the further sum of 200 pounds to be expended in labour.
It was decided to cut a road through Butter Hills to Carrow Bridge.

--*(Advt.)  "The public are respectfully informed that _on February the
18th only_ Irish, French, and plain silver will be taken at the Theatre
Royal, Norwich."

21.--The Right Hon. George Horatio Cholmondeley, Earl of Rocksavage
(eldest son of the Marquis Cholmondeley), was elected Member of
Parliament for Castle Rising, in place of the Hon. Cavendish Bradshaw.

22.*--"A Yarmouth correspondent is anxious to know (1) by what authority
the communication between the body and aisles of St. George's Chapel has
been cut off; and (2) why the Mayor or Lord Bishop is not applied to to
remove the nuisance to the congregation?"

25.--An inquest was held at Norwich on the body of Elizabeth Pope, aged
83, "who on Sunday evening, being alone in her apartment _over the
portico of St. Lawrence's church_, accidentally set herself on fire, and
was burnt in a terrible manner."

26.--Died, aged 75, at Swaffham, Mr. Francis Blomfield, "the last male
branch of the family of Blomfield, the county historian."

27.--Mrs. C. Kemble appeared at Norwich Theatre as Mrs. Oakley ("The
Jealous Wife").  On subsequent evenings she took the parts of Letitia
Hardy ("The Belle's Stratagem"), Caroline ("The Prize"), Lady Teazle, and
Myrtelle ("The Broken Sword").

The Prince Regent this month conferred the honour of knighthood on
Lieut.-Col. Robert John Harvey, K.T.S., in recognition of his
distinguished services in the Peninsular War.


MARCH.


3.--A single wicket cricket match was played in Chapel Field, Norwich,
between "a noted player from Sussex," named Michan, an ex-officer, and a
Hertford man, named Pratt.  The latter won by six wickets, and decided
"considerable bets."

8.*--(Advt.)  "Cocking.  A match for cocks will be fought at Holkham New
Inn on the 10th and 11th of March, between the gentlemen of Wells and the
gentlemen of Holt.  To fight for 10 pounds a battle and 50 pounds the
odd; and two turn outs for 20 pounds a battle.  To fight in silver spurs.
Feeders: Lamb for Wells, Nash for Holt."

10.--Miss Davison, of Drury Lane Theatre, commenced an engagement at
Norwich Theatre, during which she appeared as Rosalind, Juliana ("The
Honeymoon"), Margaretta ("No Song, no Supper"), Lady Townley ("The
Provoked Husband"), Miss Tomboy ("The Romp").

14.--A charge of blasphemy was exhibited before the magistrates at East
Dereham against one Henry Balls, for publishing a handbill entitled "The
Great Assize."  (There is no further record of the case.)

19.--The Revenue cutter Ranger, Capt. Sayers, of Yarmouth, captured a
large lugger with an armed crew of 36 men.  In the action the Ranger lost
three killed and seven wounded.  The cargo consisted of 507 ankers and
945 halves of spirits, 27 bales of tobacco, and 47 bales of Bandannas,
the whole worth 8,000 pounds.

24.--At the Norfolk Assizes, which commenced at Thetford on this date
before Sir Robert Graham, one of the Barons of the Exchequer, the _crim.
con._ action, Laton _v._ Beauchamp, clerk, was tried.  The special jury,
without leaving the box, gave a verdict for the defendant.

--Mr. Bartley appeared at Norwich Theatre as Dr. Cantwell ("The
Hypocrite") and the Mock Doctor.  Mrs. Bartley on the 29th played Lady
Constance to Mr. Bartley's King John.  On subsequent evenings he
impersonated Capt. Allclack ("The Invisible Girl"), and Sir Adam Contest
("The Wedding Day").

--Mr. Blanchard, at Lynn Theatre, appeared as Ollapod ("The Poor
Gentleman"), and Crack ("The Turnpike Gate").

26.--Died at Trowse Old Hall, aged 77, General John Money, Colonel of the
3rd Regiment of Norfolk Yeomanry Cavalry.  He entered the Army as a
volunteer in Elliott's Light Horse in the Seven Years' German War, and
was with them at the battle of Tillinghausen.  He was afterwards a
captain in the 9th (or Norfolk) Regiment of Foot, and in the American War
was Deputy-Assistant Quarter-Master General to the army commanded by
General Burgoyne.  He was the author of several pamphlets on military and
other subjects.  About 40 years before his death he built the mansion
known as Crown Point, where for more than 30 years he gave an annual
ball.


APRIL.


3.--A grand performance of sacred music was given at St. Andrew's Church,
Norwich.  Mrs. Card, a native of the city, was the principal vocalist,
and the choruses were sustained by local amateurs.

--Norwich Infantry Barracks (disused) were sold by auction, without
reserve, by Mr. R. Cana, auctioneer.

4.--A terrible explosion occurred on Wright's Norwich and Yarmouth steam
packet at Foundry Bridge, Norwich.  Of the 22 persons on board, five men,
three women, and a child were killed; six women with fractured legs and
arms were conveyed to the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital, where one died;
and the remaining seven escaped without sustaining material injury.  The
sum of 350 pounds was raised for the relief of the sufferers.  A boat
worked by horse power was subsequently placed upon the river.  "The four
horses walked as in a thrashing machine or mill.  Each in his path which
was 18 feet in diameter.  The horses by walking a distance of two miles
propelled the vessel six or seven miles."

5.--A county meeting was held at the Shirehall, Norwich, pursuant to
requisition and presided over by the High Sheriff (Mr. H. N. Burroughes),
"for the purpose of congratulating the Prince Regent on his escape from
the late atrocious attack upon his person, and of praying his Royal
Highness to dismiss from his presence and councils those advisers who, by
their conduct, had proved themselves to be alike enemies to the Throne
and the people."  The resolutions were moved by the Earl of Albemarle,
seconded by Mr. S. T. Southwell, and supported by Mr. T. W. Coke, M.P.,
and the Rev. George Glover.  They were opposed by the Hon. Col.
Wodehouse, Mr. Edmond Wodehouse, Mr. Serjeant Firth, and Mr. J. Harvey.
The High Sheriff declared the resolutions to be carried "by a most
decided majority."  An address founded on the resolutions was also
adopted, and was presented to the Prince Regent by Mr. Coke at the Levee
on April 21st.--In consequence of these proceedings a document, known as
the "Norfolk Declaration," was signed by upwards of 900 noblemen,
gentlemen, clergy, and freeholders of the county, who considered the
Ministers "eminently entitled to the gratitude of their Sovereign and the
country."  The Declaration was presented to the Prince Regent at the
Levee at Carlton House on July 1st, by the Lord Lieutenant of the county,
accompanied by the Earl of Orford, the Earl of Ancram, Lord C. Townshend,
the Hon. Col. Wodehouse, the Hon. Edward Harbord, Mr. Edmund Bacon, Mr.
Edmond Wodehouse, M.P., Mr. Charles Harvey, M.P., &c.

7.--Mr. Incledon commenced a five nights' engagement at Norwich Theatre
previous to his departure to America.  He appeared as Hawthorn ("Love in
a Village"), and Harry Blunt ("The Turnpike Gate").

14.--A "three double days' play of cocks" commenced at the White Swan
Inn, Norwich, between the gentlemen of Norwich and the gentlemen of
Cambridgeshire, for 10 guineas a battle and 200 guineas the odd.
Feeders: Fisher for Norwich, Thompson for Cambridgeshire.  The match was
won by Cambridgeshire.

--A peal of eight bells, including a new tenor cast by Mears, of London,
was opened at North Elmham by the St. Peter Mancroft company of ringers,
who rang 5,040 changes of Norwich Court Bob in three hours nineteen
minutes.

16.--A new tragedy, entitled "Edwin, Heir of Cressingham," founded on
Mrs. Porter's historical romance, "The Scottish Chiefs," and written by
Mr. Edward Ball, of Norwich, was produced at Norwich Theatre for the
first time, and received with much applause.

21.--Mr. A. T. Fayerman, "surgeon professor" to the "Royal Medical
Institution," Red Lion Street, Norwich, presented to the Prince Regent,
at the Levee at Carlton House, the first annual report of the proceedings
of the institution, with an address from "the Brunswick Knights of
Norwich, and the two lodges of the Ancient and Royal Order of
Stagorians," congratulating his Royal Highness on his "escape from the
late attack."  The Knights and Stagorians, with a band of music and
colours, set out from the Rampant Horse Inn to meet their President on
his return to Norwich on the 22nd, "but the harmony and conviviality of
the meeting were completely outraged by the assembled mob, who broke the
windows of Mr. Simmon's house at Prussia Gardens, tore up the shrubs,
threw vollies of stones at the processionists who were on horseback, and
broke the windows of Mr. Fayerman's house in Red Lion Street."  (The
Stagorians were a society founded in 1728.)

28.--Died, at his house in Berners Street, London, aged 61, Sir Jacob
Henry Astley, Bart., M.P.  He was succeeded in his title by his eldest
son.

--Died in St. Giles', Norwich, Mrs. E. Layton, aged 100 years.


MAY.


1.--Mr. Crisp Brown and Mr. Thomas Thurtell, the two senior aldermen
below the chair, were returned to the Norwich Court of Aldermen without
opposition, and on the 3rd Mr. Brown was unanimously elected Mayor.

5.--Mr. A. Guggle, of Wells-next-the-Sea, introduced an "improved double
bathing machine, so constructed as to render it perfectly safe at all
times, and regulated in a few seconds to any depth of water preferred by
the bather."

8.--The Norwich Court of Guardians ordered a new valuation of property in
the city and hamlets.

19.--The election to fill the vacancy caused in the representation of the
county by the death of Sir H. J. Astley, commenced at Norwich.  The
candidates were Mr. E. R. Pratt, of Ryston, and Mr. Edmond Wodehouse, of
Sennowe Lodge.  The polling continued for five days and closed on the
23rd, when the result was declared as follows:--Wodehouse, 3,896; Pratt,
3,321.

27.--Died at his seat, Great Melton Hall, aged 86, Sir John Lombe, Bart.
He was succeeded in his title by his great nephew, Mr. Richard Paul
Jodrell.  The deceased baronet bequeathed his large estates to Mr. Edward
Beevor, of the Middle Temple, barrister-at-law, who by special Act of
Parliament, which received the Royal Assent on July 7th, was authorised
to assume the surname and bear the arms of Lombe instead of those of
Beevor, in compliance with a condition in the will of the deceased.

28.--The birthday of Mr. Pitt was celebrated by a dinner at the Assembly
Rooms, Norwich, at which Mr. Charles Harvey, M.P., presided.

--Died at St. George's Tombland, Norwich, Mrs. Phoebe Crow, aged 77, "who
in 40 years' practice as a midwife brought into the world 9,730
children."

31.--Mr. Betty appeared as Hamlet at Norwich Theatre on the closing night
of the season, when Mr. Smith, the new manager, delivered an address at
the conclusion of the performance.

--The Brampton Indianman was launched from Mr. Bottomley's yard, and the
Wodehouse brig from Messrs. Lauker and Spong's yard, King's Lynn.


JUNE.


4.--King George III. entered upon his 80th year.  The event was
celebrated in Norwich by the ringing of bells and by a parade of the
Light Horse Volunteers and Yeomanry Cavalry.

9.--Two thousand spectators were present at "the 10th annual grand
wrestling match for prizes given by a society of amateurs for the
encouragement of gymnastic exercises," held at Kirby Cane.  There were 24
competitors, and the winner was Martin Hingle.

17.--Guild Day at Norwich.  Mr. Crisp Brown, the Mayor elect, observed
all the ancient customs, and entertained 300 guests at the guild feast.

18.--A meeting of resident gentry, clergy, yeomanry, and principal
householders of North Greenhoe and Brothercross Hundreds, was held at
Wells-next-the-Sea, under the presidency of Sir William Bolton, when
resolutions were passed expressive of their deep concern at the insults
offered to Mr. T. W. Coke, M.P., at a meeting held at Norwich on the
previous Saturday and during the county election, and an address was
ordered to be presented in accordance with the terms of the resolutions.

19.--Mr. Mathews gave his entertainment, "Mail Coach Adventures," at
Norwich Theatre.

22.--Moses Levi, aged 62, "of the Jewish persuasion," was baptised by the
Rev. George Baldero at the parish church of Rainham St. Martin.

25.--A severe hailstorm occurred in West Norfolk.  Some of the hailstones
measured six inches in circumference.  Much damage was done.  Many rooks
were afterwards found dead.


JULY.


5.--Haddock's exhibition of automata was opened in the Great Room, Davey
Place, Norwich.

7.--At the Holkham Sheep Shearing, which commenced on this date, the
address voted at Wells-next-the-Sea on June 18th was presented to Mr. T.
W. Coke, M.P., who, in reply, said he did not attribute blame to the
poorer classes who had been deluded into the belief that he was their
enemy, but he did blame the Mayor of Norwich, who, in his official
capacity, should have prevented what had taken place.  These remarks led
to a very long and acrimonious newspaper correspondence.

9.--The Rev. Charles Nourse Wodehouse was installed a prebendary of
Norwich Cathedral, in place of the Rev. John Pretyman, D.D., who died at
Lincoln on June 5th.

15.--The salt marshes near Wells-next-the-Sea were inundated by a high
tide during a northerly gale, and nearly 300 sheep, the property of
Messrs. Tuthill, Moore, and John Blomfield, of Warham, were drowned.

--A meeting of the gentry, clergy, and yeomen of the Hundreds of
Guiltcross and Shropham was held at East Harling, under the presidency of
the Earl of Albemarle, when an address was voted to Mr. Coke, M.P., and
presented to him at Thetford Wool Fair on July 26th.

19.--Thomas Carter was publicly whipped in Norwich Market Place for
stealing a cow.

--At the Norwich Court of Mayoralty, the Mayor stated that complaints had
been made to him of offences committed in the city by bakers, foggers,
and others, exercising their trades on Sunday.  The Court gave notice
that it was not lawful "to make or bake any bread, rolls, or cakes of any
sort or kind on the Lord's Day, commonly called Sunday," nor to deliver
them "at any time after half past one of the clock in the afternoon of
that day."

24.--Skipper, the pedestrian, undertook for a wager of 25 guineas to walk
from Norwich to Thetford and back, a distance of 55 miles, in 12 hours.
"He walked 54 miles, but having only four minutes to perform the last
mile, gave in."


AUGUST.


6.--Died at his house in the Lower Close, Norwich, aged 55, Mr. Frank
Sayers, M.D., author of "Poems, including Sketches of the Northern
Mythology," and "Disquisitions, Metaphysical and Literary, Antiquarian
and Historical."  A monument, with a Latin inscription by the Rev. F.
Howes, was erected in the Cathedral to the memory of the deceased.

7.--Died at Hoveton St. John, Mr. Thomas Blofeld, D.L., for many years
one of the chairmen of the Norfolk Quarter Sessions.

11.--Sports were held at Reedham under the patronage of Mr. Layton, of
Reedham Hall.  The principal event was a wrestling match, taken part in
"by twenty-four as fine athletic young fellows as England can produce."

12.--A cocking match, "fought in silver," between the gentlemen of
Norwich and the gentlemen of Yarmouth, commenced at the Feathers Inn,
Yarmouth, and concluded on the 14th.  Feeders: Lamb for Norwich, Nash for
Yarmouth.

15.--The first stone of the Nelson Monument on the South Denes, Yarmouth,
was laid by the Hon. Col. Wodehouse (chairman of the sub-committee), in
the presence of the Mayors and Corporations of Yarmouth and Norwich.  A
civic dinner was given, and in the evening a ball, attended by 350
persons, took place at the Town Hall.

--Mrs. Rigby, wife of Dr. Rigby, gave birth, at Framingham, to three boys
and a girl.  One lived 18 days, and the other three from eight to ten
weeks.  At a quarterly meeting of the Norwich Corporation on September
12th, the Court of Aldermen resolved that a piece of plate be presented
to Alderman and Mrs. Rigby in commemoration of the birth, to which the
Commons "cordially acquiesced on the understanding that if the same event
should happen in their own body they should put in a claim for a similar
complimentary memento."  A violent personal dispute ensued between two
members of the Common Council, "which so alarmed eight of the members for
the Ward beyond the Water that they left the room without leave of the
Speaker, the consequence being that the whole proceedings proved
abortive."  Another meeting was held on the 27th, when the presentation
was amicably agreed to, and on December 24th Dr. and Mrs. Rigby were
given a silver bread basket, "with the names of the children and the arms
of the family richly emblazoned thereon."

16.--The thirteenth annual exhibition of the Norwich Society of Artists
was opened in Sir Benjamin Wrenche's Court.  Mr. W. M. Sharp was
president, Mr. J. Freeman vice-president, and Mr. P. Barnes, secretary.
The Norfolk and Norwich Original Society of Artists advertised their
thirteenth exhibition to be held at the New Room, Theatre Plain--Mr. R.
Ladbrook, president; Mr. J. Sillett, vice-president; Mr. J. Thirtle,
secretary.  Both exhibitions were honoured by the presence of the Mayor
and Corporation.

--Died at his house, Chapel Field, Norwich, Mr. John Ninham, aged 63,
artist and engraver.

23.--Mr. Keen performed at Norwich Theatre in the character of Richard
III.  On succeeding nights he appeared as Othello, Bertram, Sir Giles
Overreach, Sir Edward Mortimer, Selim ("Barbarossa"), Shylock, Octavian
("The Mountaineers"), and Paul ("Paul and Virginia").  He afterwards
fulfilled an engagement at Yarmouth Theatre.

26.--A contested election took place at Norwich for the office of
freemens' Sheriff.  Mr. John Lovick was returned with 807 votes as
against 718 polled by his opponent, Mr. George Harvey.


SEPTEMBER.


6.*--"Last week two troops of the 5th Dragoon Guards, under the command
of Major Irwin, marched into Norwich Barracks, and relieved the two
troops of the Royal Dragoons, ordered to Scotland."

10.--The Bishop of Norwich confirmed 800 persons of both sexes at a
special service held at Norwich Cathedral.

13.*--"Died lately, at Madrid, at the house of her sister, Lady
Whitlingham, Barbara, wife of Mr. Bartholomew Frere, his Majesty's
secretary to the Embassy at the Ottoman Porte.  The marriage had been
solemnized by proxy according to the usual forms, but Mr. Frere having
been detained at Constantinople, neither had the happiness of seeing each
other since their union."

26.--Skipper, the pedestrian, undertook to walk 60 miles in 12 successive
hours on the bowling-green at the King's Head Inn, East Dereham.  "He was
so exhausted in the last two miles that he could not accomplish his
task."

--A meeting was held in St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, when an auxiliary
association to the London Society for Promoting Christianity among the
Jews was established, with the Lord Bishop as president.

27.--Died at Kirby Cane parsonage, from injuries received by the
accidental discharge of a gun, the Hon. C. J. Keppel, fifth son of the
Earl of Albemarle.

--A party of Indian jugglers gave a performance at Mr. Noverre's
ball-room, "near Messrs. Gurney's bank," Norwich.


OCTOBER.


1.*--(Advt.)  "Christopher Woods has been a prisoner in Norwich Castle
during four and a half years, and there must remain for life, unless
assisted with 20 pounds to enable him to put in an answer to a bill in
Chancery.  The attention of the truly Charitable is earnestly requested
in behalf of this unhappy man, his distressed wife, and four children."

11.--Mr. Robert Baker, glover and breeches maker, of Wells-next-the-Sea,
was found murdered in Market Lane, about 200 yards from the town.  His
skull was beaten in and his throat cut.  The county magistrates,
assembled for other business at the Shirehall, Norwich, ordered the
printing of 3,000 handbills giving notice of the murder.  These were
taken by the constables to every coach, fish cart, and other conveyance
leaving Norwich.  A man named James Johnson, 29 years of age, was
apprehended on suspicion at the King's Head Inn, Hethersett, on October
15th.  The prisoner was tried at the Norfolk Assizes, held at Thetford on
March 19, 1818, when, after a trial lasting seven and a half hours, the
jury returned a verdict of guilty, and he was sentenced to death by Mr.
Justice Dallas, "his body to be delivered to the surgeons to be
anatomised" on the Saturday following.  On the prisoner asking for "a
longer period than two days in which to prepare for eternity," the judge
ordered death to be postponed until the following Monday, on which day
the execution took place on the Castle Hill, Norwich, in the presence of
5,000 spectators.  "Mr. Wilson, a gentleman from London, and Mr. Austen,
a pupil of Mr. Dalrymple's, performed the dissection and prepared the
subject for the lectures which have been daily delivered by Mr. Crosse."
At the trial an indictment was preferred against an accomplice of the
prisoner, one William Hardiment, not in custody.  A third man, Benjamin
Neal, was in custody charged with being an accessory before the fact, but
the bill was thrown out by the Grand Jury.  (See March 28th, 1822.)

14.--Under the direction of Messrs. Beckwith and Pettet a grand Musical
Festival began at Norwich, and was continued until October 19th.
Miscellaneous concerts were given in St. Andrew's Hall, and selections
from oratorios in St. Peter's church.  The principal performers were Mrs.
Salmon, Miss Frith, Mr. Vaughan, Mr. Hawes, and Mr. Bellamy.

22.--A single wicket match was played at Holt by Frost, a member of the
Holt Cricket Club, and Pilch, of the Litcham Club, for 10 pounds a side.
Pilch was the winner.

28.--Mr. W. Finch announced that he had acquired Harper's Gardens, "near
St. Stephen's Gates, Norwich."  Mr. Harper, the former proprietor,
removed to the Falcon Inn, Ditchingham.

30.--Died, in his 85th year, James Vines, for upwards of 60 years a
member of the St. Peter Mancroft company of ringers, at Norwich.


NOVEMBER.


5.--A salmon trout, measuring 40 inches in length and weighing 21 pounds,
was killed at the New Mills, Norwich.

7.--An express arrived at Norwich bearing tidings of the death of
Princess Charlotte.  "Three post chaises and four followed a few hours
after with gentlemen from some of the first London houses, to buy up all
the black bombazines that the manufacturers had on hand, some of whom,
however, had earlier intelligence of the melancholy event by letter
brought by the express messenger, who arrived here on horseback."  It was
subsequently stated: "Notwithstanding the immediate and necessary
exertions of all persons employed in the manufacture of bombazines and
other articles of sable hue, they have not yet been able to satisfy the
demand for goods of this description, whilst the dressmakers, &c., have
found it difficult to execute all the orders they have received.  During
the last week all the coaches have departed heavily laden with
manufactured goods."  On November 19th, the day of the funeral, black was
worn generally, St. Peter's bell was tolled, and the Mayor and
Corporation attended service at the Cathedral.  "The Mayor substituted
for the official cloak of justice one of black crape, and he also wore
weepers."

10.--Messrs. Adams' troupe of equestrians commenced a season at the
Pantheon, Norwich.

14.--Died, whilst on a visit to Holkham Hall, Elizabeth, Countess of
Albemarle.

15.*--"There have recently been cast at the bell foundry at Downham five
clock bells for the new General Post Office, Dublin.  A large bell is now
preparing at the same place for erection in the Wabash, Indiana State,
North America, by a religious society of Germans who have settled there."

20.--Several persons "who had long resisted the threats and entreaties of
the inhabitants of Old Buckenham" were convicted before a magistrate at
Larlingford, and fined for playing cricket on Sunday, October 2nd, on Old
Buckenham green.


DECEMBER.


5.--At a special assembly of the Corporation of Norwich addresses of
condolence were voted to the Prince Regent and to Prince Leopold of
Saxe-Coburg, expressive of the deep grief felt by the citizens on the
death of the Princess Charlotte.  Similar addresses were presented by the
Corporations of Yarmouth, Lynn, and Thetford.

--Died in St. Stephen's, Norwich, in his 74th year, Mr. James Hardy, of
Hethersett.  He served the office of Sheriff of Norwich in 1800.

6.--Messrs. Caldwell, Waterhouses, and Co., advertised the establishment
of a service of "new light caravans upon springs."  The conveyances left
Norwich every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday morning at eight o'clock, and
arrived at the Swan-with-two-Necks, Lad Lane, London, on the following
morning at six o'clock.  They were despatched from London every Tuesday,
Thursday, and Saturday evening at five o'clock, and arrived in Norwich
the next afternoon at three o'clock.  The rate of carriage from London to
Norwich was 9s. per cwt., and from Norwich to London 11s. per cwt.

15.--A three days' cocking match commenced at the White Swan, St. Peter
Mancroft, Norwich, between the gentlemen of Norfolk and the gentlemen of
Suffolk.  A main of 31 cocks was won by Norfolk six battles ahead, and a
match of 11 chickens by Norfolk one battle ahead.  The byes, of which 14
were fought, were even.  Stakes: 10 pounds a battle and 200 pounds the
odd; chickens, 5 pounds a battle and 50 pounds the odd; byes 10 pounds
per battle.  Feeders: Lamb for Norfolk, Nash for Suffolk.

16.--A prize fight took place on Bungay Common between Sutton, the Black,
and Ned Painter, who was accompanied from Norwich by a large number of
his supporters.  Fifteen rounds were fought in one hour forty-two minutes
for a purse of 100 pounds, 80 pounds for the winner and 20 pounds for the
loser.  Painter, "the best man of the day with Norfolk training," won.
"Several well-dressed women were present at the fight."

20.--The Fakenham and London post coach, the Patriot, was advertised to
run from Fakenham on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday.  The proprietors were
Robert Leamon, Fakenham; T. W. Woer, Swaffham; Thos. Golding, Newmarket;
George Barton, Cambridge; and John Eames, London.

--Joseph Penny, of Yarmouth, who impersonated Neptune at the Peace
festival at Yarmouth on April 21, 1814, was drowned with his son whilst
sailing a small boat in stormy weather.

27.*--"The commissions executed and presents sent from this land of
turkies greatly exceeded any former year.  It is calculated that upwards
of 4,000 have been despatched by different conveyances from Norwich
during the past week, which, averaged at nine pounds each, at 10d. per
pound, amounted to 1,500 pounds."



1818.


JANUARY.


3.--Shore's menagerie was exhibited on the Castle Ditches, Norwich.

5.--The Norwich Court of Guardians determined to proceed with the
valuation of property in the city and hamlets.  Messrs. Rooks, Athow, and
Stannard were appointed to make the valuation at the remuneration of 850
pounds.

6.--Twelfth Day was observed in Norwich, "when the confectioners made a
grand display of their frosted and ornamented cakes.  Mr. Turner, of the
Gentleman's Walk, had one weighing 220 pounds and measuring three yards
in circumference.  It was sawn to pieces next day."  Mr. and Mrs.
Patteson gave a Twelfth Night ball and supper at their residence in
Surrey Street, at which 140 guests were present.

8.--At a meeting, presided over by Mr. T. O. Springfield, at the Swan
Inn, Norwich, resolutions were moved by Mr. Edward Taylor, and a
subscription raised to testify "the estimation in which they hold the
extraordinary and intrepid exertions of Mr. Hone, in defence of the
liberty of the Press, and to assist to defray the expenses of his
repeated prosecutions."

--Died, aged 100 years, Ashton Goodyer, formerly keeper of the workhouse
at Tilney.

13.--At a county meeting held at the Shirehall, under the presidency of
the High Sheriff (Mr. H. N. Burroughes), addresses of condolence with the
Prince Regent and Prince Leopold on the death of the Princess Charlotte,
were moved by Lord Walpole and seconded by the Hon. Col. Wodehouse.  The
Ven. Archdeacon Bathurst opposed the addresses on account of the omission
of the name of the Princess of Wales, and moved as an amendment "That any
addresses to the Prince Regent and Prince Leopold, unaccompanied by an
address to the Princess of Wales, would operate as an insulting neglect
to one of the first characters in the Royal Family, and as a disrespect
to the memory of her who was the pride and hope of the British people."
The amendment was seconded by Mr. N. Palmer, of Yarmouth.  The High
Sheriff objected to put the amendment, as the name of the Princess of
Wales had not been included in the requisition.  The addresses were then
adopted.  Archdeacon Bathurst alone dissenting.

15.--Lord and Lady Castlereagh and Prince Esterhazy, the Austrian
ambassador, passed through Norwich on their return to London after a
visit to Lord Suffield at Blickling.

16.--Died at Old Windsor, aged 71, the Right Hon. Lord Walsingham, of
Merton Hall.  He was the only son of Sir William de Grey, several years
Lord Chief Justice of Common Pleas.  In 1787 he was appointed joint
Postmaster-General, and to within two years of his death had been
chairman of the Committees of Privileges, &c., in the House of Lords.

19.--At a meeting of the inhabitants of Yarmouth, held at the New Hall,
upwards of 6,000 pounds was subscribed for aiding a plan to extend the
navigation of the river Waveney from Bungay to Diss.  The sum of 5,000
pounds was raised in the latter town.  At a meeting held at Bungay on
February 5th the scheme was opposed by the landowners through whose
property the projected canal was to pass.  On February 13th the
inhabitants of Thetford met to oppose the undertaking, as it was likely
to be injurious to the tolls of the Lesser Ouse.  It was announced on
February 28th that 20,000 pounds had been subscribed, and that the
expense of carrying the scheme into execution would be 36,931 pounds.  A
meeting was held at Yarmouth on March 10th, at which it was decided "out
of respect to Mr. Adair and the rest of the proprietors to defer
application to Parliament until the ensuing Session."  Ultimately the
scheme was abandoned.  In the course of the discussions on the project,
"it was thrown out in a highly respectable quarter that the end in view
might be answered and all objections obviated by the substitution of an
iron railway for a canal."  (This is the first instance in which a
"railway" is mentioned in the NORFOLK CHRONICLE.)

--Mr. Sinclair, from Covent Garden Theatre, appeared at the Theatre
Royal, Norwich, as Orlando ("The Cabinet"), Apollo (in the burletta of
"Midas"), and Henry Bertram ("Guy Mannering").

26.--The stacks of Mr. John Balls, farmer, Lessingham, were destroyed by
fire, his calves suspended by their necks from a beam in an outhouse, and
other outrages committed.  At the Norfolk Assizes, held at Thetford in
the month of March, James Thompson was indicted for firing the stacks,
and, after a trial lasting five hours, was acquitted.

31.--Miss Davison, of Drury Lane, commenced an engagement at Norwich
Theatre, during which she appeared as Lady Teazle, Priscilla Tomboy ("The
Romp"), Lady Bell ("Know your own Mind"), Roxalana ("The Sultan"), and
Lady Racket ("Three Weeks after Marriage").


FEBRUARY.


4.--Died, at Hethersett, aged 70, Mr. John Buckle, one of the aldermen of
the Great Ward of Mancroft, Norwich.  He served the office of Sheriff in
1787, and of Mayor in 1793.

16.--Mr. Emery, of Covent Garden, made his first appearance at Norwich
Theatre, as Tyke ("The School of Reform").  His other characters included
Robin Roughead ("Fortune's Frolic"), Zekiel Homespun ("Heir at Law"), and
Sheepface ("The Village Lawyer").

21.--Died, aged 88, Mr. William Utten, of the Lower Close, Norwich,
formerly chapter clerk to the Dean and Chapter, and secretary to the Lord
Bishop of Norwich.

28.*--"Mr. D. Fisher, whose performance of the arduous characters of
Hamlet, Macbeth, and Richard III. at Drury Lane were so excellent as to
induce the managers to engage him at a liberal salary from the
commencement of next season, has been engaged to perform those characters
at Norwich, and will make his first appearance this evening in the part
of Hamlet."  Mr. Fisher was a son of the manager of the Norfolk and
Suffolk Company of Comedians.


MARCH.


2.--The Carrow Bridge toll bar, at Norwich, was let for three years at
the annual rent of 224 pounds.

4.--During a severe gale from the south-east great damage was done to
shipping on the Norfolk coast, and several vessels were driven ashore.
At the church of Pulham St. Mary the Virgin the chancel window, 20 feet
by 11 feet, was almost demolished, and another window on the south side
was entirely blown out with the stone work.  Four large sheets of lead
were blown off the roof of East Bilney Church.

--It having been represented to the Norwich Court of Mayoralty that "the
annual Fair on Tombland hath for several years past been continued to an
unreasonable time of the night, not only to the disturbance and
inconvenience of the inhabitants, but so as to prevent the decent
observance of next day, being Good Friday," it was ordered "that the
ensuing Fair on Maunday Thursday shall end at eleven o'clock in the
evening of that day, when all persons resorting to the same are to repair
to their respective houses, and all those who shall have goods, stalls,
and shows are directed to cease their several trades and occupations at
the said hour of eleven, and immediately to remove and carry their goods
and effects from the said fairstead."  The Fair was held on March 19,
when "there were few exhibitions on Tombland, the show caravans, which
were more numerous than usual, being judiciously arranged on the Castle
Meadow."

9.--The election of Common Councilmen for the four wards of Norwich,
commenced on this date.  "The ascendency of the Purple and Orange or of
the Blue and White party in the Corporation is supposed to have some
influence at a General Election, and as that event is considered to be at
no great distance, neither money nor exertions were spared to obtain a
majority in the Long Ward."  The expenses were estimated at some
thousands of pounds, from 15 to 40 pounds was paid for votes, and the
freemen were brought in carriages from the country to vote as at a
Parliamentary Election.

10.--Married at Benacre, by the Rev. Richard Gooch, Capt. G. W. Manby,
barrack master, Yarmouth, to Sophia, daughter of Sir Thomas Gooch, Bart.,
of Benacre Hall, and sister of Mr. Sherlock Gooch, M.P., for Suffolk.

16.--At the Norfolk Assizes, held at Thetford, the _crim. con._ action,
Muskett _v._ Gurney, in which the damages were laid at 10,000 pounds, was
tried before a special jury.  Verdict for the defendant.

19.--The first Norwich Sick Poor Repository was held at Mr. Noverre's
room, St. Michael-at-Plea, on Tombland Fair day.  "The room was crowded
by the beauty and fashion of our town and its vicinity, and the counters
were completely cleared at three o'clock, when the receipts amounted to
115 pounds."

24.--Died at Hare Street, Romford, Mr. Humphrey Repton, the celebrated
landscape gardener.  He was buried at Aylsham.

26.--The organ at Swaffham church was opened by Mr. Beckwith, of Norwich.
Selections of sacred music were rendered at the church, and in the
evening a miscellaneous concert was given in the Assembly-room.  The
principal vocalists were Mrs. Card, Miss Williams, Mr. C. Fisher (tenor),
and the choristers from Norwich Cathedral.

31.--Married, at Redenhall Church, by the Ven. Archdeacon Oldershaw, Mr.
Gurney Barclay, of Tavistock Square, London, to Miss Freshfield, of
Harleston.  "On the bride's return the horses were taken from her
carriage, and, amid the cheering of the delighted people, she was drawn,
attended by a band of music, through the town."


APRIL.


5.--The London mail by way of Bury and Newmarket was discontinued, and
two light four-inside coaches, called the Mercury, substituted, starting
from the Angel Inn, Norwich, at 4.45 p.m., and from the Golden Cross,
Charing Cross, London, at six p.m., Sundays excepted.  The proprietors of
the Expedition post coach substituted two light post coaches which ran
from the Swan Inn, Norwich, every afternoon at four o'clock, and from the
White Horse, Fetter Lane, London, at 4.30.  The mail by Bury and
Newmarket had been established 33 years, and was discontinued from lack
of public support.  The Norwich and London mail by Ipswich and Colchester
continued to run as before.

8.--The Eau Brink Drainage Bill was read a third time in the House of
Commons, and the Act was subsequently passed for increasing the fund for
carrying into execution the several previous Acts for improving the
drainage of the fens, and the navigation of the several Norfolk rivers
communicating with the river Ouse.

11.--Six prisoners escaped from the Norwich City Gaol by breaking through
an 18-inch brick wall, whence they entered the snuff manufactory of
Messrs. Waite and Cozens, and with their irons on made their way to the
Market Place.  With one exception they were speedily recaptured.

--*"According to the returns of the Tax Office to March 25, 1817, the
Norfolk Land-tax amounted to 63,471 pounds 10s. 7d.; redeemed, 18,526
pounds 16s. 2d."

14.--The Norwich Paving Commissioners, in consequence of complaints
regarding the imperfect lighting and watching of the streets, appointed a
committee of fourteen of their members, and co-opted other persons, to
superintend the placing of the watchmen.  The committee were requested to
"occasionally perambulate the city, and to observe the state of the lamps
and the conduct of the watchmen."

18.*--(Advt.)  "To be fought at the White Swan Inn, Norwich, on Monday,
April 20th, 1818, and two following days, three double days play of cocks
for 10 guineas a battle, and 200 guineas the odd, between the gentlemen
of Norwich and the gentlemen of Cambridge.  Feeders: Lamb for Norwich,
Thompson for Cambridge."

--*(Advt.)  "The London and Norwich mail coach by Colchester and Ipswich.
The Postmaster-General having thought proper to discontinue the mail
coach by Newmarket, which had been established 33 years, from the public
not having latterly given it that support which its usefulness demanded,
the contractors for the remaining mail by Ipswich and Colchester, which
will in future be the conveyance of the Norwich letters, hope that so
useful a carriage in this commercial city and county will have such
success as to promote its future encouragement and continuance."

23.--St. George's Day was observed in Norwich as the festival of the
tutelar saint of England and as the appointed date for the celebration of
the birthday of the Prince Regent.  St. Peter's bells were rung, and at
night a ball was given at Chapel Field House.

24.--A meeting, presided over by Mr. J. J. Gurney, was held at the
Lancasterian School, Norwich, to encourage the establishment of Sunday
schools.

26.--Died at Norwich, aged 47, the Rev. Augustus Beevor, M.A.  "He was
educated at Bennet College, Cambridge, where he early distinguished
himself, and as a reward of his literary merits, received many college
prizes.  He was rector of Berghapton, Norfolk, and of Otley, Suffolk."

27.--After the interval of 15 years the boundaries of the county of the
city of Norwich were perambulated by the Mayor (Mr. Crisp Brown),
attended by the Sheriffs, several of the aldermen, city officers, and
others on horseback, and by a great number of persons on foot.  Much beer
was drunk _en route_, and at Earlham the chief personages were
entertained by Mr. J. J. Gurney, and 400 men and boys received each a
pint of beer and a piece of cake.  A man swam the river at Earlham,
another crossed it at Hellesdon.  "When proceeding in the direction of
Sprowston they were met on the road, leading from Norwich to Crostwick,
by Mr. James Cozens, who formally declared his intention to protest
against the establishment of the line of boundary which they were taking,
and pointed out a boundary mark nearer Norwich, which on inspection
proved to be that of St. Clement's parish."


MAY.


1.--A two days' poll commenced for the election of Mayor at Norwich.  The
poll was declared on the 2nd as follows:--Ald. Marsh, 821; Ald. Leman,
820; Ald. Thurtell, 474; Ald. Back, 412.  Mr. Leman was on the 3rd
elected, by the Court of Aldermen, Mayor for the second time.

3.--At a meeting of the Norwich Corporation it was agreed to present
congratulatory addresses to the Prince Regent and to the Princess
Elizabeth on her marriage with the Hereditary Prince of Hesse Homburgh.
On a ballot in the common council-room there were 24 for and 24 against
the addresses.  The Speaker (Mr. Samuel Stone) gave his casting vote in
favour of the addresses, which accordingly became acts of assembly.

6.--The birthday of Mr. T. W. Coke, M.P., was celebrated at Harleston,
Wells, Wymondham, and other places by public dinners.

12.--A prize fight took place on a field near Thorpe Asylum between
William Cox, blacksmith, and John Camplin, a Norwich weaver.  "Among the
spectators were a great number of females."  Camplin was seconded by Ned
Painter, and Cox by Wharton.  Twenty-nine rounds were fought in 42
minutes for 5 pounds a side.  Cox won.  Another fight between Pegg and
Short, "who milled each other for more than an hour," resulted in the
victory of the latter.

13.--A new gallery erected in North Walsham church was opened with a
grand selection of sacred music from the works of Handel, under the
direction of Messrs. Fish and Card, of Norwich.  The principal vocal
performers were Mrs. Card, Mr. Frewer, and Mr. Barron, and the choruses
were supported by performers from the Norwich concerts, and by the
Cathedral choristers.

16.--Died at Lynn, Ann Crawforth, aged 104, supposed to be the oldest
member of the Methodist Society.

18.--Miss Brunton, granddaughter of Mr. John Brunton, the former manager,
appeared at Norwich Theatre as Letitia Hardy ("The Belle's Stratagem").
Her other characters during the engagement were Miss Hardcastle,
Rosalind, and Lady Elizabeth ("The Day after the Wedding").

19.--A new peal of six bells, cast and hung by William Dobson, of Downham
Market, was opened at Northwold.  Prizes of ten guineas and five guineas
were offered to competing companies who performed the best and next best
peals of 720 complete changes.  The New Buckenham and Hopton ringers were
adjudged equal.

--At the Norwich Consistory Court, sentence of suspension for two years
was passed by the Rev. William Young, Chancellor, on the Rev. Edward
Leathes, rector of Reedham with Freethorpe, for neglecting to perform his
ministerial duties in those churches for about eight months in the course
of the years 1816 and 1817.

20.--Bull-baiting took place on Carrow Hills, Norwich.  "The game old
bull resisted every effort of the well-seasoned dogs, and remained master
of the ring.  A young bull was afterwards brought in, who is to be
trained up to exercise the rising generation of the canine species, and
for the amusement of the lovers of this fine art."

--A rowing match between two four-oared boats, the Swift and the
Adriadne, took place from Carrow to Whitlingham.  The Swift, "rowed by
four brothers of the name of Lanham, well known on the stream," won.
"The match was for each other's boat, valued complete at 14 or 15
pounds."  (This is the first instance in which the names of the rowers
are given.)

28.--The annual dinner in commemoration of Pitt's birthday was held at
the Assembly Rooms, Norwich, under the presidency of the Hon. Col.
Wodehouse.

--Tenders were invited for taking down the existing and building the new
bridge, at Hellesdon, either of timber or iron.  The Corporation on June
30 accepted the tender of Mr. Frost to build an iron bridge for 1,140
pounds.

30.--Miss Byrne began a short engagement at Norwich Theatre, during which
she appeared in favourite comic operas and musical entertainments.  Her
impersonations included Adela ("The Haunted Tower") and Rosina.

--*(Advt.)  "A match of cocks will be fought at the Angel Inn, St.
Stephen's, Norwich, on June 15th and 16th, between the gentlemen of
Norfolk and the gentlemen of Norwich, to show fifteen mains and five
byes.  To fight for 5 pounds a battle and 20 pounds the odd.  Feeders:
Stafford for Norfolk, Lamb for Norwich."

31.--Died at Wakefield, Mr. Fitzgerald, manager of the Leeds, Lincoln,
Sheffield, and Hull Theatres, and many years a favourite performer in the
Norwich Company.


JUNE.


1.--Mr. Charles Harvey, M.P., issued an address to the electors of
Norwich, in which he announced his intention of declining to offer
himself for re-election.

2.--Died at Coltishall, Mr. William Warrant, aged 100 years.

4.--The 81st birthday of George III. was celebrated in Norwich.  The
Mayor and Corporation, preceded by a band of music, went in state to the
Cathedral.

8.--A camping match, Norfolk against Suffolk, took place at Kirby Cane
for 10 pounds a side, and, after a spirited contest, Norfolk won.  "This
is the first _thorough boxing camping match_ which has taken place for
these last 35 years, and considering that not five out of the twenty
individuals who played had ever before been engaged in any pugilistic
contest, it was astonishing to observe the spirit of gallantry which
animated both parties.  The spectators amounted to some thousands, among
whom were many gentlemen of rank and fortune."

9.--Parliament having been dissolved and the writ for the election
received, Mr. W. Smith and Mr. R. H. Gurney, the "Blue and White"
candidates, made their public entry into Norwich.  The Hon. Edward
Harbord, the "Orange and Purple" candidate, was met at Mile End on the
11th.  His barouche was drawn into the city by the crowd, and a large
cavalcade of freeholders and freemen was in attendance.  Thence until the
day of election there was an active canvass in the city, and party
feeling ran high.

15.--Seaman's Museum of Natural History was exhibited on Orford Hill,
Norwich.

16.--Guild Day at Norwich.  Many members of the freemen's clubs, with
blue and white favours in their hats, and with party flags flying,
marched into the Market Place in order to attend the new Mayor to the
Cathedral.  Alderman Herring protested against such a display of party
feeling on this day.  Mr. Smith, the Parliamentary candidate, addressed
the people from a window in the Market Place, saying that anything like
party appeared to be indecorous on such an occasion, and he for one
should put his colours into his pocket.  His example, however, was not
generally followed.  After service at the Cathedral Mr. Barnabas Leman
was sworn in as Mayor, and the guild feast, given in St. Andrew's Hall,
was attended by 300 guests.

17.--Norwich Election began on this day, and the poll closed on the day
following at 1.30 p.m., with the following result:--W. Smith, 2,089; R.
H. Gurney, 2,032; the Hon. Edward Harbord, 1,475.  The two first-named
were returned.

--Thetford Election: Lord C. Fitzroy and Mr. N. R. Colbourne were
returned without a contest, on the withdrawal of Mr. Webster.

--Castle Rising Election: Lord Rocksavage and the Hon. F. Greville Howard
were returned unopposed.

18.--Lynn Election: Lord Walpole and Sir M. B. ffolkes were returned
unopposed.

19.--Yarmouth Election: The Hon. George Anson, 780; C. E. Rumbold, 760;
E. K. Lacon, 651; General Loftus, 612.  The two first-named were elected.

23.--Norfolk Election: Mr. T. W. Coke and Mr. E. Wodehouse were returned
unopposed.  Mr. Philip Hamond, of Westacre, opened a canvass in
opposition to Mr. Wodehouse, but relinquished it on the eve of the
election.  After the chairing Mr. Coke and his friends dined at the Swan
Inn, Norwich, and Mr. Wodehouse and his supporters at the Angel Inn.  At
night the members attended the ball at Chapel Field House, where the
dancing was opened by Mr. Coke and Mrs. Micklethwaite and by Mr.
Wodehouse and Mrs. N. Bacon.

Dr. C. Brown, of Margaretta Farm, and Mr. T. B. Plestow, of Watlington
Hall, received, this month, the honour of knighthood.


JULY.


4.--Spring, Scroggins, Purcell, and other celebrated pugilists, gave a
boxing display at the Swan Inn, Norwich.

6.--Died, aged 78, Mr. Richard Beatniffe, many years a well-known
bookseller in Norwich.

--Holkham Sheep Shearing commenced.  The only new implements exhibited
were a manure drill, by Mr. Frost, of Saham, and a self-sowing dibbling
machine, by Mr. Woodward, of Norwich.

12.--A severe drought of nine weeks' duration was ended on this day by a
"joyful rain."

--A new light post coach, called "The Day," carrying four insides and ten
outsides, commenced running from the Angel Inn, Market Place, Norwich, to
the Crown and Anchor Tavern, the Quay, Yarmouth.  The journey occupied
three hours each way, and the coach was owned by T. S. Coldwell and Co.

13.--Races for hackneys, hunters, and ponies, took place at
Wells-next-the-Sea, upon "a fine level width of firm beach sand."  An
immense concourse of spectators attended.

15.--Died at St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich, aged 72, Capt. James Murray,
adjutant of the 2nd Regiment of Norfolk Yeomanry Cavalry, and formerly
captain in the 9th Regiment of Foot.  He served with distinction during
the whole of the American War.

16.--The first stone of a new bridge at Letheringsett was laid by Mrs.
Best, of Bayfield Hall.  The company, after being entertained to
breakfast by Mr. William Hardy, proceeded through his gardens to a deep
excavation in the bed of the river, where the stone was placed in
position amid the cheers of the spectators and the firing of guns.

20.--The performances of Mr. David Fisher's company in "the elegant
little theatre" at East Dereham, terminated on this date, "when the
performers assembled on the stage and drank a parting glass and bade
farewell of the crowded audience amid shouts of applause."

22.--A grand cricket match played on Newmarket Heath for 330 guineas a
side, between the Holt and Newmarket clubs.  It concluded on the 23rd,
when the score was as follows:--Newmarket, 84-101; Holt, 114-74.

23.--A silver cup was rowed for by three boats at Norwich, and won by the
Apollo (Bacon).  Distance, five miles; time, 38.5 minutes.

--A troop of the 15th Light Dragoons (King's Hussars), commanded by Major
Cochrane, marched into Norwich to relieve the 5th Dragoon Guards, who the
same day set out for York.

25.*--"Mr. Case, a respectable farmer, at Stratton Strawless, lately
sustained a loss of 30 young turkies and 11 goslings, all which a
voracious fat sow devoured after a hearty breakfast."

27.--Mr. Blanchard, of Covent Garden Theatre, appeared at Norwich Theatre
as General Heartall ("The Soldier's Daughter").  Among the other
characters impersonated by him during his engagement were Crack ("The
Turnpike Gate"), Lazarillo ("Two Strings to your Bow"), Abednego ("Jew
and Doctor"), Caleb Quotem ("The Wags of Windsor"), and Dr. Ollapod ("The
Poor Gentleman").

--At a meeting of the merchants of the city, held at the Angel Inn,
Norwich, under the presidency of Mr. Crisp Brown, it was agreed to open
up a trade from Gainsborough to Yarmouth, and to employ four vessels to
sail alternately from both places.

31.--Died at his house in St. James's Square, London, Viscount Anson.  He
married in 1794 Ann Margaret, second daughter of Mr. T. W. Coke, of
Holkham, and was succeeded in his title and estates by the Hon. Thomas
William Anson, M.P. for Yarmouth.


AUGUST.


12.--Two gentlemen "angling on that beautiful river at Buckenham,
belonging to Sir Thomas Beauchamp Proctor," caught 210 pounds of fish,
the greater part of which were bream.  This was described as "a
circumstance unprecedented in this or any other part of the country."

15.--The whaler Enterprize from Greenland, Capt. Sanderson, arrived at
her berth at South Lynn, with eleven "fish" on board, "which it is
supposed will produce about 160 tons of oil, estimated to be worth 6,000
pounds, exclusive of whalebone, &c."

28.--A cricket match was played at Bungay between the Holt and Bungay
clubs, for stakes amounting to 132 pounds.  Scores: Holt, 89-130; Bungay,
54-28.  The return match was fixed for September 7th, but Bungay paid
forfeit.  In the first match, owing to men being objected to on both
sides, "it was played with only ten batsmen, but with the usual numbers
in the field."


SEPTEMBER.


1.--Robert Skipper, the Norwich pedestrian, began a walk of 1,000 miles
in 20 successive days.  He started from St. Stephen's Gates at five
o'clock a.m. and returned from the twenty-fifth milestone on the Thetford
road at nine p.m.  He relinquished the task on the ninth day in
consequence of lameness.

8.--Miss O'Neil commenced a five nights' engagement at Norwich Theatre.
She appeared in the characters of Belvidera ("Venice Preserved"), Juliet,
Mrs. Haller ("The Stranger"), Mrs. Beverley ("The Gamester"), and Mrs.
Oakley ("The Jealous Wife").  "The box office was literally besieged
every morning, and the spirit of politeness and gallantry maintained only
a very feeble influence over the conduct of the assembled multitude.  No
law prevailed but that of the strongest; nothing was to be heard but
shrieks, reproaches, and lamentations--nothing to be seen but bonnets
cramped up, hats squeezed flat, torn gowns and coat flaps, and a motley
mob in the highest state of exasperation, fermentation, and desperation.
On the nights of the performance the house was crowded in every part.
Families of the highest respectability, both of the town and from the
country, were to be seen contenting themselves, many of them with
inconvenient situations.  Even the orchestra was occupied by the
audience."  The receipts averaged 200 pounds a night, and Miss O'Neil,
including her benefit, received 700 pounds.

--A public meeting was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, at which it was
decided to apply to Parliament for leave to bring in a Bill for widening
and deepening the Norwich river so as to render it navigable by vessels
of burden from Norwich to the sea.  The Mayor presided, and the project,
which afterwards gave rise to the famous agitation "Norwich, a Port," was
introduced by Mr. Crisp Brown.

--Buonaparte's military coach was exhibited by Mr. Bullock, of the London
Museum, at Mr. Smith's coach manufactory, Swan Yard, St. Peter Mancroft,
Norwich.

26.--The Phenomena day coach was advertised to run from the Angel Inn,
Norwich, and the One Bull Inn, Bury, to the Bull Inn, Aldgate, London, in
fourteen hours.  It set out from Norwich at a quarter to six.  The
proprietors, William Pawson, T. Bridgeman, George Archer, and Ann Nelson,
Son, and Co., prohibited racing on the part of their coachman.  The rival
coach, the Norwich and London Original day coach, started from the
Norfolk Hotel every morning at a quarter to seven and ran to the Spread
Eagle, Gracechurch Street, and the Swan with Two Necks, Lad Lane, through
Bury, Sudbury, Chelmsford, and Romford.  Racing was prohibited by the
proprietors, namely, R. Gurney, T. Boyce, Chapman, S. Bright, J. Boldero,
J. Tomlinson, Elizabeth Boyce and Son, and W. Waterhouse.

28.--Died, the Rev. St. John Priest, A.M., master of Scarning Free
School, rector of Reepham with Kerdiston and of Billingford, and vicar of
Parham with Hacheston, Suffolk.  He was secretary of the Norfolk
Agricultural Society from its institution in 1800.


OCTOBER.


1.--Married, at York, Upper Canada, Mr. Samuel Peters Jarvis, barrister,
and son of the late secretary of that province, to Mary Boyles, youngest
daughter of the Hon. W. D. Powell, Chief Justice of Upper Canada, and
granddaughter of Dr. John Murray, of Norwich.

3.--Sir Edmund Lacon, Kt., of Great Yarmouth, Mr. Thomas Hare, of Stow
Hall, and Mr. Edward Stracey, of Rackheath Hall, were created baronets.

12.--Died at St. George's Colegate, Norwich, aged 50, Mr. Thomas Allday
Kerrison, who was Sheriff in 1798, Alderman in 1803, and Mayor in 1806.

13.--A sailing match, which took place at Thorpe for a silver cup, was
won by the Dreadnought (Stone), which beat the Albion (Ganning), and the
Argo (Harvey).

--A trial took place at midnight of a gasometer with complete apparatus
erected by Messrs. John and Philip Taylor, of London, at the factory of
Messrs. Joseph Oxley and Sons, of Norwich.  They were the first to
introduce gaslight into a Norwich factory.

21.--At the Norfolk Quarter Sessions, Mark Woodcock appealed against a
conviction for taking toll at a turnpike gate off soldiers when on duty.
The 15th Light Dragoons, stationed at Lynn, were being "taken out for an
airing" and on passing through Gaywood gate the appellant demanded toll
of them, to the amount of 4s. 4.5d.  He alleged that the soldiers were
not on duty, and that they passed through the gate wantonly and
unnecessarily, and in order to give him trouble.  The court confirmed the
conviction.

24.--Messrs. T. S. Coldwell and William Horne, proprietors of the Mercury
coach, from the Maid's Head, Norwich, through Wymondham, Attleborough,
and Thetford, to the Golden Cross, Charing Cross, London, advertised
"reduced fares at what you please."  The coach ran every Tuesday,
Thursday, and Saturday.

--Adams' Equestrian Troupe commenced a season at the Ranelagh Gardens,
Norwich, where a stage was provided for the production of pantomime and
burletta.

25.--The premises and stock of Mr. Griffiths, plane and tool maker, near
St. Gregory's Church, Norwich, were destroyed by fire.

31.--Died of apoplexy, at Holt, Mr. William Stokes, Clerk of the Peace
for Norfolk.  He was 66 years of age, and had held the office 19 years.
His eldest son died at Fakenham on the following day.  Mr. Robert
Copeman, of Aylsham, was appointed to the vacant clerkship.

--Four boys were whipped in Norwich Market Place, pursuant to sentence
passed upon them at the Quarter Sessions.


NOVEMBER.


1.--The Expedition coach from Norwich to London, carrying only four
insides, with car added to carry six insides, started running on this
date from the White Swan, Norwich.  Fares, four insides, 18s. each; the
car, six insides, 14s. each; outsides, 10s. 6d. each.  The proprietors
were Thomas Bryant and John Eames and Co.

2.--Thiodon's "mechanical and picturesque theatre of arts" (automata) was
opened at Norwich Theatre.

4.--Married at Gissing, W. Newby, of Burston, to Susanna Fleet, of the
former place, widow.  "Their united ages amounted to upwards of 140
years.  Nearly 40 years ago she married John Fleet, her first husband,
who, after living with her several years, set out on his travels and
visited the most distant parts of the world.  The only report that ever
reached her was the news of his death, when, having given what she
considered a decent time to his memory and his loss, she again entered
into the state of matrimony.  After living several years with her second
husband the first returned and claimed her, and his death which lately
happened gave her the second opportunity of being legally united to the
man of her heart, which actually took place, and she was a second time
married to the same person."

5.--At a meeting of the Navigation Committee, held at the Guildhall,
Norwich, a letter was received from the Mayor of Yarmouth, in which he
expressed the fear that the projected scheme for widening and deepening
the Norwich river would prove injurious to Yarmouth harbour.  It was
pointed out that there was an alternative plan of making a cut about a
mile lone: across Thurlton marshes to join the Waveney about a mile below
St. Olave's Bridge, and thence proceeding to Oulton and Lothing Broads
and entering the sea at Lowestoft.  The meeting considered the
alternative scheme the more eligible one, and Mr. Cubitt, engineer, was
ordered to make a survey and prepare an estimate of the expense.

9.--At Holkham eight guns killed 516 head of game in one day, namely,
eight partridges, 40 pheasants, 237 hares, 216 rabbits, 14 woodcock, and
one snipe.  In seven days 2,574 head were killed.

18.--On the official account being received of the death of the Queen at
Kew Palace, the great bell of St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich, and the bells
of the other churches in the city were tolled for two hours.  On Sunday,
the 22nd, the pulpits in the churches were draped with black, and on
December 2nd, the day of interment, the shops were closed, and the bells
tolled from six to eight o'clock in the evening.  The Corporation
attended service at the Cathedral.  At Yarmouth and Lynn the day was
observed in a similar manner.  Addresses of condolence were afterwards
passed by each Corporation.

20.--Mr. William Bell, of Norwich, while shooting with a party at
Sprowston, "killed at one shot five and a half brace of that rare bird
called the golden plover, a shot not to be paralleled in the annals of
sporting notoriety."


DECEMBER.


3.--Mr. Edward K. Lacon, who had canvassed Yarmouth as a candidate for
the Parliamentary election consequent upon the elevation to the peerage
of the Hon. T. W. Anson, announced in an address to the electors his
intention to retire from the candidature on the ground that "the
prejudices so unjustly excited against him were not yet fully allayed."
The Hon. George Anson was returned without opposition on February 11th,
1819.

5.--Landed at Cromer from the Earl of Leicester packet, from Holland, Mr.
Horsley, of Islington, and his little son.  The boy had been kidnapped by
Charles Rennett, a cousin of Mrs. Horsley, who had entered into
litigation respecting some property to which the child was entitled.
Rennett carried him to France, whence he was traced to Braker, near
Bremen.  The boy was recovered unharmed and handed over to his father,
and Rennett, on his arrest, was tried in London on May 28th, 1819, and
sentenced to seven years' transportation.

12.--Wombwell's Menagerie was exhibited on Castle Hill, Norwich.

24.--A tradesman at Beeston next Mileham made a wager that he would carry
twelve stone of flour a distance of ten miles in six hours, "which
Herculean task he performed in five hours and a quarter.  The odds at the
start were three to one against him."

26.--A county meeting was held at the Shirehouse, Norwich, to consider
the propriety of presenting an address of condolence to the Prince Regent
on the death of the Queen.  Col. Wodehouse was about to move an address,
when Mr. Nathaniel Palmer, jun., of Yarmouth, anticipated him by moving
one of his own framing, the last paragraph of which contained an allusion
to the criminal code.  It was seconded by Mr. Clarke, of Berghapton, and
supported by Archdeacon Bathurst.  Col. Wodehouse then moved his address,
which was seconded by Mr. T. Cubitt, and supported by Mr. M. Elwin and
Mr. C. Harvey.  Much altercation and confusion ensued, and the High
Sheriff (Mr. Edward Lombe), who presided, adjourned the meeting _sine
die_.  Those who approved the address proposed by Col. Wodehouse
adjourned to the grand jury room and signed it.  It was subsequently
presented to the Prince Regent.

--Died in Little Charlotte Street, London, aged 29, Mrs. Fisher, wife of
Mr. David Fisher, of Drury Lane Theatre.  She left a family of three
children.

Remarkably mild weather was experienced during this month.  The cuckoo
was heard at the beginning, and vegetation advanced till the middle of
the month.



1819.


JANUARY.


12.--A new peal of six bells hung in St. Gregory's Church by Mr. Hurry,
of Norwich, was opened by the St. Peter Mancroft ringers, and a dinner in
commemoration of the event took place at the Old Goat, Goat Lane.

13.--At the Norfolk Quarter Sessions was tried the appeal Burrows _v._ J.
Stracey.  The appellant was the keeper of the Norfolk and Norwich Arms
public-house at Sprowston, and was convicted by the respondent under 26th
George III., for selling beer without a licence, when in reality he then
had a licence authorising him to do so from the Supervisor of Excise for
Norwich under certificate from the magistrates of that city.  He appealed
against the conviction on the ground that the county magistrates had not
the power to grant him such licence, his house being situated in the
county of the city of Norwich, and not within the county of Norfolk as
contended by the respondent.  Counsel for the appellant produced the
Charter made in the reign of Philip and Mary, whereby various lands lying
in the county were granted to the Corporation of Norwich, amongst which
was that part of Sprowston where the appellant's house stood.  The Town
Clerk of Norwich was called for the respondent, and said he never
remembered the magistrates of the city having exercised acts of
jurisdiction over the locality in question, nor had it ever paid rates to
the city.  The court confirmed the conviction.

14.--Died at his apartments in Drury Lane, London, Mr. E. H. Seymour,
formerly of Norwich Theatre.  He was author of a work dedicated to
Sheridan--"Remarks Critical, Conjectural, and Explanatory on the Works of
Shakespeare."

23.--Madame Tussaud's collection of "composition figures representing
ninety public characters" was exhibited at the Angel Inn, Norwich.

25.--The Fox birthday dinner, held at the Norwich Assembly Rooms, was
presided over by the Earl of Albemarle, who was supported by Mr. T. W.
Coke, M.P., Viscount Bury, the High Sheriff, and Mr. W. Smith, M.P.

29.--The Rev. Levi Walton was elected headmaster of the Free School,
Scarning, in place of the Rev. St. John Priest, whose predecessor was the
Rev. Robert Potter, Prebendary of Norwich Cathedral.

It was announced this month that Mr. Thomas Clabburn, of All Saints,
Norwich, had left the following bequests: To the parishes of St. John
Timberhill, St. Michael-at-Thorn, St. Michael-at-Coslany, and St. John
Sepulchre, 200 pounds each; and to All Saints' and St. Paul's, 400 pounds
each; the interest to be given in bread and coals the first Monday in
February each year.  To the parish of Tasburgh, 400 pounds; and to
Tharston, Flordon, and Newton Flotman, 200 pounds each; the interest to
be applied in like manner.  To the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital, 800
pounds; to the Treasurer of Cook's Hospital, 800 pounds; and the like sum
to the Hospital, on trust, "that the poor women therein might receive one
shilling each every Monday for ever"; to the Bethel, 200 pounds; and a
like sum to seven of the benevolent institutions in Norwich.


FEBRUARY.


2.--The petition of the Norwich Grand Jury at the last Summer Assizes,
praying for two general gaol deliveries in the year, was presented to the
House of Commons by Mr. W. Smith.  Mr. Colborne, member for Thetford,
presented another petition from the Mayor and Corporation of that
borough, praying that there should be no change in the existing
arrangements.  On the 24th the Corporation of Norwich petitioned
Parliament in favour of Assizes being held twice a year in the city.

--At a general Court of Guardians held at Norwich, Dr. Rigby reported
that small-pox had made its appearance in several parishes in the city,
and an order was made that the city surgeons vaccinate all poor persons
desirous of availing themselves of their assistance.

3.--Mr. J. W. H. Payne, a native of Norwich, where he was formerly a
printer and bookseller, "being reduced in circumstances was allowed to
appear at the Theatre in the character of Hamlet.  He succeeded in
exciting the risibility of the other performers, and the loud laughter of
the audience."

               IMPROMPTU ON MR. PAYNE'S PERFORMANCE AS HAMLET.

    "Let mortal man his grief and care give o'er,
       Nor crave the aid of potion or of pill;
    For Payne now makes our sides with laughter sore,
       And, tho' he threatens, yet--neglects to kill."

8.--Mr. Mathews appeared at Norwich Theatre as Solomon Gundy ("Who Wants
a Guinea?").  His impersonations on succeeding evenings included Scrub
("The Beaux' Stratagem") and Goldfinch ("The Road to Ruin").  He also
gave his entertainments, "A Trip to Paris," "At Home," and "The Actor of
All Work."

9.--At a general meeting of the Norwich Paving Act Commissioners a plan
submitted by Mr. Gostling, of Birmingham, for lighting the city with gas
was taken into consideration, and on the motion of Mr. P. M. Martineau it
was agreed, by 26 votes to 17, that "it is expedient to light such parts
of the city with gas on the plan suggested and that the necessary steps
be taken to carry the plan into effect."  A committee was also appointed
to further the project.  On September 30th a meeting was held at the
Guildhall for the purpose of receiving information relative to the
proposed introduction of oil gas.  The meeting was adjourned until the
25th, when the Mayor was invited to call a public meeting.  The Paving
Commissioners met on October 12th, when permission was given to break up
the streets to lay down pipes, provided that such breaches were repaired
to the satisfaction of the City Surveyor at the expense of the promoters.
A public meeting was held on October 26th, at which it was recommended
that a company be formed for the purpose of lighting the city with oil
gas, and that not less than 2,500 pounds be raised in shares of 25 pounds
each for carrying the resolution into effect.  Two separate bodies appear
to have come into existence, the one known as the Oil Gas Company, and
the other as the Oil Gas Community.  These bodies adjusted their
differences, and on December 1st Mr. Charles Harvey obtained leave in the
House of Commons to bring in a Bill for lighting with gas the city and
county of the city of Norwich.  The Bill was read a second time on
December 21st, and in due course became law.  On January 31st, 1820, the
first of the iron gas pipes were laid in the Market Place; and on May
10th, 1820, the street lamps and burners in several shops were lighted
with gas for the first time.  "In the Market Place it produced a strong
and steady light as far as it extended, and before Messrs. Bignold's
house and office in Surrey Street, where there were three lamps, the
effect was brilliant."

12.--A salmon measuring 48 inches in length, 23 inches in girth, and
weighing 33 lbs., was caught at the New Mills, Norwich.  "These fish,
which are frequently taken in the same place, are mistaken by some for
trouts or salmon trouts."

15.--Miss Booth, of Covent Garden Theatre, appeared at Norwich Theatre as
Letitia Hardy ("The Belle's Stratagem").  Her other impersonations
included Little Pickle ("The Spoiled Child"), Helen Worret ("Man and
Wife"), Priscilla Tomboy ("The Romp"), Angela ("The Castle Spectre"),
Amanthus ("Child of Nature"), and Mary ("The Innkeeper's Daughter").

16.--Miss Fanny Brunton made her _debut_ at Lynn Theatre as Una ("The
Wood Demon").  Mr. Brunton spoke an introductory address.  At the close
of the Lynn season, Mr. Brunton and his company proceeded to Birmingham,
where he had engaged the Theatre on his own account.

18.--Died in London, Sir Thomas Berners Plestow, Kt., of Watlington Hall,
aged 70.

20.--Elizabeth Wells, wife of Robert Wells, of Gressenhall, gave birth to
four living children--three boys and a girl.

24.--The honorary freedom of the city was conferred upon Mr. R. H.
Gurney, M.P., for Norwich.

--The portrait, by Clover, of Mr. B. Leman, Alderman of Norwich, was
ordered to be placed in St. Andrew's Hall.

--The Corporation of Norwich petitioned Parliament praying that the
punishment of death for the crime of forgery be commuted for one less
severe, and for a general revision of the penal laws.

27.--One John Larkin was apprehended at Norwich "on a strong suspicion of
being the person who stole a bag containing 4,739 pounds in notes
belonging to the Fakenham bank, on August 13th, 1817, from the
messenger's gig, which was conveying it from Messrs. Gurney's bank in
Norwich."  (There is no further reference to this case.)

Died, this month, aged 100, Thomas Goodings, carpenter, of Lammas.


MARCH.


7.--Died, in her 89th year, Mrs. Mary Murray, widow of Dr. John Murray,
of Norwich.  "Possessing a disposition congenial with that of her late
excellent husband, her long life was distinguished by the practice of
benevolence and of every Christian virtue."

8.--A new tragedy, entitled "Bertha," written by Mr. Edward Ball, of
Norwich, was produced for the first time at Norwich Theatre.

--A public meeting was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, at which a
subscription was raised for the relief of the distressed inhabitants of
the Scilly Islands.  It amounted to 315 pounds.

9.--The Hon. Edward Harbord, the unsuccessful candidate for Norwich at
the previous General Election, arrived in the city and dined with the
King and Constitution Club at the Maid's Head Inn.  He was elected a
member of the club.

--At a meeting of merchants, manufacturers, and tradesmen, held at the
Guildhall, Norwich, it was resolved to petition Parliament to amend and
alter the Acts for the Relief of Insolvent Debtors in England.

15.--Capt. Manby exhibited before the Mayor and Corporation of Yarmouth
"a light fire cart, provided with the necessary apparatus ready on the
alarm of fire, to be applied by one man."

--Mrs. Faucett, formerly a permanent member of the Norwich Company, and
afterwards of Covent Garden Theatre, appeared at Norwich Theatre as Widow
Cheerly ("The Soldier's Daughter").  During her engagement she also
impersonated Clara ("Matrimony"), Florinda ("The Apostate"), Mrs. Haller
("The Stranger"), Lady Contest ("The Wedding Day"), and Ellen Rosenberg.

16.--The foundation stone of Prince's Street Chapel, Norwich, was laid by
the Rev. John Alexander.  A brass plate was placed in the stone with the
following inscription:--"This plate was deposited on the 16th day of
March, 1819, and in the 59th year of the reign of George III., in the
foundation stone of the Protestant Dissenting Chapel, erected on a piece
of freehold ground in the city of Norwich, and in the parishes of St.
Michael-at-Plea and St. Peter Hungate, by the congregation attending the
ministry of the Rev. John Alexander."  The building was opened for
service as the Independent Chapel on December 1st, 1819, when sermons
were preached by the Rev. Thomas Raffles, A.M., Liverpool, and the Rev.
John Leifchild, of Kensington.

20.*--"We understand that the cooping of freemen preparatory to election
of nominees for the Long Ward, Norwich, on the 31st inst., commenced more
than a fortnight ago.  This practice has hitherto been treated with much
indifference, but as it is likely to be annually resorted to, every
sincere friend of the purity of election and of the real interests of the
poor men who are thereby taken from their families and from their
ordinary occupations, must view it in a very serious light."  The
election of common councilmen commenced in the week beginning March 28th.
"The consequence of this year's struggle has been to continue the
ascendancy of the 'Blue and White' interest in the Common Council.  Both
parties succeeded in creating a superabundance of noise and confusion and
in putting themselves to a vast deal of trouble, vexation, and expense.
In length of purse the 'Blues and Whites' appear to possess a decided
advantage over their 'Purple and Orange' opponents, and cooping, bribing,
and corrupting were freely and openly practised."

29.--Mr. Richard Mingay, a well-known member of the orchestra at Norwich
Theatre, appeared upon the stage as Crack in the farce of "The Turnpike
Gate."


APRIL.


1.--A prize fight for a subscription purse of 50 pounds, given by the
amateurs of Norwich, took place on Rumburgh Green, near Bungay, between
Purcell and Warkley, of Norwich, a pupil of Oliver.  The former was
seconded by Ned Painter and Fuller, and the latter by Oliver and
Scroggins.  Forty-five rounds were fought in two hours three minutes, and
the battle ended in favour of Purcell.

3.--A grand boxing entertainment took place at the White Swan, St. Peter
Mancroft, Norwich, at which Oliver, Fuller, Turner, and Scroggins
appeared.

5.--Died at St. George's Colegate, Norwich, aged 67, Mr. John Aldis, who
served the office of Sheriff in 1813.

10.--Died, aged 101, Charles Grimmer, of Norwich.

--Died, Mr. George Cobb, of Diss, aged 100.

--James Belcham was executed on Castle Hill, Norwich, for committing a
burglary in an outhouse at Castleacre.  He was 34 years old, and "left an
aged mother, a wife in her last stage of pregnancy, and two children."
The execution was witnessed by many well-dressed women.  The culprit was
buried in Castleacre churchyard, and on the Sunday following the
execution "a funeral sermon was preached by the Rev. Mr. Gibbs to a
congregation amounting to 1,000 persons."

15.--A public meeting was held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, at which it
was decided to petition Parliament against the duty of 6s. 6d. per
chaldron on coals.

17.*--"We are informed that three cargoes of _foreign barley_ have
arrived this week at Yarmouth, which were purchased in London, and that
the greater part is already brought to this city (Norwich), where it will
be malted.  It is a novel circumstance to have barley in the London
markets at such low prices as to induce the Norfolk maltsters to bring it
into this great barley county to be manufactured into malt."

--*"Several of those machines denominated Pedestrian Hobby Horses have
been exhibited here this week.  The principle of this invention is taken
from the art of skating, and consists in the simple idea of a seat upon
two wheels propelled by the feet acting upon the ground.  The riding seat
or saddle is fixed on a perch upon two double shod wheels, running after
each other, so that they can go upon the footways.  To preserve a balance
a small board covered and stuffed is placed before on which the arms are
laid, and in front of which is a little guiding pole, which is held in
the hand to direct the route.  The swiftness with which a person can
travel is almost beyond belief--eight, nine, or even ten miles an hour
may be done on good level ground."

18.--In response to a circular letter issued by the Bishop of Norwich to
the clergy of the diocese, sermons were preached at the Cathedral, and at
most of the churches in the city and county in aid of the funds of the
Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts.  The effort
was made chiefly with the view of assisting the Bishop of Calcutta (the
Right Rev. Dr. Middleton, formerly of St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich), in
his benevolent plans to establish Christianity in the East Indies.  The
collections, subscriptions, and benefactions exceeded 1,800 pounds.

19.--A three "double day play of cocks" commenced at the White Swan Inn,
Norwich, between the gentlemen of Norwich and the gentlemen of Cambridge,
for 10 guineas a battle and 200 guineas the odd.  Norwich won by a single
battle.  Feeders: Lamb for Norwich, Thompson for Cambridge.

24.--Master Sewell, the Lincolnshire gigantic youth, 13 years of age, and
weighing 18 stone, and Miss Elenor Fitzjohn, Queen of the Dwarfs, 19
years old, 30 inches high, and weighing 27 lbs., were exhibited at the
Two-Necked Swan, Market Place, Norwich.

--Died at St. Stephen's, Norwich, aged 60, Mr. James Wade, butcher.  He
served the office of Sheriff in 1810.

26.--James Bigmore, aged 20, left Sudbury at 12.30 noon with the
Phenomenon coach by the side of which he ran the whole way thence to
Norwich, where he arrived at five minutes to seven o'clock.  "To keep up
with the coach he was obliged to run eleven miles in the first hour.  On
arriving at places where the coach stopped he did not take refreshment or
repose, but assisted in putting the horses to at every change.  He was
not at all distressed on reaching Norwich."


MAY.


1.--At a meeting held at the Rampant Horse Inn, Norwich, it was
determined to call a general meeting of the farmers to consider the
propriety of establishing an agricultural association to co-operate with
the London General Association for the Protection of the Rights and
Interests of Agriculture.  At the meeting which took place on the 15th
the Norfolk Association of Agriculturists was duly formed, and on the
29th Mr. Utting, of Ashwellthorpe, was appointed president.

3.--George Bidder, only 12.5 years of age, demonstrated in the Old
Library Room, St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, his extraordinary powers of
mental calculation.  He made a return visit in August.

6.--The Grand Jury at the City Sessions made a presentment to the effect
that the Norwich gaol was not capable of being converted into an
efficient prison for the purpose of the classification of prisoners.

13.--Died, aged 100, Mrs. Hannah Scott, of Holt.

21.--A meeting was held at the Assembly Room, East Dereham, to take into
consideration the best means of obtaining navigation between that town
and Norwich.  A subscription was opened.

22.--Thomas Jennings, pedestrian, ran 18 miles on the turnpike road
between Downham Market and Denver in two hours three minutes.

24.--The 24th Regiment of Light Dragoons, commanded by General Loftus,
and chiefly composed of Norfolk men enlisted in Norwich, was disbanded at
Chatham.  The regiment left England in 1796, and was actively employed in
India, under Lord Lake, during the Marhatta campaigns, for which service,
among other distinctions, it received an honorary standard.  In general
orders issued on the departure of the regiment from India on October 8th,
1818, its services were very highly spoken of.

26.--A silver candelabrum, valued 200 guineas, was presented to Mr. John
Patteson, at the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, by members of the Norwich Fire
and Life Societies, in recognition of the services rendered by him to the
institutions.  Mr. Patteson's collection of pictures by English, Italian,
and Flemish artists was this month sold by auction by Mr. Christie, and
realised the sum of 2,349 pounds.

28.--Pitt's birthday was celebrated by a dinner at the Assembly Rooms,
Norwich.  Mr. J. Patteson presided.


JUNE.


1.--Died suddenly at Yarmouth, Mr. Thomas Sutton, aged 66.  He was
surveyor to the Corporation of that borough, and was also surveyor of the
works in connection with the erection of the Nelson monument.  Mr. Sutton
was on the summit of the pillar when he complained of dizziness, and
instantly expired.

--Mr. John Watson, of Chapel Field, Norwich, proprietor of the Royal
Ipswich Mail coach, issued the following notice:--"As I have been
unexpectedly _turned out_ of my coach office in the Angel yard, and have
been the proprietor of the Ipswich mail 35 years, I trust you will
continue to give that long established _City_ Coach your accustomed
protection, and I hope my residence amongst you for seventy-four years
will plead so much in my favour, that you will be induced to desire your
parcels for the city to be sent to the Maid's Head, St. Simon's, or to
Mr. J. M. Murry's, No. 9.5, Davey Place."

4.--The birthday of George III. was celebrated for the last time in
Norwich, Yarmouth, Lynn, East Dereham, and other towns in the county.

5.--"Flying Actaeons" were exhibited at the Prussia Gardens, Norwich, by
Messrs. Brously and Stratford.  "The machine consists of a chair fixed on
to a four-wheeled carriage, in which the rider sits and guides the fore
wheels, turning corners in a similar manner to the velocipedes.  One hand
only, however, is necessary, the other being at liberty to hold an
umbrella.  The hind wheels, which force the machine along, are put in
motion with the feet of the rider by means of two foot-boards moved up
and down alternately.  With the assistance of the hand bars in going up
steep hills this carriage will travel at the rate of eight miles an hour,
and may easily be made for two persons to sit abreast.  It is equally
convenient for both males and females."

9.--Mr. Kean commenced a short engagement at Norwich Theatre, during
which he appeared as Brutus, Sir Giles Overreach, Rolla, and Hamlet.

13.--Died at Cheltenham, aged 63, Thomas Holl, formerly of Norwich, and
many years proprietor of the "Worcester Herald."

17.--A grave was opened under peculiar circumstances in St. Julian's
churchyard, Norwich.  A woman had died of small-pox, and was buried
within 48 hours of her death.  It was suspected that she had been buried
alive, and the rumour was circulated that groans had been heard
proceeding from the grave.  On the body being exhumed a medical man
pronounced life to be extinct.

18.--Died at his house on Castle Meadow, Norwich, aged 53, Mr. William
Stevenson, veterinary surgeon.  "He was an excellent operator, and stood
alone and unrivalled in comparative anatomy and pathology."

--A piece of plate, valued at 100 guineas, was presented at the Half Moon
Tavern, Yarmouth, to Mr. N. B. Palmer, in recognition of his services in
securing the return to Parliament of the Hon. George Anson and Mr.
Rumbold.

19.--The Norwich and London caravans were advertised to perform the
journey in 24 hours.  They set out from the Angel Inn at six a.m. on
Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, and from the Swan-with-Two-Necks, Lad
Lane, London, on Tuesday, Friday, and Saturday evening.  Goods were
conveyed from London to Norwich at 7s. per cwt., and from Norwich to
London at 9s. per cwt.

22.--Mr. Nathaniel Bolingbroke was sworn into office as Mayor of Norwich.
There was no guild feast, but 80 of the Mayor's friends dined at the
Assembly Rooms in honour of the day.


JULY.


4.--A severe thunderstorm occurred, accompanied by a tremendous hailstorm
and a heavy rain.  Hundreds of acres of turnips were washed away in
various parts of the county.  Upwards of 600 pounds worth of damage was
done to the wheat and barley crops of Mr. William Ungless, of Whitwell,
near Reepham.

5.--Holkham Sheep Shearing commenced.  In a speech at the dinner Sir John
Sinclair confessed that he came to Holkham prejudiced in favour of the
broad-cast system of agriculture, but after what he had seen and heard
during his visit he was now convinced that the drill system was superior.

8.--Many deaths having occurred from small-pox in Norwich the Mayor, in
accordance with a requisition, called a public meeting at the Guildhall,
and resolutions were passed in favour of general vaccination.  From
January 6th to the September ensuing 519 deaths were recorded.  "There
has not been a single death from small-pox in those parishes where
vaccination has most prevailed."

9.--Work was completed at the Nelson Monument, Yarmouth, and the
scaffolding on the top removed.

12.--The Duke of Gloucester and Princess Mary, with other distinguished
personages, paid a visit to Mr. T. W. Coke, M.P., at Holkham.

14.--Died at his house in Union Place, Norwich, aged 39, Mr. William
Saint, "whose extraordinary mathematical talents advanced him to the
honourable situation of professor of that science in the Royal
Institution at Woolwich."  In the latter part of his life he was employed
in teaching mathematics in Norwich.  His widow was appointed matron of
the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital.

20.--A cricket match for 500 pounds was played at Newmarket, between the
Holt and Cambridge clubs.  Holt, 93-56; Cambridge, 65-34.

27.--A meeting, presided over by the Mayor, was held at the Guildhall,
Norwich, for the purpose of "taking into consideration the state of
mendicity in the city."  The meeting was adjourned until October 22nd,
when, on the motion of the Hon. Edward Harbord, it was unanimously
resolved to establish a Society for the Suppression of Mendicity in
Norwich.  At the first annual meeting, held on October 9th, 1820, it was
reported that 437 vagrants had been dealt with by the society, and had
been relieved with food and lodgings at small expense, and others had
been handled over to the magistrates as notorious impostors.

28.--The first anniversary of the King and Constitution Club was
celebrated by a dinner at the Maid's Head Inn, Norwich.  Mr. Thomas
Starling Day was president, and Mr. Skipper, vice-president.


AUGUST.


1.--Mr. Thomas Amyot, formerly private secretary to the Right Hon.
William Windham, deceased, and a resident in Norwich, was appointed
Registrar under the Act for establishing a Registry of Colonial Slaves in
Great Britain.

3.--Two troops of the 9th Lancers, commanded by Capt. Daly, arrived in
Norwich to replace the 15th Light Dragoons ordered to Manchester.

4.--A prize fight took place in Kirby Park between Cox, the Norwich
blacksmith, and Christopher Barlee, the Berghapton Groom.  Seventy-two
rounds were fought, and Cox won.  Upwards of 5,000 persona were present.

10.--At the reception of his Majesty's Judges of Assize at Norwich the
coach of the High Sheriff of Norfolk (Sir W. W. Dalling) was drawn by a
team of six piebald horses, "preceded by a full retinue"; and the City
Sheriffs rode in a coach drawn by four greys, and attended by their
servants.

--Married, at Quidenham Church, by the Lord Bishop of the Diocese, Mr.
James Macdonald, M.P., only son of Sir Archibald Macdonald, Lord Chief
Baron of the Exchequer, to the Right Hon. Lady Sophia Keppel, eldest
daughter of the Earl of Albemarle.  A grand entertainment was given to
the gentry, yeomanry, and poor of the neighbourhood in tents erected in
the park; sports were held, and among the banners displayed were those
taken at the Havanna by the late earl.

11.--At the Norfolk Assizes, which commenced at Norwich on this date,
John Pycraft, of Westwick, was charged before Mr. Justice Burrough, with
administering arsenic to his infant child, in consequence of which it
died.  The prisoner, who made no defence, was, after a trial of six
hours, found guilty and sentenced to death, "his body to be delivered to
the surgeons to be anatomised."  The execution took place on the Castle
Hill on the 16th.  "The culprit had a diminutive form and decrepid
figure; when the platform fell his chest expanded at intervals during the
space of seven or eight minutes, although every precaution was taken to
shorten his sufferings by the addition of some heavy appendages.  After
dissection had been performed the body was exposed to public view at the
Shirehouse for one hour."

12.--Married at Holkham, by the Rev. Charles Anson, Archdeacon of
Carlisle, the Earl of Rosebery to the Hon. Anne Margaret Anson, eldest
daughter of Viscount Anson, deceased.

14.--Messrs. R. Goose, Goldings, and Co., advertised that the "Real
Telegraph" coach which ran from the Rampant Horse Inn, Norwich, at seven
in the morning and arrived in London at eight in the evening, had "no
concern whatever with the coach starting from the Angel, and called 'The
Telegraph.'"  The fares were:--Inside, 1 pound 4s.; outside, 14s.

--The Norwich Society of Artists announced its 15th annual exhibition of
pictures at its room in Sir Benjamin Wrenche's Court.  This year there
was no rival exhibition.

23.--The Duke of Sussex, as Grand Master of England, installed Mr. T. W.
Coke, M.P., as Provincial Grand Master at a Masonic gathering which took
place in Norwich.

--The proprietors of the Expedition coach commenced running the Defence
day coach, from the White Swan Yard, St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich, to the
Angel Inn at the back of St. Clement's Church, Strand.  The up journey
was performed on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, and the down on Tuesday,
Thursday, and Saturday.  Fares.--inside, 21s.; outside, 12s.  The
Expedition night coach ran as usual.

28.--Edward Fisher, convicted at the previous Norfolk Assizes of stabbing
William Harrison, was executed on the Castle Hill, Norwich.  "After
receiving the sacrament he long held the cup and bread with the wildest
expression of agony in his eyes and features.  He left a wife and seven
children to lament the unhappy end of a husband and father.  He was of a
reserved, sullen, and gloomy temper, in his religious profession a
Methodist, and to a certain degree of unsound mind."


SEPTEMBER.


2.--A cricket match between Holt and Bungay was played on Bungay Common.
"The Bungay players, although allowed Fennex, had smuggled into their
side two more professed Marylebone players."  Much wrangling took place
on the 3rd, when Bungay refused to go on with the game, and the match was
claimed by Holt.  The return match was played at Holt on the 13th; Bungay
had Fennex, Sparks, and Razell on their side.  Scores: Holt, 120-73;
Bungay, 73-104.  "Mr. Pilch, of the Holt club, made 57."  The following
notice was appended to the report of the match:--"The Holt club take this
opportunity of publicly declaring their determination to decline any
further contest or connection whatever with the Bungay club."

11.--Mr. Young, who had previously appeared at Yarmouth, commenced an
engagement at Norwich Theatre.  His characters included Hamlet, Macbeth,
Penruddock ("The Wheel of Fortune"), King Lear, and Zanga ("The
Revenge").

13.--The corner-stone of the new pump-room and baths at the Thetford
chalybeate spring was laid with appropriate ceremony by the Duke of
Grafton.  His Grace and the Duchess drank of the water of the spring,
dinner was served at the Guildhall, and a ball took place in the evening.

15.--A prize fight took place on Tasburgh Common, between Barlee, the
Berghapton Groom, and Belasco.  Between 8,000 and 10,000 persons were
present.  Hundreds of women attended, "some of very dashing and many more
of respectable appearance to be spectatresses of bloody noses and cross
buttocks."  Forty-one rounds were fought, and the contest ended in favour
of Belasco.

16.--A public meeting was held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, "in order
to take into consideration the late disastrous transactions at Manchester
on August 16th.  The Mayor presided, and resolutions were passed
asserting the right of the subject to petition the King.  The legality of
the Manchester meeting was affirmed, the conduct of the magistrates and
Yeomanry Cavalry censured, and a subscription was opened for the relief
of the sufferers.  An address was also proposed for presentation to the
Prince Regent, in which his Royal Highness was asked to remove certain
ministers from his presence and councils.  The address was afterwards
presented to the Prince at Carleton House by the members for the city.  A
counter declaration was also circulated in Norwich, and received 1,608
signatures.  In due course it was presented to the Prince Regent.

20.--A meeting, presided over by the Mayor, was held at the Guildhall,
Norwich, to take into consideration the best means to be adopted to carry
into effect a plan for making a new street, and for erecting a bridge
over the river Wensum at Duke's Palace.  The meeting was adjourned till
October 18th, when a resolution in favour of the plan was rejected by a
considerable majority.  A meeting of the supporters of the undertaking
was held on November 29th, under the presidency of Mr. George Morse, when
it was reported that 7,000 of the 9,000 pounds proposed to be raised by
shares of 25 pounds each had been subscribed.  A Bill was afterwards
introduced into Parliament, and was read a second time on December 17th.
On February 26th it was announced that the Bill had not been passed in
Committee of the House of Commons owing to the interference of the
petitioners, and that the promoters would have to commence fresh
proceedings in the new Parliament.  On July 8th, 1820, it was stated that
the Bill had passed both Houses.  The foundation-stone of the bridge was
laid on August 28th, 1821, by Mr. Alderman T. S. Day.

24.--The Mayor and Corporation of Yarmouth voted a loyal address to the
Prince Regent, expressive of their "detestation of the wicked and
atrocious attempts of seditious and disaffected subjects in various parts
of the kingdom, now openly and avowedly meditating the subversion of the
laws and Government, the annihilation at once of all distinctions of
rank, and the sacred rights of property."


OCTOBER.


1.--A squadron of the 14th Light Dragoons, under the command of Capt.
Anderson, arrived at Norwich to replace the 9th Lancers.  Detachments
were sent to Yarmouth and Holt.

5.--Died, aged 32, Mr. John Charles Beckwith, organist of the Cathedral
and of St. Peter Mancroft church, Norwich.  His remains were interred on
the 11th in a grave beside that of his late father beneath the organ loft
of St. Peter's church.  Mr. Z. A. Buck was, on the 9th, appointed
Cathedral organist and master of the choristers, and on the 13th Mr.
Alfred Pettet was elected organist by the parishioners of St. Peter
Mancroft.

16.--The East Dereham and London Telegraph coach was advertised by John
Leverett and Co.  It started from the Cherry Tree Inn every Sunday,
Tuesday, and Thursday at 6.30 a.m., and travelled by Shipdham and Watton
to the King's Head, Thetford, to meet the Norwich Telegraph.  The Dereham
Telegraph then proceeded to the Woolpack Inn and the Angel Inn at Bury
St. Edmund's, whence it returned to Thetford on the following day and met
the Norwich Telegraph on its return from London, and arrived at Dereham
the same evening at nine o'clock.  On Saturday the Dereham Telegraph ran
to Norwich and back.

25.--The Duke of Wellington passed through Norwich on his way to
Blickling Hall.  On changing horses at the Angel Inn he was warmly
cheered by the crowd.

29.--Pursuant to requisition a county meeting was held at St. Andrew's
Hall, Norwich, on adjournment from the Shirehouse in consequence of the
excessive crowd, to "take into consideration the transactions which
unfortunately took place at Manchester on August 16th."  The High Sheriff
(Sir William Windham Dalling) presided, and resolutions were passed
asserting the right of Englishmen to meet for the purpose of petitioning,
and demanding a Parliamentary inquiry into the transactions.  It was also
decided to present an address to the Prince Regent.  A declaration,
previously published, was signed by the Lord Lieutenant and upwards of
1,000 other noblemen, gentlemen, clergy, and freeholders, expressing
their reasons for dissenting from the meeting as tending to prejudice the
public mind against the magistrates and military.


NOVEMBER.


1.--A peal of five bells, cast at the Whitechapel foundry, and hung by
Hurry, of Norwich, was opened at Wroxham church.  Five hats were offered
as a prize to the company who rang the best of three peals.  The South
Walsham ringers won.

--Sir Edward James Smith, of Norwich, President of the Linnaean Society,
was elected Honorary Professor of Botany at the Royal Institution,
London.

6.--The Norwich and Yarmouth Telegraph post coach was announced to run
daily from the Angel Inn, Norwich, to the King's Head Inn, Yarmouth, in
two and a half hours.  Fares: Inside, 5s.; outside, 3s.

13.*--"Capt. Borrow has retired from the adjutancy of the First or West
Norfolk Regiment of Militia after 42 years' service."

24.--A meeting of the inhabitants interested in the woollen manufactures
of Norwich was held at the Guildhall, for the purpose of taking into
consideration the propriety of applying to Parliament for a repeal of the
duty imposed upon the importation of foreign wool.


DECEMBER.


7.--Died at St. Giles', Norwich, at a very advanced age, Mrs. Mary
Fisher, mother of Mr. David Fisher, comedian.



1820.


JANUARY.


1.*--(Advt.)  "Ned Painter begs to inform his friends and the public that
he has taken the Sun and Anchor Tavern, Lobster Lane, Norwich, where he
will have for their accommodation the best ales, London porter, spirits,
wine, &c., and he hopes by strict attention to merit patronage and
support.  N. P. begs to inform the Amateurs of Norwich and Norfolk that
he intends to give private lessons in sparring in the most scientific
style and at reasonable terms at all hours of the day."

13.--Died at Catton, aged 68, Mr. Robert Harvey, an Alderman of Norwich,
and a magistrate for the county.  He served the office of Sheriff in
1784, and of Mayor in 1787.

15.--Very severe weather set in.  The thermometer fell to seven degrees.
A rapid thaw took place on the 18th, and a flood ensued.

17.--Lord and Lady Castlereagh, accompanied by the Marquis of Ancram,
arrived in Norwich on their way to visit Lord Suffield at Gunton.  Whilst
the horses were being changed at the Angel, a mob hooted and hissed the
visitors, and one of the ringleaders was seized by Mr. Crisp Brown.

18.--Died in London, aged 92, Mrs. Linley, widow of Mr. Linley, formerly
proprietor of Drury Lane Theatre, who was father of the first Mrs.
Sheridan, and of the Rev. O. T. Linley, of Norwich.

20.--The Duke of Wellington passed through Norwich on his way to Gunton.
His grace returned to the city on the 27th on his journey back to town.

21.--Died, John Nash, of Hempnall.  He was clerk of the parish 56 years,
keeper of the Swan Inn 35 years, and at the age of 40 weighed 24 stone.

23.--Died at Ludham, aged 79, Thomas Smith, shoemaker.  "By his
particular request he was carried to the grave by six men of his own
trade, each with his leather apron tied round him, and stirrups with hand
leathers attached slung across their shoulders."

24.--Fox's birthday was commemorated by a dinner at St. Andrew's Hall,
Norwich, at which 460 noblemen and gentlemen were present.  The company
included H.R.H. the Duke of Sussex, the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of
Albemarle (who presided), Mr. T. W. Coke, M.P., &c.

25.--Intelligence was received in Norwich of the death of H.R.H. the Duke
of Kent.

27.--The Castle Corporation at Norwich celebrated their 55th anniversary.

29.--Mr. Harley, of Drury Lane Theatre, commenced an engagement at
Norwich Theatre.  The performances were interrupted by the intelligence
of the death of George III., and were resumed on February 17th.  His
characters included Marplot ("The Busybody"), Tristran Fickle ("The
Weathercock"), Popolino ("The Sleeping Draught"), Risk ("Love Laughs at
Locksmiths"), Caleb Quotem ("The Wags of Windsor"), Peter Fidget ("The
Boarding House"), Phantom ("Frightened to Death"), and Somno ("The Sleep
Walker").

30.--A messenger from London brought to Lord and Lady Castlereagh, who
were staying at Gunton Hall, intelligence of the death of George III.,
which was announced in Norwich on the morning of the 31st.  Most of the
shops were immediately closed, and the bells of the parish churches were
tolled for three hours.


FEBRUARY.


2.--The accession of George IV. was proclaimed on the Castle Hill,
Norwich, by Sir William Windham Dalling, Bart., High Sheriff of the
county of Norfolk, who was accompanied by Mr. Edmond Wodehouse, M.P., and
other gentlemen, who gave three cheers for his Majesty.  In accordance
with a writ addressed to the Mayor and Sheriffs of Norwich on the 1st
inst., the proclamation was made in the city with due formality on the
2nd.  The Corporation assembled at the Guildhall, and the 14th Light
Dragoons paraded in the Market Place.  From the leads of the Guildhall,
after a flourish of trumpets, the Town Clerk (Mr. Elisha de Hague) read
the proclamation amid loud cheers.  A procession was afterwards formed
and passed through the city, the proclamation being read at various
points.  "At the upper gate of the Close the Under Chamberlain advanced
and demanded the gates to be opened in pursuance of the King's writ.  Mr.
J. Kitson, the Chapter clerk, then answered from within, 'In obedience to
his Majesty's commands the gates shall be opened.'"  After the
proclamation had been made in the Close the procession returned to the
Guildhall, where refreshments were served.  The proclamation was made in
similar form at Yarmouth, Lynn, and Thetford.

16.--This being the day of the funeral of the late King, all the shops in
Norwich were closed, and almost every person appeared in deep mourning.
The Mayor, members, and officials of the Corporation, wearing black
scarfs over their robes, went in solemn procession to the Cathedral,
where a sermon was preached by the Rev. Prebendary Thurlow.  At the
different churches and chapels throughout the city proper Psalms and
lessons were read, and in the evening muffled peals were rung.

21.--Died in the Council Chamber at the Guildhall, Norwich, Mr. Thomas
Back, aged 52.  He served the office of Sheriff in 1802, was elected
alderman of the Great Ward of Mancroft in 1808, and Mayor in 1809; and
shortly before his death was appointed a deputy lieutenant for the county
of Norfolk.

24.--Mr. Young appeared at Norwich Theatre as Othello.  On subsequent
evenings he sustained the characters of Brutus, The Stranger, Sir Edward
Mortimer ("The Iron Chest"), King John, Petruchio, and Coriolanus.


MARCH.


1.--A severe storm and high flood occurred in the Lynn district.  A large
number of vessels were stranded on the Norfolk coast.

2.--Died at Norwich, aged 85, Mr. Starling Day, who served the office of
Sheriff in 1775, was elected alderman in 1777, and Mayor in 1782-1812.

6.--Miss Brunton appeared at Norwich Theatre as Rosalind.  She also
played the parts of Lady Contest ("The Wedding Day"), and Lady Teazle (to
the Charles Surface of Mr. Brunton).  In a piece, entitled "An Actress of
all Work," she sustained seven different characters.

7.--Parliament having been dissolved by proclamation on February 28th,
consequent upon the death of the late King, the Norwich election was
fixed for this date.  The sitting representatives, Mr. William Smith and
Mr. R. H. Gurney, were returned without opposition.  The circumstance of
a Norwich election passing off without a contest had not occurred since
1774, when Sir Harbord Harbord, Bart., and Mr. Edward Bacon were elected.

10.--Yarmouth election, which began on the 7th, concluded on this date.
The result was declared as follows:--The Hon. George Anson, 753; Mr. E.
E. Rumbold, 750; Lieut.-General Michel, 612; Mr. Josias H. Stracey, 612.
The two first-named were elected.

13.--Mr. T. W. Coke and Mr. Edmond Wodehouse were re-elected without
opposition to represent Norfolk.  Among the other local elections which
took place were the following:--Thetford, Lord C. Fitzroy and Mr. N. W.
R. Colbourne, returned unopposed; Castle Rising, the Earl of Rocksavage
and Col. F. G. Howard, unopposed.

15.--Died in St. Andrew's, Norwich, aged 64, Mr. John Lovick, common
councilman for the Great Ward of Wymer.  He served the office of Sheriff
in 1817.

16.--At a special assembly of the Corporation of Norwich an address of
condolence on the death of his late Majesty and of the Duke of Kent was
unanimously passed, and afterwards presented to the King by the members
for the city.

20.--At the Lent Assizes held at Thetford, the Grand Jury made a
presentment to the effect that Norwich Castle was inefficient, as then
constructed, for the purposes of a county prison.

24.--Died at Catton, aged 66, Mr. Jeremiah Ives, an acting magistrate for
the county, and alderman for the Great Wymer Ward.  He was Sheriff in
1782, and Mayor in 1786-1801.

25.*--"Cleansing week, at Norwich, has resulted in the restoration of the
ascendancy of the 'Purple and Orange' party in the Corporation of the
city."


APRIL.


3.--A prize fight took place in a field at West Burlingham between
Rushmore, a blacksmith, of Limpenhoe, and Layden, the Cantley carpenter.
The match was for 100 pounds, subscribed by the fathers of the
combatants.  Rushmore was attended by Ned Painter, and Layden by Potter,
of Yarmouth.  "There were 44 rounds of hard milling without science or
skill, and Rushmore won."

--Mr. Kean appeared at Lynn Theatre for a short season as King Richard
III., Othello, Shylock, &c.

6.--A prize fight took place at St. Faith's between Cox, the blacksmith,
of Norwich, and Teasdale, "the noted prize fighter from London, who had
been brought to Norwich and passed off as a countryman under the feigned
name of Johnson."  More than 5,000 persons were present.  Ned Painter and
Purcell attended on Teasdale, and Warkley and Hurry on Cox.  The battle
lasted one hour thirteen minutes, and 65 desperate rounds were fought.
"Cox faced his man and fought with great resolution, and drove his
adversary over the ropes eleven times.  In the end, however, superior
science prevailed, and in the 65th round Cox received several violent
blows on the left eye, which had been cut on one of the stakes in a fall
in the second round, and victory was declared in favour of Teasdale.
After the battle the imposition was discovered, and a hand bill
circulated, declaring all bets void.  The friends of Teasdale denied any
deception, and said his name was really Johnson."--Another battle took
place for a subscription purse of 5 pounds on the same ground, between
Dan, a stonemason, of Norwich, and Sparks, a blacksmith, of Norton.  Dan
won after 25 rounds had been fought.

13.--Mr. Edward Ball's new melodrama, "Giraldi" (founded on Mrs. Opie's
popular tale, "The Russian Boy"), was performed for the first time at
Norwich Theatre, and received with great applause.

15.--A county meeting was held at the Shirehouse, Norwich, the High
Sheriff (Mr. G. S. Kett) presiding, at which an address of condolence on
the death of the late King was adopted, and afterwards presented to his
Majesty by the High Sheriff.

24.--This day was appointed for the celebration of his Majesty's
birthday.  At Norwich the Union flag was hoisted on the steeple of St.
Peter Mancroft, and the bells were rung.  The 14th Light Dragoons fired a
_feu de joie_ in the barrack square, and the Norwich Light Horse
Volunteers a salute on the Castle Meadow.  The several troops of Norfolk
Yeomanry Cavalry paraded in review order.

28.--A grand _fete_ was given in Heydon Park in celebration of the
majority of Mr. William Earle Lytton Bulwer.  The inhabitants of Heydon
and of the neighbouring villages went in procession to the park, where
dinner was served at 155 tables.  A performance was given by a troupe of
equestrians, and "28 barrels of strong ale were placed in different
positions in the park."


MAY.


1.--A contested election for the office of Mayor of Norwich commenced
this day and ended on the 2nd, when the result was declared as
follows:--Alderman Burt, 1,173; Alderman Marsh, 1,077; Alderman Thurtell,
1,018.  Mr. Burt was afterwards chosen Mayor by the aldermen.

2.--Died, in his 89th year, Mr. William Calthorpe, the oldest inhabitant
of St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich.  "He generally commenced his morning walk
about four o'clock during the summer season, and gradually later as the
days became shorter.  He almost constantly attended daily prayers at St.
Peter's Church."

3.--At a quarterly assembly of the Norwich Corporation, Mr. A. A. H.
Beckwith was elected Speaker of the Common Council.

5.--Four prisoners made their escape from the city gaol at Norwich.  Each
prisoner was wearing his leg irons, and their escape was observed.  One
was apprehended immediately, another was captured at Wymondham, a third
at St. Augustine's gates, and the fourth surrendered.

10.--Died at Cheltenham, aged 57, Major-General Sir Haylett Framingham,
K.C.B., colonel of the Royal Horse Artillery and commanding officer of
Royal Artillery in Ireland.  He was the eldest son of Mr. C. Framingham,
of Swaffham, and served under Wellington in the Peninsula.

14.--The Bishop of Norwich commenced his Ordinary Visitation at Thetford,
where he confirmed 1,500 persons.  The numbers confirmed in other centres
in the diocese were:--At Newmarket, 2,900; Sudbury, 2,400; Bury St.
Edmund's, 4,320; Stowmarket, 2,200; Ipswich, 2,300; Woodbridge, 1,400;
Framlingham, 1,900; Halesworth, 1,300; Lowestoft, 600; Beccles, 700;
North Walsham, 1,370; Holt, 1,200; Fakenham, 2,000; Lynn, 2,000; Downham,
1,300; Swaffham, 1,600; and Dereham, 1,230.  The Visitation concluded on
July 1st, and was said to have "redounded highly to the honour of the
clergy of this extensive diocese, as the number of persons confirmed
greatly exceeded all former visitations."

--Died at King Street, Norwich, in her 104th year, Mrs. Laney, widow of
the Rev. Benjamin Laney, formerly rector of Mulbarton.

20.*--"The depredations on the river Yare during the last five years have
amounted to 25,000 pounds."

24.--At a meeting of the clergy of the county of Norfolk and of the
diocese of Norwich, held at the Swan Inn, St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich,
under the presidency of Archdeacon Bathurst, it was decided to petition
Parliament against the claims of "the Roman Catholic persuasion."

29.--Pitt's birthday was celebrated by a public dinner at St. Andrew's
Hall, Norwich, at which 350 noblemen and gentlemen were present.  Lord
Bayning presided.


JUNE.


1.--A detachment of the 10th Light Dragoons, commanded by Major
Stapleton, arrived at Norwich to relieve the 14th Light Dragoons, who on
the same day left on their route to Canterbury.

4.--Died at his house in the Close, Norwich, Mr. Thomas Tawell, aged 57,
"who, having been deprived of his sight for some years, founded the
Hospital and School for the Indigent Blind in Norwich, in 1806."

13.--Died, aged 84, at her house in Surrey Street, Norwich, Mrs. Holland,
"formerly and for many years a respectable actress in the Norwich
company."

14.--Died at the Great Hospital, Bishopgate Street, Norwich, aged 70,
John Dale, "who for many years travelled the circuit with the Norwich
company as dresser to the actresses, and whose skill and ingenuity in
that capacity stood unrivalled, for the taste and excellence which he
manifested in his profession.  By his industry he was enabled to support
his father and mother in their extreme old age."

19.--Mr. Booth appeared on the Norwich stage as Richard III.  His other
characters were King Lear, Octavian, Sir Giles Overreach, and Jerry Sneak
("The Mayor of Garrat").

20.--Guild Day at Norwich.  The Corporation attended service at the
Cathedral, and Mr. William Burt was sworn in as Mayor at the Guildhall.
He afterwards entertained 600 guests at the guild feast at St. Andrew's
Hall, and in the evening gave a ball at Chapel Field House.

22.--A fire engine, constructed by Mr. Jordan for the Norwich Union Fire
Office, "was tried on the society's house in Surrey Street.  It
discharged three barrels of water a minute, and its price is 78
pounds--cheaper by 50 pounds than the more cumbrous engines."

26.--The First or West Norfolk Militia, commanded by the Earl of Orford,
assembled on the Castle Hill, Norwich, for 28 days' training.  "The next
morning the men paraded in their new scarlet coats and blue pantaloons."
The regiment was paid off on July 23rd, when "the Earl of Orford made
each of the non-commissioned officers a handsome present for their
exertions."

28.--A dinner was given at the Feathers Hotel, Holt, in honour of Mr. W.
E. L. Bulwer, on his accession to the Heydon estate.  Mr. R. Brereton
presided over 320 guests.

30.--A meeting of the owners and occupiers of lands and tenements in the
hamlets of the city was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, under the
presidency of Mr. J. Harvey, when resolutions were moved against the new
and increased assessment of the hamlets to the poor rates, according to
the valuation of property made by order of the Court of Guardians, and a
subscription was started for defraying the expenses of appealing against
the mulct and of any other legal proceedings.


JULY.


3.--Holkham Sheep Shearing, which commenced on this date, was attended by
a very large company.  "Perhaps we cannot give our readers a better idea
of the utility of the system of agriculture practised at Holkham, than to
inform them that it and the adjoining country for many miles around were
fifty years ago a barren waste where scarcely a rabbit could find
subsistence, and that it is now the garden of England, covered with most
luxuriant crops of every description."  H.R.H. the Duke of Sussex, and
the Russian Princes Potemkin and Trabetzkoy, were present this year.  Mr.
Morton, of Leith, showed a small cast-iron plough, performing five
different operations; a revolving harrow, and a weed extirpator.

3.--A prize fight took place on Tharston Common between Dan, the
stonemason, and Gales, the butcher.  The stakes amounted to 20 pounds,
and 120 rounds were fought in one hour twenty-one minutes.  Gales was the
winner.

8.*--"We congratulate the county on the election of a Norfolk man, Dr.
Hyde Wollaston, to the president's chair of the Royal Society.  It is a
curious circumstance that the presidents of three very distinguished and
scientific bodies, and two of the principal officers of two others are
natives of this county, namely, Dr. Wollaston, president of the Royal
Society; Sir James Edward Smith, president of the Linnaean Society; Dr.
Astley Cooper, president of the Medical Chirurgical Society; Mr. Richard
Taylor, secretary of the Linnaean Society; and Mr. John Taylor, treasurer
of the Geological Society."

17.--The great prize fight between Painter and Oliver, commemorated by
Borrow in "Lavengro," took place near North Walsham.  The stakes were 100
pounds a side, and the amateurs of Norwich gave 20 pounds towards the
training expenses of Oliver, on condition that he fought within
reasonable distance of Norwich.  The battle was contested upon a
platform.  A staging about 100 yards in length was erected for the
accommodation of spectators, for whom, also, sixty waggons were formed in
a circle round the outer ring; 50 pounds was collected at the gate, and
the sums charged for admission to the seats on the staging produced 80
pounds.  The greatest order prevailed among the 20,000 persons present,
the ring being kept by Shelton, Randall, Turner, Scroggins, Eales, Josh
Hudson, Harmer, Purcell, and other noted pugilists.  Oliver was seconded
by Cribb and Belcher, and Painter by Spring (his former opponent) and
Paul.  The odds were five and a half to four on Painter.  Twelve rounds
were fought, and Painter won.  His colours (yellow) were hoisted upon a
waggon, and he was everywhere greeted with loud cheering.  Many of the
London contingent lost heavily over the fight.--A second battle took
place between Sampson, the Birmingham youth, and Martin, the baker (the
Master of the Rolls).  The former was seconded by Turner and Paul, and
the latter by Cribb and Spring.  The odds were six to four on Martin, who
won after 29 rounds, fought in 38 minutes.  It was during this fight that
the thunderstorm, so vividly described by Borrow, occurred.  At a dinner
given at North Walsham the same evening Painter announced that this was
his last appearance in the prize ring.  Other "festivities" took place
the same week.  On the 19th there was a "turn up" between Josh Hudson and
Belasco on Gurney's bowling-green, Norwich, the former of whom was
seconded by Spring and a Norwich amateur, and his opponent by Martin.
Thirty-three rounds were fought, in the course of which Hudson dislocated
his shoulder and lost.  The sum of 10 pounds was collected round the
ring.  On Saturday, 22nd, a benefit was given for Painter in the large
room at the Swan Inn, at which most of the above-named pugilists
appeared.  "The amateurs could not separate without giving a chance to
West Country Dick, who was matched against George Redgrave."  The fight
was decided in the room.  Dick won after a contest of eleven rounds
occupying sixteen minutes.

--The great main of cocks annually fought between the gentlemen of
Norwich and the gentlemen of Cambridgeshire this year fell through.  A
match was accordingly arranged with the gentlemen of London.  It
commenced on this date at the Swan Inn, Norwich, for 10 pounds a battle
and 100 pounds the odd, and ended on the 19th, when the local sportsmen
won by four battles.  Feeders: Nash, sen., for London, Lamb for Norwich.

19.--Married at St. Luke's Chapel, Norwich Cathedral, by the Lord Bishop,
the Rev. Heaton C. de Crespigny, second son of Sir W. de Crespigny,
Bart., M.P., to Miss Caroline Bathurst, third daughter of his lordship.


AUGUST.


1.--Died in St. John Maddermarket, Norwich, the Rev. Edward Beaumont,
"who for 62 years had exercised the functions of a Catholic priest in
this city."  He took up his residence in Norwich on August 1st, 1758.
His remains were interred on August 8th in St. Giles' church after the
funeral service had been performed in his own chapel according to the
rites of the Roman Catholic Church.

2.--A meeting was held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, for the purpose of
passing resolutions expressive of sympathy with her Majesty Queen
Caroline.  The Mayor (Mr. W. Burt) declined to preside and left the Hall,
and Mr. Alderman Leman then took the chair.  The resolutions were
adopted.  The only person who expressed disapproval was Mr. Kerrison
Harvey, who narrowly escaped rough handling.  An address of
congratulation was also adopted, and was presented to the Queen by Mr. N.
Bolingbroke and Mr. Edward Taylor.

11.--Died in St. Margaret's, Norwich, aged 46, Capt. Robert Tinkler, R.N.
"He signalised himself by his intrepid bravery in several engagements, in
which he had received twenty-one wounds.  Capt. Tinkler was cabin boy on
board his Majesty's ship Bounty (Capt. Blyth) at the time the crew of
that ship mutinied in the South Seas in 1789, and was one of the twelve
persons who with the captain were turned adrift in a boat by the
mutineers.  Capt. Blyth and his companions, after a voyage of 1,200
leagues, during which the only sustenance they had was one ounce of bread
and a quarter of a pint of water each per day, had the good fortune to
arrive at the Dutch settlement of Cupan, in the island of Timor."

14.--Jennings, the pedestrian, undertook to walk 100 miles in twenty-two
hours at the Prussia Gardens, Norwich.  He covered 90 miles in twenty
hours eight minutes, "and would have finished with ease, but a
misunderstanding having taken place between the timekeepers he thought
proper to give up."

19.--A detachment of the 9th Lancers marched into Norwich from
Nottingham, under the command of Capt. D'Este.

--The Norfolk Society celebrated the 50th year of its establishment by a
dinner at the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich.  Mr. T. Cubitt, Father of the
Society, presided, and Major Payne was vice-chairman.  (This was a
non-political society.)

--A county meeting was held at the Shirehouse, Norwich, when resolutions
protesting against the mood of proceeding by Bill of Pains and Penalties
against her Majesty, Queen Caroline, were adopted.  A petition for
presentation to the House of Commons against the Bill was also agreed to.
The resolutions were moved by the Hon. George Walpole, seconded by the
Ven. Archdeacon Bathurst, and supported by Mr. T. W. Coke, M.P.  The High
Sheriff (Mr. S. Kett) declined to preside, and Mr. Edmond Wodehouse,
M.P., dissented from the proceedings as impolitic and unnecessary.

29.--This being the anniversary of the Decollation of St. John an
assembly was held at the Church Hall, Yarmouth, at which the Mayor and
Corporation were present, for the purpose of electing a Mayor,
chamberlain, churchwardens, and other officers of the borough for the
year ensuing.  "The inquest was balloted for and locked up on Tuesday
afternoon, and kept without fire, candle, meat, or drink till ten o'clock
on Thursday morning, when they returned the following gentlemen as being
elected to fill the respective offices:--Mr. John Goat Fisher, Mayor; Mr.
William Barth, chamberlain; Mr. T. Bateman and Mr. John Preston,
churchwardens."

--A contest for freemen's Sheriff took place at Norwich.  Mr. E. T. Booth
was elected with 929 votes, against 478 recorded for Mr. Peter Finch.


SEPTEMBER.


1.--Mr. Robert Hamond, shooting in West Norfolk, killed to one brace of
pointers, and "without cleaning his gun," 53 brace of partridges, a hare,
and a landrail.  He missed eight shots, lost only one brace of birds, and
had only one double shot.  The gun was by Scarlett, of Swaffham.

5.--A prize fight took place on Ashby Common, near Thurton, between Cox,
the Norwich blacksmith, and Barlee, the Berghapton Groom, for a purse of
25 pounds.  Walkley and Payne seconded Cox, and Ned Painter and Teasdale
waited upon Barlee.  "The odds were greatly in favour of Cox till the
30th round, when Barlee planted some severe blows, and in the 47th round
floored his opponent.  In the 53rd round Cox made a desperate effort and
beat, or rather ran down, his opponent in every round till the 80th.  The
betting was now seven to four in favour of Cox.  Barlee again exerted
himself, and in the next six rounds planted several desperate hits on his
adversary's face, and in the 88th round brought Cox to the ground by a
tremendous blow under the jaw, and won the fight in one hour twenty-three
minutes.  Cox's head and face presented a frightful spectacle, and not a
feature of his countenance could be distinguished."

--Died at the house of Mr. Robert Marsham, at Stratton, Sir Edmund Bacon,
premier baronet, of Raveningham.  He was in his 71st year, and his death
was occasioned by a fall from his carriage on August 30th.  "Sir Edmund
was director of the Loddon and Clavering Incorporation, and chairman of
the committee of the Norfolk Lunatic Asylum.  He had made unremitting
exertions to improve the public roads.  It was one of his fixed opinions
that the roads might be kept in a good state of repair by the fair
performance of the Statute duty without the imposition of tolls, and he
practically evinced the truth of the opinion which he had formed.  In the
attainment of this important object he had to encounter the prejudices of
the ignorant and the complaints of the interested, but he steadily
pursued his course regardless of the unpopularity which he thus caused,
and at length had the gratification of making converts of his most
decided opponents."

12.--Miss Macauley, from the King's Concert Room, London, gave her
literary and musical entertainment, _La Petit Souper_, at Norwich
Theatre.  On the 14th she gave a dramatic reading at the New Concert
Room, St. George's.

18.--A fire broke out on the premises of Mr. Neale, coach maker, St.
Giles' Gates.  The whole range of workshops was consumed, and damage done
to the amount of 2,000 pounds.

24.--Died at his seat at Nackington, Kent, Mr. Richard Milles, of North
Elmham, aged 85.

25.--Cossey bells, rehung by Messrs. T. and J. Hurry, of Norwich, were
re-opened.  "Five good hats" were offered for competition.

29.--Mr. Henry Francis and Mr. E. T. Booth, Sheriffs of Norwich, gave a
dinner to 130 guests at Chapel Field House.  "A turtle, weighing 130
lbs., was dressed by Mr. Snow, and so highly relished that not a fragment
remained."

Rear-Admiral Philip Wilkinson assumed this month the surname and the arms
of Stephens, in compliance with the request contained in the will of his
maternal great uncle, Sir Philip Stephens, Bart., for many years
Secretary to the Admiralty.


OCTOBER.


1.--Died, aged 47, at Dunkirk, Mr. Charles William Jerningham, second son
of Sir William Jerningham, of Costessey.  "Mr. Jerningham had served
eight camps in the Austrian Army with distinguished valour, being engaged
in the great battles of Jemappe and Fleurus, and was several times
wounded."  His remains were interred at Costessey on October 23rd.

7.*--"It is with mingled feelings of shame and disgust that we state no
less than four pugilistic battles were fought on Sunday morning last on
Mousehold Heath, near Norwich, and that many hundreds of persons were
present to witness the unchristianlike scene."

16.--At a dinner held at the King's Arms Inn, North Walsham, under the
presidency of Capt. Simpson, Capt. Cooper was presented with a piece of
plate by the inhabitants of the town and neighbourhood as a testimony of
their high esteem for his public conduct and private worth.

19.--At the opening concert of the Harmonic Society, Mr. and Miss Mori
made their first appearance in Norwich.  Mr. Mori is stated to have been
"well known as one of the first violin performers of the present day."

21.--The Rev. Edward Bankes, LL.B., was installed a Prebendary of Norwich
Cathedral, in place of the Rev. George Anguish, A.M., resigned.

--*"Died at her father's house in Gun Lane, in this city, aged 19, Miss
Smith, daughter of Mr. Smith, of Norwich Theatre."


NOVEMBER.


3.--Died at Yarmouth, aged 70, Sir Edmund Lacon, Bart., senior alderman
of the borough.  He four times served the office of Mayor.  He was
succeeded by Mr. Edmund Knowles Lacon, of Ormsby.

11.--Soon after the arrival at Norwich of the coaches with the
intelligence of the abandonment of the Bill of Pains and Penalties after
its third reading in the House of Lords, the bells of "one or two of the
minor parishes" were rung, a few houses illuminated, and parties paraded
the streets with flambeaux, crying "Light up for the Queen."  An attempt
to make a bonfire on the Castle ditches was prevented by the magistrates,
many of the torches were put out, and eight of the torch bearers taken to
the watch-house.  In view of a disturbance 1,000 special constables were
sworn in on the 13th, on which evening a procession was formed on
Tombland.  In passing through the city the mob groaned outside houses
which were not illuminated, and an iron ball was hurled through the
window of Dr. Reeve's house in St. Giles'.  On the 23rd a public meeting
was held at St. Andrew's Hall, presided over by the Mayor, when
congratulatory resolutions and an address to the Queen were adopted.
(The address was subsequently presented to her Majesty at Bradenburgh
House by Mr. N. Bolingbroke, who was accompanied by Mr. W. Smith, M.P.,
and Mr. Edward Taylor.)  After the meeting a bonfire was lighted in the
Market Place.  "We understand that an impression of the NORFOLK CHRONICLE
(surely not dishonoured by being obnoxious to such a crew) was committed
to the flames."  Demonstrations took place at Yarmouth, Lynn, and other
towns.

13.--The Olympic Circus was opened by Mr. T. Cooke at the Pantheon,
Norwich.

19.--Died in St. Andrew's, Norwich, aged 81, an eccentric person named
Charles Archer.  "It was his constant practice to be at his post every
morning at four o'clock with his kettle of hot cocoa and saloop.  His
station was near the Two-Necked-Swan, and he was allowed half a pint of
porter each morning for calling up the landlord at six, which custom
continuing 14 years he drank at that house 2,556 half pints, or something
more than 319 gallons.  He had formerly been in the 12th Regiment of
Foot, and lost a leg in the memorable siege of Gibraltar, for which he
was granted a pension which he received 39 years.  But what most affected
his mind next to the misfortune of having his leg shot away was to see a
hog, a circumstance related by himself, snatch it up in his mouth and run
away with it without his being able to prevent it."

28.--Died, in his 82nd year, at the Great Hospital, Bishopgate Street,
Norwich, Robert Davey, "who for several years was leader of the nocturnal
band of musicians vulgarly called 'mumpers,' though their performances
justly entitled them to a more respectable appellation.  He personated
Orpheus in the grand procession which took place in Norwich in honour of
Bishop Blaize on March 24th, 1783."

29.--H.R.H. the Duke of York passed through Norwich on his way to Gunton
Hall, the seat of Lord Suffield.  On the duke's approach to St. Stephen's
Gates the horses were taken from his carriage, and it was dragged through
St. Stephen's Street and Rampant Horse Street to the Market Place.  After
changing horses at the Angel Inn, his Royal Highness proceeded on his
journey.  On the following day the Duke of Wellington passed through the
city on his way to Gunton.

30.--Died, aged 102, Mr. John Walden, of Wells-next-the-Sea.


DECEMBER.


1.--A special assembly of the Norwich Corporation was held at which a
loyal address to his Majesty was adopted.  Similar addresses were passed
by the Corporations of Yarmouth and Lynn.

2.--At a special assembly of the Corporation it was resolved to grant the
honorary freedom of Norwich to the Duke of York and the Duke of
Wellington.  These illustrious personages arrived unexpectedly in the
city on their return from Gunton on the following day (Sunday, 3rd).
After attending service at the Cathedral they proceeded to the Angel Inn,
where the Mayor (Mr. William Burt), the Sheriffs, and other civic
officials waited upon them.  The Steward (Mr. Robert Alderson) read the
address passed on the previous day, and the admission to the freedom of
the city was completed in due form.  His Royal Highness and the Duke of
Wellington returned thanks, and afterwards invited the company to
luncheon.  On their departure from Norwich the same afternoon they were
enthusiastically cheered.

9.--The Duke of Gloucester visited Col. Dixon at Rainham, and afterwards
proceeded to Holkham as the guest of Mr. T. W. Coke, M.P.

10.--Died at Hethel, aged 68, Sir Thomas Beevor, Bart., D.L., one of the
chairmen of Norfolk Quarter Sessions.

13.--A meeting of the owners, occupiers, and inhabitants of the hamlets
was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, to take into consideration the
expediency of establishing an effective police for the district.
Resolutions were passed asking the assistance of the city magistrates.
In consequence of the numerous highway robberies and burglaries, and
other depredations committed in city and county, public meetings were
held and resolutions passed granting a reward of 5 pounds to watchmen who
apprehended offenders.  It was stated that more burglaries had been
committed within the three preceding months than in the former twenty
years.

25.--The Hon. George John Watson, of North Elmham, second son of the
Right Hon. Baron Sondes, deceased, assumed the surname and arms of
Milles, in compliance with the will of his maternal grandfather, Mr.
Richard Milles, of North Elmham, and of Nackington, Kent.

27.--A meeting, presided over by Mr. John Morse, Father of the City, was
held at the Angel Inn, Norwich, at which resolutions expressive of
attachment to his Majesty's person and Government, and to the established
constitution in Church and State were passed, and a loyal address to the
King adopted.  The address, which received 1,634 signatures, was
presented to his Majesty in the following January by Mr. Charles Harvey,
M.P., Mr. John Harvey, alderman, and Sir Robert John Harvey.  Similar
addresses were adopted by the Corporations of Yarmouth and Lynn.



1821.


JANUARY.


2.--A meeting of the dyers, dressers, and manufacturers was held at the
Guildhall, Norwich, under the presidency of Mr. John Harvey, chairman of
the manufacturing interest, to consider "the most effectual means of
checking the violation of the Sabbath, which has of late arisen to a most
shameful height, in consequence of the recent increase in the trade of
the city"; and the notice "on the part of the dyers and dressers of
bombazines announcing to the manufacturers the conditions on which alone
they had agreed to conduct their business, namely that of holding goods
which they may have in hand at the time of any bankruptcy or failure as a
lien for any balance due to them on their accounts."  The meeting was
adjourned _sine die_.

6.*--"The Rev. Alfred Inigo Fox, of Woodton Hall, has assumed the surname
of Suckling only, with the arms of Suckling, quarterly, with his own,
pursuant to the will of the late Robert Suckling, of Woodton Hall."

9.--Mr. Mathews appeared at Norwich Theatre in his entertainments, "At
Home," "A Trip to Paris," and "Country Cousins."

--At Norwich Quarter Sessions, Sarah Powell, keeper of a boarding school,
was sentenced to three months' imprisonment for cruelly ill-treating and
wounding Mary Ann Phillips, aged 6.5 years.

13.--At the Norfolk Quarter Sessions, the case of the King on the
prosecution of Robert Leamon, the younger, against Edmund Heagren Gibbs
for assault, was tried.  The defendant, an opulent farmer living at
Quarles, pleaded guilty to the charge.  The offence was committed in
Fakenham Market Place, and it was alleged that the defendant several
times struck the plaintiff with a jockey whip.  He was fined 300 pounds.

22.--Mr. Dowton appeared at Norwich Theatre as Sir Peter Teazle and
Restive ("Turn Out").  On succeeding evenings he took the parts of Job
Thornberry, Sir Anthony Absolute, Barnaby Brittle, Old Drugget ("Three
Weeks after Marriage"), Sheva ("The Jew"), &c.

27.*--(Advt.)  "100 pounds Reward.  Whereas at about nine o'clock on the
evening of the 22nd inst., Mr. John Thurtell was attacked in Chapel
Field, Norwich, by three men, knocked down, and robbed of a pocket book
containing 1,508 pounds in notes, thirteen of which were of the Bank of
England, value 100 pounds each, and the name of John Thurtell is endorsed
on them.  Notice is hereby given that whoever will give information which
might lead to the apprehension and conviction of the persons concerned in
this robbery, shall be paid the above reward on applying to Mr. Thurtell;
and any person concerned in the robbery who will give information of his
accomplices will receive the reward and a free pardon.  Norwich, January
23rd, 1821."  (In the following week it was announced that a commission
of bankruptcy had issued against John Thurtell and John Giddens,
bombazine manufacturers, dealers, and chapmen.  Soon afterwards Thurtell
absconded.)

29.--The first anniversary of the King's Accession to the Throne was
celebrated in Norwich by peals on the bells of St. Peter Mancroft, and of
several of the minor parishes of the city.  At Methwold a lad named T.
Coates, aged 11, rang second in a peal of single bob major, and "the
company challenged England for his equal."


FEBRUARY.


3.--At a meeting held at the Rampant Horse Inn, Norwich, the Norfolk
Agricultural Association adopted a form of petition to be presented to
the House of Commons upon "the present deplorable condition of
Agriculture."

10.*--"The remains of two bodies (no doubt those of Roman soldiers) were
lately dug up in a field opposite the west front of the Roman camp at
Caister, near Norwich.  Nothing was entire of them except several teeth
and a metal brooch in excellent preservation, although they cannot have
been interred less than 1,400 years.  Eleven or twelve human skeletons,
supposed to have been buried after some battle, were also discovered on a
farm at Longham, near Mileham, close at the foot of an antient ditch,
which Parkin supposes gives name to the Hundred of Launditch.  Eight or
ten years ago, in removing a tumulus in the same parish, some urns were
discovered."

10.--Bloggs' London caravan was advertised to run from the Rampant Horse
coach office, Norwich, to London in 24 hours.  It started on Monday,
Wednesday, and Friday mornings at four o'clock, and returned on Tuesday,
Thursday, and Saturday.  The Norwich and London Fly vans ran from the
Star Inn, Norwich, to the Bull Inn, Aldgate.

--Dr. Lewis Evans was elected physician to the Norfolk and Norwich
Hospital on the resignation of Dr. Alderson, to whom a vote of thanks was
accorded by the governors for his professional services of 50 years.

12.--Miss Macaulay commenced at Norwich Theatre an engagement of four
nights, during which she appeared as Lady Randolph ("Douglas"), Violante
("The Wonder"), Jane Shore, Rosabello ("Rugantino"), Lady Townley ("The
Provoked Husband"), and Phoebe ("Rosina").

15.--By the careless driving of the coachman the Morning Star, Yarmouth
coach, was overturned at Scole Inn, and of the three inside and nine
outside passengers, one, Mr. Butterfield, of Leeds, was seriously
injured, and died on April 14th.  At the Norfolk Assizes in March, 1822,
an action was brought by Butterfield's employers against the owners of
the coach for the recovery of damages sustained by them by the loss of
their servant.  The jury found for the plaintiffs, damages, 100 pounds;
expenses, 258 pounds; and costs, 40s.

17.--The perfectly new house of Mr. John Cator, at Woodbastwick, was
destroyed by fire.  "The interior of the building was consumed, the walls
alone left standing."

24.--Mr. J. M. Murry, of Davey Place, Norwich, advertised himself as
"sole agent for the sale of Bridgman's patent iron coffins as security to
the deceased persons."

26.--Mrs. Davison appeared at the Theatre Royal, Norwich, in the
character of Letitia Hardy.  On subsequent evenings she performed
Priscilla Tomboy, Hypolita ("She Wou'd and She Wou'd Not"), and Kathleen
("The Poor Soldier").

28.--An unusually large supply of white herring was received from
Yarmouth at Norwich.  The fish were sold at a penny a dozen at Fye Bridge
staith, and afforded great relief to the poor.


MARCH.


3.*--"Died lately at Reepham Moor, St. John Hunt, who was buried by his
desire in his best suit of clothes, great coat, hat, &c.  A tobacco box,
short pipe, and walking stick were also deposited by his side in the
coffin."

--Mr. Richard Taylor, of Norwich, published his well-known work, the
"Index Monasticus."

--Died at his house in Queen Street, Norwich, Mr. William Foster, an
alderman of the Wymer Ward.

5.--Died, at Versailles, in her 70th year, Miss Hannah Brand, formerly of
Norwich.

7.--Three prisoners confined in the city gaol, Norwich, and charged with
capital offences, effected their escape by making a hole through the wall
of their cell.  They were recaptured.

--Mr. Edward Temple Booth, Sheriff of Norwich, was elected an alderman of
the Great Ward of Wymer, in place of Mr. Foster, deceased.  The other
candidate was Mr. Richard Shaw, who served the office in 1818.

8.--A new tragedy, entitled "Antigone," written by Mr. Edward Ball, of
Duke's Palace House, Norwich, was produced at Norwich Theatre for the
first time.

13.--Mr. E. Wodehouse presented to the House of Commons petitions from
the owners and occupiers of land in the vicinity of Norwich, Yarmouth,
and North Walsham, on the depressed state of agriculture, praying for a
repeal of the last duty on malt, and for the substitution of a modified
tax on property.  At this date wheat was making 25s. to 31s.; barley, 9s.
to 12s. 6d.; oats, 9s. to 10s.; and malt, 34s. per coomb.

22.--A performance took place for the benefit of the Theatrical Fund,
established for the relief of aged and decayed actors of the Norwich
company.  The Freemasons gave their patronage, and, in full regalia,
attended the Theatre, where the pieces produced were the comedy "Secrets
worth Knowing," and the musical farce "The Padlock."  The proceeds
amounted to 117 pounds 2s. 6d.

26.--Mrs. Bartley commenced at Norwich Theatre an engagement, during
which she appeared in the characters of Bianca ("Fazio"), Jane Shaw,
Madame Chermont ("Adrian and Orrila"), Mary Stuart, and Catherine ("The
Taming of the Shrew").

31.--The freedom of the city of Norwich was presented to Capt. William
Edward Parry, R.N., prior to his departure for the Arctic Seas to
ascertain the existence of a north-west passage.  He was a nephew of Dr.
Rigby, of Norwich.  The parchment was presented in an oak box, made of a
piece of the wood of the Hecla, the ship commanded by him in his voyage
of discovery towards the North Pole in 1819-20.


APRIL.


2.--A new peal of bells, hung by Messrs. Hurry, of Norwich, was opened at
Ditchingham.

3.--Died, aged 92, Thomas Burton, "father of the St. Peter's company of
ringers, Norwich."

--Died in St. George Colegate, Norwich, aged 88, Mrs. Goulty, widow of
Mr. John Goulty, and aunt to Admiral Lord Nelson.

--Mr. R. Morlege, many years confidential clerk to Messrs. W. and S.
Bircham, of Reepham, "left that place with his family, a wife, and seven
children, one an infant, in a covered van for Liverpool, there to embark
for Baltimore, and from thence to proceed in his van, which he takes on
board with him, about 400 miles up the country, and to settle on the
banks of the Ohio."

5.--Died in St. Swithin's, Norwich, aged 84, the Rev. James Lane, for 32
years Roman Catholic priest in the city.

7.--A "new and elegant" light post coach, "The Times," was announced to
set out from the Angel Inn, Norwich, to the Swan-with-Two-Necks, Lad
Lane, London, on Sunday, Wednesday, and Friday morning at six o'clock, by
way of Scole, Bury, Sudbury, and Halstead.  It returned on Tuesday,
Thursday, and Saturday.  The proprietors, W. Start, J. Thorogood and Co.,
regretted "the circumstance which rendered the dissolution of partnership
between them and Mrs. Nelson indispensable, in consequence of which they
had no connection with the Phenomena coach."  Thorogood himself drove the
coach both to and from London.

9.--Mr. J. Brunton, the former manager, and his daughter, Miss Fanny
Brunton, performed at Norwich Theatre.  They appeared respectively as
Othello and Desdemona on the opening night, and on subsequent evenings as
Horatius and Horatia ("The Roman Father"), and Wildlove and Zephyrina
("The Lady and the Devil").  "Miss Brunton, though not 19 years of age,
has made great progress towards histrionic excellence."

10.--At a public meeting held at the Town Hall, Yarmouth, under the
presidency of the Mayor (Mr. Fisher), a committee was appointed and a
subscription opened for the formation of a fund from which to reward
boatmen for rescuing persons from shipwreck.

14.--The Wellington coach ran from Norwich on Tuesday, Thursday, and
Saturday to Stamford, where it effected a connection with coaches to the
Midlands and the North.

15.--Wombwell's Menagerie was exhibited on the Castle Meadow, Norwich.

17.--The erection of a new jetty was commenced at Cromer.  It was
finished in the summer of 1822.  "Erected on massy iron frames by Mr.
Hase, of Saxthorpe, it exhibits a magnificent proof of the skill of the
engineer, and of his honourable attention to his contract."

22.--Died in St. George's Colegate, Norwich, after a few days' illness,
John Crome, the elder.  He was president of the Norwich Society of
Artists, and an artist of considerable repute.  His remains were interred
on the 27th in a vault in St. George's church.

23.--St. George's Day being the day appointed for the celebration of his
Majesty's birthday, the Corporation of Norwich attended service at the
Cathedral, and the 9th Lancers and the Norwich Light Horse Volunteers
fired three volleys with their pistols in the Market Place.  The Mayor
gave a dinner at his house, Major Harvey and the officers and men of the
Light Horse dined at the White Lion Inn, St. Benedict's, and several
members of the Common Council met for dinner at the Castle Inn.  The
Loyal Heroes or Sons of Pitt, and several other societies dined at their
respective club houses.

--Miss Rosalie Corri appeared at Norwich Theatre as Polly ("The Beggars'
Opera").  Her other characters included Louison ("Henri Quatre"), Zerlina
("The Libertine"), &c.

25.--At a meeting held at the Guildhall, Norwich, for the promotion of
vaccination amongst the poor, it was stated that in 1819, when about 500
persons died of small-pox, "the figures of persons liable to take the
disease was on an average of five years not less than 1,000 annually."
Since that year vaccination had again languished, and in 1820 not 100 of
the poor were vaccinated.  The meeting directed that a census be
immediately taken for the purpose of ascertaining how many persons
remained unvaccinated, and what would be the extent of the danger
attending the introduction of small-pox.

26.--A smuggling boat was captured at Yarmouth between the Nelson
monument and the old jetty, by boats of the Revenue cutter Ranger, Capt.
Sayer.  The smuggler had on board about 400 tubs of Geneva, and a
quantity of dry goods, and her crew escaped by jumping overboard and
swimming ashore.

28.*--"Died last week at Swaffham, the widow Turner, aged 96, formerly a
midwife.  Mrs. Turner had a perfect remembrance of the girl who was burnt
at Lynn on April 1st, 1731, for aiding and assisting in the murder of her
mistress, and was taken by her friends to visit her in prison a few days
before the execution of that dreadful sentence."

--Gurney's Original day coach was advertised to leave the Norfolk Hotel,
Norwich, for the Spread Eagle, Gracechurch Street, and the Black Bear,
Piccadilly.  The proprietor referred to the liberal patronage he had
received "amidst the powerful ruinous competition among other parties
concerned in the Norwich and London coaches."

30.--At the White Swan Inn, Norwich, commenced a three double days' play
of cocks, for 10 guineas a battle and 200 guineas the odd, between the
gentlemen of Norwich and the gentlemen of Cambridgeshire.  Feeders: Lamb
for Norwich, Burn for Cambridge.  Norwich won by seven battles ahead in
the mains, and two in the byes.


MAY.


1.--There was a contest this year for the Mayoralty of Norwich.  At the
close of the poll the numbers were declared as follow:--Alderman Rackham,
986; Alderman Hawkes, 950; Alderman Marsh, 630; Alderman Yallop, 631.
The two first-named were returned to the Court of Aldermen, who elected
Mr. Rackham to serve the office.

2.--Died at his ancestral seat at Great Ormesby, aged 68, Mr. James
Symonds, who was descended from one of the oldest families in Norfolk.

8.--At a meeting of the merchants, manufacturers, dyers, &c., held at the
Guildhall, Norwich, presided over by Mr. John Harvey, it was resolved to
petition Parliament for a repeal of the tax on imported foreign wool.

12.--A foot race of 30 miles was run at New Buckenham, between two men
named Tuttle and Beales.  The former won easily in five hours nine
minutes.

13.--Died at his house in Surrey Street, Norwich, aged 72, Mr. William
Stevenson, upwards of 35 years proprietor of the NORFOLK CHRONICLE.  He
served the office of Sheriff in 1799.

--Died at Lyng, Christopher Allcock, aged 91.  "He served in the first
draft of the Norfolk Militia when called out in the glorious year, 1759,
and such was his attachment to the military service that he made a
reserve of his coat that it might serve him for a shroud."

18.--Died at Norwich, aged 53, Robert Chesnut, leader of the St. Peter's
ringers.

19.--The "safety" coach from the Rampant Horse Inn, Norwich, commenced
running to London on Sunday, Tuesday, and Thursday evenings by way of
Thetford, Bury, and Newmarket.

23.--At a special court of the Norwich Guardians it was agreed to
petition the House of Commons against the Bill introduced into Parliament
by Mr. Scarlett, for amending the laws relating to the relief of the poor
in England.

28.--The principal inhabitants, with many other parishioners,
perambulated the parish of St. Clement's, Norwich, and afterwards dined
at the Bull Inn, Magdalen Street.

30.--A glass bottle was thrown from the gallery on to the stage of
Norwich Theatre by a youth named Wheeler, son of a former member of the
Norwich company.  He was apprehended by Mr. Smith, the manager, taken
before the Mayor, and sentenced to one month's imprisonment in the
Bridewell.


JUNE.


12.--Costessey Guild was held, and the "Mayor" sworn in with great
formality.  Several "splendid equipages" appeared in the subsequent
procession.

--The festivities connected with Necton Guild were carried out on a scale
of much splendour in a field adjoining the residence of Major Mason, of
Necton Hall, the patron of this annual gathering.

--The Census was completed on this day at Norwich.  The city, with its
hamlets and the Close, contained 10,833 houses and 50,173 souls, namely,
22,732 males and 27,441 females.  In comparison with the returns at the
previous Census these figures showed an increase of 2,300 houses and of
12,917 persons.

18.--Guild Day at Norwich.  Mr. William Rackham was sworn in Mayor, and
entertained 650 guests at the guild feast at St. Andrew's Hall.

--Died, aged 52, Charles Hague, Mus. Doc., professor of music at the
University of Cambridge.

--At an assembly of the Norwich Corporation, the Tonnage Committee was
ordered to obtain plans and estimates for the improvement of the south
side of St. Andrew's Hall, and of the plain and gardens.  The proposed
work included the taking down of the old Library Room and the Court of
Conscience, which formed part of the entrance to the Hall, and completely
obscured and disgraced the structure; the erection of a Gothic porch on
part of their site to correspond with the architecture of the original
building, and the laying open of the whole south side of the Hall, "by
taking down the present garden walls, so as to form a square in front of
the hall."  It was also proposed that the building be no longer used as a
corn exchange.

--About twenty of the Waterloo men resident in Norwich were entertained
to dinner at the Coach and Horses, Red Lion Lane, in celebration of the
anniversary of the battle.

23.*--"The curious antique pump in St. Lawrence, in this city (Norwich),
erected by Robert Gybson in 1576, has been lately put into repair, and
the singular inscription and ornaments thereon repainted by the present
proprietor, Quarter-Master Betts, of the West Norfolk Regiment."

28.--The Marshland free bridge, built by Messrs. Jolliffe and Bank, under
the direction of the engineer, Mr. Rennie, and forming a direct means of
communication between the eastern and northern districts, was opened on
this date.  A procession of carriages, preceded by a band of music and
banners, with 7,000 pedestrians, passed over the bridge at one o'clock.
The carriage of Mr. Thomas Hoseason led the van.  Among the vehicles was
the Lynn and London coach, drawn by four bays decorated with ribbands and
flowers.


JULY.


2.--Twelve smacks were despatched from Wells to a newly discovered oyster
bed at Happisburgh, whence they returned on the following day with from
100 to 121 tubs each.

--*"Notwithstanding the clouds which lower on the landed interest, the
sun of Holkham's prosperity has shone forth with undiminished splendour,"
was the comment which prefaced this year's report of the Holkham Sheep
Shearing.  The business of the meeting commenced with an inspection in
front of the hall "of the various processes in the manufacture (by the
labourers' children and the parish poor) of part of the crop of flax and
hemp grown upon Holkham Park Farm in the last year.  The several
operations of breaking, heckling, and spinning were gone through by
females of various ages with ease and facility."  Some of the sacks and
sheeting manufactured from the materials were also shown.  The gathering
was attended by H.R.H. the Duke of Sussex, the Duke of Bedford, the Earl
of Albemarle, Lord Erskine, Lord Crewe, Sir F. Burdett, Mr. Hume, &c.
"The magnificent hospitality of these meetings congregated men from all
parts of the civilized world.  None but agricultural subjects were
discussed.  On these the most conflicting opinions were freely given and
as freely canvassed, but anything political was excluded.  And thus,
although the political opinions of Mr. Coke and most of his personal
friends were not only very decided, but for a great period, and that the
most brilliant era of the Holkham meetings, unpopular with the great
majority of those connected with the landed interest, yet men of every
shade of political opinion were heartily welcome . . . and although they
might hear some favourite theory of farming ridiculed they never would
find anything hurtful to their political feelings advanced.  The Sheep
Shearing of 1821, indeed, was an exception.  Political topics were then
introduced.  It was a bad omen.  This Sheep Shearing was the
last."--"Journal of the Royal Agricultural Society," Vol. XIV., part 1.

7.--Miss Biffin paid a return visit to Norwich, and was exhibited at St.
Peter's Steps, the Market Place.

19.--Norwich, in common with the cities and towns of the kingdom
generally, celebrated the Coronation day of King George IV.  The Mayor
and Corporation went in procession to the Cathedral, preceded by a troop
of the 9th Lancers, commanded by Capt. Campbell, sixty-four Waterloo men
wearing their medals, and by the loyal and constitutional clubs with
their flags.  The procession was closed in by the Norwich Light Horse
Volunteers.  After service a roasted bullock, weighing 60 stones, was
distributed in the Market Place, with 2,880 penny loaves, and several
barrels of beer.  There was a similar distribution in Ber Street.  A
dinner took place at St. Andrew's Hall, under the presidency of the
Mayor, and at night a display of fireworks was given on a staging erected
on the south side of the Market Place.  A very elaborate triumphal arch,
erected near the Guildhall, was brilliantly illuminated.  There were like
demonstrations at Yarmouth, Lynn, and other towns in the county.

29.--Died at St. John Timberhill, Norwich, John Smith, schoolmaster, aged
54, "the author of several scholastic works and an English grammar."

30.--A grand cricket match between the Holt and Nottingham clubs
commenced at Holt, and was continued on the two following days.  It
terminated in favour of Nottingham, with ten wickets to
spare--Nottingham, 150-154; Holt, 80-73.  The Holt team included R. J.
Brereton, Garwood, N. Pilch, William Pilch, F. Pilch, W. Englebright, R.
Englebright, Frost, Brunton, Carmichael, and Goggs.

31.--The new river or Cut from King's Lynn to Eau Brink was opened.  At
8.30 a steam barge passed beneath the new bridge into the Cut, followed
by a great number of boats.  After the commissioners had viewed the work
the steamboat returned to Lynn, where dinner was served at the Town Hall,
under the presidency of Lord William Bentinck.


AUGUST.


1.--Died at his house in Charles Street, Berkeley Square, the Right Hon.
Lord Suffield, his Majesty's Lieutenant of Norfolk.  His lordship, who
was in his 54th year, dying without issue, he was succeeded in his title
and estates by his brother, the Hon. Edward Harbord, M.P. for
Shaftesbury.  The remains of his lordship arrived at Aylsham, and lay in
state at the Black Boys Inn on August 12th, and the funeral took place at
Gunton on the 13th.

4.*--"In the recent creation of baronets are Major-General Sir Edward
Kerrison and Mr. Astley Paston Cooper, surgeon to his Majesty's person."

6.--The Norwich Assurance Company and the Norwich Union Society combined
their establishments under the style of the Norwich Union Fire Insurance
Society, with a capital of 550,000 pounds.

9.--Official intelligence was received in Norwich of the death of Queen
Caroline.  Her Majesty died at Bradenburgh House, Hammersmith, on the
7th.

10.--The organ in Loddon church, the gift of Mr. Thomas Reynolds, of
Chedgrave, was opened with a performance of sacred music by Messrs.
Pettet and Woolman.  The principal vocalists were Miss Gaskill, of
Norwich Theatre, Mrs. Card, and Mr. French; and the instrumental band was
composed of Norwich and Yarmouth amateurs.  "Tickets: middle aisle, 3s.;
side aisle, 2s."

11.*--"A troop of the 4th Dragoons arrived here last week to replace the
troop of 9th Lancers, who have gone to Canterbury."

--*"Died, last week, at Surlingham, Mrs. Elizabeth Utting, in her 104th
year."

14.--Mr. Justice Richardson, in charging the Grand Jury at the Norwich
Summer Assizes, made reference to the large number of street robberies
and burglaries that had taken place in the city.  "Several persons had
their pockets picked in court; one man was detected in the act, and was
committed to Bridewell."

17.--Among the civil actions tried at the Norwich Assizes, before Sir
Robert Dallas, Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, was that of
Crawcour _v._ Smith.  It was for the recovery of the cost of a suit of
clothes, &c., bought by the plaintiff in consequence of having received
from the defendant a fictitious card of invitation to dine at the Guild
feast in 1820.  The defendant, who admitted the sending of the card, was
heard to remark that "he would rather undergo transportation than not see
the plaintiff (a Jew dentist) at the door of the Guildhall in his pomps
and opera hat."  Counsel for the defendant endeavoured to show that the
order for the apparel was given subsequent to the plaintiff receiving
notice of the fictitiousness of the card; and he argued that even if he
had gone to the feast he could not have partaken of it without incurring
the censure of the higher orders of his religion.  Mr. Sergeant Blossett,
for the plaintiff, replied that "of the 600 covers placed on the tables
on Guild Day there were several of which Mr. Crawcour might partake
without injury either of his soul or his stomach."  The jury found for
the plaintiff--damages 1s.  (Mr. Crawcour on September 23rd met with a
terrible accident on Tombland.  The horse, which he was driving, ran
away, and he was thrown from the vehicle.  His leg was fractured in so
shocking a manner that immediate amputation was rendered necessary.)

18.--Col. the Hon. John Wodehouse, M.P., was appointed his Majesty's
Lieutenant, Vice-Admiral of the county, and Custos Rotulorum, in place of
the late Lord Suffield.

20.--A fire took place on the premises of Mr. Cross, Lower Earlham, by
which his barns and outhouses, hay, corn, and straw stacks were
destroyed.  The damage was estimated at 1,000 pounds.

21.--Belzoni, the celebrated traveller and discoverer of Egyptian
antiquities, visited Norwich, and stayed with Mr. Jeremiah Ives, at his
residence, St. Catherine's Hill, where several gentlemen of the city were
invited to meet him.

22.--Died, aged 72, Mrs. Mary Mountain, of Norwich.  "On the first
establishment of the Institution for the Indigent Blind in this city she
tendered her gratuitous services as matron, and for 16 years filled that
situation."

28.--A contest for freemen's Sheriff took place at Norwich.  Mr. Joseph
Gibson, 680; Mr. T. O. Springfield, 442.  A scrutiny was afterwards
demanded and granted, but was abandoned.


SEPTEMBER.


1.*--"The Easton Lodge estate, the property of the late Mr. W. Foster,
has been purchased by Mr. Thomas Trench Berney, of Morton Hall, for
30,000 guineas."

--*"The tower of the antient church of St. John of Maddermarket, Norwich,
which has long been in a state of dilapidation, is now taking down to be
reduced by 14 feet, so as just to leave room for the bells."

--A panorama of Waterloo was exhibited at Ranelagh Gardens, Norwich.

6.--The freemen of the "Blue and White" interest presented to Mr.
Alderman James Marsh a silver vase, weighing upwards of 100 ozs.  The
presentation was made at the Angel Inn, Norwich, by Mr. Edward Taylor.

--Workmen digging at the bottom of Bethel Street, Norwich, discovered a
human skeleton "laid exactly in the crossway of the roads; it was thought
to be the body of a criminal who died in prison and was buried there."

8.*--"That highly esteemed performer, Mr. Vining, has formed a very
advantageous engagement with the proprietor of the Bath Theatre, and will
leave the Norwich company at the termination of Bury Fair."  (He was
succeeded by his brother, Mr. J. Vining, who ultimately became a great
favourite on the Norwich stage.)

10.--Miss Dance, of Covent Garden Theatre, appeared at Norwich Theatre in
the character of Belvedera ("Venice Preserved").  Her other
impersonations included Lady Teazle, Juliet, Widow Cheerly ("The
Soldier's Daughter"), Mrs. Haller, Maria ("The Citizen"), &c.

16.--Died at Downham Market, at a very advanced age, William Howlett.
"He was for many years employed as a labourer on the premises of Mr. E.
R. Pratt, at Ryston.  About 30 years ago he sold his wife, and delivered
her to the fortunate purchaser in a halter in the Market Place at
Downham, with whom she has ever since lived, and it is supposed they will
now marry."

21.--At a quarterly meeting of the Corporation of Norwich, a committee
was appointed to take into consideration Mr. Cubitt's plan for connecting
the city with the sea by way of Lowestoft.

26.--The foundation-stone of the Unitarian Chapel in Park Field, Diss,
was laid by Mr. Meadows Taylor and Mr. Thomas Dyson.

28.--Experiments with a life-saving rocket on Tregrouse's principle were
made on Yarmouth beach by Rear-Admiral Spranger.  The rocket carried a
line from the ship to the shore, and running rigging was then brought
into use.


OCTOBER.


4.--Died in London, aged 64, the celebrated engineer, Mr. John Rennie,
who a few weeks previously had attended the opening of the Eau Brink cut.

6.*--(Advt.)  "Distressing case of long imprisonment.  Christopher Wood,
formerly of Lynn, bricklayer, committed in 1813 to Norwich Castle for
contempt of the Court of Chancery, incurred by his inability through
poverty to put in an answer to a bill filed against him to foreclose a
mortgage on an estate of which, unfortunately for him, he became owner.
He has been in prison eight years, and has hitherto been supported by his
labour beyond the prison allowance of bread, but having lately nearly
lost his sight he must in future depend entirely on the latter.  The
expense of putting in his answer will amount to 18 pounds, and being
totally unable to raise that sum must end his days in prison unless the
benevolent shall extend their bounty towards him by putting in his answer
to obtain his discharge, the Act for the Relief of Insolvent Debtors not
extending to persons in custody for contempts."

10.--Robert Skipper, the Norwich pedestrian, commenced the task of
walking 1,000 miles in twenty successive days at the Prussia Gardens,
Norwich.  He had completed 100 miles on the evening of the 11th, and at
the 390th mile was compelled to give up in consequence of magisterial
interference.

27.*--"Lady Beevor, widow of the late Sir Thomas Beevor, has taken the
surname of Hare out of respect to the memory of her late father."

--Died, aged 74, Mr. Edward Rigby, M.D., of Norwich.  He received his
medical education under Mr. Martineau, and first began practice in 1769,
when he distinguished himself as an accoucheur, and was the author of a
treatise on subjects connected with that branch of his profession.  In
1814 he took his degree in physic.  Dr. Rigby in 1786 established the
Benevolent Medical Society for the relief of the widows and orphans of
medical men; and in 1789 became a member of the Corporation of Surgeons
and of the Medical Society in London.  He was assistant surgeon of the
Norfolk and Norwich Hospital on its establishment in 1771, surgeon in
1790, and physician in 1814.  For many years he kept a private lunatic
asylum; and made constant and unremitted exertions in the cause of
vaccination.  He wrote several treatises on agricultural subjects, and
was in 1820 elected an hon. member of the Philadelphia Society for
Promoting Agriculture.  He was also a member of the Linnaean Society.
Dr. Rigby was elected an alderman in 1802, Sheriff in 1803, and Mayor in
1805.  His remains were interred at Framingham, near Norwich, on November
5th.

28.--The county magistrates adopted a plan prepared by Mr. Wilkins for
the erection of a new county gaol on the Castle Hill, Norwich, "so far as
the sum of 26,000 pounds would carry it into effect."  This plan included
the removal of the then Shirehouse and inconvenient courts of justice.
In order that the whole of the expense of the work should not fall upon
occupiers it was arranged that half only be paid by them, and the other
half by the owners of estates.--On December 1st a meeting of the county
magistrates was held at the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, to remonstrate
against the selection of the Castle Hill as the site for the new gaol.
At the Norfolk Quarter Sessions in January, 1822, the subject was
reconsidered, and it was finally decided by 30 to 24 votes to adhere to
the Castle Hill site.--On July 29th the workmen began to prepare the
ground for the foundations of the Shirehall, and on September 9th the
foundation-stone was laid with "Masonic ceremony."  Current coins were
deposited in the cavity, and upon the stone was a Latin inscription
composed by the Rev. F. Howes.--The demolition of the old debtors' court
commenced on May 7th, 1823, previous to which the prisoners committed on
criminal charges were removed to the different bridewells and houses of
correction in the county, the debtors only remaining in the Castle
keep.--On July 11th some workmen employed on the building were raising a
large stone, which fell and injured four of them, and one, Nicholas Mase,
died next day in hospital.  The new Shirehall was completed in time to
admit of the Quarter Sessions being held therein on October 15th, 1823,
which was the first occasion on which the building was used.  "As to the
prison buildings the ancient Saxon castle with Bigod's tower is left
entire in its pristine state.  The hill is now surrounded with a
castellated wall of Aberdeen granite 20 feet high, leaving, however, in
general a space of nearly 20 feet for a public promenade on the summit of
the hill."  The Castle ditches and meadow had previously been improved at
considerable expense by the city.  These works completed the first part
of the extensive scheme undertaken by the county.

--Lord Suffield was elected one of the chairmen of Norfolk Quarter
Sessions, in the room of the late Sir Thomas Beevor, Bart.

31.--There were two candidates for the vacancy occasioned upon the
Norwich aldermanic bench by the death of Dr. Rigby--namely, Mr. Jeremiah
Ives and Mr. Thomas Osborne Springfield.  Both political parties paraded
the streets with bands of music, flags, &c.  The poll was declared as
follows:--Springfield, 430; Ives, 268.  "The major part of the electors
of the Great Northern Ward received a couple of guineas each for their
free and independent votes."


NOVEMBER.


3.--An accelerated mail service was introduced between London and Norwich
by the Postmaster-General.  By this arrangement the Norwich and Ipswich
mail coach performed the journey in one hour less time than previously.
On December 8th, however, it was announced that in consequence of the
Ipswich mail not having kept to the prescribed rate of travelling the
Post Office authorities had been obliged to return to the former times of
departure and arrival in respect to the London mail.  On the 17th a new
contract was entered into, by which the London mail to Norwich was
conveyed _via_ Newmarket.  The coach reached the city at ten o'clock am.
and departed at five p.m.

4.--A great gale occurred on the Norfolk coast, many vessels were driven
ashore between Yarmouth and Wells, and several foundered at sea.

10.*--"Mr. Charles Thurtell, son of Mr. Thomas Thurtell, of Lakenham, has
obtained a lieutenancy on board the Rochefort, now in the Mediterranean."

13.--Died at Biddeford, Devonshire, aged 63, Major Charles Berkeley
Money, Royal Marines.  "He had retired from the service some years on
account of a severe wound received when captain on board the Royal
Sovereign on the glorious 1st of June.  He was a native and freeman of
Norwich."

16.--A severe storm took place.  The roads were in many parts of the
county rendered impassable by the heavy rains, and the marshes and low
grounds were flooded.

18.--Died at the house of his son-in-law, Mr. William Mason, of Necton,
the Rev. Paul Colombine, D.D., rector of Little Plumstead with Witton and
Brundall, perpetual curate of Hardley, and rector of Chilton, Suffolk.
He was presented to the living of Thurlton by the Mayor and Corporation
of Norwich in 1757.  He was in his 92nd year.

23.--Died, aged 62, Mr. William Burrows, alderman of the Great Northern
Ward, and Sheriff of Norwich in 1817.

24.--Dr. Yelloly was elected physician to the Norfolk and Norwich
Hospital, in place of Dr. Rigby, deceased.

26.--Mr. Peter Finch was elected an alderman of the Great Northern Ward,
Norwich, in place of Mr. William Burrows, deceased.


DECEMBER.


1.--A troop of the 4th Light Dragoons, under the command of Capt. Pratt,
left Norwich for Romford.

3.--A coursing party at Horsford "started a fine stout fox which was
instantly pursued by a brace of fleet greyhounds.  He kept before them
for more than half a mile when the dogs turned him.  After beating them
off for more than an hour he was taken alive.  Soon after Sir George
Brograve's huntsman and hounds came up, when the coursing party, who had
joined in the chase, offered to unbag the fox for another run, but he was
found too exhausted and injured for the purpose, and it became necessary
to give him the _coup de grace_, and his head and brush were carried off
in triumph."

7.--Mr. R. Hamond turned off a deer at Swaffham which led the field a
chase of nearly 30 miles.  "It crossed the river twice, and what is most
extraordinary Mr. A. Hamond, who is in his 81st year, partook of the
whole chase, and was at the spot when the deer was taken near Lynn."

8.*--"Died last week at Ramsgate, at an advanced age, the Rev. Samuel
Vince, M.A., F.R.S., Plumian Professor of Astronomy in the University of
Cambridge, and Archdeacon of Bedford.  He was also rector of Kirby Bedon
and vicar of South Creake."

11.--Died at his house in Mansfield Street, Sir Martin Browne ffolkes,
Bart, of Hillington Hall, M.P., F.R.S.  He was created baronet in 1774,
served the office of High Sheriff in 1783, and in 1790 was elected member
of Parliament for King's Lynn, and continued to represent the borough
without intermission until the time of his death.

--An inquest was held at Lynn by Mr. Samuel Hadley, one of the coroners
of the borough, on the body of Robert Roberson, who was shot by Mr. Henry
Pond, a linen draper in High Street, whilst in the act of breaking into
his shop.  The jury returned a verdict of justifiable homicide.

15.*--"Robberies and depredations upon the public having been made to an
extent hitherto unknown, it is the determination of the justices in
certain Hundreds to form an establishment that will give vigour and
effect to the exertions of the magistrates in preventing robberies,
burglaries, larcenies, poaching, and felonies of various descriptions."

17.--Cooke's Company of Equestrians commenced a season's engagement at
the Norwich Pantheon.

18.--A deputation waited upon Mr. Alderman Crisp Brown, of Norwich, to
acquaint him that 300 citizens had subscribed for his full-length
portrait, as a mark of "the respect and esteem entertained towards him
for his manly and loyal conduct upon all occasions, and for the strenuous
exertions which he made during his mayoralty to promote the better
observance of the Lord's day."  The portrait, by Clover, was hung in St.
Andrew's Hall in October, 1822.

22.*--"Mr. Alexander Baring has purchased the mansion and domains of the
Hon. Mr. Petre in Norfolk, it is said for 300,000 pounds.  The estate is
situate near Thetford, and there are 26,000 acres of land."

--*"An experiment has been tried for the bettering of the condition of
the labourers in agriculture, and for reducing the poor rates in the
parish of Terrington by the apportionment of parcels of land from one to
five roods, which has been found, after three years' trial, to be
productive of the happiest effects."

23.--During a violent gale from the N.N.W. a new East Indiaman, the
Indian, of 400 tons, from Hull to London, was wrecked off Yarmouth.  The
crew of 20 hands and a small part of her stores were saved.  The value of
the ship and cargo was estimated at 10,000 pounds.

25.--Service was held at St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich, when "the lighting
of the church was strikingly beautiful, and had a very imposing effect by
the admission of some additional lamps, which were very judiciously
arranged, giving to the altar and the communion plate upon the table a
very brilliant and splendid appearance."

28.--A prize fight took place at Testerton Park, the residence of Major
Case, between Barlee, the Berghapton Groom, and Gales, the Norwich
butcher.  The former was attended by Ned Painter and Hervey, and the
latter by Josh Hudson and Cullington.  Seventy-eight rounds were fought
in one hour three minutes, and the battle was won by Barlee.  "Barlee, on
being declared victor, immediately planted an oak in the ring in the
presence of about 5,000 spectators in front of Testerton Hall.  The two
young pugilists were, by order of Major Case, taken under his hospitable
roof and put to bed, where everything needful was generously offered
them.  A large party of the Fancy had the honour of dining with the
major."



1822.


JANUARY.


2.--A party of thieves, known as the "Cossey gang," committed great
depredations in the neighbourhood of Norwich.  On the night of the 2nd
they broke into the Half Moon public-house, Stone Hills, and stole
sixteen gallons of spirits and other property.  "Tired of committing
depredations on foot, about ten o'clock at night, as soon as they find
those who keep horses are gone to bed, they resort to the stables and
take out what horses they want, ride to the spot of depredation, whether
for game, poultry, sheep, &c., and when done return the horses almost
jaded and harassed to death."  (See August 2nd, 1822.)

9.--The Marquis of Titchfield was elected without opposition as member of
Parliament for King's Lynn, in place of Sir Martin Browne ffolkes,
deceased.

12.--The poor of Norwich and its neighbourhood were informed by
advertisement that medical and surgical advice was given free at the
Infirmary for Diseases of the Eye, St Benedict's, Norwich (late Messrs.
Day's bank), by Mr. L. Evans, M.D., physician, and Messrs. Robert Hull
and T. Martineau, jun., surgeons.  At a public meeting held on July 11th,
under the presidency of Sir Robert J. Harvey, it was resolved that "the
Norfolk and Norwich Infirmary for Diseases of the Eye, instituted and
supported by Dr. Evans, Mr. Hull, and Mr. T. Martineau, has already been
productive of great advantage, and is deserving of public support."

--A meeting of the proprietors and occupiers of land was held at the
Shirehouse, Norwich, "for the purpose of taking into consideration the
present most truly alarming state of agriculture."  The High Sheriff (Sir
Jacob Astley) presided.  Resolutions were adopted urging the diminution
of taxation by means of rigid economy, the repeal of one half of the Malt
Tax, and the removal of the heavy imposts upon candles, salt, leather,
&c.  A petition embodying these views was ordered to be presented to the
House of Commons.  After this date many similar meetings were held in the
principal towns and villages in the Hundreds of the county, ostensibly
for the purpose of suggesting remedies for agricultural distress and of
promoting Parliamentary reform.  It was alleged that many of these
gatherings were of a party character, and on May 18th, the NORFOLK
CHRONICLE observed: "The discussion of agricultural distress was last
week suspended, and the mask of Parliamentary Reform entirely thrown off
by those who for the last four months have displayed so much violence
against the Government in pursuing the one, and casting so much obloquy
upon Parliament in assuming the other."

24.--The annual dinner held at Norwich in celebration of the birthday of
Fox was attended by H.R.H. the Duke of Sussex, the Duke of Norfolk, the
Earl of Albemarle (who presided), Mr. T. W. Coke, and many other
representatives of the Whig nobility and gentry of the county.

28.--Two Corsican stags, presented by Lord Maynard to Mr. Robert Hamond,
gave the Westacre Hunt good sport this season.  "The first was turned off
at Rougham on the 28th, and gave them a severe chase of nearly three
hours, from the effects of which two horses died.  They are very superior
to the red deer of this country from their capability to endure extreme
fatigue and to take the most extraordinary leaps."

31.--Norwich Theatre was opened for the season with the grand spectacle
of "The Coronation."


FEBRUARY.


1.--Lord Henry Cholmondeley was elected Member of Parliament for the
borough of Castle Rising, in the room of the Earl of Rocksavage, created
a peer by the title of Baron Newburgh.

11.--The Papyruseum, an exhibition of models formed of paper by Mrs.
Aberdein, was opened at the White Swan Inn, Norwich.

14.--A smuggling boat landed 80 tubs of gin and brandy on Snettisham
beach.  The crew of the preventive boat seized the cargo, a portion of
which with their boat was rescued by the smugglers, who had the
assistance of about 100 persons, some of whom were armed with bludgeons
and fowling pieces.  Twenty or thirty horses and carts were in waiting to
remove the contraband goods.  Two of the smugglers were wounded in the
affray.

18.--Lynn Theatre was opened under the management of Mr. T. Marsters.

19.--Skipper, the Norwich pedestrian, walked 50 miles in a few minutes
under eleven hours at Lynn.

23.*--"We understand that the manufactory of bombazines and crapes in
Norwich is likely to be affected from the circumstance of those articles
being now made in considerable quantities in various parts of Lancashire
at a much lower rate of wages for the weaving than that which is paid
here."

26.--Married, by special licence, at the house of the Earl of Albemarle,
St. James's Square, London, by the Lord Bishop of Norwich, Mr. Thomas
William Coke, M.P., of Holkham, to Lady Anne Keppel, second daughter of
the earl.

27.--The machine breaking riots commenced in Norfolk.  Upwards of a
hundred labourers assembled at Kenninghall, and seized the threshing
machine of Mr. Bailey, a farmer.  The Rev. J. Surtees, of Banham, a
county justice, at once proceeded to a neighbouring farm where an auction
was being held, and, in the King's name, requested the auctioneer and the
farmers present to assist him in quelling the disturbance.  The whole
party rode over to Kenninghall, and after the Riot Act had been read the
mob dispersed.  On March 4th there were further riotous assemblies at
Attleborough, Shropham, Buckenham, Banham, &c.  The Eye troop of Yeomanry
Cavalry were called out, and of the 30 rioters secured eight who were
regarded as ringleaders, and they were sent to Norwich Castle under
cavalry escort.  The Yeomanry after lodging the prisoners in gaol were
assailed by a Norwich mob, who stoned them in the streets, and attacked
the Trowel and Hammer public-house, St. Stephen's, where they had halted
to bait their horses.  The troopers returned to headquarters at East
Harling after a march of eighty miles in twenty hours.  Many prisoners
were also committed to the Castle from other districts, and several cases
of incendiarism were reported.  At the adjourned Quarter Sessions for the
county, held at Norwich on the 6th, the rioters were tried and sentenced
to various terms of imprisonment in the Bridewells and houses of
correction in the county.  A guard of the West Norfolk Militia was
stationed at the Castle, and a squadron of the Norwich Light Horse
Volunteers did duty at the Cavalry Barracks until relieved by the 16th
Lancers.  The Lancers and Light Horse afterwards acted as escorts to the
vans by which the prisoners were conveyed to the different prisons.  On
the march the military were repeatedly stoned by the mobs.  Detachments
of the 7th Dragoon Guards were stationed at Hingham and Attleborough, and
remained at those places until the lawless disposition manifested by the
rural population had subsided.


MARCH.


9.--Wombwell exhibited his menagerie on the Castle Meadow, Norwich.

16.--Mr. Blanchard appeared at Norwich Theatre as Toby Allspice ("The Way
to Get Married") and Crack ("The Turnpike Gate").  Among the other
characters impersonated during his engagement were Dr. Ollapod, Sir Abel
Handy, Mungo, Job Thornberry ("John Bull"), Capt. Meadows ("The Deaf
Lover"), &c.

28.--At the Norfolk Assizes held at Thetford, before Mr. Justice
Richards, William Hardiment and Benjamin Neal, who were concerned with
James Johnson in the murder of Mr. Baker at Wells-next-the-Sea on October
11th, 1817, were put upon their trial.  Hardiment had evaded
apprehension, and at the Spring Assizes in 1818 the bill charging Neal as
an accessory was thrown out by the Grand Jury.  Several witnesses now
deposed to having seen Johnson and Hardiment in company at about the time
of the murder, and two persons confined in Aylsham bridewell at the same
time that Hardiment and Neal were prisoners there gave evidence as to
hearing conversations between the two when planning the murder.  One of
these witnesses (Thomas Robinson), on December 24th, 1821, met Hardiment
at Beverley, in Yorkshire, and gave information which led to his arrest.
The jury found Hardiment guilty, and acquitted Neal.  Hardiment was
executed on the Castle Hill, Norwich, at noon on April 1st in the
presence of an immense crowd of spectators.  "Not more than three yards
from the gallows a boy was knocked down by a gentleman who detected him
picking his pockets."

--At the same Assizes, before Mr. Justice Richards, the cause Lock, D.D.,
_v._ the Bishop of Norwich was tried.  In consequence of simony alleged
to have been committed by the Rev. Dr. Lock, the patron of the advowson
of Hilgay, the Crown had seized the living and presented the Rev. Dr.
Hewlett thereto on April 6th, 1819.  This action of _quare impedit_ was
instituted by the plaintiff to try the right of the Crown to such
presentation.  The defendant raised three pleas: (1) that the Rev. John
Royle being seized of the living of Hilgay it was corruptly agreed that
Lock should resign the living of Compton Martin, in Somersetshire, and
cause him (Royle) to be presented to it, and also that Lock should pay
Royle the sum of 12,900 pounds for the advowson of Hilgay, and that in
consideration of the promises Royle should resign the living and cause
Lock to be presented to it.  (2) That Lock being seized of the living of
Hilgay did corruptly agree with one James Craddock, that in consideration
of the said Craddock paying to him the sum of 25,000 pounds he (Lock)
should convey to Craddock the advowson of Hilgay, and also resign the
living and cause him (Craddock) to be presented to it.  (3) That Lock,
being seized of Hilgay, having presented Craddock, did corruptly agree
that, in consideration of Lock abandoning certain proceedings in an
action for debt against Craddock, he should forego proceedings upon a
bill of indictment for perjury preferred by Lock against Craddock, but
Lock corruptly prevailed upon Craddock to resign the living in order that
he (Lock) might present himself to it.  The jury gave a verdict for the
Crown generally upon all pleas.  The Judge: A very proper verdict.  It is
very disgraceful dealing, gentlemen.

30.*--(Advt.)  "To be fought at the White Swan Inn, Norwich, on Monday,
April 15th, 1822, and two following days, three double-days' play of
cocks for ten guineas a battle and 200 guineas the odd, between the
gentlemen of Norwich and the gentlemen of Northampton.  Feeders: Stafford
for Norwich, Nash for Northampton."


APRIL.


6.*--"A fish of the whale species was killed in shallow water on Cromer
beach last week.  Its dimensions were 57 feet long, breadth of tail, 13
feet; pectoral fin, six feet; from the eye to the end of the jaw, 13
feet; length of jaw bones, 14 feet; length of tongue, nine feet; breadth,
four feet.  It answers the description of the under-jawed whale."

13.--Noah Peak and George Fortis were executed on the Castle Hill,
Norwich, for setting fire to three stacks on February 25th.  Both men had
been soldiers.  Peak was present at Busaco, Albuera, and Waterloo; and
Fortis was also in the last-named battle.  "It is not three years since
Peak came to Norwich and conveyed home for burial the body of Edward
Fisher, his fellow parishioner, who was executed on the Hill in August,
1819, for stabbing William Harrison."

20.--Among the passengers who perished in the ship Albion, wrecked upon
the coast of Ireland, was Miss Powell, eldest daughter of the Hon. W. D.
Powell, Chief Justice of Upper Canada, and granddaughter of Dr. John
Murray, of Norwich.


MAY.


1.--Four candidates were nominated for the Mayoralty of Norwich, and the
poll was declared as follows:--Alderman Hawkes, 957; Alderman Patteson,
908; Alderman Thurtell, 364; Alderman Yallop, 318.  The Court of Aldermen
unanimously returned Mr. Robert Hawkes as Mayor.

4.*--"Last week two gentlemen on searching the burial ground belonging to
the Roman camp at Caister discovered the remains of a kiln with several
urns upon it as they were placed for burning.  Antiquaries having doubted
whether urns found at Caister were burnt in a fire or only dried in the
sun, the discovery of this kiln may be decisive of the question."

11.--A county meeting was held at the Shirehouse, Norwich, "for the
purpose of taking into consideration the propriety of presenting a
petition to Parliament for a reform in the representation of the people."
There was a crowded gathering, and much confusion prevailed until the
High Sheriff (Sir R. P. Jodrell) adjourned the meeting to the Castle
Hill, where the speeches were delivered from waggons.  Sir Thomas Beevor
moved a series of resolutions, the sixth of which stated "that a petition
be presented to the House of Commons praying that the House will
forthwith give to the people a real representation in place of that
corrupt and defective one which now exists."  Mr. S. T. Southwell
seconded the resolutions, which were put _seriatim_ and carried _nem.
con._  Mr. T. W. Coke, M.P., and Mr. Edmond Wodehouse, M.P., spoke from
their respective waggons, and each surrounded by his partisans, left the
Hill amid much cheering.

20.--A meeting was held at the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, to decide upon the
rules of a society for enabling traders to oppose the discharge of
fraudulent debtors under the Insolvent Acts.

25.--An immense number of persons assembled at the Eau Brink Cut at Lynn
to witness the performance of "Zachariah Witmore, of Philadelphia" upon a
"water velocipede."  It was a hoax.

30.--A meeting was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, the Mayor (Mr. W.
Rackham) presiding, at which a fund was inaugurated for the relief of the
distress in Ireland.  Sermons were also preached in the churches and
chapels in city and county in aid of the same object.  The amount raised
in Norwich and Norfolk was upwards of 3,000 pounds.


JUNE.


3.--The Leicester and Yarmouth Royal Mail coach commenced running.  It
started from Yarmouth at 1.45 p.m. and travelled by way of Norwich,
Dereham, Swaffham, Lynn, Wisbech, Peterborough, Stamford, and Melton
Mowbray.  At Stamford and Leicester it was in connection with coaches to
the north and west.

5.--Died at his house in Bolton Row, London, Mr. Edward Jerningham,
youngest son of Sir William Jerningham, Bart.  The remains were removed
from London to Costessey, where they were interred beneath the altar in
the private chapel.  Mrs. Edward Jerningham died on June 24th.

10.--A camping match took place at Ranworth between ten men of that
parish, and a like number from neighbouring parishes.  "After half an
hour's excellent sport, which produced some good set-tos and a few bloody
noses, victory was declared in favour of Ranworth."

14.--Died at his house in Cavendish Square, London, the Right Hon.
Horatio Walpole, Earl of Orford, Baron Walpole of Wolverton, and Baron
Walpole of Walpole, High Steward of the Borough of King's Lynn, and
colonel of the West Norfolk Regiment of Militia.  The deceased nobleman,
who was in his 70th year and was buried on the 25th at Wickmere, was
succeeded in his title and estates by the Right Hon. Horatio Lord
Walpole, Member of Parliament for Lynn.

18.--The Guild Day festivities at Norwich were carried out with great
splendour by the Mayor-elect, Mr. Robert Hawkes.  After returning from
service at the Cathedral, the Corporation listened to the Latin oration
delivered at the Free School porch by the head boy, Peter Hansell, and
after the customary ceremonies at the Guildhall, 700 guests assembled at
the feast at St. Andrew's Hall.  In Bethel Street, where the Mayor
resided, were two triumphal arches, and on the summit of one a band
played selections of music.

23.--The tower of Happisburgh church was considerably damaged by
lightning during a severe thunderstorm, which occasioned much loss
throughout the county.

27.--The election to fill the vacancy in the representation of Lynn
caused by the elevation to the peerage of Lord Walpole commenced.  The
candidates were Col. the Hon. John Walpole, brother of the late member,
and Sir William Browne ffolkes.  Considerable disturbance prevailed
throughout the contest.  About 40 voters had polled for each candidate,
when the mob demolished Col. Walpole's polling booth, set fire to the
materials, and stoned the poll clerks.  They then proceeded to the Duke's
Head Inn, smashed the windows, tore the Corporation flag to pieces, and
committed other acts of violence.  The polling was adjourned until the
28th, when the disturbances were renewed, and a further postponement was
rendered necessary, the numbers then standing: Walpole, 137; ffolkes, 72.
About three o'clock in the afternoon a detachment of the 7th Dragoon
Guards arrived from Norwich, under the command of Lieut. Everard.  One of
the ringleaders of the mob was captured and sent under escort to Swaffham
Bridewell.  The polling was resumed on the 29th, and at noon, when every
vote appeared to have been recorded, the Town Clerk announced the numbers
as follow: Walpole, 156; ffolkes, 92.  The former was then declared duly
elected.  At the Norfolk Assizes held at Norwich on July 31st, before Mr.
Justice Best, William Chandler was indicted for taking part in the riot
at Lynn, and was ordered to enter into his recognisances to come up for
judgment when called upon.  Thomas Johnson and other persons were at the
Lent Assizes at Thetford in March, 1823, sentenced by Mr. Justice Garrow
to various terms of imprisonment for participating in the disturbances.


JULY.


4.--Died, at the age of 101, Mrs. Aldborough, of Trowse.

5.--A meeting of the manufacturers was held at the Guildhall, Norwich,
"to consider the present prices paid for weaving."  It was agreed to
adopt a reduced scale of payment.  Meetings of the men were called, and
the employers were requested to reconsider the question.  Another meeting
was accordingly held on the 9th, when Mr. Beloe urged that the proposals
of the employers were ill-advised.  On the other hand it was stated that
goods were being manufactured in Yorkshire in large quantities at much
lower rates than in Norwich.  It was contended by the weavers that
greatly increased demands had been made upon them for house rent and
coals, and that it was impossible for them to live on reduced wages.  A
further statement was made to the effect that the lowering of prices
would tend to inferior workmanship.  A mob assembled outside the
Guildhall and cheered or hooted the different manufacturers whom they
deemed friendly or adverse to their claims.  One gentleman, Mr. William
Bosley, was very roughly handled, and his hat, coat, and shoes were taken
from him and torn to pieces.  It was considered necessary to summon the
assistance of the 7th Dragoon Guards, but the mob dispersed after the
announcement had been made from the leads of the Guildhall that the
manufacturers had consented to return to the old prices.  The weavers
spent the 10th in festivity and rejoicing.

6.--Died, William Coward, aged 85, for 54 years parish clerk at St.
Margaret's, Lynn.  "He was borne to the grave by six grave-diggers, and
the pall was supported by six parish clerks."

8.--Died at Calcutta, the Right Rev. Thomas Fanshaw Middleton, D.D.,
Bishop of Calcutta, and formerly vicar of St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich.

--A camping match took place at Ranworth, in the presence of 6,000
spectators, between men of the Blofield and of the Tunstead and Happing
Hundreds.  "So closely were the men (ten a side) matched for strength,
courage, skill, and activity that the ball was nearly in the centre of
the ground when time was called and play stopped.  At the conclusion of
the camp, Turner, of Witton, and Riches, of Upton, had a pugilistic trial
of manhood.  A well-fought battle of thirty-two rounds of hard milling,
with little or no science, ended in favour of Riches."

19.--Mr. T. Filby, of Elsing, fell down dead in the Sessions Court at the
Shirehouse, Norwich, when in the act of entering the jury box.

20.--Puxley and Nelson's "New Fly Vans" were advertised to run between
the Star Inn, Norwich, and the Bull Inn, Aldgate, every day.  The journey
was accomplished in twenty-four hours.

--At the Norfolk Quarter Sessions, Giuliano Mantova, an Italian boy, who
travelled the country with pictures for one Dominico Crostea, of Norwich,
was indicted for maliciously and fraudulently taking by force from
William Hill, employed by Messrs. Copeman and Petworth, solicitors,
Aylsham, a child named Susan Hoffrath.  The prisoner denied that he had
enticed the child away, and his master gave him a good character; but the
jury found him guilty, and he was sentenced to two years' imprisonment in
Norwich Castle.

21.--Died at his house, Tombland, Norwich, aged 76, Mr. Charles Kitson,
one of the Chapter Registrars of the diocese of Norwich.

29.--Norwich Theatre was opened for the Assize week.  "Since the period
of its leaving Norwich the company has been subject to almost an entire
change, and it is now equal to any provincial establishment of the
histrionic kind in the kingdom."  The new members included Miss Wensley,
Mrs. Dowton, Mr. Osbaldiston, and Mr. Ford White.  Mrs. Dowton was a
favourite actress in the Norfolk and Suffolk Company of Comedians, under
the management of Mr. Fisher, and afterwards married Mr. Sloman, the low
comedian of the Norwich Company.


AUGUST.


2.--At Norwich Theatre a new tragedy, entitled "The Persian Heroine,"
written by Mr. Richard Paul Jodrell, was performed under the patronage of
the High Sheriff and Lady Jodrell.

--At the Norfolk Assizes, held at Norwich, before Mr. Justice Best, James
Smith was indicted for breaking into the house of William Balls, the Half
Moon, Stone Hills, near Norwich, and stealing on January 2nd 16 gallons
of liquors in bottles, a purse containing 8 pounds in notes and cash, a
quantity of copper coin, &c.  He was found guilty and sentenced to death.
(Although it was not stated at the trial, the prisoner was evidently one
of the "Cossey gang" referred to under date January 2nd, 1822.)  At the
Norwich Assizes, Henry Carter was sentenced to death for entering the
dwelling-house of John Clarke, of St. Paul's, and stealing therein
several articles.  The execution of these men was carried out under
revolting circumstances on August 24th.  From an early hour in the
morning they were incessantly appealed to by the chaplain of the gaol and
a Wesleyan minister to acknowledge the justice of their sentence.  The
procession from the gaol in St Giles' Street to the scaffold was headed
by the Under Sheriffs on horseback; the Sheriffs accompanied by the
chaplain and the minister came next in a mourning coach, "followed by a
cart covered with black cloth on which sat the two malefactors each with
arms pinioned, neck bare, and head uncovered, each sitting on the coffin
destined to receive his lifeless body."  Smith was well behaved, but
Carter acted with great levity during the progress of the procession
through the Market Place to the scaffold erected near the weighing
machine on the Castle Meadow, and on the very drop itself "he seemed to
evince perfect indifference to the fate which awaited him."  After
hanging for an hour "the bodies were carried by twelve bearers to the
house of Carter's parents in St. Margaret's, and were buried on the 26th
in the churchyard of that parish."

3.*--"Mr. Yarrington, of this city, plumber and glazier, has presented
the Dean and Chapter of Norwich with a valuable piece of stained glass, a
portrait of the Virgin, which has been placed in the west window of the
Cathedral."

6.--A great cocking match lasting two days commenced at Yarmouth, between
the gentlemen of that town and of Norwich.  Yarmouth won eleven mains and
five byes, and Norwich nine mains and seven byes.  "The feeder for
Norwich (Nash) proved the excellence of his management.  On Wednesday
evening the Norwich cock was pounded and taken by Nash, and from the
superiority of his condition afterwards won the battle.  In the second
pit the same evening one of the Norwich cocks had his thigh broken in the
first part of the battle, and afterwards fought two hours, and at one
time brought the odds from ten to one against him to the same odds in his
favour.  He, however, eventually lost.  This battle would have been
withdrawn, but as the money depended upon it they were induced to
continue it."

7.--Mr. Heber, "the very eminent book collector and M.P. for the
University of Oxford," dined with the Bishop of Norwich at the Palace,
and on the following morning proceeded to Blickling to inspect the
library at the hall.

8.--A cricket match between eleven members of the Holt club and the first
eleven of the Nottingham club, commenced at Nottingham, and owing to
unfavourable weather was protracted to the 11th.  Scores: Nottingham,
109-91; Holt, 52-43.  "Bets to the amount of several thousand pounds were
dependent upon the match."

11.--His Majesty the King passed off Yarmouth on his voyage to Scotland.
"About half past five o'clock two steam tugs were seen with the Royal
yacht in tow, and thousands of persons crowded to the jetty and beach."
The vessels steered a course outside the Roads; but the Perseverance yawl
put off with thirty persons on board, "and had the good fortune to fall
in with the yacht as it was weathering the Newarp floating light.  The
company in the boat gave four cheers for the King, who came on board and
returned the salutation."  On his return voyage on Saturday, August 31st,
his Majesty passed through the Roads, and the yacht came close in shore.
"His Majesty was greatly disappointed in not receiving a supply of fresh
provisions which had been previously ordered to be ready for him on his
arrival off the town.  The letter arrived two hours after the King had
passed."

12.--Marshland free bridge and causeway were opened for the use of the
public.  A procession, led by the carriage of Mr. Thomas Hoseason, and
followed by those of Sir Thomas Hare, Mr. Anthony Hamond, and others
started from the South Gates, Lynn, preceded by a band of music.  On the
arrival of the procession at the foot of the bridge the horses were taken
out of Mr. Hoseason's carriage and men who had been employed on the works
dragged it over the bridge and causeway.  After a congratulatory speech
by Mr. Hoseason, luncheon was provided for 200 guests at the expense of
the directors.  In the evening a dinner was given at the Freemasons'
Tavern, and on the marshes belonging to Mr. W. Goddard, at West Lynn, a
fair for stock was held for the first time, a sheep roasted, and several
barrels of beer given away.

17.*--"Thorogood, one of the proprietors of the Times coach from Norwich
to London, has actually driven the whole distance, 116 miles, and been in
both those cities _every day_ for more than a twelvemonth, an instance of
laborious perseverance altogether unparalleled."

19.--Lee Sugg, the ventriloquist, who had been before the public for half
a century as a performer, gave his entertainment at the Prussia Gardens,
Norwich.

29.--This being the anniversary of the Decollation of St. John the usual
formalities were observed at the election of the Mayor, chamberlain, and
churchwardens of Yarmouth.  The inquest was locked up at twelve noon, and
did not come to a decision until next morning at 7.30, when the following
officers were returned: Mayor, Mr. Isaac Preston; churchwardens, Messrs.
Robert Cory and Danby Palmer; chamberlain, Mr. James Lawes.


SEPTEMBER.


9.--At Thorpe Water Frolic a match was sailed by nine boats for a silver
cup, gave by Mr. Harvey.  Rowing matches followed, and "the banks of the
Yare were thronged beyond all precedency with genteel company."

12.--A meeting was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, for the purpose of
furthering the scheme for making Norwich a port, in accordance with the
plans prepared by Mr. William Cubitt, C.E.  On the motion of Mr. Crisp
Brown, seconded by Mr. Joseph Geldart, it was agreed to open a
subscription for carrying the plans into effect, and formal notice was
given of the introduction of the Bill into Parliament.  (See December
21st, 1822.)

14.*--"Died last week in Norwich, well stricken in years, Mr. James
Paston, a comedian of considerable talent, many years a performer in the
Norfolk and Suffolk Company, and was much admired in that circuit as an
actor."

25.--A camping match took place at Worstead between ten men of the
Blofield Hundred and ten of the Tunstead and Happing Hundred.  It
terminated in favour of the former.  "A poor old man, who had repaired
thither to see the sport, fell down and expired on the spot."

27.--A deputation of journeyman weavers presented Mr. John Harvey with a
silver vase, subscribed for by 2,300 persons, "in testimony of the high
esteem in which they regarded him as a liberal patron and spirited
promoter of the manufactures of his native city of Norwich, and as a
small tribute of gratitude for the many acts of kindness he had
manifested towards them on various occasions."

30.--Mr. David Fisher's season terminated at Swaffham Theatre.  "With the
close of the season has ended the use of the present Theatre, which is to
be pulled down and a new one on a more extended and improved scale
erected."

--A dinner was given at the Town Hall, Lynn, by the Mayor-elect, Mr.
Edward Everard.  The company present included, among others, Mr. T. W.
Coke, M.P., the Marquis of Tichfield, M.P., Col. Walpole, M.P., &c.
"Some pointed remarks fell from both parties, and Mr. Coke made some
remarks which called forth some observations from Mr. Wodehouse."
Alderman Blencowe proposed "the health of Lady Anne," and Mr. Coke, in
reply, said "it was extremely natural that he should wish for a son and
heir to the Holkham estate, but declared that rather than his son should
prove a Tory he should wish not to have a son at all."

--A serious accident occurred at Yarmouth on the occasion of the dinner
given by the Mayor-elect.  As the company were entering the Town Hall a
salute was fired from some "swivels" laid on the Quay, one of which burst
and severely wounded seven or eight lads.  From the effects of the
terrible injuries he received, one of the lads died next day.


OCTOBER.


1.--H.R.H. the Duke of Sussex arrived at Lynn on his way to Holkham Hall.
A meeting of the Corporation was held, at which his Royal Highness was
enrolled a free burgess of the borough.  Luncheon was served at the Town
Hall, and "the Mayor presented that exquisite relic of antiquity, King
John's cup, filled with wine, of which his Royal Highness partook."

1.--Died, in his 81st year, at Westacre High House, Mr. Anthony Hamond.
"He lived a life of extraordinary activity, and rode the foremost in the
coursing as well as in the hunting field on the most spirited horses,
even to a few weeks of his death.  He was born at South Woodton, near
Lynn, and succeeded his uncle, Mr. Richard Hamond, in possession of his
extensive landed property.  By the female line he was related to the Duke
and Princess Sophia of Gloucester, the late Earl of Orford, and the
present Marquis Cholmondeley, his grandmother being sister of Sir Robert
Walpole.  He was the only surviving original member of the Swaffham
Coursing Society, established in 1779.  He served the office of Sheriff
of Norfolk in 1792, and leaves surviving three sons and two daughters."

2.--M. Chalon, the famous French conjurer, performed at the Norwich
Theatre.

8.--The Norfolk and Norwich Literary Institution was founded at a meeting
held at the Guildhall.  The rooms of the institution were at a house in
the Haymarket.

12.*--"A short time since as two gentlemen of Norwich were fishing at
Halvergate, they caught a pike which weighed twenty-two ounces and
measured twenty-three inches in length; in the body of which they found a
weasel in a perfect state, which weighed six ounces and measured twelve
inches in length."

13.--During a terrible gale the Revenue cutter Ranger, Capt. John Sayers,
was lost off Happisburgh with 30 of her crew.  Capt. Sayer was appointed
to the command of the Lapwing cutter in 1807, and of the Ranger in 1809.
The latter vessel was wrecked within 50 yards of the spot where another
Revenue cutter, the Hunter, was lost some years previously.  Allegations,
the truth of which was denied, were made that the inhabitants of
Happisburgh shamefully neglected the signals of distress made by the
Ranger.  "The shrieks of the crew," it was said, "were heard distinctly
on the shore, yet no attempt was made to rescue."

15.--A "grand music meeting" commenced in Norwich, and concluded on the
18th.  Evening concerts were given at the Theatre, and morning
performances in the Hall Concert Room, St. George's.  The managers were
Messrs. A. and E. Pettet, and the principal vocal performers M. Sapio,
Mr. Beale, and Madame Camporese.

18.--Died, aged 51, Daniel Coppin, of St. Catherine's Plain, Norwich.  He
was a member of the Norwich Society of Artists, and was principally known
for his highly creditable studies from Opie.

28.--Two men named Grint, a dyer, and Purdy, a weaver, "neither of whom
had any pretensions to pugilistic science," fought for an hour near
Bishop Bridge, Norwich, until Purdy became insensible, and three days
afterwards died.  Grint was committed for trial, and at the Norwich
Summer Assizes, in 1823, was found guilty, and sentenced by Mr. Justice
Blossett to three months' imprisonment.

31.--The chandling office of Messrs. Staff and Chamberlin, St.
Martin-at-Palace, Norwich, was destroyed by fire.  "Several hogsheads of
tallow and a large quantity of candles were melted and ran down the
streets in a stream into the river, from the surface of which more than
ten cwt. was skimmed off by persons in boats."


NOVEMBER.


4.--Mr. Harvey was presented by the Corporation with a massive silver
candelabrum in recognition of his impartial and honourable conduct as
Steward and Recorder of Norwich during the period of 40 years, and of his
zeal on all occasions for the interests of the city.

5.--Mutton of the best quality was sold in Lynn Market at 3d. per pound.
On the 6th Mr. Martin, butcher, sold mutton at 2.5d. per pound.

9.*--"Lately was launched from Mr. Bottomley's yard in South Lynn a ship
of 600 tons burden with figure-head and quarter galleries, built for the
Jamaica trade.  She was called the Marlborough."

--The Phoenix new night coach from the Star Inn, Market Place, Norwich,
left on Sunday, Tuesday, and Thursday, at four o'clock and arrived at the
Bull Inn, Aldgate, at eight in the morning.  It was advertised on this
date as the property of Ann Nelson and Sons and Thomas Ridley and Co.

--Died at Coltishall, aged 77, Mr. William Palgrave, an alderman of
Yarmouth, who served the office of Mayor of that borough in 1782 and
1805.

26.--A grand moving panorama of the battle of Genappe, St. Helena, &c.,
was opened in Mr. Noverre's room, St. Michael-at-Plea, Norwich.

28.--Died at Doughty's Hospital, in his 63rd year, John Swan, for many
years an inhabitant of St. Peter Mancroft.  "In the former part of his
life he acted as watchman and parish constable.  Being of athletic make,
of a stern countenance, and possessing a sonorous, rough voice he excited
terror and commanded obedience to his authority.  He was several years
one of the appointed trumpeters for sounding before the judges in the
Assize week, and also for attending at Thetford on the same occasion."

29.--An inquest was held at Loddon by Mr. Pilgrim, coroner, on the body
of James Dale, who was killed the preceding day by a patient in the
private lunatic asylum kept by Mr. Jollye, surgeon.  The deceased, a
keeper, incautiously laid down the carving knife which he was using at
the dinner table, when the patient snatched it up and stabbed him in the
left breast, killing him instantly.

30.--Lloyd's Equestrian Troupe commenced a season's engagement at the
Ranelagh Gardens, Norwich.


DECEMBER.


1.--H.R.H. the Duke of York passed through Norwich on returning from a
visit to Houghton Hall.

--Died at Downham Market, Mrs. Pidgeon.  "This venerable person was 89
years of age, and what is remarkable she never had any other place of
residence than the one she died in, and expired upon the same bed on
which she was born."

6.--Sir Jacob Astley's hounds drew at Ringstead and chased a fox to
within a mile of Fakenham, a distance of 16 miles, when the hounds became
at fault.  "Reynard was spied upon the tiles of a cottage, when a general
cry was raised to spare him.  The huntsman dismounted and caught him as
he slipped off the tiles by the cottage door, and drove him in, when he
was secured and saved and taken home in a sack for another day's sport."

7.--A panorama illustrating Lord Exmouth's victory over the Algerines was
exhibited in a wooden building specially erected on the Castle ditches,
Norwich.  It was described as "the peristrephic or moving panorama," and
was invented by the exhibitors, Messrs. Marshall.

12.--Died at Hampstead Park, Berkshire, the seat of the Earl of Craven,
Mr. John Brunton, aged 82.  "He was father of the late Mrs. Merry, of the
present Lady Craven, and of Mr. John Brunton, manager of the West London
Theatre.  He was a native of Norwich, and for many years patentee and
manager of the Norwich Theatre, in which situation he was highly esteemed
for his judicious and liberal conduct.  He was a superior actor, and in
the characters of Lear, Iago, Evander, and The Stranger but few excelled
him."

21.*--"We understand that Mr. Telford, successor to the late Mr. Rennie,
has delivered a report on the proposed plan for making Norwich a port, in
which he bears ample testimony to the satisfactory nature of Mr. Cubitt's
professional investigations and remarks."  Mr. John Harvey, chairman of
the committee for carrying the project into execution, forwarded to the
Mayor of Yarmouth a copy of Mr. Telford's report, and received in reply
an assurance that the Corporation of Yarmouth would do everything in its
power to oppose an undertaking "which was pregnant with the most ruinous
consequences to the navigation of that port and to the trading interests
of the town and neighbourhood."  (See January 21st, 1823.)

26.--Lady Anne Coke gave birth to a son and heir at Holkham.  The infant
was christened at the town house of Mr. T. W. Coke, M.P., Hanover Square,
on June 21st, 1823, when their Royal Highnesses the Dukes of Sussex and
Gloucester stood sponsors, and Lady Andover godmother.  The ceremony was
performed by the Lord Bishop of Norwich.



1823.


JANUARY.


1.--At the Norwich Adjourned Quarter Sessions, the magistrates decided to
build a new gaol on a piece of ground outside St. Giles' Gates.  On
February 23rd the Corporation granted to the justices a lease of the
site, five acres in extent, for 500 years, at the annual rent of 50
pounds.  At a full assembly of the magistrates on August 26th the tenders
of Messrs. Mears and Blyth for building the new gaol in accordance with
plans prepared by Mr. Barnes, for the sum of 17,395 pounds, were
accepted.

2.--The coming of age of Mr. Henry Jerningham, eldest son of Sir George
and Lady Jerningham, was celebrated at Costessey Park with great
rejoicings.

3.--Pursuant to requisition signed by 540 occupiers of land, &c., in the
county the High Sheriff of Norfolk (Sir R. P. Jodrell), convened a
meeting at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, "for the purpose of taking into
consideration the severe and unprecedented distresses of agriculture and
the best means of relieving them."  The High Sheriff presided, supported
by the county members, Mr. T. W. Coke and Mr. Edmond Wodehouse.  Mr.
Cobbett was in the body of the Hall, and great confusion prevailed at
intervals.  Mr. Alderman Thurtell moved a string of resolutions in favour
of the reduction of taxation and the abolition of needless and,
therefore, useless places, pensions, and sinecures, such a reduction of
the National Debt as was required; and the total repeal of the Malt and
Beer taxes, which would relieve heavy burdens and encourage the growth of
barley.  Mr. George Watson seconded the resolutions.  Mr. Cobbett, amid
great uproar, then moved, as an amendment to Mr. Thurtell's resolutions,
that a petition be presented to Parliament containing among other
suggestions the following: the appropriation of part of the public
property, commonly called Church property, to be applied to the
liquidation of the National Debt; the abolition of the standing army; the
total abolition of sinecure pensions, grants, and emoluments; the sale of
numerous public estates commonly called Crown lands, and the application
of the money towards the liquidation of the public debt; to suspend by
law for one year all distraints for rents; to suspend all processes for
tithes for the same period, and all processes arising out of mortgages
effected on houses or land; and to repeal the taxes on malt, hops,
leather, soap, and candles.  Not three-fourths of the audience were able
to hear the reading of the petition, but it was adopted, and the
resolutions moved by Mr. Thurtell negatived by at least twenty to one.
Mr. Cobbett, at the close of the meeting, stood forward and said this was
the greatest triumph he had ever had; it was their triumph also--the
triumph of truth and sound principles.  Subsequently meetings were held
in the various Hundreds of the county "to disavow the Norwich proceedings
of the 3rd," and "to express abhorrence and detestation of the
revolutionary doctrines promulgated, and the measures of fraud and
spoliation recommended for legislative adoption."  On March 8th the
NORFOLK CHRONICLE published the following paragraph: "Norfolk Petition.
Serious loss.  We understand the county has been so unfortunate as to be
deprived of its Petition by some daring depredator who had the audacity
to steal it from the coach by which it was sent to London about a
fortnight ago.  The most diligent search has been made for this important
document, but without success."

4.*--"We have been called upon by several gentlemen who were witnesses of
the circumstance to notice the very reprehensible conduct of the persons
who drove the Day and Times coaches into this city on Tuesday evening.
These coaches had been racing on the road, and proceeded at such a rapid
rate that they reached Norwich at a quarter before five o'clock, having
performed the journey from London, 112 miles, in less than eleven hours."

11.--Master Hubbard, "the scissor artist," exhibited his proficiency in
cutting out profiles in paper at Norwich.

11.--At a fire which occurred at Blackthorn Farm, Diss, in the occupation
of Mr. John Elsey, a chimney fell and killed John Gardiner and William
Tipple.  Two other persons were severely injured.

16.--Married at Lakenham church, by the Rev. George Carter, Mr. George
Thurtell, son of Mr. Alderman Thurtell, to Miss Edwards.

--Married at North Walsham, by the Rev. W. F. Wilkinson, Mr. George
Fisher, of the Norfolk and Suffolk Company of Comedians, to Miss Marianne
Nickless, niece of Mrs. Saul, of that place.

20.--A coach commenced running from the Crown Tavern, Lynn, every Monday,
Wednesday, and Friday morning by Swaffham and Dereham to Norwich.  It
returned from Norwich _via_ Hingham, Watton, and Swaffham.  Another coach
set out from the White Swan, Norwich, every Tuesday, Thursday, and
Saturday morning at eleven o'clock, and travelled by Dereham and Swaffham
to meet the Stamford coach at Lynn.  It returned after the arrival of the
Stamford coach, by Swaffham, Watton, and Hingham.

21.--At a public meeting held at the Guildhall, Norwich, presided over by
the Mayor (Mr. Robert Hawkes), it was resolved, on the motion of Mr. John
Harvey seconded by Mr. Crisp Brown, and unanimously agreed, that direct
and improved communication with the sea was an object of the first
importance to the future prosperity of the city; that the plan for an
open harbour at Lowestoft be approved; that application be made to
Parliament for carrying the undertaking into execution; and that a
subscription for the purpose based on shares of 100 pounds each be
immediately opened.  On February 8th a letter from the fishing masters,
boatmen, and pilots to Mr. Harvey, expressing the hope that the proposed
plan would be of the greatest benefit to the city of Norwich as well as
to the town of Lowestoft, was published.

24.--Capt. Hayes, "the Father of the British Army," was entertained at
the Star Inn, Norwich, on the anniversary of his entrance into the
service.  He had served 62 years.

25.--It was announced that Messrs. W. and M. Stark, manufacturers, of
Norwich, had completed an establishment for carrying into operation the
patent of Mr. J. F. Smith, of Dunston Hall, Chesterfield, in the method
of finishing bombazines and other silk and worstead goods.


FEBRUARY.


1.--Died, Mrs. Browne, formerly of the Theatre Royal, Norwich, and mother
of Mrs. J. Brunton.

--A new drama, entitled "The Fortunes of Nigel, or King James the First
and his Times," founded upon Mr. Scott's novel, and written by Mr. Edward
Ball, formerly of Norwich, was produced at Norwich Theatre for the first
time.

--An action "of an entirely novel description to Norfolk" was tried in
the Sheriffs' court at Norwich, "Jonathan Wrench _v._ the men inhabiting
the Hundred of Holt in Norfolk."  It was brought for the purpose of
ascertaining the amount of damage the plaintiff had sustained by having a
stack of corn destroyed by fire through the act of an incendiary.  It was
enacted by 9th George I. c 22, that the owner of property so injured was
entitled to recover an amount not exceeding 200 pounds from the
inhabitants of the Hundred in which the property was situate on complying
with the requirements of the Act, namely by giving notice within two days
after the commission of the offence "to some of the inhabitants near unto
the place where any such act shall be committed, and within four days
after such notice that statement be made before a justice of the peace."
It was admitted that the requirements of the Act had been complied with,
and a verdict was given for the plaintiff--damages 143 pounds 15s.

2.--A congregation of about 120 persons, "of the sect commonly called
Ranters," were assembled for worship in a room adjoining the City of
Norwich public-house, St. Stephen's, Norwich, when the floor gave way and
the whole were precipitated into a cellar nine feet deep.  Twenty-five
received material injury and were conveyed to the Norfolk and Norwich
Hospital.  Four were suffering from fractured limbs, and one person had
his leg amputated.

10.--A trotting match took place between a brown mare, the property of
Mr. William Day, of St. Stephen's, and a mare owned by Mr. J. Harper,
auctioneer,--stakes 10 pounds, distance two miles.  Ned Painter rode Mr.
Harper's mare and the brown had her owner up.  "They started from Earlham
toll-gate, and within a short distance of the starting post Mr. Day's
mare broke into a gallop, and she had to turn back.  By this circumstance
she was dead beat."

15.--Owing to the frequency with which a number of trunks, measuring 28
inches long, 13 inches wide, and 12 inches deep, had been sent from the
Rampant Horse Inn, Norwich, by the Telegraph coach to London, suspicion
was aroused at the coach office, and directions were given that the
porter bringing the next be detained and the parcel examined.  This was
done on the 15th, when it was found that the package contained the dead
and naked body of an old man.  The Rev. George Carter, vicar of Lakenham,
identified the body as that of a man named Brundall whom he had buried a
few days previously.  Brundall's grave was examined and it was found that
only the coffin and the shroud remained.  From information given by the
porter, two men named Collins and Crowe were apprehended and committed
for trial at the Quarter Sessions.  On July 15th they were tried, found
guilty, and sentenced to three months' imprisonment, and to pay a fine of
50 pounds.


MARCH.


8.--Messrs. Marshall's panorama of the battle of Trafalgar and the death
of Nelson was exhibited at Norwich.

31.--"A serio-comic Mill-Dramatic Farcical, Moral Burletta, called 'The
Tread Mill, or Tom and Jerry at Brixton,'" was produced at Norwich
Theatre.  "An exact representation of a tread mill with culprits at work
made a goodly show in the lower circle, crowded the gallery, and filled
the pit to the excess of squeezing."


APRIL.


2.*--(Advt.)  "It having been represented that there are well-founded
grounds of apprehension that some mad dogs have made their appearance in
different parts of the city and neighbourhood of Norwich by whom several
other dogs have been bitten, the Mayor hereby recommends all of the
inhabitants who have dogs immediately to cause them to be tied up or
otherwise confined, as in case of their continuing to suffer them to be
in the streets, an order will be issued for their being killed" (_sic_).

5.--The Rev. Chancellor Yonge, as one of the Visiting Justices of
Swaffham Bridewell, reported to the Home Secretary, in reply to inquiries
made respecting the use of the tread-wheel, "it has been in use here
about four months, and during that time no injurious effects whatever
have been experienced to the health of the prisoners.  There have been in
general a large number of prisoners and they have been very healthy,
which may in some measure be owing to the regular exercise on the
tread-wheel.  The exercise of the tread-wheel is very salutary."

--*(Advt.)  "The annual great main of cocks between the gentlemen of
Norwich and Northamptonshire for 5 pounds a battle and 200 pounds the
odd, will be fought at the White Swan Inn, St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich,
on Tuesday, April 22nd, and two following days.  A silver tankard will be
fought for by 16 subscribers.  No cock to exceed four pounds ten ounces.
The above to be fought in fair silver spurs, and to commence fighting
each day at twelve o'clock.  Feeders: Nash for Northampton, Skipper for
Norwich."

--At noon William Bray, aged 20, was executed at the foot of the bridge,
Castle Hill, Norwich, for a burglary at Shouldham.  "Almost continually
night and day he was crying out to God for mercy in so lamentable a
manner as to leave little room for religious impressions.  His parents
were too poor to send for his remains, which were interred the same day
in St. Michael-at-Thorn churchyard."

11.--At the Norfolk Quarter Sessions, the county justices appointed a
committee to consider the best means of procuring the holding of the Lent
Assizes at Norwich instead of at Thetford.  On April 14th the Norwich
Corporation petitioned his Majesty in favour of two gaol deliveries each
year.  (The NORFOLK CHRONICLE contained the following editorial note:
"The holding of the Lent Assizes for Norfolk at Thetford has been long
and justly complained of as a serious grievance.  It is high time to put
an end to the disgraceful scene annually exhibited of a body of criminals
being exposed in open waggons from Norwich to Thetford, and there
congregated for a week without regard to age or crime.")

16.--Died at Great Malvern, Mrs. Bathurst, wife of the Lord Bishop of
Norwich.

23.--On the occasion of the celebration of the King's birthday, the
members of the Norwich Light Horse Volunteers presented to Lieut.-Col.
Harvey "a valuable scymetar, in recognition of his services during the 26
years that he had commanded the corps."

25.--Pursuant to requisition a meeting was held at the Guildhall,
Norwich, presided over by the Mayor, "to take into consideration the
state of the British West Indian Colonies with the view to the gradual
and complete abolition of slavery."  Resolutions were passed in favour of
the movement.

30.--A man who sold sand about the streets of Norwich drove his cart and
pair of horses up the flight of ten steps, leading from Davey Place to
the Castle ditches.  "The horses did it with much ease and without
receiving any injury, to the astonishment of the spectators."

--A singular case came before the Mayor of Norwich.  A man named
Stebbings had sold his wife to a person named Turner for 6 pounds 10s.,
who, having paid down 4 pounds on account, took home his "bargain" and
brutally turned his lawful wife out of doors.  On Mrs. Turner applying to
the court for relief, the parties were summoned before the Mayor, who
obliged Turner to relinquish his bargain and Stebbings to support his own
wife.


MAY.


1.--Four candidates were nominated for the Mayoralty of Norwich, and the
polling resulted as follows: Alderman Patteson, 835; Alderman Francis,
774; Alderman Leman, 101; Alderman Yallop, 94.  Mr. Patteson was returned
by the Court of Aldermen on May 3rd.

3.--At a quarterly assembly of the Norwich Corporation, it was resolved
that a former order for taking toll for cattle standing for sale on the
Castle Meadow be rescinded.

5.--A great main of cocks was fought at the White Swan Inn, Norwich, on
this and the three following days between the gentlemen of Norfolk and
the gentlemen of Herefordshire.  The stakes were five guineas a battle
and 200 guineas the odd battle.  The feeders were Burn for Herefordshire,
Lamb for Norfolk.  Herefordshire won by ten in the main and three in the
byes.

12.--Messrs. Stannard, Athow, De Carle, Wright, and Coleman, of Norwich,
became the purchasers of Wanstead House, Essex, which was sold by auction
on this date.  The amount given was 10,000 pounds, and one of the
conditions of sale was that the purchaser or purchasers should clear
everything away even to the foundation by Lady Day, 1825.  The purchasers
"absolutely sold a pair of marble chimney pieces for 300 guineas before
they left the room.  Thus is sacrificed on the shrine of extravagance and
gambling, a mansion which cost in its erection more than 360,000 pounds,
and which has no equal in the county of Essex."

13.--The first annual dinner of the Norfolk Society in London was held at
the City of London Tavern.  The objects of the society were: to afford
means of social intercourse between persons connected with the county
residing in London; to promote by mutual co-operation the general
interests of its members; and to form a fund for the relief, education,
or apprenticeship of such objects of charity as the society considered
suitable.

22.--Died, aged 55, Mr. Thomas Coldwell, postmaster of Norwich, and a
common councilman of the Great Mancroft Ward.

23.--A cricket match was played at Hockwold-cum-Wilton between 11 married
and 11 single females for eleven pairs of gloves.  The match terminated
in favour of the former.  "The parties were dressed in jackets and
trousers tastefully decorated with blue ribbands."

27.--Married at St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich, by the Rev. John Bowman, Mr.
James Vining, of Norwich Theatre, to Miss Caroline Holmes, daughter of
Mr. George Holmes, of Burstall Hall, Suffolk.

29.--In celebration of the Restoration of Charles II. the Mayor and
Corporation of Yarmouth attended service at St Nicholas' Church, the
ships in the harbour were "dressed," and a salute was fired from the fort
at noon.


JUNE.


2.--A curious incident occurred at the Fighting Cocks Inn, Winfarthing.
"A large cock, of the true fighting breed, attacked a beautiful child, of
a year and a half old, belonging to the family of the landlord, and
wounded him in several places in the head and face, and if timely
assistance had not been at hand there is little doubt that he would have
repeated his attacks till he had deprived him of his sight, if not his
life.  The cock was killed immediately."

4.--A new melo-drama, entitled "Eugenio, or the Secrets of the Abbey,"
written by Mr. J. Bambridge, a native of the city, was performed at
Norwich Theatre for the first time.

5.--Mr. Marker Graze was appointed Postmaster of Norwich, in place of Mr.
Thomas Coldwell, deceased.

11.--The theatrical season ended at Norwich.  The benefit receipts were
as follow: Mr. Smith (manager), 146 pounds; Mr. Thorne, 54 pounds; Mr.
Vining, 118 pounds; Mr. Clifford, 87 pounds; Mr. G. Smith, 72 pounds;
Mrs. Jones, 105 pounds; Messrs. Wharton and Hamerton, 35 pounds; Miss
Brunton, 70 pounds; Miss Wensley, 72 pounds; Mr. Beacham, 79 pounds; Mr.
and Mrs. Sloman, 130 pounds; Mr. Harrison, 62 pounds; Mr. Henderson, 53
pounds; Mr. Bennett, 111 pounds; Miss Glover, 45 pounds; Mr. Benson 56
pounds; Mr. and Mrs. Osbaldiston, 134 pounds; Mr. Hunt, 86 pounds; Miss
Tubby, 111 pounds; Messrs. Wharton and Hamerton (second benefit in
consequence of wet weather on the previous occasion), 75 pounds; Mr.
Simpson and Miss Adcock, 35 pounds.  Total, 1,738 pounds; average, 82
pounds 15s.

16.--A prize fight took place near Wymondham for 5 pounds a side between
Gales and Dann.  "After a hard milling contest of more than an hour,
during which 70 rounds were fought without the least display of skill or
science, Dann was obliged to give in."

17.--Guild Day at Norwich.  The Recorder, Aldermen, and Sheriffs went in
their carriages to the mansion of the Mayor-elect (Mr. J. S. Patteson) in
Magdalen Street, and partook of "an elegant dejeune"; they next proceeded
to the house of the Mayor (Mr. R. Hawkes), "with whom they took some
refreshment," and then to the Cathedral, where the Mayor's Chaplain, the
Rev. William Frederick Patteson, preached.  George Steward, second son of
Mr. Alderman Steward, delivered the Latin oration at the Free School
porch.  After the ceremony at the Guildhall Mr. Patteson entertained 650
guests at the Guild feast, and 500 at the ball at Chapel Field House.

20.--The House of Commons in Committee of Supply granted 2,000 pounds to
Capt. Manby for his services in saving the lives of shipwrecked seamen.

24.--Died at Thetford, aged 70, Mr. Shelford Bidwell, who had served many
times as Mayor of the borough, and was a great benefactor of the poor.

29.--Died at Acle, aged 59, Samuel Morris.  "He was generally known as
'Old Sam.'  For many years he delivered letters from the post office
there, and he must have travelled some thousands of miles on foot.  On
various occasions when he might have made the delivery on horseback he
invariably walked, and being furnished with a red guard's coat he was
frequently dignified with the appellation of the 'Scarlet Runner.'"

30.--Died in St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich, aged 60, Matthew Joy.  "This
poor man was known by the appellation of 'The Walking Baker,' and for the
last eleven years of his life used to carry a large basket of bread,
about eight stones weight, upon his shoulders to several villages,
walking no less than 20 miles per day.  He walked in all about 68,440
miles."


JULY.


1.--At a meeting held at the Swan Inn, Norwich, at which Mr. Dalrymple
presided, resolutions were passed condemning the French invasion of
Spain.  A subscription was opened "in aid of the suffering and heroic
people of that country."

11.--Died at Stiffkey, Col. Henry Loftus, of the Coldstream Guards,
eldest son of General Loftus.  His remains were interred in the chancel
of Rainham Church.

12.*--"The antient pastime of heron hawking is still carried on in this
county.  Ten cast of hawks and four falconers, natives of Germany, to
which country they repair annually in the autumn to catch a supply of
hawks for the ensuing season, are kept at Didlington Hall, the seat of
Major Wilson, near to which place is an extensive heronry."

16.--Died at North Walsham, where he had some time resided for the
benefit of his health, the Rev. Marmaduke Revell, aged 56.  "He was 23
years minister in the Methodist connexion, among whom he was a useful and
zealous preacher of the Gospel, which he adorned by strict conformity to
its precepts."

19.--Mr. John Cross was elected assistant surgeon of the Norfolk and
Norwich Hospital.

22.--The Norfolk Rangers, under the command of Major Lord James
Townshend, were inspected at Fakenham by Col. the Hon. John Wodehouse,
his Majesty's Lieutenant for the county.

24.--A troop of the 15th Hussars arrived at Norwich to relieve the troop
of the 1st Royal Dragoons, who marched for York.

26.--A machine exemplifying perpetual motion was advertised to be
exhibited at Mrs. Chesnut's, St. Giles', Norwich.  "This grand machine,"
it was stated, "has been going ever since it was invented, now upwards of
seven years, and will continue to go without any assistance whatever by
power of its own balance and pivots, or, in other words, if the materials
it is made of would last for ever."  The Mayor made inquiries which
proved the exhibition to be a deception, and prohibited its further stay
in the city.

28.--Died, at the age of 110, Mr. John Lock, of Larling.  "He left behind
him 130 children and grandchildren."


AUGUST.


1.--The Norwich weavers held a demonstration in celebration of the
success of their Spitalfields brethren in obtaining the decision of both
Houses of Parliament upon the Spitalfields Act.  The clubs met in Chapel
Field, and afterwards went in procession through the streets.

2.*--"Mr. Mueller, from the Haymarket Theatre, has succeeded Mr. Phillips
as leader of the orchestra at the Theatre Royal, Norwich."

--Died at Winchester, the Right Hon. Charles Frederick Powlett Townshend,
Lord Bayning, of Honingham, aged 38.  His remains were conveyed to the
King's Head Inn, Wymondham, on the 12th, and were interred at Honingham
on the 13th.  His lordship was succeeded by his only brother, the Hon.
and Rev. Henry Townshend, Baron Bayning.

6.--Married, by special licence, by the Lord Bishop of Norwich, at the
parish church, Costessey, Thomas Alexander Fraser, of Lovat and Strichen,
to Charlotte Georgina, eldest daughter of Sir George Jerningham, Bart.,
Costessey Hall.  The marriage ceremony was previously performed in the
chapel at the Hall, according to the rites of the Roman Catholic Church,
by the Rev. Frederick Husenbeth, domestic chaplain to Sir George.  Soon
after the service the bride and bridegroom left Costessey in their
travelling barouche and four for Beaufort Castle, Inverness.

--In the presence of Lord Suffield, Col. Wodehouse, Mr. T. W. Coke, M.P.,
Mr. Wodehouse, M.P., and other gentlemen, experiments were made on
Mundesley beach with a new life-saving apparatus invented by Capt. Manby.
It consisted of "an airtight tin case encompassing the body beneath the
armpits."

12.--Mr. R. C. Harvey, an eminent agriculturist at Alburgh, near
Harleston, held his first annual show and sale of stock.  Mr. Spelman, of
Norwich, was the auctioneer, and the company, numbering 2,000, included
the Marquis of Blandford, Lord Huntingfield, and some of the most
distinguished agriculturists of the county.

--The Corporation of Norwich conferred the honorary freedom of the city
on Col. the Hon. John Wodehouse, Lieutenant of the county.

16.*--"Died, lately, at Sheerness, Mr. Edward Quin, many years connected
with the public press of the Metropolis, and formerly a member of the
Common Council.  He was previously a respectable performer in the Norwich
Company, under the theatrical name of Stanley.  He was the author of a
tragedy called "Elmira," which he published at Norwich, with some other
works.  He was a native of Ireland.  The cause of his death was a stroke
of apoplexy.  His body was found resting upon the wall from Sheerness to
Queensborough long after he had ceased to breathe."

23.--Mons. Alexandre appeared at Norwich Theatre in his ventriloquial
entertainment, "The Rogueries of Nicholas."

--*"Died, last week in London, Mr. Robert Mildenhall, comedian and
freeman of Norwich, formerly of the Norwich Theatre.  He pursued his
profession nearly to the end of his life, was happy in a great variety of
characters, and a strictly honest man."

25.--Thorpe Water Frolic, "instituted two years ago by Lieut.-Col.
Harvey," took place.  Ten thousand persons were present.

--Died at Hardingham, Mr. Hamond Alpe, aged 80.  He was
Lieutenant-Colonel of the 2nd Regiment of Norfolk Yeomanry Cavalry.


SEPTEMBER.


10.--The Yarmouth Court of Gaol Delivery was proclaimed to be held for
the trial of two persons charged with robbery from a vessel upon the high
seas within the Admiralty jurisdiction of that borough.  On such
occasions the Mayor, Recorder, and Steward of Norwich were associated
with the borough magistrates in forming the court.  The Mayor of Norwich
and the Mayor of Yarmouth, with Mr. Robert Alderson, who was both
Recorder of Yarmouth and Steward of Norwich, "in full legal dress," with
the magistrates and members of the Corporation, attended service, and
afterwards proceeded to the Toll House, where the trial was conducted in
due form.  "A similar instance of holding an Admiralty court for the
trial of pirates and robbers has not occurred here since the reign of
Charles I."

13.*--"The Norwich Company of Comedians is about to lose one of its
oldest and most efficient members.  Mr. Bennett quits the theatrical
profession.  Having become proprietor of the Star Inn, Yarmouth, this
able performer and respectable individual will doubtless on the stage of
real life exercise that happy zeal, and we hope with equal success that
happy art of pleasing which rendered him in the mimic scene so truly and
deservedly a public favourite."

20.--A mineral spring was reported to have been discovered on the estate
of Mr. F. Wheatley at Mundesley.  The spring was situate about 600 yards
from the edge of the cliff.

23.--A prize fight took place on Yarmouth Denes between two young men
named Tennant and Pile.  The contest lasted about 45 minutes, when Pile
received a blow which rendered him unconscious, and from the effects of
which he died two days after.  At the Quarter Sessions in April, 1824,
Tennant was sentenced to five months', and the seconds, Christopher
Parker and Bennet Paul, to one month's imprisonment.

29.--The foundation-stone of the Rehobeth chapel, Union Place, Norwich,
was laid by the Rev. R. G. Lemare.  The chapel was opened for divine
service on December 25th.


OCTOBER.


4.--A shooting match between Mr. William Coke and Lord Kennedy for 200
sovereigns a side, play or pay, "who shoots and bags the greatest number
of partridges in two days' sport on September 26th and October 4th," was
decided.  Mr. Coke shot over his uncle's manors in Norfolk, and Lord
Kennedy over Sir William Maxwell's lands at Monteith.  Mr. Coke on the
first day bagged 80.5 brace, and on the second day 90 brace.  Lord
Kennedy on the first day killed 50 brace, and on the second day 82 brace.

11.--William Burton Peeling, a prisoner in Swaffham gaol, was
endeavouring to hold a conversation with another prisoner in the
adjoining division of the tread-mill, when he accidentally placed his
head in the wheel, which drew him in and crushed him to death.

17.--The 8th King's Royal Irish Hussars, commanded by Lieut.-Col.
Westenra, were inspected at Norwich by Lord Edward Somerset,
Inspector-General of Cavalry.

18.*--"Mr. Bellamy, well known as a favourite actor on the Norwich boards
and late manager of the Theatre, is about to resume his professional
career at Bath after a short retirement from the stage."

22.--The first annual meeting of the Norfolk and Norwich Literary
Institution was held in the society's rooms in the Haymarket, Norwich,
Lieut.-Col. Harvey, the president, in the chair.

25.*--"In consequence of directions given at the end of last year by the
Hon. Fulke Greville Howard, one of the members for the most antient
borough of Castle Rising, and who is also lord of the manor, the rubbish
which had accumulated for ages in the great hall, where the court leet is
held in the inward part of the castle or keep, having been cleared away,
the bases of two pillars, which apparently supported an arch, were
discovered, and likewise a well between these columns, 63 feet deep, in a
very perfect state.  Many hundred cart loads of the ruins which had
fallen in from above were removed before these interesting remains were
laid open to view."

26.--Died, Dr. W. B. Carter, assistant surgeon in the 8th King's Royal
Irish Hussars, whose remains were buried with military honours at St.
Peter Mancroft church, Norwich, on the 30th.  The grave was dug at the
lower extremity of the middle aisle, and the customary volleys were fired
by a party of hussars stationed in the roadway between the great west
door of the church and the entrance to the Swan Inn.

27.--The Norwich Pantheon was opened under the management of Mr. Kinloch,
with his company from the Royal Amphitheatre, London.  "A real fox chase,
with dogs, horses, fox, and hounds," was the principal attraction.

31.--By virtue of a writ of mandamus granted by the Court of King's
Bench, the Norwich Court of Quarter Sessions was compelled to hear the
appeal "the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Hamlet of
Lakenham, appellants, _v._ the Governor, Deputy-Governor, and others of
the Court of Guardians of the City of Norwich, respondents."  The
appellants contended that the assessment made upon stock was not in
accordance with the Act of Parliament, by virtue whereof the rate for the
maintenance of the poor of Norwich was raised, and was unfair and
inequitable.  It was stated in the course of the trial that the real
estate of the city was valued at 54,041 pounds, that of the hamlets at
15,028 pounds; the personal property in the former was estimated at
99,800 pounds, and in the latter at 5,700 pounds.  The court confirmed
the certificate, and dismissed the appeal.

--One of the most violent storms ever remembered occurred on this date,
and resulted in many disasters on sea and land.  The whole of the coast
of Norfolk was strewn with wrecks, many lives were lost, and much misery
prevailed.  At Cromer the brig, Duchess of Cumberland, came ashore near
the lighthouse, and notwithstanding the brave exertions of Mr. Buxton,
Mr. Samuel Hoare, Mr. William Lukin, Mr. Windham, and other gentlemen, to
effect their rescue the crew of sixteen perished.  Among the most
remarkable of the incidents on land was the subsidence of a cottage at
Corpusty.  The occupier, Robert Faircloth, and two women felt the house
in motion, rushed out, and a few seconds afterwards "saw it sink out of
sight into the bowels of the earth, leaving a vacuum of several feet deep
above it which presently filled with water."


NOVEMBER.


1.*--"Died very recently in London, aged 62, Mr. William Perowne,
formerly an actor in the Phoenix Company.  He was a truly honest and
industrious man."

8.--Died at Yarmouth, Mr. Luke Waller, in the 105th year of his age.

22.--A meeting was held at the Shirehall, Norwich, under the presidency
of the Hon. John Wodehouse, Vice-Admiral of the county, at which it was
decided to form a society for saving the lives of shipwrecked mariners on
the coast of Norfolk.  At an adjourned meeting on December 13th it was
agreed to place lifeboats immediately at Yarmouth, Winterton, Blakeney,
&c.

30.--Married, at Walcot church, Bath, Mr. Frederick Henry Yates, of
Charlotte Street, London, to Miss Brunton, daughter of Mr. John Brunton,
of Norwich.


DECEMBER.


1.--The "extravaganzic burletta" entitled "Tom and Jerry" was produced at
the Pantheon, Norwich.  It was described as "an animated picture deprived
through the filtering stone of the proprietor's character and career, of
all that might offend even the most fastidious imagination."

6.--Messrs. J. and W. Wiggens advertised their Phenomena coach to run
from the Angel Inn, Norwich, every morning at a quarter to six and to
arrive at the Bull Inn, Aldgate, at seven o'clock the same evening.

9.--At a meeting held at the Guildhall, Norwich, presided over by the
Mayor (Mr. J. S. Patteson), it was resolved to petition the House of
Commons for the repeal of the duty on coals carried coastwise.

20.*--"The portrait of Mr. William Hankes, Mayor of Norwich in 1817,
painted by Mr. Clint, has lately been placed in St. Andrew's Hall."

--Drake, a showman, advertised the exhibition "in a commodious theatre
upon the Castle ditches, Norwich," of a performing elephant, a boa
constrictor, and a sea serpent alive, "which was discovered when they
were in search of the great one, and is supposed by the most moderate
calculation to measure more than 300 feet in length.  It is asserted by
the Linnean Society that this is of the same breed as the large one."

30.--Some remarkable vaults--the disused workings of ancient chalk
pits--were discovered on the property of Mr. Sendall, near St. Giles'
Gates, Norwich.  They were 35 feet beneath the surface, and extended in
various directions.  The vaults were thrown open for public inspection
and illuminated with coloured lamps.



1824.


JANUARY.


1.--At a public meeting, held at Calvert Street chapel, it was decided to
erect a second Wesleyan Methodist chapel in Norwich.  A subscription was
opened, and 600 pounds contributed.  The foundation-stone of the new
(Lady Lane) chapel was laid on April 14th by the Rev. William Gilpin,
superintendent of the Norwich circuit; and the building was opened for
worship on October 21st by the Rev. R. Newton, president of the Methodist
Conference, the Rev. John Anderson, of London, and the Rev. Mr. Farrar,
of Leeds.

2.--Persistent efforts were made this year to obtain the removal of the
Lent Assizes from Thetford to Norwich.  At a meeting of the county
magistrates on January 2nd, it was decided to present an address to the
Lord Chancellor and Mr. Secretary Peel, representing the inconvenience
and ill consequences resulting from the then existing arrangement.  At a
quarterly assembly of the Corporation of Norwich on February 24th, a
committee was appointed to co-operate with the county justices, and a
petition to the House of Commons and a memorial to the Lord Chancellor
were prepared.  On June 5th the city petition received the seal of the
Mayor, and on June 11th Lord Suffield, in the House of Lords, presented
the petition from the Norfolk magistrates.  It stated that the prisoners
were carried in open carts through the towns and villages, guarded by
soldiers, and "it was not long since that they were exhibited as sights,
one shilling being charged to see convicts of the second and third
degree, and two shillings or more for condemned felons."  There was a
dungeon at Thetford, thirteen feet below the surface of the ground,
measuring eighteen feet by nine feet, and eight and a half feet in
height, and in this cell upon one occasion no less than seventeen persons
were placed to sleep.  The Lord Chancellor intimated that the subject was
under consideration, and the petition was ordered to be printed.  On
August 7th the announcement was made that the Lieutenant of the county
had received a letter from the Lord Chancellor, stating that the twelve
Judges had unanimously decided against the removal of the Lent Assizes
from Thetford.  At the Summer Assizes on August 11th, the Grand Jury for
the county presented an address to the Judges expressing regret at their
decision, and pointing out that the chief benefits contemplated by the
recent Act of Parliament for the regulation of gaols must be in a great
degree frustrated by a continuance of the then state of things in
Norfolk.  "The late city calendar," said the NORFOLK CHRONICLE,
"furnishes no less than three cases of exceptional long confinement
before trial; namely, one person for more than twelve months, who has
been acquitted, and two others in custody upwards of eleven months
against whom no true bills were found."

16.--At the Norfolk Quarter Sessions at Norwich, the magistrates agreed
that the whole of Mr. Wilkin's plan for erecting a new gaol at Norwich
Castle be carried into execution.  It was understood that the entire cost
of the Shirehall and prison would not exceed 46,000 pounds.

24.--Great sensation was caused in Norwich by the trial and execution at
Hertford of John Thurtell for the murder of Mr. Wear on October 24th,
1823.  The execution took place on January 9th, and on the 24th was
published in the NORFOLK CHRONICLE a letter received by Mr. Alderman
Thomas Thurtell, of Norwich, the father of the culprit, from Mr. Robert
Sutton, High Sheriff of Hertfordshire, in which the writer commiserated
with him in his great affliction.  In the same paper was another letter
addressed by Mr. N. Bolingbroke, of Norwich, to the High Sheriff of
Hertfordshire, in which he wrote: "It may appear to some that he (the
father) has not acted with sufficient kindness of feeling towards his
unhappy son; but you may be assured, Sir, that there was no part of his
conduct which could not be satisfactorily explained.  He has generally
acted under the advice of Mr. Unthank, a respectable solicitor in this
city, my own, and others.  There are many actions in a man's life of
which no correct opinion can be formed without a knowledge of the motives
by which such have been influenced."

29.--At a meeting held at the Guildhall, Norwich, under the presidency of
Lieut.-Col. Harvey, supported by Mr. E. Wodehouse, M.P., and Mr. T. F.
Buxton, M.P., it was agreed to petition Parliament to carry into effect
the resolutions passed in the previous Session of the House of Commons on
the subject of colonial slavery.


FEBRUARY.


2.--A fine ship called the Colville, built for the India trade, was
launched from the shipyard of Mr. William Bottomley, at Lynn.

4.--Thirty-two half ankers of Geneva, sixteen casks of tobacco, and six
casks of tea were discovered in a vault in a plantation belonging to Lord
Suffield by the coastguard stationed at Mundesley.

7.*--"In Norfolk the number of miles of turnpike road is 271.  The income
per mile is 38 pounds; the expenditure per mile, 26 pounds; excess of
income over expenditure, 12 pounds."

--*"The following notice appeared in a Norwich paper about 60 years ago
and affords a curious instance of the then stage coach celerity: 'A wain
will set off on Thursday from Norwich early in the morning and be in
London on Saturday evening.'  Our coaches now perform the journey in 14
hours, and our fly waggons in 24 hours!"

19.--The eight bells of St. Margaret's church, Lynn, hung by Messrs. T.
and J. Hurry, of Norwich, were opened.

24.--To effect improvements in Willow Lane, Norwich, and to lay open to
view the churchyard of St. Giles', a lease was granted by the Corporation
to Mr. Edward Browne, Messrs. Fountain and Cattermoul, Mr. William De
Carle, and Mr. J. Wright, of certain premises in that lane, for a term of
99 years at the yearly rental of 42 pounds, they covenanting to lay out
from 3,000 to 4,000 pounds on the erection of suitable buildings under
the direction of the Corporation Surveyor.

28.*--"Died, lately, in St. Giles', Norwich, aged 78, Mr. Benjamin
Guyton, who for many years followed what may justly be called the first
of occupations--a gardener and horticulturist.  His skill in the
knowledge and properties of plants and vegetables could only be equalled
by his ingenuity in delineating with his pencil the curious productions
of nature, particularly those of the insect tribe.  Some few specimens of
his art, in the various species of papilio, are in the possession of some
gentlemen in this city, who knew how to appreciate merit though found in
an obscure individual moving in a humble sphere of life."

--Died, "greatly and justly esteemed by all his old comrades and
friends," Capt. John Borrow, many years adjutant of the First or West
Norfolk Regiment of Militia.


MARCH.


3.--At a meeting of manufacturers and others at the Guildhall, Norwich,
under the presidency of Mr. John Harvey, resolutions were adopted
expressing satisfaction with the proposal of the Government to reduce the
duties on raw and thrown silks as well as on foreign wools; but they
viewed with surprise and alarm the proposal to allow the free exportation
of British wool, "as a consequence of supplying foreigners with the raw
material must be to throw out of employment many thousands of the
labouring poor."

6.--Intelligence was received at Lynn of the death, which occurred on the
5th, of the Marquis of Titchfield, M.P.  A writ for the election of a new
member was moved for in the House of Commons on the 9th, and two
candidates, Lord John C. Bentinck, eldest brother of the deceased
marquis, and successor to the title, and Sir William Browne ffolkes,
Bart., immediately issued addresses.  The election took place on March
19th.  "Sir William ffolkes, after leaving the hustings, was carried in a
chair round the Market Place and down High Street, he addressed the crowd
from the window of his committee-room, and threw amongst them a large
quantity of silver coin, which was eagerly scrambled for."  The result of
the polling was declared as follows: Marquis of Titchfield; 177; Sir
William ffolkes, 89.

11.--A meeting of the manufacturers, merchants, and others interested in
the silk trade was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, under the presidency
of Mr. Alderman Roberts, to take into consideration the resolutions
passed by the House of Commons relative to alterations in the silk
duties.  A resolution was moved to the effect that the meeting viewed
with satisfaction the measures proposed for the extension of the silk
manufactory, "but the object could not fully be attained by the proposed
immediate remission of so great a proportion of the duties on raw and
thrown silks."  It was advocated that endeavours be made to obtain
compensation for the loss sustained upon stocks of manufactured goods,
and a petition to Parliament embodying that view was adopted.  On April
5th "an unusual scene was witnessed in Norwich, that being the last day
on which manufacturers of the city warehoused their raw and foreign silk
in order to obtain the drawback according to the late decision of
Parliament.  The number of pieces of bombazines and crapes bonded was
about 40,000, which may be averaged at 7s. 6d. each, and the total amount
of the drawback will be 30,000.  Such of the goods as are for exportation
are already returned to the owners, and an order is expected in a few
days for the delivery of those intended for the home trade.  By this
arrangement, which was recommended to Government by a gentleman deputed
from Norwich, little time will be lost, and the manufacturer will obtain
the relief which, but for its adoption, would, under the late alteration
of the law, have proved highly injurious to many of our fellow citizens."
On June 23rd a dinner was given at the Rampant Horse Inn by the merchants
and manufacturers to Mr. John Harvey, Mr. E. T. Booth, and Mr. T. O.
Springfield, "for the zeal and ability with which they promoted the
interests of the trade, and for their successful exertions in obtaining
the drawback."

11.--Died at his house in Chapel Field, Norwich, in his 71st year, Mr.
John Clayton Hindes, many years manager of the Norwich Theatre.  "His
loss is sincerely deplored by his relatives and friends and many others
whose necessities have been relieved by his benevolent hand."

--Died at Uxbridge, Mrs. F. E. Horne, widow of the Right Rev. George
Horne, D.D., formerly Bishop of Norwich.

17.--The Norwich Penny Library "having after 12 months' experience proved
its worth," it was resolved at a general meeting of subscribers, presided
over by Mr. William Youngman, that it be placed on a permanent footing by
public subscription.  The library room was at Mr. Daines's, St.
Michael-at-Coslany.


APRIL.


2.--At a public meeting held at Lynn, the Mayor presiding, it was
resolved that a gas company be formed.  The shares were fixed at 20
pounds each, and Mr. John James Coulton appointed secretary and agent.

3.--Died at the house of his son-in-law (Mr. H. Dowson, of Geldeston),
aged 65, the Rev. Pendlebury Houghton.  "He received his education at
Warrington at the time Dr. Atkin was the classical teacher there, and
after the completion of his studies continued there one year as assistant
classical tutor.  He first settled as minister at Dob Lane, near
Manchester, whence he removed to Shrewsbury, and in 1787 was chosen a
pastor, with Dr. Enfield, of the Unitarian congregation in Norwich.  On
the death of Dr. Enfield in 1797 he became sole minister.  In 1808 he
succeeded Mr. Jervis at Prince's Street, Westminster, and in 1811
returned to Norwich.  In 1812 his was invited to become joint pastor with
Mr. Yates, of the congregation in Paradise Street, Liverpool, where he
continued till 1823, when he retired from his ministerial labours."

7.--At a meeting held at Norwich, it was agreed "that the Rosary
burial-ground having been duly entered at the office of the Bishop of the
Diocese, and therein designated a general burial-ground for the use of
persons of all sects and denominations, shall be invested in trustees on
behalf of those who may become the holders of shares, to be limited to
500."

8.--A performance was given at Norwich Theatre by the Stagorians.  "The
stage exhibited the appearance of the interior of a Stagorian lodge, and
presented a spectacle at once novel and striking.  In accordance with the
principles of the assembled brethren the ceremony opened with 'God save
the King,' and closed with the last verse of that same loyal strain.  The
whole was conducted and well supported by Mr. Hudson, treasurer of the
lodge No. 2, Independent, who sang a song in so good a style that the
audience testified their approbation by loud and repeated cheerings."

9.--Died, suddenly, in the Fleet Prison, the Rev. John Cross Morphew,
rector of Cley and of Walpole St. Peter.

10.*--(Advt.)  "Mr. Edward Painter informs his friends and the public
that his horse, the celebrated Tam o' Shanter, will be shown upon Norwich
Hill this day, and every Saturday during the season, at 12 o'clock.  His
trotting and other paces the proprietor leaves for the public at large to
be their own judges, as puffing is quite out of the question.  N.B.--Tam
o' Shanter will be found at the White Hart, St. Peter's, Norwich."

--*"Miss Bathurst, daughter of the late Mr. Benjamin Bathurst, and
granddaughter of the Lord Bishop of the Diocese, was riding in Rome on
horseback, accompanied by Lord and Lady Aylmer and the Duc de
Montmorency, when her horse slipped down the steep bank into the Tiber,
and with its rider was washed away, and never seen again."  The body of
Miss Bathurst was recovered on September 26th.

--The proprietors of the Expedition coach started new coaches, called the
Magnet, which ran from the Swan Inn and Rampant Horse Inn, Norwich, each
afternoon at four o'clock and arrived in London at seven in the morning.
The return coach left the Golden Cross, Charing Cross, at six p.m.,
called at the White Horse, Fetter Lane, at 6.20, the Cross Keys, Wood
Street, at 6.30, "cleared" from the Flower Pot and Bull Inns at seven
o'clock, and arrived at Norwich at nine the next morning.

--The following malefactors were executed at Thetford: James Reeve for
rape; Miles Wiseman for shooting at and wounding William Everett,
gamekeeper, at Rackheath; and Robert Gibson for sheep stealing.  "The
body of Wiseman was buried at Hardingham churchyard, whence it was stolen
by resurrection men, who had been observed lurking about the chief part
of the previous day."

15.--Wombwell's National Menagerie was exhibited at Tombland Fair,
Norwich.  It was described as "the greatest variety of living animals
ever collected together since the days of Noah."

16.--Died at Caister, near Norwich, Francis Neale, in the 100th year of
his age.

21.--Died at Harley Street, Cavendish Square, aged 71, Mr. John Dixon, of
Rainham Hall, Norwich, and of Gledhow, Yorkshire, Colonel of the West
York Militia.

25.--The organ at North Walsham church was opened with a recital given by
Mr. E. Pettet, of Norwich.

29.--The members of the three Church of England Societies, namely for the
Education of the Poor, for Promoting Christian Knowledge, and for the
Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts, had their "first united
anniversary" dinner at the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich.  The Deputy Mayor, Mr.
Robert Hawkes, presided.


MAY.


1.--Mr. Henry Francis was elected Mayor of Norwich.

5.--Died at an advanced age, Mrs. Windham, widow of the Right Hon.
William Windham, of Felbrigg.

6.--The second anniversary dinner of the Swaffham Rat Society was held at
the George Inn, in that town.  The report stated: "From the time the
ferrets re-commenced their operations in October, 1823, assisted by the
terriers, the total number of rats killed up to May 6th was 1,140, which
added to last year's return makes 2,947 rats exterminated in the course
of twelve months."

8.*--"The King has granted William Lukin, Esq., Rear-Admiral of the White
Squadron of his Majesty's Fleet, to take, use, and bear the arms of
Windham, in memory of his uncle, the Right Hon. William Windham, of
Felbrigg Hall."  (By the death of Mrs. Windham Admiral Windham came into
possession of the estates of his late uncle.)

--*"We understand that there are at this time persons stationed upon the
road between Norwich and London for the purpose of giving information
against the proprietors of coaches carrying more than the number of
passengers allowed by Act of Parliament, or any waggon or van carrying
passengers without being duly licensed."

10.--A prize fight took place near Arminghall between Nicholls and
Thompson, of Norwich.  "The battle lasted upwards of two hours, and both
men displayed better bottom than science."

--For the benefit of the manager of Norwich Theatre (Mr. Smith), his
younger son, Mr. J. Smith, appeared as Selico in "The Africans."

15.*--"A gentleman from Lynn for a wager shot 20 dozen rooks with an air
gun, which he loaded himself, in the course of a day.  He commenced
shooting at half-past six in the morning, and finished his task in a
masterly manner at four o'clock in the afternoon, in the rookery
belonging to Mr. John Lloyd, of Pentney."

--*(Advt.)  "Cocking.  To be fought at the White Swan Inn, Norwich, on
May 31st and two following days, three double days' play of cocks for 5
pounds a battle and 100 pounds the odd, between the gentlemen of Norwich
and the gentlemen of Yarmouth.  Feeders: Stafford for Norwich, Anson for
Yarmouth."

--The Magnet coach from London to Norwich had just crossed the bridge at
Chesterford, Essex, when, owing to the swollen state of the river, the
arch burst with a tremendous crash.  Another coach was approaching, and
received a lantern warning from the guard of the Magnet.  The up Magnet
coach from Norwich crossed the bridge shortly before its demolition but
got off the road into a swamp.  The passengers had to climb out upon the
roof and remained there while the water flowed through the windows.  The
coach was dragged out by a strong team of cart horses.  A public
subscription was started in Norwich to reward the guard of the Magnet.

22.--Townshend, the pedestrian, commenced a walk of 64 miles per day of
sixteen hours for six successive days.  He started from Swaffham at 4.30
a.m., passed through Watton at 6.30, through Dereham at 8.30, and arrived
at Swaffham at noon, and completed the same journey in the afternoon.
(No further record.)

27.--Died, Mrs. M. Jones, of the Theatre Royal, Norwich, in her 61st
year, "after long and patient suffering under one of the most tormenting
of human disorders."  She was a daughter of the Rev. Nathaniel Gerard,
rector of Waxham and vicar of Palling, and of Whepstead Rectory, Suffolk.

28.--Six officers of the 8th Hussars rowed in Capt. Cartwright's
six-oared boat from Norwich to Yarmouth in four hours against the tide,
and returned in four and a half hours with a strong stream against them.

29.--The Ottawa, 320 tons, intended as a passage vessel from London to
Quebec, was launched from the yard of Messrs. John and Thomas Douglas, at
Yarmouth.

31.--The Mayor of Norwich (Mr. J. S. Patteson), with the Sheriffs,
magistrates, and aldermen went in procession from the Guildhall to the
site of the new gaol outside St. Giles' Gates, and laid the
foundation-stone.  Several gold, silver, and copper coins were deposited
in the stone, "and the whole was cemented with mortar and fastened with
lead poured in boiling hot."  The proceedings were witnessed by hundreds
of spectators, one of whom, "a person of respectability, had his pocket
picked of a gold watch, chain, and seals."


JUNE.


3.--Died, on his return from Madeira, aged 29, Dr. Thomas Martineau.

4.--The 3rd Norfolk Yeomanry Cavalry was inspected at Sprowston at the
conclusion of permanent duty at Norwich.

7.--The Yarmouth Yeomanry Cavalry, commanded by Sir E. K. Lacon, Bart.,
were inspected by Major Deare, 8th Hussars, after permanent duty.

--Townshend, the pedestrian, "undertook to pick up with his mouth, on
Monday last, from the ground in Finches' Gardens, 300 stones placed one
yard apart and to deposit the same in a basket in eleven successive
hours, being a distance of 51 miles 540 yards."  The feat was performed
sixteen minutes within the time.  On June 14th he undertook to walk 40
miles backwards in ten hours at the same Gardens, but failed owing to the
unfavourable state of the weather.

8.--The commissioners appointed under the Norwich Paving Act determined
to apply to Parliament for leave to bring in a Bill for amending the Act
and for raising additional funds.

--A prize fight took place at Poringland between Fenn and Camplin, of
Norwich.  Three thousand persons were present, and 76 rounds fought.  The
contest terminated in favour of Fenn.

9.--McMullon, a youth of sixteen, at the Prussia Gardens, Norwich, walked
12.5 miles in two hours; and on the 14th walked forty miles in eight
hours.

16.--Died at Gissing, aged 86, Mr. J. Hunt, surgeon, and founder of the
Ebenezer Chapel in Ber Street, Norwich.  "He was a man of extraordinary
piety and extensive benevolence, who was singularly infatuated by a
diversity of religious opinions as to render his character in the highest
degree eccentric.  Having successively embraced the profession of
Presbyterian, Independent, Anabaptist, Swedenborgian, Unitarian, and
Methodist, he recently founded and endowed a chapel at Gissing to a
profession made up of a heterogeneous mixture of doctrines.  That nothing
might be wanting to complete his religious character he was a constant
attendant on the worship of the parish church, keeping his meeting closed
on those occasions, and a regular communicant with the minister of the
parish till a short time before his death, when his advanced age and
increasing infirmities precluded the possibility of his attendance."

17.--A trotting match took place on St. Stephen's Road, Norwich, the best
two of three one mile heats, between a pony belonging to Mr. Durrant, of
the Norfolk Hotel, and a pony the property of Mr. Davey, horse dealer.
The former won easily.

--The 8th Hussars marched from Norwich Barracks for Ipswich.

19.*--"One day last week Messrs. James Stannard, T. Turner, Samuel Poll,
and Alfred Stannard, four oars, rowed from Norwich to Yarmouth and back
in eight hours, notwithstanding wind and tide were full against them in
crossing Breydon."

--The season's benefits at Norwich Theatre were announced to have been as
follow: Mr. Smith, 125 pounds; Mr. Chippendale, 39 pounds; Mr. Vining,
114 pounds; Mr. Beacham, 89 pounds; Miss Pindar, 40 pounds; Mr. G. Smith,
70 pounds; Mr. Harrison, 46 pounds; Mr. Clifford, 67 pounds; Mr. and Mrs.
Sloman, 156 pounds; Mr. Benson, 69 pounds; the Misses Glover, 91 pounds;
Mr. Crook, 63 pounds; Miss Wensley, 72 pounds; Miss Mason, 74 pounds; Mr.
and Mrs. Hamerton, 51 pounds; Mr. Brundall, 45 pounds; Mr. Wharton, 41
pounds; Mr. Mueller, 62 pounds; Mr. Thorne, 28 pounds; Miss Tubby, 99
pounds; Mr. Hunt, 78 pounds; Mr. Chippendale (second benefit), 57 pounds.
The total amount was 1,556 pounds; average, 70 pounds 14s. 9.75d.

22.--Guild Day at Norwich.  The Mayor-elect, Mr. Henry Francis,
entertained 806 guests at the guild feast, and the ball at Chapel Field
House was fully attended.  The streets in the parish of St. Stephen's,
where the Mayor resided, were decorated.

29.--Great rejoicings took place at Costessey in celebration of the
elevation to the peerage of Sir George Jerningham, Bart., by the title of
Baron Stafford, of Stafford Castle, in Staffordshire, of Shiffnall in
Shropshire, and of Costessey in Norfolk.  A large cavalcade attended by a
band of music proceeded to Easton, where Lord and Lady Stafford and their
daughters were received with enthusiastic cheering and escorted to
Costessey Hall.  Sheep were roasted, 500 loaves of bread distributed, and
many barrels of beer consumed.


JULY.


7.--At a meeting, presided over by Dr. Yelloly, at the Rampant Horse Inn,
Norwich, the medical men of the city decided "to form a union between the
two previously existing societies in order to render more efficient the
circulation of medical books, and the establishment of a medical library
in Norwich."

12.--Meetings of Loyal Orange Societies, No. 50, held at the Waggon and
Horses, Tombland, and No. 213 at the Waterloo Tavern, St. Stephen's,
Norwich, celebrated the anniversary of the battle of the Boyne.

14.--A severe thunderstorm occurred at Norwich after a period of very
sultry weather.  "Almost immediately after the tempest a cloud of immense
magnitude and extreme density, having the appearance of a mass of snow,
passed over the city.  Drifting with a strong westerly wind it was so low
as to envelope a considerable portion of the Cathedral spire.  Its
passage was attended with a very curious phenomenon.  The current of the
river, which had previously been sluggish, suddenly became very rapid, as
if propelled by the irruption of some mighty flood.  This acceleration
lasted about ten minutes, the cloud having once passed over, the stream
gradually resumed its former rate of progression."

15.--Died at his residence, Catton Place, aged 58, Mr. Joseph Fitch, who
served the office of Sheriff of Norwich in 1808.

16.--A troop of the 2nd Queen's Dragoon Guards, commanded by Capt.
Kearney, marched into Norwich Barracks, and were followed by three other
troops.  "This fine regiment, whose uniform is free from modern finery,
and has a truly British appearance, is commanded by Lieut.-Col. Kearney.
They were the first regiment who occupied the Norwich Barracks after
their erection in the year 1793."

22.--The new Union steamboat intended for passenger traffic between Lynn
and Cambridge made her first voyage.  "She is 72 feet long, 12 wide,
carries 100 passengers, and is propelled by two engines.  Her paddles are
in the stern; they communicate with the boiler and engine by means of
long rods through more than half the length of the vessel."

30.--Died at her house in the Close, Norwich, aged 65, Mrs. Dickens, wife
of Mr. W. H. Dickens.  "She was the widow of the late Mr. William Crowe,
of Lakenham, who on his death bed enjoined her to marry Capt. Dickens
immediately after his (Mr. Crowe's) decease."

31.*--(Advt.)  "To the corn growers of the county of Norfolk.  Gentlemen,
the merchants of Norwich having honoured me by accepting the Pantheon, in
which to hold their corn market, permit me to acquaint you the same will
be held at the Pantheon, Ranelagh Gardens, during their pleasure.--W.
Finch."  The removal of the corn market to the Pantheon was rendered
necessary by the alterations in progress at the Hall in preparation for
the first Triennial Musical Festival.  On August 14th a meeting of
millers, merchants, and corn growers was held at the Norfolk Hotel, "for
the purpose of taking into consideration the best means of erecting a
Corn Exchange."  Mr. J. Culley presided, and resolutions were adopted in
favour of the proposal, the required amount to be raised in 100 pounds
shares.  A committee was appointed to ask the county magistrates to grant
a site "within the iron railing on the north side of the Castle Hill, in
the intermediate space between the road leading from Messrs. Gurney's
Bank on the right to the opening from Davey Steps on the left."  A
further meeting was held on October 23rd, at which it was reported that
the magistrates declined to accede to the request, but that the
Corporation of Norwich had agreed "that a piece of ground on the Castle
Meadow, in length 130 feet and in breadth 70 feet, be granted to the corn
merchants for a term of 99 years at the yearly rent of 10 pounds, for the
purpose of building thereon a corn exchange."  A meeting was held on
November 1st, at which it was decided to accept the offer, and to issue
shares of 50 pounds each to the amount of 2,000 pounds.  (_See_ February
24th, 1825.)


AUGUST.


4.--In consequence of a requisition the Mayor of Norwich convened a
meeting at the Guildhall to consider the subject of establishing a
botanical garden in the neighbourhood of Norwich.  Resolutions were
adopted in favour of the scheme, which was introduced by Dr. Yelloly.

--Died at Norwich, aged 72, Mr. John Funnell Goldsmith Atkinson,
solicitor.  "He was devotedly attached to the constitution in Church and
State, and was in reality the character which has often been drawn of
Honest John Bull."

11.--At the Norfolk Assizes at Norwich, before Sir William Alexander,
Chief Baron of the Exchequer, came on the action Howard _v._ Howes.  The
plaintiff sought to substantiate his right to the exclusive enjoyment of
a pew in the parish church of Fundenhall.  He and his father had occupied
it since 1787 until disturbed in such occupation by the defendant on
November 2nd, 1823.  Verdict for the plaintiff, damages 1s.--At the same
Assizes, a similar action, Reader _v._ Bloom, was tried, and damages
claimed for assault.  The declaration set forth that the defendant on
August 31st, 1823, at Wells, "did grievously with his hands and feet
assault the plaintiff," a maiden lady, in the same town, to whom had been
bequeathed a house, which, it was supposed, entitled her to the use of a
certain pew in the parish church.  Defendant contested the right, locked
the pew, and nailed over the door a piece of wood to prevent entry
thereto.  When plaintiff endeavoured to effect an entrance Mr. Bloom
kicked her legs and nipped her arm.  The defence was that the plaintiff
first "clapperclawed" the defendant.  The jury returned a verdict for
plaintiff, damages 1s.

31.--An election took place at Norwich for the office of freemen's
Sheriff.  Mr. Charles Turner was nominated in the "Purple and Orange,"
and Mr. T. O. Springfield in the "Blue and White" interest.  "About an
hour after the poll had commenced it was announced to Mr. Turner's
committee that the 'Blue and Whites' were giving 5s. for each vote.  This
information caused the 'Purple and Orange' party also to unloose their
purse strings, and the cash was paid down on both sides to all who would
receive it."  Result of the poll: Turner, 1,165; Springfield, 929.


SEPTEMBER.


5.--Died, aged 73, Mrs. Death, widow of Mr. Thomas Death, of the Theatre
Royal, Norwich, and of Covent Garden, London.

11.--St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, was for the first time lighted with gas
in preparation for the Musical Festival.  "The pure bright flame that
issued from the numerous gas burners communicated a lustre to every part
of the edifice more evident, perhaps, than what it receives from the
light of day."

17.--Married at St. Martin's-in-the-Fields, London, Mr. William Henry
Brundall to Miss Priscilla Mason, both formerly of the Theatre Royal,
Norwich.

19.--Died at Chelsea, Mr. Henry Cooper, barrister, aged 39.  The son of
an eminent Norwich barrister, he went to sea with Nelson, and as a boy
was present at the battle of the Nile.  He early quitted the naval
profession for that of the law, and was afterwards appointed
Attorney-General of the Bermudas.  On the appointment of Mr. Sergeant
Blosset to the Chief Justiceship of Bengal, Mr. Cooper, who was then
rapidly rising on the Norfolk circuit, became one of the leaders.

21.--The first Triennial Musical Festival, "for the benefit of the
Norfolk and Norwich Hospital," commenced on this date.  On the evenings
of the 21st, 22nd, and 23rd a miscellaneous concert was given at St.
Andrew's Hall; on the mornings of the 22nd, 23rd, and 24th oratorios were
performed in the same building; and on the evening of the 24th a ball
took place.  The principal vocal performers were Mrs. Salmon, Miss
Stephens, Miss Carew, Madame Renzi De Begnes, Mr. Vaughan, M. Sapio, Mr.
Bellamy, Mr. Edward Taylor, of Norwich (in place of Mr. F. Novello,
absent through family bereavement), Mr. Terrail, Master Kempton, and
Signor De Begnes.  Sir George Smart was the conductor.  The Festival was
attended by H.R.H. the Duke of Sussex, who was the guest of the Bishop of
Norwich.  The receipts amounted to 6,695 pounds, and the amount given to
the Hospital was 2,411 pounds 4s. 2d.  At a quarterly assembly of the
Corporation on September 27th, the freedom of the city was voted to Sir
George Smart, "for the eminent services rendered by him to the city and
county as conductor of the late Musical Festival"; and the Corporation
further agreed to purchase the organ erected for the occasion in St.
Andrew's Hall by Mr. Grey, for the sum of 280 guineas.

29.--Races were held at East Dereham, and were well attended by "beauty
and fashion."


OCTOBER.


14.--The premises of Mr. Ling, upholsterer and cabinet maker, Bridewell
Alley, Norwich, were destroyed by fire.  The terrified prisoners were
removed from their cells in the Bridewell adjoining and conveyed to the
City Gaol, and all the property that could be saved from the burning
premises was taken into St. Andrew's church.  The 2nd Dragoon Guards were
called out to preserve order, and the staff of the West Norfolk Militia
assembled under arms.  "Owing to the goods being stored in St. Andrew's
church it was impossible to hold service there on Sunday."

15.--Died, in his 88th year, Mr. Robert Priest, of St. James' Street,
Norwich.  He was for many years treasurer to the Charity Schools, and in
1786 paid the fine on declining the office of Sheriff.

21.--Died of consumption, in his 24th year, at Little Baddow, Essex, the
Rev. Stephen Morell, "pastor of the Christian Society at the Old Meeting
House, Norwich."

26.--Mrs. Sloman, formerly of the Norwich Company, made her first
appearance at Covent Garden as Belvedera in "Venice Preserved."  The
"Times" described the performance as "more than respectable--in many
parts excellent"; and the "Morning Herald" stated that "it was the most
promising tragic _debut_ since the days of Miss O'Neil, and the applause
at the dropping of the curtain was long, loud, and universal."  Mrs.
Sloman was subsequently engaged by the managers of Covent Garden for
three years at a high salary.


NOVEMBER.


7.--William Brownsell, many years in the service of Mr. William Mason, of
Necton, was accidentally shot in his master's plantation by a spring gun.
He lay in dreadful agony all night and died soon after being found next
morning.

15.--A private watch instituted and maintained by the inhabitants of St.
Stephen's, Norwich, commenced its duties.

--A prize fight took place near Mattishall between Mike Fenn and John
Short, of Norwich.  "After 14 rounds Fenn was so dreadfully beaten that
he was carried off the ground in a state of insensibility."  Two thousand
persons were present.

20.*--"Died at East Dereham last week a poor woman of the name of Rumble,
aged 103 years.  She retained her faculties till within a month of her
decease."


DECEMBER.


3.--At a meeting held at the Guildhall, Norwich, under the presidency of
the Mayor, it was resolved to establish a law library in the city.

11.--The prospectus of a plan for establishing a "Museum of Natural
History, Antiquity, &c."  in Norwich was issued in accordance with a
resolution passed at a meeting held a short time previously under the
chairmanship of Mr. John Harvey.

14.--The London, Yarmouth, and Norwich Steampacket Company announced the
completion of a new vessel, called the City of Norwich, for the London
and Yarmouth trade.  A considerable portion of the stock of this company
was raised in Norwich and Yarmouth.

15.--Married at East Dereham, by the Rev. C. H. Wollaston, Mr. Fisher,
jun., of the Norfolk and Suffolk Company of Comedians, to Sarah, third
daughter of Mr. William Howard.

--A meeting was held at the King's Arms Inn, North Walsham, at which it
was resolved to carry into immediate execution the Act of Parliament for
the construction of the North Walsham and Dilham Canal.

17.--Concerts were given on the 17th and 18th at Norwich Theatre under
the management of Messrs. Pettet.  The performers included Signor and
Madame Renzi De Begnes and Miss Paton.

20.--Signor Antonio, "generally called Il Diavolo Antonio," commenced an
engagement at the Norwich Assembly Room in an entertainment consisting of
gymnastic exercises, feats of strength, juggling, and fantoccini.

--Died at his house in St. Giles', Norwich, the Rev. Thomas Deeker, M.A.,
66 years vicar of Bawdsey, Suffolk, rector of St. Simon and Jude,
Norwich, perpetual curate of St. Margaret and St. Swithin, and chaplain
of the county gaol.

23.--Married at Norwich, by the Rev. George Carter, M.A., Mr. James
Archibald Murray, solicitor, under secretary to the Master of the Rolls,
and second son of Mr. Charles Murray, of John Street, Bedford Row,
London, to Elizabeth Powell, youngest daughter of Capt. R Browne, of the
Precincts, Norwich Cathedral.

29.--A new Masonic Hall was "dedicated" at Yarmouth by Deputy Provincial
Grand Master Ives and the officers of the Grand Lodge of the Province.



1825.


JANUARY.


1.--The "Norfolk and Suffolk Railway Company" advertised its prospectus.
It was proposed to raise a capital of one million sterling in 10,000
shares of 100 pounds each.  The prospectus stated: "The trade from London
to Norwich in bombazeen and crape is at once extensive and permanent, yet
the conveyance of goods is dilatory, expensive, and troublesome.  The
mode of conveyance of fish is insufficient on the one hand, and
extravagant on the other."  It was proposed to construct the railway from
London to Norwich through Chelmsford and Colchester, with a branch to
Harwich; to Ipswich with a branch to Bury St. Edmund's; and to Norwich
with branches to Lynn and Yarmouth.  The cost of the undertaking was
estimated at 980,000 pounds, and there were to be twelve country and
twelve London directors.  Among the former were Messrs. E. T. Booth, W.
Foster, Joseph Geldart, R. Hawkes, and J. Ives, of Norwich; and Sir E. K.
Lacon, of Yarmouth.

5.--At a public meeting held at the Guildhall, Norwich, under the
presidency of the Mayor, it was decided to establish a Mechanics'
Institution, "similar to those already formed in London."  Nearly 100
members joined at the conclusion of the meeting.

12.--At the Norfolk Quarter Sessions, the justices ordered that the
houses of correction at Aylsham and Wymondham be abolished on the
completion of the county gaol.

22.--A new roadway made through the city wall at the west end of
Pottergate Street, Norwich, was completed on this date, and opened for
vehicular traffic on the 24th.  "This great improvement was effected by
Mr. Alderman T. S. Day, aided by the exertions of Mr. Blyth, who, in
company with Mrs. Blyth, was the first who rode through the new way."

24.--Died at Lynn, aged 78, William Hall, auctioneer and bookseller.  "He
was generally known by the appellation Antiquarian Hall, having for many
years been in the habit of dealing in works of black letter lore, of
which, at one time, he had a good collection.  He was a man quite
uneducated, but of strong natural abilities, and had read a great deal on
subjects of antiquity.  Though a man of very eccentric habits, he was
universally respected for his industry and integrity."

--The exhibition commenced at the Ranelagh Gardens, Norwich, of a "grand
model of the Holy Sepulchre at Jerusalem."

25.--The Castle Corporation at Norwich celebrated its 60th anniversary.

29.*--"Died last week, at Holt, Mary Ann Edge, at the advanced age of
103."

31.--Norwich Theatre re-opened for the season.  The new members of the
company included Mr. Balls, comedian; Mr. Baker, comedian; Mr. Warren,
"walking gentleman"; Miss Scruton, Mrs. Sheppard (formerly Miss Diddear),
Mrs. Balls, and Mrs. Watkinson.


FEBRUARY.


2.--The body of an old man, buried in Hethersett churchyard, was stolen
by resurrection men.  A similar outrage took place in Thorpe churchyard
on the same date.

5.*--"Sir Edmund Bacon (one of the three gentlemen nominated to serve the
office of Sheriff of this county) is gone to London to prefer some
antient claim of exemption from it on account of his being the premier
baronet of England.  Such claim had been successfully made on a similar
occasion by his late father."  Exemption was granted; but on November
11th, in the Court of Exchequer, the Lord Chief Justice of the Court of
King's Bench stated that the authorities, after duly investigating the
claim, had decided to disallow it.

--*"The governors of the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital have presented a
silver waiter, of the value of 50 guineas, to Mr. Edward Taylor for his
eminent services in promoting, arranging, and assisting at the grand
Musical Festival."

10.--An exceptionally high tide occurred at Yarmouth.  The river
overflowed and flooded cellars, stables, granaries, and other buildings
on the Quay; and the Southtown Road from the Bear Inn, near the bridge,
to Gorleston was completely under water, in places to the depth of three
feet.  At Cromer great damage was done to the cliffs.

11.--A petition for leave to bring in a Bill to amend the Norwich Paving
Act was presented in the House of Commons by Mr. William Smith.--At a
meeting held at the Duke's Palace Inn, Norwich, on March 1st, it was
decided to oppose the Bill because the Paving Commissioners by clause 8
sought to obtain authority to levy an additional due of 8d. per ton on
all goods brought by vessels up the river higher than Thorpe Old
Hall.--The Bill was read a first time on March 4th, but in consequence of
the opposition to clause 8 Mr. Smith withdrew the measure and suffered
the second reading to pass as a dropped order.--On March 28th Mr. Smith
moved the second reading on the understanding that the objectionable
clause would be withdrawn in Committee.  The Bill was then read a second
time.--It passed its third reading on May 3rd; received the Royal Assent
in the House of Lords on May 20th; and the first meeting of the
Commissioners under the new Act was held at Norwich on June 14th.

15.--The prospectus of the Norwich and Lowestoft Navigation Company was
adopted at a meeting held at Gray's Inn Coffee House, London, presided
over by Col. Harvey, High Sheriff of Norfolk.  The principal object for
which the company was formed was that of making Norwich a port for
seaborne vessels not exceeding ten feet draught, by opening the best and
most direct line of communication between that city and the sea.  In
addition to the old list of shares, amounting to 27,000 pounds, it was
decided to raise 120,000 pounds in shares of 50 pounds each, and to apply
to Parliament in the ensuing Session for leave to bring in a Bill.--The
first general meeting of the shareholders was held at the Guildhall,
Norwich, on June 1st, and on July 2nd a meeting of proprietors of land
adjoining the proposed canal between the Yare and the Waveney resolved to
oppose the Bill on account of threatened danger to their property.--The
proprietors of the North Walsham and Dilham Canal, and of the Coltishall
and Aylsham Canal also decided to oppose the measure because it would
divert the traffic from Yarmouth to Lowestoft, would lead to the neglect
of Breydon, and consequently to the injury of the navigation of the Bure
and Ant.

19.*--"Died last week in Bishopgate Hospital, Norwich, Mr. John Green,
aged 101."

24.--In the House of Commons Col. Wodehouse moved that petitions from the
magistrates of Norfolk and from the Mayor and Corporation of Thetford in
reference to the removal of the Lent Assizes from Thetford to Norwich be
referred to a Select Committee.  The motion was defeated by 72 votes
against 21.

--The Corporation of Norwich rescinded the resolution by which they had
offered the corn merchants a site for a Corn Exchange, and appointed a
committee to report on the propriety of the Corporation erecting a
building of their own for the sale of corn and other agricultural
produce.  The committee, on March 15th, reported in favour of the
proposal, the Under-Chamberlain was directed to mark out a site 150 feet
by 70 feet on the Castle Meadow, and on May 3rd it was resolved to
advertise for plans and estimates.--The corn merchants held a meeting at
the Norfolk Hotel on July 25th, and finally agreed to erect an exchange
"on part of the present site of Sir Benjamin Wrenche's Court."  It was
announced "a new street is to be made to communicate with the Market
Place from St. Andrew's Street, to enter it at the upper end of Cockey
Lane."  A proposal was made to erect in the Exchange galleries for the
accommodation of the Norwich Society of Artists, who would be deprived of
their rooms in the Court.--At a special meeting of the Corporation on
August 10th "the further consideration of the erection of a Corn
Exchange" was indefinitely deferred.

28.--A peal of six bells, cast by William Dobson, of Downham Market, was
opened at Marham by the Aylsham company of ringers.

28.--Mr. David Fisher, "a flower of our own garden, a native of our own
county," made his first appearance at Lynn Theatre in the character of
Richard III.  He afterwards appeared as Macbeth.


MARCH.


2.--Died at Bolton Row, London, Lady Jerningham, widow of Sir William
Jerningham.  Her ladyship was a daughter of the 11th Viscount Dillon.
Her remains were interred at Costessey on March 11th.

--Died at Holkham Hall, aged 45, the Rev. Richard Odell, B.A., Fellow of
Christ's College, Oxford, curate of Burnham Overy and of Holkham, and
chaplain to his Royal Highness the Duke of Sussex.

3.--Died at his house in St. Giles', Norwich, aged 75, Mr. John
Christopher Hampp, a native of Germany, many years an eminent merchant in
the city, and a liberal benefactor of the poor.

6.--Died at Tenby, aged 43, Col. Francis Manners Sutton, second son of
the Archbishop of Canterbury.

--Died at Hatton, Warwickshire, aged 80, the Rev. Samuel Parr, LL.D.,
Prebendary of St. Paul's, and rector of Graffham, Huntingdonshire, and
formerly head-master of Norwich Free Grammar School.

7.--Died, aged 69, Mr. John Banks, proprietor and manager of the Theatres
Royal at Liverpool and Manchester, and formerly of Norwich.

8.--Mr. Denny, of Egmere, was presented with a silver cup by the members
of the Walsingham Coursing Club, "as a mark of their esteem and gratitude
to him for the handsome, liberal, and friendly manner with which he has
at all times come forward in support of the meeting."

25.--The contract was completed for the purchase of the works of the
Norwich Gas Company by the British Gas Light Company.  "The latter
company have bought a piece of land in the World's End Lane, near St.
Martin-at-Palace, on which they intend to erect a building and construct
works for supplying the city with coal gas."--The Paving Commissioners on
September 13th consented to an application being made to Parliament for a
Bill to enlarge and amend the Act for lighting with gas the city of
Norwich, "and of the extension of the capital of the British Gas Company
and of the monies appropriated to their own use provided it meet all such
capital to the extent of 12.5 per cent. per annum."

26.*--"Died lately, at Shelfanger, James Catchpole, labourer, in his
105th year.  Within the last year of his life he was willing and able to
do a day's work in husbandry."

--*(Advt.)  "Miss Phillis Glover, being obliged by the early opening of
the Haymarket Theatre, where she is engaged, to leave the Norwich Company
before the close of the season, begs permission to take this, her only
opportunity, of returning thanks to the inhabitants of Norwich for the
kind indulgence afforded to her professional exertions, and of bidding
them most respectfully farewell."  (Miss Glover, whose place in the
Norwich Company was filled by the engagement of Miss Goward, was married
on November 19th, 1827, at the church of St Clement Danes, London, to Mr.
J. C. Evans, solicitor, of Liverpool.)

29.--Mr. Dewing's hounds met at West Bradenham, where a fine buck was
turned off, and ran through Bradenham and Saham, skirted Ashill to Holme
Hale, crossed Necton Common, ran through Necton by Fransham to Dunham,
Palgrave, and Sporle, and thence to Castleacre, where he was taken after
a severe run of 21 miles over the stiffest country in Norfolk.


APRIL.


2.--Shore's menagerie was exhibited on the Castle Ditches, Norwich.

--*"Died at Yarmouth, Mrs. Elizabeth Campling, in her 101st year."

3.--Died at North Walsham, Mary Cook, aged 101.

5.--One hundred "bankers" from Bedfordshire arrived at North Walsham and
commenced digging the North Walsham and Dilham Canal.  "The first spade
of earth was taken out by Mr. William Youard, the band striking up 'God
save the King.'"

--A prize fight took place between Camplin and Murrell, of Norwich, on a
meadow near Thorpe, for 10 pounds aside.  Murrell was the winner.

7.--The Archdeacon of Norwich convened a meeting of clergy at the Maid's
Head Inn, Norwich, at which a petition to the House of Commons was
adopted stating that the signatories were not in agreement with their
brethren who had petitioned Parliament in opposition to Roman Catholic
claims.  Seventy signatures were appended.  The other petition against
the Bill for conceding the claims of the Roman Catholics was signed by
the Bishop of Norwich and 200 clergy.  A similar petition was adopted by
the Corporation on May 3rd by thirty-three votes against six.--The
intelligence that the Emancipation Bill had been rejected by the House of
Lords was received in Norwich on May 19th with the ringing of the bells
of St. Peter Mancroft and of the other churches in the city.

16.--Died at Ryslip, near Uxbridge, the Right Hon. Lady Wodehouse, aged
77.  She was the only surviving daughter of the Hon. Charles Berkeley, of
Bruton Abbey, Somersetshire, niece of Lord Berkeley of Stratton, and the
last of that branch of the Berkeley family.  Her ladyship's remains were
interred at Kimberley on May 27th, when the funeral procession was headed
by fifty mounted tenants on the estate.

18.--A meeting of the citizens was held at St Andrew's Hall, Norwich, by
requisition, at which resolutions were adopted asking the legislature "to
undertake at the earliest opportunity such a revision of the Corn Laws as
may secure cultivators of the soil from a recurrence of those ruinous
fluctuations in price which the present system has occasioned, and at the
same time complete that liberal commercial policy in which progress has
already been made."  A petition based on the resolution was prepared and
presented to Parliament.  It received 14,385 signatures.

21.--Married at St. Giles' Church, Norwich, by the Rev. C. J. Chapman,
Lieut. Charles Thurtell, R.N., third son of Mr. Thomas Thurtell, alderman
of Norwich, to Mrs. Dunham, of Chapel Field.

23.*--"Died at Lynn, the Widow Oldershaw, aged 107."


MAY.


1.--Four candidates were nominated at the Mayoral Election at Norwich.  A
poll was demanded, and the result was declared on the same day (Sunday)
as follows:--Alderman Day, 679; Alderman Booth, 579; Alderman Leman, 152;
Alderman Burt, 150.  "It is somewhat singular that the father of the
Mayor-elect was also chosen on a Sunday, May Day so falling in 1808."

9.--The Norwich Museum was opened at a house in the Upper Haymarket.

14.*--"The work of constructing the new Theatre was commenced, at
Norwich, last week.  Mr. Wilkins is the architect and patentee, and the
site is nearly adjoining to the ground on which the present Theatre
stands, and at the back of the green rooms."

29.--At Yarmouth Quarter Sessions, before the Recorder (Mr. Robert
Alderson), Mary Neal, aged 42, Susan Neal (21), her daughter, and William
Neal (18), son, were charged with attempting to murder the family of Mr.
Hales, cordwainer, of Howard Street, Yarmouth, by poisoning them.  It was
alleged that the female prisoners persuaded William Neal, an apprentice
of the prosecutor, to place arsenic in the food of his master's family to
avenge some fancied grievance.  Mr. and Mrs. Hales and their children
narrowly escaped death.  Sentence of death, afterwards commuted to
transportation, was recorded.

30.--The members of a newly established club, called the Norwich Loyal
Society, held their first anniversary dinner at the Wheat Sheaf Inn,
Bethel Street, in commemoration of the birthday of Pitt.


JUNE.


6.--The 2nd Dragoon Guards marched from Norwich for Hampton Court
Barracks.

15.--A cricket match was played at Litcham "with the six Alexanders, of
Hingham, and the five Cushions, of Shipdham, on the one side, against the
town of Litcham on the other."  The stakes, 22 sovereigns a-side, were
won by the "families" by one wicket.  The families, 55-88; Litcham,
82-60.

18.--The last performances took place at the old Norwich Theatre.  The
pieces were "The Provoked Husband" and the farce "A Roland for an
Oliver."  The concluding season had proved very productive to the
patentee and the performers.  The total amount accruing from the twenty
benefits was 1,732 pounds, an average of 86 pounds 12s. exclusive of
"ticket nights."

20.--A special meeting of the Yarmouth Corporation was held for the
purpose of promoting the erection of a new church in the town.  The sum
of 1,500 pounds was voted in aid of the fund, and a piece of land given
as an eligible site.

21.--Guild Day at Norwich.  The aldermen, Sheriffs, and Town Clerk had
breakfast with the Mayor-elect, Mr. T. S. Day, and afterwards went to the
house of the Mayor (Mr. H. Francis), "their carriages passing through the
newly-made opening in the city wall at the end of Pottergate Street,
where an arch had been formed with boughs."  The subsequent procession to
the Cathedral was headed by two bands of musicians and "Snap."  The
guests at the Guild feast at St. Andrew's Hall numbered 450, and "the
proceedings, from the excellence of the wines, were protracted till about
eleven o'clock, when the worthy donor of the feast retired from the
chair."

30.--Died at his house in Surrey Street, Norwich, Mr. William Manning, of
Ormesby, in his 94th year.  "This gentleman was the Father of the
Magistracy of Norfolk, and had been 65 years on the commission."


JULY.


2.--The steam packet Lowther started from Yarmouth on a pleasure
excursion to Rotterdam, and arrived at its destination at six o'clock on
the evening of the 3rd.  The vessel returned to Yarmouth on the 10th
after a passage of 27 hours.

4.--Madame Tussaud's exhibition opened at the Assembly Rooms, Norwich.

--The company of ringers at St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich, presented to Mr.
Samuel Thurston "an elegant silver gilt jewel for his eminent services in
composing the peal of 5,016 of Norwich Court, 12 in, and ringing the
tenor in a superior style."

11.--Four troops of the Scots Greys (2nd North British Dragoons) marched
into Norwich.  "Their veteran colonel, Sir Thomas Pate Hankin, rode at
the head of this very fine body of men and horses.  Their excellent
regimental band, including keyed bugles and kettledrums, played before
them from their entrance at St Stephen's Gates to the Cavalry Barracks."

12.--Mr. Thorogood, coachman and part proprietor, "completed his fourth
year of driving the Times coach to London and back again to Norwich the
next day without missing one single day.  The total number of miles in
four years, up and down--163,520."

23.--Direct conveyance from Norwich to Boston by the Independence new
coach was announced.

28.--Eleven hundred persons were confirmed at Norwich Cathedral by the
Bishop of the Diocese.

--The peal of bells at St. Andrew's Church, Norwich, increased from eight
to ten, and re-hung by T. Hurry, was re-opened by ten of St. Peter
Mancroft ringers.

30.*--(Advt.)  "The annual main between the gentlemen of Norwich and
Yarmouth will be fought at the Two-Necked Swan, Market Place, Yarmouth,
on the race days, for 5 pounds a battle and 25 pounds the odd; to show 25
mains and six byes.  Feeders: Lamb for Norwich; Steward for Yarmouth.
The first pit will begin fighting at ten o'clock each morning before the
racing."

30.--Died at Cowes, the Right Hon. the Earl of Craven, Lord Lieutenant of
the county of Berks., Recorder of Coventry, and a lieutenant-general in
the Army.  His lordship, who was in his 55th year, married on December
12th, 1807, Miss Brunton, of Covent Garden Theatre, and formerly of the
Norwich Company, and left issue Viscount Uffington, another son, and a
daughter.


AUGUST.


1.--Lord Chief Justice Abbott and Lord Chief Baron Alexander, Judges of
Assize, were received at Harford Bridge, Norwich, by the High Sheriff of
Norfolk (Col. Harvey).  "Being a member of the Corporation, the Mayor and
his brethren determined to accompany him with the city Sheriffs, and a
procession was formed in the following order:--Two blue coats on
horseback; justices and aldermen of Norwich in their carriages; city
Sheriffs' officers on horseback; the Under Sheriff's ditto; the Sheriffs
in a carriage and four; two blue coats, with the castles, on horseback;
two mace bearers, ditto; the Under-Chamberlain with small mace, ditto;
the Mayor in his carriage with the Town Clerk and sword bearer; the High
Sheriff's trumpeters on horseback; his marshalmen, ditto; 24 javelin men,
ditto, in dark blue liveries with orange cockades; the Under-Sheriff of
Norfolk; the High Sheriff in his elegant carriage drawn by six fine brown
horses, the coachman, postillions, and footmen in livery, with his
chaplain, the Rev. Edward Bellman; servants on horseback; Sir Robert John
Harvey and Mr. George Harvey, the High Sheriff's sons, in a chariot.  It
is said that a similar procession has not taken place here for the last
100 years."

2.--At the Norfolk Assizes, held at Norwich before Lord Chief Justice
Abbott, the action Fellowes _v._ Steward, clerk, was tried, with the
object of deciding whether the plaintiff had set out his tithe in a
manner warranted by law.  The plaintiff's men cut the tithe wheat on
seven acres of land, each man taking a strip or rig of land, and after
cutting each strip returned and put his sheaves into shocks of ten each.
The plaintiff's bailiff set out the tithe by taking every tenth sheaf
from the shock and placing it a yard or two from the rest.  He then put a
bough on every sheaf so laid apart, and replaced it in the shock whence
he had taken it.  The next day the sheaves, except those marked as tithe,
were carted.  Mr. Alderman Steward, of Norwich, who was acting as agent
for his son, the rector of Saxlingham, stated that the corn should be
tithed in sheaves before it was shocked.  Mr. Fellowes endeavoured to
prove that the corn had been set out according to the custom of the
place.  The Judge censured the plaintiff for adopting the method of
separating the tithe corn from the other corn and mixing it with the
shock again, as it opened the door to the practice of all kinds of fraud.
The plaintiff was non-suited.

5.--At the Norwich Assizes, before Lord Chief Justice Abbott, the _qui
tam_ action Woodewis _v._ J. S. Patteson came on for trial.  It was
brought to recover a penalty of 100 pounds under 3rd George IV., chap.
77, by which persons trading in excisable liquors were precluded from
taking part, as magistrates, in licensing proceedings.  It was alleged
that Mr. Patteson interfered, on the application of the plaintiff, to
have a house licensed for the sale of home-brewed beer and London porter
in Fishgate Street, Norwich, nearly opposite one belonging to himself.
The answer was that this was an attempt to fix a stigma on the character
of Mr. Patteson.  The Judge said the jury could find a verdict for the
plaintiff without impeaching the character of the defendant.  The jury
returned the following verdict: "We give the plaintiff 100 pounds
damages; at the same time we entertain a very high opinion of the high
honour and good faith of Alderman Patteson and the other gentlemen of the
Corporation."

6.--Died at Ryde, Isle of Wight, Mr. John Lens, "his Majesty's ancient
Sergeant at Law," aged 69.  He was a native of Norwich, and was educated
at the Free Grammar School.

--Mr. Graham made a balloon ascent from Richmond Hill Gardens, Norwich,
at 6.5 and descended at Beighton at 6.30 p.m.  He made a second ascent on
August 30th and descended at Earlham.  He was advertised to ascend on
September 6th in company with the High Sheriff, but the balloon was
inadequate in lifting power.  A second attempt was made on the 7th.  Mr.
Graham had to resign his place to Mrs. Graham, who successfully made the
ascent with Col. Harvey, and descended in safety at Bradeston, near
Brundall.

13.--The governors of the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital received from his
Majesty the King a copy of Arnold's edition of Handel's works in 49
volumes "for the use of those engaged at the Musical Festival connected
with the charity."

22.--At a rent audit dinner held at Woodbastwick the tenants presented to
Mr. John Cator a silver vase, of the value of 120 pounds, as "a token of
regard and respect for his liberal abatement of rent during four years of
unprecedented depreciation of agricultural produce, by which means they
were able to continue in the occupation of their farms during the wreck
and ruin of thousands, and now times are altered for the better, hope to
be enabled to pay their rents and meet their landlord as before with
money in their pockets, cheerful countenances, and grateful hearts."

30.--Election of freemen's Sheriff at Norwich.  The candidates were--Mr.
James Brooks, jun., 865 votes; Mr. Alderman Springfield, 501; Mr. William
Scott ("nominated with the view of dividing Mr. Brooks's interest"), 0.


SEPTEMBER.


1.--Mr. William Simpson, Chamberlain of the city of Norwich, was
presented by the Corporation with a piece of plate, of the value of 100
guineas, in recognition of the able discharge of his official duties.

3*--"Died at Yarmouth, Mary, the wife of Mr. Clifford, of the Norwich
Theatre, in her 55th year."

10.--The Swaffham and London new post coach was advertised to run from
the Crown Inn, Swaffham, on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday mornings at
seven o'clock, and to return from the Three Nuns Inn, Aldgate, on
Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday mornings at the same hour.  It performed
the journey in twelve hours.

14.--A piece of plate, of the value of 120 pounds, was presented to Mr.
William Palgrave, of Yarmouth, by the manufacturers and merchants of
Norwich, "to express their sense of his official conduct in regulating
the drawback granted to them by the Government on the repeal of the
duties on silk."

23.--The Duke and Duchess of Clarence passed through Norwich.  Their
Royal Highnesses had luncheon at the Rampant Horse Inn, and afterwards
proceeded on their way to Newmarket and London.


OCTOBER.


2.--Died, Mrs. Hannah Want, of Ditchingham, aged 106.  "She was born
August 20th, 1720.  Till the day of her death she was not confined to her
bed, and on the anniversary of her 105th birthday entertained a party of
her relatives, who visited her to celebrate it.  She lived to see a
numerous progeny of the fifth generation, and at her death there were
living children, grandchildren, great grandchildren, and great great
grandchildren to the number of 121."

4.--Mr. Daniel Woods, surgeon to the Gressenhall House of Industry, and
to sixteen of the surrounding parishes, was presented with a piece of
plate by the Guardians of the Mitford and Launditch Hundred in
recognition of his efficient services during the period of 36 years.

8.--The Defiance Swaffham and London day coach was advertised to run to
the Flower Pot Inn, Bishopsgate Street, every Monday, Wednesday, and
Friday in twelve hours.

11.--A shooting match for 200 sovereigns commenced at Holkham between Mr.
T. W. Coke, M.P., and Capt. Ross.  Conditions: to shoot partridges; to
toss for choice of ground on first day and exchange grounds on the second
day; to load own guns and bag own game; and to have no other beaters than
the dogs.  On the first day Mr. Coke killed 54 and Capt. Ross 40 brace.
The second day's shooting took place on the 14th, when Capt. Ross had men
to mark, beat, and pick up game.  At the first day's shooting, it was
alleged, Mr. Coke inadvertently broke the rules of the match.
Explanations followed, and bets were declared off.

17.--The Rev. T. D. Atkinson, St. Mary's, Thetford, was presented with a
piece of plate by the parishioners, churchwardens, and others in
recognition of his unwearied zeal as "a most exemplary parish priest."

20.--Messrs. Pettet's Session Week Concerts at Norwich Theatre and the
Hall Concert Room, St. George's, commenced on this date.  The principal
vocalists were Mr. Phillips and Madame Caradori; leader of the band, Mr.
Mori.

--Died at his house, St. Clement's, Norwich, aged 83, Dr. James Alderson.
The funeral took place on October 27 in the Gildencroft burial-ground
belonging to the Society of Friends.

20.--A county meeting was held at the Shirehall, Norwich, under the
presidency of the High Sheriff, at which it was decided to petition
Parliament "for the immediate mitigation of slavery throughout the
British Colonies, and for its extinction at the earliest safe and
practicable period in compliance with the resolutions of the House of
Commons in May, 1823."--The petition, which was presented in the House of
Commons by Mr. Edmond Wodehouse on March 1st, 1826, received 17,125
signatures, and was 82 yards in length.

22.--Mr. James Vining, formerly of the Norwich Company, appeared at the
Haymarket Theatre in the character of Octavian ("The Mountaineers"), and
was favourably received.

23.--The Baron Von Bulan gave an address at the Old Meeting House,
Norwich, as agent for a Continental society "for the distribution of
Bibles and Christian instruction where Popery and infidelity prevail."

25.--The Magnet coach from London to Norwich was accidentally overturned
in passing through the Eldon gate at Thetford, and one of the passengers,
a widow from Hargham, was crushed to death by the vehicle falling upon
her.

26.--Died at the Cavalry Barracks, Norwich, aged 59, Lieut.-Col. Sir
Thomas Pate Hankin, commanding the Scots Greys.  He joined the regiment
as cornet, July 21st, 1795; was promoted lieutenant, August 13th, 1796;
captain, October 18th, 1798; major, April 4th, 1808; lieutenant-colonel
in the Army, June 4th, 1814; and lieutenant-colonel commanding the
regiment, October 11th, 1821.  He was with that distinguished corps at
the battle of Waterloo, when he received a severe wound in the knee.
Previous to entering the Army he was a surgeon at Upwell in this county,
and afterwards captain of the grenadier company of the Middlesex Militia.
Sir Thomas was buried with military honours in the north transept of
Norwich Cathedral on November 2nd.


NOVEMBER.


3.--Thorogood, the driver of "The Times" coach, gave up the reins on this
date, having held them since July 14th, 1822, "during which time he drove
the coach every day to and from the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, and the Swan
with Two Necks, Lad Lane, London, a distance of 116 miles without any
accident of consequence, a task which we believe was never before
performed by any man.  In the above space of time he travelled 182,352
miles, independent of the distance he regularly walked, which could not
have been less than a mile each day, as he always slept at the Blue Boar,
Aldgate, when in London, and at the Bell, Orford Hill, when in Norwich."
Thorogood married on November 8th Miss M. Westall, of London.

4.--H.R.H. the Duke of Sussex, who was staying with Admiral Windham at
Felbrigg, visited Cromer, when the inhabitants removed the horses from
his carriage and dragged it through the town.

7.--According to annual custom, a grand _battue_ took place at Holkham,
when upwards of 700 head of game were shot.  "Game has not been found so
plentiful as in former seasons.  The deficiency was in hares, of which
not more than 220 have been shot in one day.  In previous years upwards
of 500 hares have been killed in the park in one day."

12.--The Norwich Society "for promoting the immediate mitigation and
final abolition of slavery" was established at a meeting held at St.
Andrew's Hall, under the presidency of the Mayor (Mr. T. S. Day).

14.--Married at Minto, Roxburghshire, Mr. J. P. Boileau, jun., eldest son
of Mr. J. P. Boileau, of Mortlake, and of Tacolneston Hall, to Lady
Catherine Elliott, daughter of the Earl of Minto.

--Swaffham Coursing Meeting commenced with a very small attendance.  "We
have to regret the retirement of Lord Rivers, whose advanced age and
infirm state of health have obliged him to relinquish his favourite
pursuits.  The superior greyhounds his lordship used to bring secured him
the victory in almost every match he made--indeed, he was allowed to
possess the best breed of greyhounds in the kingdom.  The noble lord,
during has coursing career, has been the winner of fourteen cups, and is
the only member since the establishment of the Swaffham Coursing Meeting
in 1779 who has won five cups at Swaffham, and this during the last
eleven years, his lordship first entering in 1813.  His greyhounds sold
at Tattersall's in May last for 1,029 guineas; with seven horses and two
dog carts the amount was brought up to 1,339.5 guineas, which sum his
lordship generously presented to his servants.  One dog, Rex, who has
never been beaten, and also a bitch, as companion to this nonpariel, are
retained by Lord Rivers as a memento of his celebrated kennel."

21.--A meeting of the Norwich and Norfolk Law Library was held at the
Guildhall, Norwich, at which were adopted the rules and regulations drawn
up by a committee appointed on December 3rd, 1824.  The books were
ordered to be deposited in a room in Institution Court, Upper Haymarket.

23.--The Norwich Association for Assisting in the Detection and
Prosecution of Criminal Offenders was instituted at a meeting held at the
Guildhall.

26.--A meeting was held at the Angel Inn, Norwich, at which an
association was formed for the protection of agriculture.  It was known
as the East Norfolk Agricultural Society, and Mr. Jehosaphat Postle was
elected president.

--A corn market was re-established at Wells-next-the-Sea.

28.--The first annual meeting of subscribers to the Norfolk and Norwich
Museum was held at the Guildhall, under the presidency of Sir James E.
Smith.  Rules for the management of the institution were adopted.

30.--St. Andrew's Day was celebrated by the Scots Greys at the Cavalry
Barracks, Norwich.  A soldier dressed as St. Andrew was escorted from the
city boundary to the barracks by a party of forty troopers in Highland
dress, who called at the house of the Mayor, in Pottergate Street, and
danced a reel.  The festival was afterwards kept in a convivial manner at
the barracks.


DECEMBER.


9.--Mr. De Hague's portrait, painted by Sir William Beechey, was hung in
St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich.

12.--Died, aged 83, Mr. Burks, one of the proprietors of the "Norwich
Mercury."

16.--Messrs. T. H. and W. Day, of the Norwich and Swaffham Bank,
announced that they were compelled to suspend their payments.  On the
17th it was made known that a docket had been struck preparatory to a
commission of bankruptcy being issued against the firm.--Messrs.
Fincham's Bank at Diss stopped payment at about the same date owing to
the sudden death of Mr. Benjamin Fincham on November 19th, but was
re-opened on January 9th, 1826.

20.--The Rev. Robert Forby, rector of Fincham, was found drowned in his
bath.  It was supposed that he was seized with sudden faintness while
bathing.

27.--Died at Tittleshall parsonage, the Rev. Dixon Hoste, aged 76, for
many years an acting magistrate in the Hundred of Launditch.

28.--A public meeting at Lynn approved a plan for constructing a bridge
and embankment over the Cross Keys Wash, in order to establish direct
communication between the whole of Norfolk and part of Suffolk with
Lincolnshire and the north of England.

31.--Wombwell exhibited his menagerie on the Castle Hill, Norwich, and
advertised as an attraction "the two unequalled lions, Nero and Wallace,
the same who fought and conquered the dogs at Warwick."



1826.


JANUARY.


7.--In consequence of continued applications for relief by the unemployed
weavers, &c., the Norwich Court of Guardians increased the mulct for the
ensuing quarter 3,000 pounds--an addition to the rates of 2s. in the
pound.--On January 12th a Crape Ball, at which the lady patronesses wore
white Norwich crape, other ladies scarlet geranium-coloured Norwich
crapes, and gentlemen waistcoats of plain white shawl with shawl pattern
border as part of their evening dress, was held at the Assembly Room for
the purpose of promoting a fund for the relief of the poor, and produced
a clear profit of 79 pounds.  The fund was formally inaugurated at a
public meeting held at the Guildhall on January 16th, and upwards of
5,000 pounds was afterwards subscribed.--The Paving Act Commissioners on
January 24th decided to macadamise Ber Street in order to afford relief
work, and in March the manufacturers, with the same object, commenced
making bombazetts and twilled stuffs, articles that were entirely new to
Norwich.  On March 10th the governors of the Bank of England granted to
the manufacturers the loan of 80,000 pounds for four months at the rate
of five per cent. per annum; and on May 15th application was made to the
committee in London for the relief of distressed manufactures, who
granted 600 pounds to the unemployed weavers, still numbering several
thousands.--The Court of Guardians on July 4th increased the mulct for
the ensuing quarter to 15,000 pounds; and in August offered to obtain
employment for a considerable number of distressed weavers if they would
consent to a slight reduction of wages.  The men declined the offer
because the manufacturers refused to guarantee that they would not send
work into the country.  During the remaining portion of the year
employment continued to be scarce.

14.*--"Mr. W. E. L. Bulwer, of Heydon Hall, has lately been presented by
his tenants with a piece of plate, of the value of 500 guineas, as a
testimony of their respect and esteem for his general good conduct, and
especially as a mark of gratitude for his disinterested generosity during
the late agricultural distresses."

18.--Died at Yarmouth, John Joy, for 30 years guard of the mail coach to
London.  "He has left three sons, two of whom, since the death of Serres,
are said to be the first marine painters in the kingdom."

26.--A great skating match at Wisbech, in which all the principal fen
skaters took part, was won by Farrow, of Nordelph.

31.--A large number of weavers caused a riot in Norwich, and destroyed a
carrier's cart which was conveying into the country materials for
manufacturing purposes.  On February 1st the mob stopped all country
carts and seized what manufacturing articles were found upon them, broke
the windows of several factories, and became so aggressive that the Scots
Greys were called out to quell the disturbance.  The rioting was resumed
on February 13th, when many citizens were sworn in as special constables,
and after the Riot Act had been read the cavalry cleared the streets.


FEBRUARY.


4.*--"Died at a rustic and old habitation on Kettlestone Common, at the
age of 99, Robert Pamell, an honest husbandman, who, until he was 93,
never took relief from the parish.  He had frequently said he never
recollected having taken physic in his life."

9.--The Norwich and Lowestoft Navigation Bill was introduced into the
House of Commons and read a first time; it passed its second reading on
February 17th, and on February 27th petitions were presented against the
measure from the Corporation of Yarmouth and the owners of estates, and
in its favour from the inhabitants of Lowestoft and the Port Reeve and
inhabitants of Beccles.  On April 10th a Committee of the House proceeded
to take evidence, and after a sitting of 18 days 20 votes were given for
the Bill and 25 against.  The result of the Parliamentary proceedings
gave rise to great rejoicings at Yarmouth, where, on May 18th, a dinner
was held to celebrate the defeat of the Bill.--On August 8th the Haven
and Pier Commissioners received a deputation from the Norwich and
Lowestoft Navigation Committee, and a conference was held.  Further
discussion was deferred until September 5th.--On August 26th the county
magistrates held a meeting at the Norwich Shirehall, and resolved that it
was desirable that Norwich be made a port through Yarmouth, and requested
the Haven and Pier Commissioners to continue negociations with the
Norwich Joint Stock Company.--At the adjourned meeting on September 5th
the negociations fell through owing to the strong opposition manifested
by the traders and merchants of Yarmouth.  The Navigation Company, on
September 29th, decided to revive the Lowestoft scheme, to execute the
work for a sum not exceeding 100,000 pounds, and to apply for a Bill in
the next Session of Parliament.  On November 22nd a petition was
presented in the House of Commons for leave to bring in the Bill, and was
referred to Committee.  At a public meeting at Yarmouth on November 28th,
it was resolved to exercise every influence to bring about the defeat of
the measure.--The Bill was read a first time in the House of Commons on
November 29th.

12.--Died at his house in St. Giles', the Rev. Charles John Chapman,
B.D., upper minister of St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich.  He was educated at
the Norwich Free Grammar School, under the Rev. Dr. Parr, and at the
University of Cambridge, and was some time fellow of Corpus Christi
College.

13.--Capt. Parry, R.N., was presented with the freedom of Lynn "in
testimony of his meritorious and enterprising conduct in his several
voyages of discovery."  On the 15th the Corporation gave a dinner in his
honour at the Town Hall.

14.--Died, Mrs. Mary Seaman, of Norwich, aged 100.

23.--The Scots Greys marched from Norwich for Liverpool.


MARCH.


3.--The 1st Dragoon Guards marched into Norwich.

9.--At a meeting of the county magistrates, held at the Shirehall,
Norwich, a letter from the Secretary of State was read on the subject of
the removal of the Lent Assizes from Thetford to Norwich.  It was agreed
to answer the various objections it contained, and to strongly urge the
removal of the Assizes.--The Grand Jury at Norwich Assizes on July 22nd
made a presentment of the grievance from which the city suffered in the
absence of a second gaol delivery in the course of the year.

18.*--"Died lately in London, aged 62, Mr. Henry Smith, of Ellingham
Hall, who for 29 years held the situation of solicitor to the East India
Dock Company, and clerk of the Drapers' Company.  Mr. Smith some time ago
represented the borough of Colne in Parliament."

25.--Between 60 and 70 friends of Mr. Cobbett dined at the Bowling Green
Inn, Norwich, under the presidency of Sir Thomas Beevor.  Mr. Cobbett was
present, and replied to the toast of "Our Guest," proposed by Sir Thomas.

27.--The new Theatre at Norwich was opened with the performance of "The
School for Scandal" and of the farce "Youth, Love, and Folly."  The
proceedings commenced with the singing of the National Anthem by the
whole of the company, after which the leading actor, Mr. Osbaldiston,
delivered an address, "written by a young lady of this city for the
occasion."  On the previous Saturday evening (March 25th) the patentee,
Mr. Wilkins, entertained a party of 150 ladies and gentlemen in the green
room of the Theatre.  The High Sheriff (Col. Harvey) proposed "Success to
the new Theatre," "which the guests readily pledged in glasses of
sparkling champagne," and the evening concluded with a dance upon the
stage.


APRIL.


11.--Died at her house, Rue Neuve du Luxembourg, Paris, Madame De
Bardelin, wife of Monsieur le Chevalier Laget De Bardelin, Officier
Superieur, Lieutenant des Gardes du Corps du Roy.  "Madame De Bardelin
was well known and highly respected by many distinguished families in
Norwich and Norfolk, where, when she was Miss Sutton, she resided for a
considerable time."

14.--A squadron of 1st King's Dragoon Guards left Norwich for Leeds, and
on the same day the depot of the 40th (2nd Somersetshire) Regiment of
Foot arrived in the city and occupied the Cavalry Barracks.

20.--Mr. Osbaldiston took leave of the Norwich stage in the part of
Virginius, and proceeded to the Haymarket Theatre, London.

30.--The large east window of Norwich Cathedral was exposed to view after
restoration.  "The central light formerly comprised the Transfiguration,
after Raphael, painted by the lady of the late Dean Lloyd, with varnished
colours, but these not having been burnt in were after a time entirely
dissipated.  The same subject has now been re-executed in vitrified
colours from the picture by Julio Romano, in the possession of Mr. W.
Wilkins.  To that ingenious artist, Mr. Zobel (in the employment of Mr.
Yarrington, of Norwich), we offer our congratulations on the success of
his undertaking."


MAY.


1.--Mr. Barton, from the Bristol Theatre, who succeeded Mr. Osbaldiston
as the tragedian of the Norwich Company, made his first appearance in the
part of Hamlet.  "The thanks of the pure lovers of the stage are due to
Mr. Chippendale for not playing the grave-digger in the traditionary
number of waistcoats."

4.--Major Jonathan Peel, son of Sir Robert Peel, and brother of the Right
Hon. Robert Peel, Secretary of State for the Home Department, issued his
address as candidate for Norwich in the "Purple and Orange" interest.

17.--Mr. William Smith issued his address as candidate for Norwich in the
"Blue and White" interest.  "I regret," he wrote, "that practices exist
against which I have frequently and earnestly remonstrated; not only in
private, but before thousands of you assembled I have openly protested
against the right of any man to call for a reform in Parliament who
accepted any reward for his own vote."

18.--Died at his lodging at Yarmouth, aged 86, Mr. Roger Hays, of
Norwich, formerly captain in the 11th Light Dragoons, and many years
adjutant of the 3rd or East Norfolk Yeomanry Cavalry.  He entered the
Army in 1760, and was on duty with the Household troops at the coronation
of George III.

19.--The several troops of the 3rd Norfolk Yeomanry Cavalry, commanded by
Lieut.-Col. Harvey, completed 28 days' permanent duty at Norwich, and
were inspected at Mile End by Major Rutledge, 6th Carabineers.


JUNE.


9.--Mr. William Smith, the former member, and Major Peel were returned
unopposed for Norwich.  A Mr. Morrison had been invited to contest the
seat as a third candidate, but excused himself on the ground that he was
already nominated for Great Marlow.  It was by the extreme section of the
"Blue and White" party that Mr. Morrison's services were sought.  Failing
in this they nominated Mr. R. H. Gurney, but it being represented to the
Sheriff that he would not consent, the nomination was withdrawn.

--Yarmouth Election: the Hon. George Anson, 645; Mr. C. E. Rumbold, 649;
Sir E. K. Lacon, 250.

10.--Lynn Election: The Hon. John Walpole, 199; Lord William Bentinck,
174; Sir W. B. ffolkes, 104.

--*"Died a few days since at Hampstead, in Berkshire, Mrs. Brunton, widow
of the late Mr. John Brunton, of Norwich."

12.--Lord Charles Fitz Roy and Mr. William Bingham Baring were returned
unopposed for Thetford.

--Lord H. Cholmondeley and Col. the Hon. F. G. Howard were returned
unopposed for Castle Rising.

--The portrait of Mr. J. S. Patteson, by Beechey, and of Mr. William
Simpson, Chamberlain of the city and Treasurer of the county, by
Phillips, R.A., were hung in St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich.

14.--The Wesleyan Methodists of Norwich presented to the Rev. William
Gilpin, superintendent of the Norwich circuit, a pair of silver cups as a
token of gratitude and esteem.  The inscriptions were surmounted by
engraved representations of Calvert Street and St. Peter's Chapels, both
of which were erected under Mr. Gilpin's superintendence, the former in
1819 and the latter in 1824.

--The first laden wherries proceeded along the North Walsham and Dilham
Canal from Wayford Bridge to Mr. Cubitt's mill at North Walsham, with
music playing and flags flying.  "Thousands of spectators assembled to
witness this interesting scene, and the day finished with a plentiful
treat to the workmen of Mr. Sharpe's strong ale and Barclay's brown
stout."

19.--Mr. T. W. Coke and Mr. Edmond Wodehouse were returned unopposed for
Norfolk.  "At Mr. Walter's house on the Gentleman's Walk, Lady Anne Coke,
with her two lovely children, presented herself at the windows, and was
greeted with loud acclaims by Mr. Coke's friends.  When the hon. member
himself passed the spot our venerable Lord Bishop was holding the young
heir of Holkham in his arms, and each time that his father was
triumphantly thrown up in his chair the plaudits were renewed with an
enthusiasm which must have been truly grateful to his parental feelings."

20.--Guild Day at Norwich was observed with the customary formalities.
Mr. Ed.  Temple Booth having been sworn in as Mayor, the Right Hon.
Robert Peel, Secretary of State for the Home Department, and his brother,
Major Peel, M.P., took the oath as freemen of the city.  The Guild feast,
given at St. Andrew's Hall, was attended by 650 guests, and the ball at
Chapel Field House by 300.

21.--Messrs. Charles and George Green ascended in their balloon from the
gasworks at Lynn in the presence of 15,000 spectators, and descended at
Southery, near Downham Market.


JULY.


4.--A meeting of the "Blue and White" freemen was held at the Ranelagh
Gardens, Norwich, under the presidency of Mr. William Smith, M.P., at
which was formed the Norwich Union Independent Society.  Its object was
"to promote the purity of election."

8.--Died at Dublin, aged 24, Lieut. Henry Francis Bell, 58th Regiment of
Foot, grandson of Mr. Henry Bell, of Wallington.  He was accidentally
shot by a recruit while at practice with ball cartridge.

10.--Great rejoicings took place at Cromer on the coming of age of the
heir of Felbrigg.  The horses were removed from Mr. Windham's carriage,
which was dragged through the streets of the town.  "Fourteen barrels of
strong ale and porter having been placed on a pleasant eminence on the
road to Felbrigg, thirteen were broached and distributed among the
company, and the remaining barrel was given to the poor of Cromer.  A
ball was held at Felbrigg Hall in the evening."

13.--In the Rolls Court Lord Gifford delivered judgment in the tithe case
Bayley _v._ Sewell.  The plaintiff was the lessee of the impropriate
rectory of Wymondham, and the defendant the occupier of certain farms
called the Great Park Farm and the Little Park Farm, which had been
purchased upwards of 200 years previously by Sir Henry Hobart, the then
Lord Chief Justice of Common Pleas, as tithe free, subject only to the
demand of a _modus_ of 1 pound 6s. 8d. in respect of the Great Park and
of 13s. 4d. in respect of the Little Park.  This suit was instituted for
the purpose of compelling payment of tithes in respect of both farms; and
at the Norfolk Summer Assizes in 1825 the jury found for the plaintiff.
Lord Gifford, in his judgment, established the two ancient _moduses_
which exempted the properties from the payment of tithes.

15.--The discontinuance of Magdalen Fair, Norwich, was announced in the
following official notice:--"Sprowston, July 15th, 1826.  Whereas it has
been represented to the executors and trustees of the estate of the late
Thomas Woodruffe Smith, Esq., lord of the manor of Sprowston and lord of
the fair called Mary Magdalene Fair, yearly held at Sprowston in the
Hundred of Taverham in the county of Norfolk, that divers tumults and
riotous proceedings have taken place at the above fair to the terror and
fear of the lives of the peaceable inhabitants of the said parish, and
great nuisances and depredations have been committed on their property,
notice is hereby given to all dealers and chapmen and all persons
whatever who have usually resorted thereto, that no fair will be held
this year on the 2nd day of August or any subsequent day at Sprowston
aforesaid, nor again in future, and any person or persons who may, after
this notice, be found trespassing on the lands where the fair has been
usually held, or on any other lands adjoining, or obstructing the public
roads in Sprowston aforesaid, will be dealt with according to law.  By
order of the said Trustees, Lords of the Manor of Sprowston.--Thomas
Sayer, Bailiff."

15.--A fine vessel called the Rapid, upwards of 160 tons, was launched
from Mr. Preston's yard at Yarmouth.

22.--A historical play entitled "Viriatus, the Lusitanian Hero," written
by Mr. Thwaites, jun., of Norwich, a member of the Norwich Company, was
produced at the Theatre for the first time, and "was received with great
approbation."

30.--A singular phenomenon was witnessed at Cromer.  "The lighthouse hill
and adjacent heights were literally covered with myriads of the insect
called Lady Bird of an unusually large sort."


AUGUST.


7.--The prisoners at the old City Gaol at Norwich were removed to the new
Gaol at St. Giles' Gates.

28.--Ten thousand persons were attracted to the neighbourhood of St.
James's Hill, Norwich, to witness the performances of "Signor Carlo Cram
Villecrop, the celebrated Swiss Mountain Flyer from Geneva and Mont
Blanc," who was to exhibit "with the Tyrolese pole, 50 feet long, the
most astonishing gymnastic flights never before witnessed in this
country."  It was a hoax.

29.--The election of the freemen's Sheriff at Norwich was attended with
great excitement.  The candidates were Mr. J. Bennett and Mr. T. O.
Springfield.  "Complimentary half-crowns were paid to the 'friends of
independence,'" and it was mentioned as a circumstance highly creditable
to the poor freemen of the "Purple and Orange" interest, that "they
contented themselves with a fee of 5s. each from their own party."  The
poll was declared as follows: Bennett, 1,164; Springfield, 1,079.

--The North Walsham and Dilham Canal was formally opened by a grand
procession of vessels which started from Wayford Bridge accompanied by a
band of music and filled with company, among whom were Lord Suffield and
many of the principal residents in the district.  At Antingham the
company landed, formed in procession, and marched to North Walsham, where
a dinner was held at the King's Arms Inn, under the presidency of Col.
the Hon. John Wodehouse.


SEPTEMBER.


4.--The Ven. Archdeacon Oldershaw preached at Pulham Market church on the
occasion of the opening of the newly-erected organ, built by Mr. Bullen,
"an ingenious mechanic of that place."

9.*--"The aged inhabitants residing in the alms-houses in St. Gregory's,
bequeathed by Alderman Thomas Pye to the poor people belonging to St.
Giles', were removed this week into their newly-erected and comfortable
dwellings in West Pottergate Street."

13.--A man named Gibson, for a wager of 50 pounds, undertook to walk from
Norwich to Yarmouth in seven and a half hours carrying 4 pounds worth of
copper coins, weighing four stones four pounds.  He started from Bishop
Bridge at five o'clock in the morning, accomplished the first twelve
miles in three hours, and arrived at Yarmouth half an hour within the
stipulated time.

18.--A prize fight, "one of those revolting scenes, which are equally an
outrage on every feeling of humanity as well as a scandal to civilised
society," took place at Bramerton.  The combatants were prevented by a
magistrate from bringing off the affair at Surlingham; and the parish
constable at Bramerton on attempting to stop the fight was almost killed
in the execution of his duty.


OCTOBER.


5.--Joseph Wiggins, driver of the Norwich Phenomena coach, was fined at
Ixworth in the mitigated penalty of 90 pounds for having 36 head of
partridges in his possession, contrary to the statute 5 Anne c. 14, s. 2.

11.--Died in Goat Lane, Norwich, aged 75, Mr. John Reynolds, who served
the office of Sheriff in 1796.

17.--At Norwich Quarter Sessions a committee of justices reported that
the Bridewell was "insufficient, inconvenient, and inadequate to give
effect to the rules and regulations enforced in recent legislation, and
it was necessary from the increased number of commitments to such
Bridewell that some other and more commodious building should be erected
or substituted."

19.--A meeting was held at the Angel Inn, Norwich, under the presidency
of Mr. Unthank, at which was passed a resolution to the effect "that by
the present mode of electing Guardians the great body of the payers of
the poor-rates are entirely unrepresented, that the extraordinary
increase in the poor-rates of the city within the last six months has
caused the greatest alarm and demands the strictest scrutiny, and that it
is desirable a Bill should be brought in to amend the present Court of
Guardians Act so far as to the choosing members of the Court."  A
petition embodying the principle of this resolution was ordered to be
presented to the House of Commons.

21.--Died, Mr. John Ansell, plumber and glazier, St. John Maddermarket,
who served the offer of Sheriff of Norwich in 1806.

--At about this date large numbers of people assembled nightly on Orford
Hill, Norwich, to watch for a "ghost" which was said to haunt the
premises of a Mr. Hart.  Martin, a police officer, examined some
unoccupied premises adjoining, and discovered a hiding-place which had
evidently been used by the person who had annoyed Mr. Hart's family.

--Mr. Stone, the County Surveyor, was reported to have "discovered rooms
and passages within the walls of the Keep of Norwich Castle which have
been unknown since it has become a county gaol, a period of nearly 500
years."

22.--The Friends' Meeting House in Goat Lane, Norwich, erected on the
site of the old Meeting House demolished in 1825, was opened for public
worship.  The architect was Mr. Patience, and the builder, Mr. John
Bensley.

28.--At the adjourned Quarter Sessions at Norwich, Mr. Alderman Crisp
Brown made serious allegations as to the way in which the contractors for
the new Gaol had done their work.  The court appointed Mr. Nicholls, of
London, to survey the work.  Vestry meetings were held in St. Giles', St.
Peter Mancroft, St. Andrew's, and St. Julian's, at which resolutions were
adopted expressing approval of Mr. Brown's action.  On May 12th, 1827, it
was announced that Mr. Nicholls had awarded the sum of 1,552 pounds to
the contractors over and above the balance previously due to them.


NOVEMBER.


5.--A great part of the premises erected on the site of the old
alms-houses, adjoining the Friends' Meeting House, Goat Lane, Norwich,
fell with a tremendous crash.

11.*--"Mr. W. Wilkins has received another testimony to his ability as an
architect in the preference given to his design for the London
University."

--Died at Brundall, aged 72, Mr. Elisha De Hague, Town Clerk of Norwich,
to which office he was elected on August 8th, 1792, on the death of his
father.

18.*--"An intelligent mercantile gentleman from Russia, who landed at
Yarmouth, with whom we had some conversation on the subject of the free
admission of foreign corn into this country, gave it as his opinion that
the fears entertained here by the landed interest of excessive
importations, at least for some time to come, are quite groundless.  He
admitted, however, that in eight or ten years, from the encouragement we
shall have given to the foreign grower by our free trade system, if it
should be extended to corn, abundant supplies may be expected.  What will
_then_ be the state of the agriculture of _this_ country by no means too
flourishing _now_ may be easily imagined."

21.--At a special assembly of the Corporation of Norwich, Mr. William
Simpson, for 34 years Chamberlain, was elected Town Clerk and Clerk of
the Peace, and steward of the several manors belonging to the
Corporation, in the room of Mr. Elisha De Hague, deceased.

25.--A county meeting was held at the Shirehall, Norwich, for the twofold
purpose of opposing the Bill presented to Parliament for the appointment
of district surveyors of highways, and of expressing dissent from the
practice which prevailed at the Shirehall of conducting county business
with closed doors.  With regard to the first subject a resolution was
passed stating that the county-rate had increased from 7,200 to 20,400
pounds in twenty years, and that it was undesirable to increase it by
making the proposed appointments.  It was decided to take counsel's
opinion upon the other matter.  (_See_ January 12th, 1827.)

27.--The Rev. William Whitear, rector of Starston, met with his death
under singular circumstances.  He had gone out with a party to apprehend
poachers; the party divided themselves into two bodies, and on proceeding
to the place where it had been agreed upon to reassemble, Mr. Whitear was
mistaken for a poacher and shot in the right side by another of the
party, a young man named Thomas Pallant.  He died from the effects of the
wound on December 10th, and Pallant was committed for trial on the charge
of manslaughter.  The case was tried at the Norfolk Assizes at Thetford
before Mr. Justice Gaselee, on March 26th, 1827, when the accused was
acquitted.  "He was so seriously affected during the trial that before
its conclusion he became quite insensible, and was taken home in that
state."


DECEMBER.


2.*--[Advt.]  "Whereas a report was very generally circulated last week,
and in a great measure obtained credit, that the body of William
Tounshend, which was buried at Lakenham, on Sunday, November 19th, had
been disinterred and taken away, we, the undersigned, have investigated
the matter and certify the following statement to be correct:--The
relatives of the deceased being much affected at such a report and
naturally anxious to ascertain the truth of it, made application to have
the grave examined.  After due deliberation upon the subject permission
was granted for that purpose.  The grave was opened on Saturday last in
the presence of them, together with us, when it was discovered that the
body reposed in its peaceful abode undisturbed.  We consider it to be our
duty to give this public contradiction to so groundless and scandalous a
report, in order thereby to satisfy the minds of the parishioners and the
public at large.--George Carter, vicar; Hunton Jackson, William Norman,
churchwardens; Lakenham Vestry, November 26th."

6.--At a meeting of the Norwich Corporation, Mr. Robert Alderson was
elected Recorder in place of Mr. C. S. Onley, resigned.  "Mr. Alderson,
though only what is technically termed an 'utter barrister,' is now the
Recorder of three Corporations, namely, Norwich, Yarmouth, and Ipswich.
An 'utter barrister' (according to Bailey) is a young lawyer admitted to
plead at the Bar, or a person well schooled in the common law who is
called from contemplation to practice."

8.--At a special court of the Corporation of Guardians, Norwich, Mr.
Roger Kerrison, solicitor, was elected clerk in the room of Mr. William
Simpson, resigned.

--Died at Holkham, aged 90, William Jones, for upwards of 50 years
huntsman and principal stable servant in the Coke family.  "On his
death-bed he was seen by Mr. Coke, who took with him the young heir of
Holkham, to shake his faithful old servant by the hand.  Lady Anne Coke,
Lady Anson, and all the family at Holkham showed every possible kindness
and attention to the venerable and much-respected old man."

11.--A serious poaching affray took place in Heydon Woods between a band
of 25 poachers and about 20 keepers and watchers.  The Hon. George
Edwards (a son of Lord Kensington), who accompanied the keepers, was
knocked down by a stone, and shot while upon the ground.  At the Norfolk
Assizes, held at Thetford on March 26th, 1827, before Mr. Justice
Gaselee, 13 persons were indicted in connection with the affair.
Sentences of death passed upon them were commuted to terms of
transportation.

12.--Mr. Isaac Preston was elected Steward of Norwich in room of Mr.
Robert Alderson, appointed Recorder.

14.--A meeting of the Hundred of Eynsford was held at the Swan Inn,
Reepham, at which it was decided to petition Parliament against any
alteration in the Corn Laws.  Similar petitions were adopted by almost
every Hundred in the county.

17.--The depot of the 40th Regiment of Foot marched from Norwich for
Bradford.



1827.


JANUARY.


6.--Mons. Louis, a native of Lorraine, 26 years of age, seven feet six
inches in height, was exhibited at the Angel Inn, Norwich.

7.--Intelligence was received in Norwich of the death of H.R.H. the Duke
of York, and the great bell of St. Peter Mancroft, and the bells of other
churches in the city, were tolled for two hours.  On Saturday, the 13th,
the day of the funeral, "all the shops in Norwich were kept as closely
shut as on the Sabbath"; the Mayor and Corporation attended service at
the Cathedral; and funeral sermons were preached at many of the parish
churches and city chapels.

11.--A meeting of the Norfolk Cricket Club was held at Norwich, when
rules were adopted.  It was agreed to play four matches during the year,
one on each of the four grounds to be established by the club in the
neighbourhood of Norwich, Yarmouth, Swaffham, and Gunton.  Rule 20
provided that members, clergymen excepted, should wear at the annual
meetings the uniform dress--"a dark blue coat with buttons lettered
'N.C.C.,' with white waistcoat, &c."  Mr. Philip Gurdon, of Letton, was
elected treasurer.

12.--A bull driven along St. Martin's Street, Norwich, entered the Bess
of Bedlam public-house, and rushing upstairs made its way into a room
where a musical party was held.  The animal was dislodged with great
difficulty.

--At a meeting of the county magistrates the question of the conduct of
business was discussed.  Several magistrates resisted the idea that the
public had a right to claim admission, and it was agreed that the
proceedings be read in the lower court at the close of each meeting, and
"such of them as appeared advisable be advertised in the newspapers."

13.--Very severe weather was experienced in Norfolk.  The thermometer on
this date registered 14 degrees below freezing point.  A heavy fall of
snow on the 15th impeded coach traffic in the neighbourhood of Swaffham.
"Many hundreds of rabbits perished in the Thetford and Brandon districts
through being out in search of food and unable to find their burrows
again."

26.--A severe storm occurred on the Norfolk coast.  Four vessels drove
from their anchors and stranded on Yarmouth beach; and a brig was wrecked
on Happisburgh sands.  The whole of her crew perished.

29.--On November 28th, 1826, three candidates were nominated for the
office of City Chamberlain at Norwich, of whom Mr. James Goodwin had the
majority in the Court of Aldermen and Mr. Beckwith in the Common Council.
The assembly broke up without electing the Chamberlain.  On January 29th
a special meeting of the Corporation was held in consequence of the Mayor
having received notice that a rule of the Court of King's Bench would be
applied for requiring them to shew cause why a writ of _mandamus_ should
not issue commanding them to admit and swear Mr. Goodwin into the office
of Chamberlain and other offices.  It was ordered that cause be shown.
On February 10th the Court of King's Bench discharged the rule _nisi_.
At a special meeting of the Corporation on March 9th, the Town Clerk
reported on the result of the motion, and Mr. A. A. H. Beckwith was then
unanimously elected Chamberlain, and Mr. John Skipper Speaker of the
Common Council, in place of Mr. Beckwith.  A new Council was elected in
April, and at a special assembly on May 16th, Mr. Beckwith was requested
to leave the room.  The Speaker, Mr. J. S. Parkinson (who had been
elected in place of Mr. Skipper), declined to recognise Mr. Beckwith as
Chamberlain.  Mr. Goodwin was then proposed, and elected to the office.
At a Council meeting on June 7th, Mr. Beckwith took his seat as
Chamberlain, and was asked to retire; he refused, and the beadle was
called in.  Mr. Beckwith, addressing that officer, said, "I give you
notice, if you lay your hands on me you do so at your peril."  One of the
members remarked that if the beadle did not turn him out they would.  Mr.
Beckwith was then led out by the beadle, and the incident terminated.


FEBRUARY.


2.--A fine specimen of the sea eagle (_falco ossifragus_) was shot near
Fritton Decoy.  It measured from tip to tip of its wings seven feet nine
inches, and was presented to the Norwich Museum.

5.--Four thousand weavers met at Ranelagh Gardens, Norwich, and passed
resolutions protesting against the action of certain manufacturers in
reducing the rate of wages without consulting other employers, and
requesting the Mayor to summon a meeting of the masters to shew cause why
the reduction had been made.  On the 12th a procession of 600 operatives,
headed by a man carrying a loaf of bread draped in black crape, passed
through the streets of the city.  A petition to Parliament was prepared,
in favour of an Act to regulate the price of labour.  The petition was
presented in the House of Commons on May 30th, by Mr. William Smith.

12.--The last stage of the agitation for making Norwich a port was
commenced on this date, when Major Peel presented a petition in the House
of Commons from the Mayor, Aldermen, and inhabitants of Norwich in favour
of the Norwich and Lowestoft Navigation Bill.  The Bill having been read
a second time, entered the Committee stage on February 21st, when Mr.
Alderson opened the case on behalf of the promoters; the examination of
their witnesses concluded on Feb. 27th.  The case for the opposition was
commenced on the same day, and the evidence concluded on March 7th.  In
the division on the question "that the preamble of this Bill is proved,"
there were 25 ayes and 5 noes.  Peals were rung on the church bells at
Norwich when intelligence was received, on March 8th, that the Bill had
passed through Committee, and Mr. Crisp Brown, on his return from London,
on the 9th, was met at St. Stephen's Gates by a large number of citizens,
who, headed by a band of music, drew his carriage to his residence in
King Street.  On March 11th the Bill was reported to the House, and on
the 22nd it was read a third time and passed.  On the same evening it was
read a first time in the House of Lords; it passed its second reading on
March 26th, and was referred to Committee, who took evidence on May 7th,
and on the 22nd it was read a third time and carried without opposition.
The news of the final success of the measure was received in Norwich with
great rejoicing.  On the 23rd a procession was organized to meet the
promoters on their arrival from town.  The Times coach, by which they
travelled, was met at Harford Bridges, and at St. Stephen's Gates the
horses were removed from the vehicle, which was dragged in triumph
through the city, preceded by bands of music and by men carrying models
of ships and naval emblems.  At night a bonfire was lighted in the centre
of the Market Place, and was fed with wooden spouts, palings, and
watch-boxes.  Some of the ringleaders were lodged in clink, but their
comrades rescued them and threw the clink doors upon the bonfire.  Sheep
were roasted in Ber Street and Bishop Street.  The Bill received the
Royal assent on May 28th.  The first meeting of the proprietors of the
Norwich and Lowestoft Navigation Company was held at the Guildhall, on
July 3rd, when Col. Harvey presided.  Mr. Edmund Newton was appointed
clerk, Mr. Cubitt engineer, and Messrs. Harvey and Hudson treasurers.
The work of excavation was begun in the Lowestoft section on September
4th, when Mr. Crisp Brown dug the first spadeful of earth, and a dinner
and aquatic sports were held to celebrate the event.

17.--Died at Wymondham, aged 69, Mr. Thomas Troughton, who was Sheriff of
Norwich in 1810.

19.--Mr. William Smith, in the House of Commons, presented a petition
from the inhabitants praying leave to bring in a Bill to regulate the
state of the poor in Norwich.  The Norwich Court of Guardians Amendment
Bill was brought in and read a first time on March 1st.  On March 24th it
was stated that the promoters of the measure had effected a compromise
with the Court of Guardians as to the proportion of representation;
persons assessed 10 pounds and upwards were to have two votes, and those
above 5 pounds one vote; the Recorder, Steward, and Aldermen not to be
Guardians; the hamlets not to be assessed on stock, but the proportion of
assessment between them and the city to be five-sixths--_i.e._, when the
city was assessed 1s. the hamlets were to be assessed 10d.  The Bill went
through Committee of the House on the 26th, and was reported on the 28th.
It was read a first and second time in the House of Lords in April,
finally passed on May 4th, and received the Royal assent on May 28th.
The first election under the new Act took place on June 11th, and the
first meeting of the new Court was held on June 20th, when Mr. Anthony
Hudson was elected Governor, and Mr. Joseph Geldart Deputy-Governor.

19.--The _Crim. Con._ case, Sir Jacob Astley, Bart., _v._ Capt. Garth,
was tried in the Court of Common Pleas, when a verdict was given for the
plaintiff, damages one shilling.

20.--A cricket match was played on the ice at Diss Mere.  It commenced at
10 a.m., and was well contested until dusk, in the presence of about
1,500 spectators.

24.*--"Died last week, at Kenninghall, aged 105, Mrs. Sarah Barham."

--"Died at Yarmouth Mr. Nathan Fenn, in his 101st year."

--A detachment of the 12th (Prince of Wales') Royal Lancers marched into
Norwich Barracks from Hounslow, under the command of Capt. Cunnyngham.

25.--Died at Norwich, aged 101, Thomas Greenfield, gardener.

26.--Major Peel presented in the House of Commons a petition from the
Chancellor and Prebendaries of Norwich Cathedral, and from the Archdeacon
and clergy of Norfolk, against further concessions to the claims of Roman
Catholics.


MARCH.


3.--Died at Costessey Hall, the Rev. Lawrence Strongitharm, aged 31,
formerly of the Roman Catholic church, St. John Maddermarket, Norwich.
"To great learning and a highly gifted mind, to the most elegant and
refined manners, and to the most powerful and commanding eloquence he
added a most fervent and unaffected piety and undying zeal for the
furtherance of religion."  His remains were interred on the 9th, before
the altar in the chapel of St. John Maddermarket.

8.--"Two celebrated amateurs of fashion," the Hon. W. Berkeley and the
other "a military man," appeared in the parts of Othello and Roderigo at
Norwich Theatre.  They afterwards appeared as Romeo and Mercutio, and in
other characters.

9.--Died Adam Burrell, many years carrier between Flitcham and Lynn.
"The deceased was rather an eccentric character, and often designated as
'Adam Slow,' as he usually occupied six or seven hours going from
Flitcham to Lynn, a distance of about 10 miles.  He was, however, a very
honest and inoffensive man."

10.--Particulars were published on this date of the Norfolk and Norwich
Joint Stock Banking Company, of which Mr. Samuel Bignold was managing
director.  The capital was advertised as 200,000 pounds, and the bank had
branches at Lynn, Swaffham, Dereham, Foulsham, and Harling.

17.*--[Advt.]  "Marshland Shales.  The well-known trotting stallion,
Marshland Shales, will be sold by auction on Tombland Fair-day, unless
previously disposed of by private contract.  This is the horse which on
August 3rd, 1810, trotted 17 miles in 56 minutes, carrying 12 st. 2 lb.,
and was then sold by auction for 305 gs.  For particulars apply, if by
letter post-paid, to Mr. Moneyment, veterinary surgeon, Norwich."

19.--A large portion of the city wall at Richmond Hill Gardens, Norwich,
fell into the Bracondale Road, from the effects of a violent gale on the
17th.

--Died, aged 59, Mr. Edward Dewing, of Guist.  He was out hunting with
his hounds when he was seized with a fit of apoplexy and dropped from his
horse.  During a second attack he expired.

22.--Sixty-five prisoners for trial at the Lent Assizes at Thetford were
escorted from Norwich Castle to that place by men of the Norfolk Yeomanry
Cavalry.

31.*--"Lately died at Wicklewood, Mrs. Mary Spraggs, aged 100."

--*"Died lately, Mrs. Catherine Mann, aged 102."


APRIL.


1.--A newly-erected malthouse, belonging to Mr. W. Hardy, at
Letheringsett, was destroyed by fire.  The building was 150 feet by 40
feet, and contained 90 last of malt, a considerable quantity of wool,
barley, and empty casks.  "The engine from Holt did not arrive until
after the roof fell in, the people supposing the alarm of fire to be only
an April hoax."

2.--The annual election of Common Councilmen commenced at Norwich.  "For
several years 'cleansing week' has passed off without any serious
contests, and the 'Purple and Orange' party has held uninterrupted
ascendency in three of the great wards since 1820.  All at once, however,
the 'Blue and Whites' have roused themselves from their inaction, and
again entering the field of party warfare, have succeeded in displacing
their opponents.  It is useless to deny that the week's proceedings have
been marked by undisguised bribery and corruption, and that the object of
the triumphant party has mainly been achieved by superior weight of
metal--by dint of money."

10.--Died at his residence in London, aged 78, the Marquis of
Cholmondeley, of Houghton Hall, Lord Steward of his Majesty's Household,
&c.

13.--Died, aged 82, Mr. Daniel Clark, of Norwich.  "He was in the
commercial establishment of Messrs. Ives for nearly 70 years and was
justly esteemed in nautical and musical communities.  To the last his
song was cheerful and his convivial good humour unabated, and many a head
must lie as low as his before the name of 'Admiral' Clark will be
forgotten, or his memory ceased to be cherished with respect."

14.--The Norwich Cricket Club announced that a lease had been taken of a
field at Lakenham, "without Ber Street Gates, and nearly opposite
Lakenham Terrace," and that the ground had been "laid down with fine turf
by Mr. Bentley, of Lords."  The secretary of the club was Mr. Henry
Hobart, solicitor, of Bethel Street.

22.--Died at Harleston, aged 66, Mr. Robert Paul, formerly of Starston,
"well known to agriculturists for several ingenious inventions and for
his inquiries into the nature, history, and habitudes of the turnip fly
and wireworm."


MAY.


1.--Four candidates were nominated for the Mayoralty of Norwich, namely,
Alderman Peter Finch, who received 918 votes; Alderman Yallop, 867;
Alderman J. S. Patteson, 566; and Alderman C. Brown, 565.  At the Court
of Aldermen on the 3rd Mr. Finch was elected Mayor.

3.--Newspaper reporters were for the first time admitted to the assembly
of the Norwich Corporation.

9.--Died at Margaretta Farm, Clenchwarton, aged 83, Dr. Charles Browne,
for many years physician to the King of Prussia.  On his return to
England his Majesty conferred upon him the Order of the Red Eagle as a
mark of his esteem.  Dr. Browne was a man of high literary attainments.

24.--The bounds of St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich, were perambulated.  "It
gave rise to those scenes of vulgar mirth for which occasions of this
kind are used as an excuse for indulging in with impunity.  We never
remember the ducking system carried to such lengths.  The Rev. J. Bowman,
in the early stage of the proceedings, was on Hay Hill drenched from head
to foot.  The pail which a fellow had in his hand (and which had been
filled with water from an adjoining pump) being dropped at his feet, he
accidentally fell over, but fortunately escaped without any serious
injury.  The company afterwards met for dinner at the Angel Inn."

29.--The Bishop of Chichester, acting on behalf of the Bishop of Norwich,
held a visitation at Lynn and confirmed 1,400 persons at St. Margaret's
church, and 620 at St. Nicholas' chapel.  The number confirmed at Holt
was 1,120; at Fakenham, 1,800; at East Dereham, 1,100; and at Hingham,
803.


JUNE.


4.--Mr. Bolton, formerly coach proprietor and landlord of the Norfolk
Hotel, Norwich, was driving between Melton Mowbray and Stamford when his
horse ran away and overturned the vehicle.  Mr. Bolton received severe
injuries, from which he died on the 10th.

12.--A serious riot occurred at Norwich.  A party of Wymondham weavers,
who had damaged looms and destroyed silk to the value of 1,000 pounds, at
Ashwellthorpe, had been conveyed to Norwich Castle for examination.  The
witnesses were brought to the city in hackney coaches, escorted by a
detachment of the 12th Lancers.  The Norwich weavers, who had barricaded
the Golden Ball Lane entrance to Castle Meadow with a waggon, and placed
a similar obstruction near the Castle Bridge, received the military with
a volley of stones.  The witnesses were then conveyed by way of
Timberhill to Orford Hill, and while a large body of special constables
displaced the waggon at the bridge, a second detachment of Lancers came
from the Barracks, charged the mob at full gallop, and dispersed them in
all directions.  An attempted rally was frustrated by a second charge.
The Militia staff were under arms on the Castle Hill, and the streets
were patrolled by the Norwich light Horse Volunteers.  At the Norwich
Assizes, on August 11th, several of the rioters were indicted before Mr.
Baron Garrow for assaults, and were discharged on entering into their
recognisances.  David Seeker, Henry Rix, and William Thurston were
charged with the capital offence of riotously assembling together to the
disturbance of the public peace.  Mr. Cooper, for the defence, objected
to the wording of the indictment.  The words of the King's proclamation
read at the time of the disturbance were "chargeth and commandeth all
persons," &c.; the indictment said "chargeth and command"; and instead of
directing the people to "depart to their lawful habitations _or_ to their
lawful homes," the indictment said "_and_ to their lawful homes."  The
learned Judge pronounced the objection to be valid, and expressed the
hope that the prisoners "would go home sensible of the blessings of
Providence in having shielded them that day, and saved them from an
ignominious death."  The Ashwellthorpe rioters were bound over in the sum
of 50 pounds each.

19.--Breakfast _a la fourchette_ with the Mayor-elect (Mr. Peter Finch)
and luncheon with the Mayor (Mr. E. T. Booth), prepared the Sheriffs,
Aldermen, &c., for the Guild Day proceedings at Norwich.  The customary
ceremonies were observed at the Guildhall, service was attended at the
Cathedral, and 600 guests dined at St Andrew's Hall.

23.--The Surrey Gardens, Thorpe Road, Norwich, were advertised as a
resort "for the reception of respectable families and invalids," where
"pure air, unbounded prospects of land and water, refreshing fruits and
odoriferous flowers" could be obtained.  A military band played on Sunday
evenings, from five to seven o'clock.

27.--The Bishop of Norwich confirmed at North Walsham church 1,280
persons.  On one day in the previous week his lordship confirmed in
Norwich Cathedral 1,100 persons.

30.--Died at Yarmouth, aged 87, Mr. Jacob Preston, senior magistrate of
the borough.  He was Mayor in 1793, 1801, and 1813.

--Mr. Yates gave his entertainment, "Portraits and Sketches," at Norwich
Theatre.  On subsequent evenings he was assisted by Mr. Brunton and Mrs.
Yates (formerly Miss Brunton).


JULY.


25.--A well-contested prize fight took place at Bessingham, between Rix
and Sharpens, for 5 pounds aside.  The former beat his opponent, after
fighting 78 rounds in 45 minutes.


AUGUST.


5.--A duel took place on Yarmouth Denes "between J--- B---, Esq., and W.
M---, Esq., in consequence of a dispute the previous day at the Bath
Rooms.  Both were to fire at the same time, but on the signal being given
Mr. M.'s ball did not take effect, and Mr. B.'s pistol missed fire.  The
seconds then interfered, and the affair was adjusted without much
difficulty."

6.--Norwich Theatre was re-opened for the Assize week.  "The return of
Mr. Osbaldiston gave rise to scenes of disturbance which interrupted the
progress of the performance for several evenings.  A kind of set appears
to have been made against him, but he has been warmly applauded by the
respectable part of the audience."

6.--The Norfolk Cricket Club played the first of a series of matches
which took place during the Norwich Assize week.  The annual dinner was
held at the Rampant Horse Inn on the 10th, under the presidency of Lord
Suffield, and in the evening a ball was given at Chapel Field Rooms.  The
patronesses were the Countess of Albemarle, Lady Anne Coke, Lady
Stafford, Lady Suffield, the Hon. Mrs. Wodehouse, Lady Lacon, and Mrs.
Gurdon.  "The waltz was introduced for the first time in the course of
the evening, but a very select few appeared inclined to join in that
rotatory movement."

28.--The election of freemen's Sheriff took place at Norwich; the
candidates were Alderman T. O. Springfield and Lieut. Fred White, R.N.
"As soon as the polling commenced, a ticket was given by the 'Blue and
White' party, entitling the voter who chose to accept it to half-a-crown.
Nothing was given on the side of the 'Purple and Orange,' Lieut. White
having merely come forward in consequence of a requisition sent to him by
the poor freemen and signed by upwards of 300 names."  The poll was thus
declared: Springfield, 1,210; White, 474.  Lieut. White, in his
subsequent address, wrote: "I consider my failure more honourable than to
have gained the day by bribery and corruption.  The 474 votes I obtained
will at least rescue the character of a considerable portion of our
fellow-citizens from the reproach of selling themselves to the highest
bidder."


SEPTEMBER.


5.--The first stone of the new Roman Catholic chapel in St. Giles'
parish, Norwich, was laid by the Hon. and Rev. Edward Clifford.

8.--Died, aged 74, at his house in St. Faith's Lane, Norwich, Mr. William
Herring, 32 years an alderman of the city.  He was the second son of the
Very Rev. William Herring, D.D., Dean of St. Asaph.

12.--The election of an alderman to fill the vacancy caused by the death
of Mr. Herring took place at Norwich.  The candidates were Mr. Angell,
"Purple and Orange," and Mr. Marshall, "Blue and White."  Great
excitement prevailed throughout the contest.  "The 'Purple and Orange'
party were informed in the course of the day that some of their friends
had been carried off and were detained in a warehouse in St. Clement's.
A magistrates' warrant was applied for and the captives set at liberty."
At the close of the day the voting stood as follows: Angell, 215;
Marshall, 195.  The friends of the latter demanded that the poll be
continued on the 13th, "because seven of Mr. Marshall's friends were
detained at Ranworth against their will."  The other side retaliated that
eleven of their voters had been forcibly carried away by the "Blue and
Whites."  The Mayor deprecated the system that had been put in force, and
adjourned the poll till 10 o'clock the following morning.  The poll was
finally declared as follows: Angell, 218; Marshall, 196.  (_See_
September 24th.)

18.--A Musical Festival for the benefit of the Norfolk and Norwich
Hospital commenced at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, and concluded with a
ball in the same building on the 21st.  The principals engaged for the
oratorios and concerts were Madame Pasta, Miss Stephens, Miss Bacon, Miss
Farrar, Madame Caradori Allan, Mr. Braham, Mr. Vaughan, Mr. Terrail, Mr.
Edward Taylor, and Signor Zuchelli.  Sir George Smart conducted.  The
total receipts amounted to about 6,400 pounds, of which 1,672 pounds 12s.
1d. was handed to the Hospital.

24.--An inquest was held by Mr. Bell, the Norwich Coroner, on the body of
James Bailey, one of the persons who was forcibly carried away to prevent
his voting at the Alderman's election on the 12th.  "On the 10th he was
taken away by the 'Blues and Whites' to Wroxham Castle public-house, the
next morning removed to Horning Swan, afterwards taken to Smallburgh, and
on the same night removed to Ridlington Plough.  They wanted nothing for
eating and drinking, but Bailey being very ill, suffered very much from
being moved about."  On his return to Norwich he was engaged to sell
programmes at the Musical Festival, where he was in attendance from the
18th to the 20th.  On the 22nd he broke a blood vessel and died.  "His
attendance at the Festival took the onus off his captors, and the jury
returned a verdict of 'Died from the visitation of God.'"

28.--Mr. Samuel Stone was elected Speaker of the Common Council of
Norwich, in the room of Mr. J. S. Parkinson, deceased.

29.*--[Advt.]  "100 pounds Reward, and his Majesty's Pardon.  Eight
horses belonging to Mr. William Slack, of Norwich, died between the 25th
August last and the 10th September, six soon after their return from
Attleborough (one of the depots for horses drawing the London vans) to
Norwich, one at Attleborough, and the other at Newmarket, and upon being
opened it has been ascertained that they died by mineral poisoning,
supposed to have been administered in water or in some liquid form.  The
Government offer the above reward."

--*"The week before last Mr. Meyer Levi, gold and silver smith, a
converted Jew, together with Mrs. Hannah Levi, a converted Jewess,
received the rite of Christian baptism at the hands of the vicar in the
parish church of St. Stephen's, Norwich, when the Christian names of John
and Hannah were given to the above parties, and at the same time they
adopted the surname of Herbert."


OCTOBER.


6.--A number of silver coins, some of them bearing date 1577, were dug up
by a gardener at Thorpe, who sold them for 30 pounds.

13.--The portrait of Mr. Henry Francis, Mayor of Norwich in 1824, was
hung in St. Andrew's Hall.  The artist was Mr. Lane, of Greek Street,
Soho.

18.--Died at Costessey, Mrs. Anne Maria Teresa Vere, aged 100, sister of
Mr. Charles Gosnold, formerly of Norwich.

20.--Killed at the battle of Navarino, aged 24, Lieut. George William
Howe FitzRoy, R.N., of H.M.S. Dartmouth, second son of Lieut.-General the
Hon. William FitzRoy, of Kempston Lodge.


NOVEMBER.


3.*--"At the auction mart last week Mr. Hoggart sold the well-known
estate called St. Andrew's Hall, Old Buckenham, a fine mansion house, and
532 acres of land, at 29,300 pounds."

10.--It was announced that Mr. Smith, manager of Norwich Theatre, had
taken of the patentee, Mr. Wilkins, a seven years' lease of that and the
other houses in the circuit.

--Mr. Mathews commenced a three nights' engagement at the Assembly Rooms,
Norwich.

17.*--"The expense of erecting the house of industry at Wicklewood in
1777 was defrayed by a tontine called the 'Forehoe Tontine,' consisting
of 110 shares at 100 pounds each, bearing an interest of 5 pounds per
cent.  Fifty years have now elapsed, and in 1827 there are still 50
survivors out of the original number."

25.--Died at Prospect Place, Gorleston, aged 65, Mr. F. F. Hope, for 30
years paymaster of the East Norfolk Militia.  "Previously he was an
officer of the line, saw much service during the great American War, was
at the siege of Yorktown in Virginia in 1781, and there taken prisoner by
the combined Armies of France and America, with the whole of the British
Army under Lord Cornwallis."


DECEMBER.


16.--The small organ in East Dereham church, mentioned by Dr. Burney in
his "History of Music" as a curiosity, which was built by the famous
Schmidt, in 1666, for the Hon. Roger North, of Rougham Hall, and
purchased for the parish in 1786 for the small sum of 30 pounds, was,
after enlargement under the direction of the Rev. R. F. Elwin, of
Norwich, opened before a congregation of 1,600 persons, by Mr. Last, of
Orford.  The builder, Mr. Joseph Hart, of Redgrave, found that Schmidt's
pipes were as sound as on the day they were finished.

--A boy of 13, named William Moore, was brutally murdered in a field at
Brisley, by John Kenney, a lunatic, aged 24.  The body was horribly
mutilated.  The prisoner was committed for trial on the Coroner's
warrant, on the charge of wilful murder, and at the Lent Assizes, held at
Thetford on March 21st, before Mr. Baron Garrow, the jury returned a
verdict of not guilty, on the ground of the insanity of the accused.

22.*--[Advt.]  "A main of cocks will be fought at the White Hart Inn,
Swaffham, on Thursday, the 27th of December, 1827, for 50 guineas,
between Mr. J. Farrer, of Necton, and Mr. G. Gould, of Swaffham.  A very
superior day's play is expected, as there are several other matches
besides."

--*"Died lately, at Northrepps, Hannah Storey, in her 101st year."

--Lieut.-Col. Harvey, commanding the 3rd Regiment of Norfolk Yeomanry
Cavalry, addressed a letter to the Marquis of Lansdowne, Secretary of
State for War, detailing the services rendered by the regiment in
quelling disturbances, &c., and expressing the hope that the Government
would not order the disbandment of the corps.  His lordship replied that
he had not lost sight of the valuable services of the Yeomanry, but that
the Barracks at Norwich were then, and were likely to continue, a station
for regular cavalry, and consequently he was unable to accede to the
request to continue the pay and allowance to the regiment.

24.--Died at Lynn, Samuel Pearson, a journeyman cabinetmaker, "who, in
the intervals of his labour, acquired a deep knowledge of mathematics,
and possessed the faculty of communicating his knowledge to others.  He
established a mathematical academy, which had every prospect of success."

29.--Miss C. Morgan's Menagerie was exhibited on the Castle Hill,
Norwich.

--Great excitement was caused in Yarmouth by the discovery that upwards
of twenty recently interred bodies had been removed from the churchyard
by resurrection men.  "The churchyard was quickly crowded by the
population.  Wives were searching for the remains of their deceased
husbands, husbands for those of their wives, and parents for their
children."  Three men, Thomas Smith, _alias_ Vaughan, William Barber, and
Robert Barber, were apprehended, and committed for trial at Yarmouth
Quarter Sessions, whence, on April 1st, 1828, the indictment was removed
by writ of _certiorari_ to the Court of King's Bench.  The case was tried
at Norwich Assizes, before Lord Chief Baron Alexander, on August 11th,
1828, when only Vaughan (or Smith) was proceeded against.  Robert Barker
turned King's evidence, and described the method by which the graves were
robbed, and how the bodies were sent to London by the wain.  A verdict of
guilty was returned, and on November 14th, 1828, the prisoner was brought
up for sentence in the Court of King's Bench.  He urged that he was
driven by poverty to the commission of the offence, and was sentenced by
Mr. Justice Bayley to six months' imprisonment in the house of correction
at Norwich.

31.--Miss Clark, a native of the city, commenced an engagement with her
equestrian company at the Pantheon, Ranelagh Gardens, Norwich.



1828.


JANUARY.


4.--A grand concert, given at Wells Theatre, was attended by Earl
Rosebery, Lord and Lady Bury, Lord Dalmeney, Viscountess Andover, Admiral
Digby, Lady H. Primrose, the Hon. Misses Anson, the Hon. B. Primrose, &c.
The programme opened with Haydn's "Surprise Sinfonia," and the _artistes_
engaged included M. Venna, Master Sporle, Madame Baur, and Mr. Barron.
"Gentlemen amateurs" sang glees, and at the close of the concert a ball
took place, at which 200 were present.

18.--A resurrection-man was shot in Bacton churchyard by a party of grave
watchers.  He was in the act of disinterring the body of one James
Howlett, who was accidentally killed a few days previously.  The
resurrectionist, although badly wounded, effected his escape in the
darkness.

23.--Norwich Theatre opened for the season with Mr. Smith as manager and
lessee.

24.--Died, Mr. Martin Fountain, who was Sheriff of Norwich in 1812.

26.--Atkins' Menagerie was exhibited on the Castle Hill, Norwich.

31.--Lord William Bentinck addressed a circular letter to his
constituents at Lynn, announcing his resignation as one of the members
for the borough, in consequence of his appointment as Governor-General of
India.


FEBRUARY.


4.--Lord George Bentinck was elected without opposition a member for
King's Lynn.  "No colours were worn, agreeable to the regulations of Lord
John Russell's most sapient Act, and for which the ribbon-makers must
feel highly indebted to him in depriving them of a source of consumption
for an important branch of British manufacture of no inconsiderable
extent."

5.--At a meeting of the Norwich Court of Guardians, a report was adopted
in favour of altering the mulcts of the assessable property in each of
the parishes and hamlets of the city.  In the parishes the old valuation
was 61,302 pounds; the new, 89,080 pounds; increase, 27,778 pounds--45
per cent.  In the hamlets the old valuation was 19,722 pounds; the new,
21,487 pounds; increase, 1,765 pounds--about 9 per cent.  At the vestry
meetings in several parishes the new assessment was rejected--(1) on the
ground of increased local and public burdens to which the citizens would
be exposed by increased rent on such valuation; and (2) because of the
disproportion of the assessment of the hamlets as compared with the
assessment of the city at large.  At a meeting of the Guardians on April
1st, a resolution was adopted declaring the mulct to be unequal, and
advising that steps be taken to place it upon a fair and equitable basis.

8.--A "trial of speed" took place between the Westacre and Melton
Constable hounds.  "A noble stag stood before the hounds an hour and ten
minutes, but from the numerous field, amounting at least to 400, the
greater part of whom were shamefully riding the roads and heading the
stag at every point, the sport was not brilliant.  Through the greater
part of the day the Westacre hounds took the lead, carried the best head,
and did all the work; but from the jockeyship of Sir Jacob Astley's
huntsman in continually lifting his hounds, and numerous horsemen
pressing on them in the lanes and woods, so completely frightened the
Westacre hounds, which are more timid and less accustomed to such crowds
than the Melton, that most of them were thrown out and could not again
recover their ground."  The match took place in the neighbourhood of East
Dereham.

12.--In the Court of King's Bench, Sir James Scarlett moved for a rule to
show cause why a _quo warranto_ information should not be filed against
Mr. Angell, of Norwich, for exercising the office of alderman without
being properly elected thereto.  "A very ancient custom," he said,
"prevailed at Norwich on the election of aldermen, which he was sure
would not, from its antiquity, receive their lordships' sanction.  It was
called the cooping of voters, and consisted of taking the voters by force
in a body, bribing them, giving them drink, and keeping them locked up
until they consented to vote for the party on whose side they had been
taken."  It was alleged that several of the supporters of Mr. Angell's
opponent (Mr. Marshall) were waylaid, carried away by force in a coach,
put on board a boat on the broads, and had persons placed over them as
guards.  If these persons had had their liberty, Mr. Marshall, it was
contended, would have been elected.  Lord Tenterden granted a rule to
show cause.  It was abandoned, however, on April 28th, and "the bells of
St. Peter rang a triumphant peal on the result being known."

13.--A squadron of the 6th Dragoons arrived at Norwich Barracks, to
replace the depot of the 12th Lancers.

23.--A man named Bailey did penance in the chancel of Yarmouth parish
church for applying an opprobrious epithet to a Mrs. Jenner.  "It being a
very great novelty, there was a large assemblage of persons to witness
the performance of the ceremony and to hear Bailey repeat his
recantations, which continued for some time, but he did _not_, as
generally supposed, stand in a white sheet."


MARCH.


5.--The election of a County Coroner took place at Norwich, consequent
upon the resignation of Mr. C. Bringloe.  Mr. E. Press, of Hingham, the
successful candidate, polled 1,073 votes, as against 766 obtained by his
opponent, Mr. Henry Hobart, Norwich.

17.--Died at his house in Surrey Street, Norwich, aged 68, Sir James
Edward Smith, M.D., F.R.S., President of the Linnaean Society.  He was
born in Norwich December 2nd, 1759, proceeded to Edinburgh University in
1780, and completed his medical studies in London.  In 1792 he had the
honour of instructing her Majesty the Queen and the Royal Princesses in
botany at Windsor.  He married, in 1796, a daughter of Mr. Robert Reeve,
of Lowestoft, and in 1810 received the distinction of knighthood.  He was
the author of "English Botany," and other works.

18.--Mr. Macready appeared at Norwich Theatre in the part of Virginius.
On subsequent evenings he performed the characters of Macbeth and William
Tell.

22.*--"Died at Canton, in China, by falling overboard, Henry, son of Mr.
Alderman Thurtell, of Norwich, master-at-arms of the Atlas Indiaman."

--*"Died at Yarmouth, Mr. David Service, aged 52, the well-known author
of the 'Caledonian Herd-boy' and many other poetical productions of
considerable merit."

24.--The ward elections commenced at Norwich on this date.  "Five
shillings a man had been given on each side from the commencement; but
about eleven o'clock a placard was put out from the window of the 'Blue
and White' (the Reformers') room, bearing the words, 'The Blues pay
gold.'  This alteration in the market was followed, about an hour
afterwards, by a similar declaration from the 'Orange and Purples.'  From
this moment stock looked up; the price for the freemen altered from five
shillings to half a sovereign, and a whole sovereign, and so on to sums
of which we are not prepared to limit the extent.  A whole club,
consisting of 20 members, calling themselves 'the Independent Club,' was
purchased in the lump by one of the 'Blue and White' candidates.  The
price first demanded was 5 guineas a man, but others allow they were
knocked down at the price of 50 gs."


APRIL.


2.--Died, aged 106, Thomas Scrape.  "He was the father of Mrs. Lovell, of
the Lobster Inn, St. John Maddermerket, Norwich, and was born at Stalham
in 1722, in the 9th year of the reign of George I.  He had been often
heard to speak of remembering as a child the illuminations on the
occasion of the accession of George II.  At the age of 105 this
extraordinary old man presided at a large convivial party at his
residence.  His pipe was his constant companion, and he was often to be
seen smoking and enjoying it at his daughter's house, where his latter
days were rendered comfortable."

3.--Tombland Fair, Norwich, was ushered in by a severe snowstorm.  "The
Banisters, the Samwells, the Chipperfields, the Adamses, and a host of
other ornaments of the vagrant stage for daylight gauds and the practical
wit of buffoons displayed themselves in imposing array."  The only
"rational" exhibition at the fair was Atkins' Menagerie.

5.--A vessel, named the Lord William Bentinck, was launched from the
shipyard of Mr. Frederick Preston, at Yarmouth.  She was nearly 500 tons
burden, and the largest ship, with one exception, ever built at the port.

7.--Ching Lau Lauro, "the celebrated posture master and buffo from Drury
Lane," appeared at Norwich Theatre.  On the 10th he performed in a
harlequinade, entitled, "The Man in the Moon."  "No viler tissue of
nonsensical stuff could be foisted on the patience of an insulted
audience.  It had more revolting coarseness, and infinitely less
ingenuity than ever characterised the worst puppet shows' clumsiest
performers.  'Harlequin in the Shades' descended to the lowest vault of
the Capulets, amidst universal hisses which such execrable trash
deservedly called forth, in spite of Ching Lau Lauro swallowing his own
head."

19.--The Norfolk County Cricket Club announced the completion of a new
cricket ground at East Dereham, described as one of the best in the
provinces.

25.--A remarkable whirlwind occurred at Gresham.  "It came suddenly as in
a moment from the south-west, accompanied by a roar like thunder, and
taking a north-easterly direction towards Cromer, spent itself at sea.
The extreme force of the whirlwind lasted scarcely three minutes, but in
that time it completely ruined one William Watts, by rending the sails
and stocks from his mill, lifting the whole fabric from off the post, and
crushing the beams and inside works to pieces, together with the roof and
walls of the round-house."

27.--Died at his house, Vauxhall, Lambeth, Mr. Thomas H. Hull, aged 74,
"a gentleman well-known in Norwich and Norfolk for a great number of
years, and where many of his beautifully-executed pictures remain as
specimens of his superior talent in the miniature department of portrait
painting."


MAY.


1.--Mr. Angell and Mr. Patteson were nominated for the Mayoralty of
Norwich.  Mr. W. Wilde nominated Mr. Alderman Thurtell, the senior
alderman below the chair; and Mr. Alderman Yallop was also proposed.  A
poll was demanded, and the result was declared as follows: Thurtell,
1,144; Yallop, 1,148; Angell, 1,042; Patteson, 979.  Application was made
by Messrs. Angell and Patteson for the reopening of the books on the
following morning, when the voting was: Thurtell, 1,210; Yallop, 1,212;
Angell, 1,097; Patteson, 1,020.  The Court of Aldermen subsequently
elected Mr. Thurtell.

5.--A public meeting was held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, under the
presidency of the Mayor (Mr. Finch), at which resolutions were passed
affirming that it was objectionable to continue bounties on the export of
sugar and prohibitory duties on the produce of Colonial free labour, by
which slavery was supported at the expense of the British public.  It was
also decided to petition Parliament to repeal such bounties and duties,
and to take measures to ensure the immediate alleviation and the ultimate
extinction of British Colonial slavery.  The petition, which was signed
by 10,125 persons, measured 150 feet in length, and was presented in the
House of Commons by Mr. William Smith.

6.--A new theatre was opened at North Walsham by Mr. Fisher, with the
performance of the comic opera, "Sweethearts and Wives," and the musical
farce of "The Turnpike Gate."

8.--Died at Tittleshall, Mr. Thomas Riches, farmer, aged 69.  "In his
early life he for many years, by being pressed from Lynn, served his
country at sea, and was in many distinguished actions.  He was at
Gibraltar, at the Chesapeak with Hood, in the same ship with our present
Lord High Admiral, then a boy; and was in the Formidable (flagship) with
Sir George, afterwards Lord Rodney, in the memorable battle of 1782, when
M. De Grasse was taken.  On his discharge and his return to his native
county, he embraced farming for a livelihood, and always retained many of
the peculiarities and superstitions of a sailor's life."

27.--The first seaborne vessel from London to Norwich port direct, the
Thames steam packet, Capt. John Morley, arrived at Carrow Bridge.  She
was of 120 tons burden, 82 feet in length, and handsomely fitted up for
the accommodation of passengers.  The duration of her voyage was 28
hours.

--The Norwich Corporation decided to rebuild Fye Bridge of iron, in
accordance with the plans of Mr. Stone.  The foundation-stone of the new
bridge was laid by the Mayor (Mr. Thurtell) on June 2nd, 1829.


JUNE.


9.--Mr. Kean, jun., made his first appearance at Norwich Theatre in the
character of Romeo.  During his engagement he appeared also as Jaffier
("Venice Preserved") and Felix ("Hunter of the Alps").  "It is difficult,
indeed, to imagine," says the critic, "what besides an irresistible
_penchant_ for the stage and an hereditary attachment for the most
elevated dramatic work, could have induced this gentleman to choose the
profession of a tragedian.  Of a stature rather below the middle size,
and with a countenance that forms no index of the heroic mind, the
younger Kean seems studious of displaying all those peculiarities of
attitude, action, and intonation which we have been accustomed to regard
rather as defects than as excellencies in his justly celebrated father.
The genius of the elder Kean does not shine forth in his son."

--A prize-fight took place between Warren and Cocks, light weights, for
50 pounds a side.  The gathering, which was at Mattishall, was attended
by many of the principal gentry in the county, and by several members of
the London ring, including Phil Sampson (conqueror of Big Brown), Dick
Curtis, Tom Oliver, Frank Redmond, Ned Stockman, and Frosty-Faced Fogo,
"the Poet Laureate of the Ring."  The combatants met in a meadow
belonging to Mr. Petchell, but a magistrate interfered, and a move was
made to Elsing Common, where the fight was brought off.  Cocks was
attended by Ned Painter and Ben Gale, and Warren by Curtis and Redmond.
Forty-one rounds were fought in 56 minutes.  Cocks, who won, threw his
man 23 times in the first 25 rounds.

17.--Guild Day was celebrated in Norwich.  Mr. Alderman Thurtell, on
being sworn in as Mayor, stated that he stood in rotation for the office
in 1818, and to his utter astonishment the late Mr. Back was put in
nomination and elected.  "I thank God," he added, "I have had nerve
enough to break all connection with a set of men who have acted with so
much duplicity and injustice towards me."  The Guild feast at St.
Andrew's Hall was attended by 460 guests.

24.--Died, Captain John Murray Browne, of the 75th Regiment, aged 36,
only son of the Rev. M. Browne, Minor Canon of Norwich Cathedral, and
grandson of Dr. John Murray.  Capt. Browne, who was drowned while fishing
on a Lake near Mullingar, had been in the Army from his youth, and served
throughout the Peninsular War.  He was the author of a work entitled,
"The State of Portugal, by an eyewitness."

26.--Died at Hingham, suddenly, Charles Alexander, aged 23, "an excellent
cricketer, and the fastest length bowler in the county."


JULY.


4.--A severe storm occurred in the Dereham, Fakenham, and Cromer
districts.  Unsettled weather prevailed until the 13th, when the lower
parts of Norwich and the meadows and marshes above and below the city
were flooded.  Much meadow hay was swept away, and the grain crops beaten
down.

8.--Twenty-three mackerel luggers contested for a subscription purse of
100 pounds, at Yarmouth.  The race, which took place in the Roads, was
won by the Brothers (Capt. John Ayres), owned by Messrs. R. and B. Fenn.

9.--An inter-county cricket match, Norfolk _v._ Lincolnshire, was
commenced at East Dereham.  Scores: Lincoln, 110; Norfolk, 74-30.  At the
conclusion of the first day's play, a dinner, presided over by Lord
Suffield, and attended by eighty-six ladies and gentlemen, was given at
the Assembly Rooms; and on the 10th a grand ball took place in the
evening.

12.--The following statement was published of the number of benefits,
with the gross receipts, at Norwich Theatre during the period of 22
years, ending 1828:--

           Number of benefits.     Gross receipts (pounds).
1807                           15                         1090
1808                           17                         1870
1809                           18                         1540
1810                           20                         1610
1811                           21                         1890
1812                           23                         2140
1813                           23                         1970
1814                           25                         1940
1815                           23                         1890
1816                           19                         1250
1817                           15                         1050
1818                           14                         1360
1819                           14                         1320
1820                           17                         1410
1821                           20                         1670
1822                           21                         1620
1823                           22                         1720
1824                           23                         1690
1825                           22                         1900
1826                           25                         1760
1827                           21                         1450
1828                           23                         1430
                              441                        85070

16.--At the Norfolk Quarter Sessions, Mr. T. W. Coke, M.P., gave notice
that at the ensuing October Sessions he would move "that reporters for
the newspapers be admitted into the Grand Jury Chamber when the
magistrates assemble there at Quarter Sessions for the despatch of the
business of the county."  The motion was discussed on October 17th, when,
after three hours' debate, the Court divided, with the following result:
For the motion, 46; against, 45.

22.--Died at Stalham, aged 103, Isabella Perowne.

25.--A Jews' Synagogue was opened in the parish of St. George, Tombland,
Norwich.

26.--The announcement was made that the Norwich Cricket Club had
"engrafted an archery branch" on their own "excellent establishment."
The members of the Archery Club were permitted the use of the Norwich
Cricket Ground on certain days.


AUGUST.


4.--Died at the Deanery, in his 83rd year, the Very Rev. James Turner,
D.D., F.S.A., Dean of Norwich, Master of Pembroke Hall, Cambridge, and
rector of Sudbourne and Orford, Suffolk.  He was installed Dean of
Norwich on June 24th, 1790.  His remains were interred in the Cathedral
on August 12th.  Dean Turner was succeeded by the Hon. and Rev. George
Pellew, Prebendary of Canterbury and of York, and third son of Lord
Viscount Exmouth.  Dean Pellew was installed on December 13th.

11.--A libel action, Maitland _v._ Kinnebrook, was tried at the Norwich
Assizes, before Lord Chief Baron Alexander.  The plaintiff was an
attorney living at North Walsham, and the defendant one of the
proprietors of the "Norwich Mercury."  The libel, which the defendant
admitted, was contained in a letter published in the "Mercury."  The
plaintiff had provoked and carried on a newspaper correspondence, and
because the defendant published the replies of adversaries of the
plaintiff's own creation, the plaintiff sued him for damages, which the
jury assessed at one farthing.

--Exchange Street, Norwich, was first opened to the public.  There was no
communication, however, with St. Andrew's Street, and it was not until
April, 1829, that operations were commenced for the removal of the old
buildings at the north end of the new thoroughfare.  That portion of the
street was opened to the public on May 21st, 1832; and public business
was for the first time transacted in the Post Office erected there, on
June 25th, 1832.

--The members of the Norfolk and Suffolk Institution, the new title by
which the Norwich Society of Artists established in 1805 was known,
celebrated the opening of their new gallery in Exchange Street by dining
at the Norfolk Hotel, under the presidency of Mr. J. B. Crome, with Mr.
Stark in the vice-chair.  The first exhibition in the new gallery was
opened on the 13th, and was visited in state by the Mayor, Sheriffs, and
Aldermen.

26.--Mr. George Grout was elected freemen's Sheriff at Norwich.


SEPTEMBER.


1.--Mr. William Martin, a native of Norwich, and the painter of the two
large pictures in St. Andrew's Hall--"The death of Lady Jane Grey" and
"Queen Eleanor, Consort to Edward I.," was lodging in indigent
circumstances at the Trowel and Hammer public-house, St. Stephen's,
whence he issued a circular on this date, asking for subscriptions for
two engravings--"Interior of an English Cottage Home" and "Children going
to bed."  The Corporation, on February 24th, 1829, voted him a grant of
100 guineas.

12.--Died at his seat at Terrington, near Lynn, in his 91st year, Sir
Andrew Snape Hamond, Bart., a post-captain in the Royal Navy, formerly
Lieutenant-Governor of the Province of Nova Scotia, and subsequently
Commodore and Commander-in-Chief in the River Medway.  He was many years
Comptroller of the Navy, twice member of Parliament for Ipswich, and one
of the Brethren of the Trinity House.

29.--The ceremony of swearing in the Sheriffs of Norwich was performed at
the Guildhall, amid a scene of great disorder.  The windows of the lower
court had been screwed down, to prevent persons entering by that way
before the arrival of the magistrates.  The court was crowded, the heat
intolerable, and the Mayor (Mr. Thurtell) ordered the windows to be
broken.  Upon the Sheriffs-elect, Mr. Stevenson and Mr. Grout, presenting
themselves, the latter was objected to, on the ground that he was not a
freeman; and Mr. Stevenson declined to serve unless he received legal
indemnity from his colleague.  The Recorder (Mr. Alderson) disposed of
the legal difficulty in Mr. Stevenson's case, but the uproar was so great
that an adjournment had to be made to the Aldermen's Chamber, where the
Town Clerk administered the oath to Mr. Grout, notwithstanding a protest
by Col. Harvey.  At a meeting of the Common Council, on October 2nd, a
notice signed by eight of the "Purple and Orange" Aldermen was read,
intimating that any act done by the Council would not be valid, as one of
the Sheriffs was improperly elected.  They therefore declined to attend
the meeting.  The Mayor complained that he was being set at defiance, and
threatened to appeal to a higher power.  On November 8th a motion was
made in the Court of King's Bench, to show cause why an information in
the nature of a _quo warranto_ should not be filed against Mr. Grout, to
show by what authority he exercised the office of Sheriff; the Court
granted a rule _nisi_.  On February 24th the Corporation unanimously
conferred on Mr. Grout the freedom of the city.  The case, after being
several times before the Court, was finally disposed of on June 28th,
1830, when Mr. Justice Bailey delivered judgment, and said that the Court
were of opinion that it was essential to the validity of election to the
office of Sheriff that the individual chosen should be a freeman.
Judgment of ouster was therefore entered.  Retaliatory proceedings were
taken in the Court of King's Bench by the other political party against
Mr. Alderman Patteson for holding the office of Treasurer of the city,
and against Mr. Alderman T. S. Day, for acting as Corn Inspector.  A rule
_nisi_ was obtained against Mr. Patteson on May 30th, 1829, and was made
absolute on July 4th, after that gentleman had resigned the
treasurership.

29.--The 6th Inniskilling Dragoons marched from Norwich for Chesterfield
and Manchester.


OCTOBER.


6.--A troop of the 12th Lancers arrived at Norwich, from Canterbury.

7.--Died, aged 72, at New York, Mr. John B. Murray, eldest son of Dr.
John Murray.

9.--Died, aged 74, at his residence, in Carlow, Major John Beevor,
formerly of the 9th Dragoons, and for 30 years inspecting-officer of
Yeomanry Cavalry in the districts of Waterford and Wexford.  He was
second son of Sir Thomas Beevor, of Hethel.

11.--The Norwich Corn Exchange, "one of the finest edifices of its kind
in Europe," was opened to the public.  "Mr. Riches, merchant, of Norwich,
bought of Mr. Riches, of Thorpe, the first sample of corn (barley) in the
new building, for which he gave 18s. 6d. per coomb."  A commemorative
dinner was held in the Exchange on November 28th, at which Mr. T. W.
Coke, M.P., presided, supported by the High Sheriff (Sir W. B. ffolkes),
Lord Lyndock, Lord Neville, Lord Suffield, Mr. Edmond Wodehouse, M.P.,
and other prominent personages.

18.*--"The proprietors of the Norwich Cloth Establishment have taken a
contract for supplying the two battalions of Portuguese troops lately
formed at Plymouth out of the refugees from that distracted country with
jackets and trousers.  These troops are intended to accompany the young
Queen of Portugal, whither she will shortly proceed to claim the Crown."

25.*--"The portrait of Mr. Alderman Francis, painted by Lane, was hung in
St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, this week."

--*"Died lately at Wimbotsham, near Downham Market, aged 52, Mr. William
Henry Ware, many years composer of music, and director of the orchestra
at Covent Garden Theatre, and one of the masters of the Royal Academy,
Woolwich."

29.--Died, at his son's house, in Southampton Street, Bloomsbury, aged
79, Mr. Luke Hansard, many years printer of the Journals, private Bills,
&c., of the House of Commons.  "He was born at Watton, served his
apprenticeship with Mr. White, printer, of Norwich, was afterwards an
assistant of the late Mr. John Crouse, who originally established the
NORFOLK CHRONICLE in the year 1761, and had ever since been a much
attached and valued friend of all his successors."


NOVEMBER.


3.--The following curious incident was recorded as having taken place at
Tunstead on this date.  A Chelsea pensioner was about to be married to a
widow, and "early in the morning the parties, accompanied by three
witnesses, repaired to the cross-ways in the road a short distance from
the village, where the intended bride crossed the road _in puris
naturalibus_, and was received on the opposite side by the bridegroom,
who entertains the idea that by the due performance of this ceremony he
is discharged from all liability of paying the debts of the former
husband."

4.--Lord Neville, rector of Berghapton, sent a letter to the NORFOLK
CHRONICLE, denying a statement made by Mr. Cobbett, at a dinner at
Maidstone, that he (Lord Neville) was "rector of a parish in Norfolk and
at the same time enjoyed half-pay as a captain of Dragoons."  His
lordship wrote: "I admit being rector of a parish in Norfolk, but I
assure you upon my word that a considerable time before I took orders I
resigned my commission, and consequently ceased from that time to enjoy
either half or full pay."

9.--The King's letter, "authorising collections to be made for the
building and enlarging of churches and chapels (instead of by briefs, as
formerly)," was read in the churches in the city and county.

15.--A hamper conveyed by Messrs. Marsh and Swan's London van from King's
Lynn, was found to contain the dead body of a young woman, supposed to
have been taken from a grave at Lynn.

--*"Mr. Suckling's beautiful yacht, the Marmion, has lately arrived at
Buckenham Ferry, to be laid up for the winter.  In December last she was
laid down and built upon his estate at Woodton, under his immediate plans
and directions, and in May last dragged from thence upon a sledge to the
water's edge at Carrow Bridge, to the surprise of the natives, who
assembled in great number.  She dropped down the river and boldly cleared
out to sea, on her passage to London, which voyage, though blowing very
fresh, she performed much to the satisfaction of those on board.  She
afterwards went to Calais, made two journeys to Holland, and sailed many
times up the canals."

29.--Mr. B. H. Norgate was elected assistant-surgeon of the Norfolk and
Norwich Hospital, in the room of Mr. Henry Carter, previously elected
surgeon, on the resignation of Mr. Martineau.

--Died at his house in St. Giles' Street, Norwich, aged 72, Mr. John
Hammond Cole, an Alderman of the Great Ward of Mancroft.  He was Sheriff
in 1797; Mayor in 1811; Receiver of Stamp Duties, Treasurer of the Boys'
and Girls' Hospital, and of the Norwich Dispensary, and Treasurer and
Secretary of the Norfolk and Norwich Savings Bank.


DECEMBER.


1.--Died at New York, aged 64, Mr. James Valentine Murray, third son of
Dr. John Murray, of Norwich.

4.--The Norwich Brunswick Constitutional Club, "for preserving the
integrity of the Protestant Constitution, and upholding the principles
which placed the House of Brunswick upon the Throne of these realms," was
formed at a meeting held at the Norfolk Hotel.

6.--Died, aged 48 years, Capt. Sir William Hoste, Bart, R.N., K.C.B.,
eldest son of the Rev. Dixon Hoste, of Godwick Hall.  "He was among the
many brave youths from this county on board the Admiral's flagship, the
Vanguard, at the memorable battle of the Nile."

8.--Master W. R. Grossmith, "the celebrated young Roscius, 9.5 years
old," gave, in the Concert Room, St. George's, Norwich, his
entertainment, "consisting of rapid transitions of dress and characters."

19.--Died at Yarmouth, aged 79, Mr. John Watson, Mayor of that borough in
1785.  In 1799 he was elected Town Clerk, and resigned the office in
1822.

20.*--"Died, last week, at Lakenham, aged 45, Mr. Roger Jean, an eminent
miniature painter, leaving a wife and seven children to lament his loss.
Although Mr. Jean possessed very superior abilities as a miniature
painter, owing to his long-continued illness his latter days were
embittered by most distressing privations, and his wife, a well-educated
woman, is left in very destitute circumstances."

24.--The weather on Christmas Eve was described as "very close and warm."
The whole month was remarkable for its unusual mildness.

26.--Mons. Batty opened his Circus at the Pantheon, Ranelagh Gardens,
Norwich.

30.--A "grand match of cocks" was fought at the New Inn, Aylsham, between
gentlemen of that town and of North Walsham.  The sport was continued on
the 31st.  North Walsham won 9 battles out of 12.  The winning cocks were
"fed" by Stafford, of Norwich.



1829.


JANUARY.


1.--Died, aged 76, Mr. Philip Meadows Martineau, one of the surgeons of
the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital from its foundation in 1772.
"Pre-eminently successful as an operator, and most intimately acquainted
with the theory of his profession, Mr. Martineau was celebrated in every
part of England and throughout Europe.  He directed his attention to
cases of lithotomy with distinguished success."  He was buried at Thorpe,
on January 9th.

10.--Cockey Lane, Norwich, was for the first time accorded its new
designation, "London Street."

14.--At the Norfolk Quarter Sessions, it was ordered that the east end of
Norwich Castle, including the south end buttress, be put into proper
repair, at an expense not exceeding the sum of 600 pounds.

17.*--"The sales at Garraway's and the Auction Mart of landed estates in
Norfolk last year exceed 110,000 pounds.  The principal Norfolk estates
sold in London during the last 12 months were as follow:--Wellington
Hall, 1,724 acres, with house, gardens, &c., 41,000 pounds; Clippesby
Hall 1,100 acres, with house, &c., 48,110 pounds; Mr. Watson's estate at
Saxlingham, 137 acres, with house, &c., 7,000 pounds."

21.--A meeting of the medical practitioners of the city and county was
held at the Guildhall, Norwich, "to petition the Legislature upon the
increasing difficulties of pursuing anatomical studies in the public
schools."

31.--Mr. Alexander Thurtell, nephew of the Mayor of Norwich, was returned
fourth wrangler at Cambridge.  He was of Caius College, and was educated
by Mr. Bowles (formerly of Norwich Theatre), at the Academy, Yarmouth.

--Norwich Theatre was opened for the season.  Mons. Decour, a "strong
man," exhibited feats of strength and juggling.

--A disastrous fire occurred on the premises of Messrs. Trivett and
Cozens, ironmongers, Exchange Street, Norwich.  The 12th Lancers rendered
efficient service in saving adjoining property.  The NORFOLK CHRONICLE
Office narrowly escaped destruction.


FEBRUARY.


7.*--"So great is the panic in Lynn in the minds of the credulous with
reference to the resurrectionists, that an individual who was consigned
to the grave had round his coffin 13 iron hoops, and in the lid 50
screws."

9.--A brig of 100 tons burden was "raised" at Mr. T. Batley's staith at
Carrow, Norwich.  Upon the stem of the vessel was the inscription: "This
is the first seaborne vessel that was ever built in Norwich.  Began
January, 1829, by Thomas Batley, and the first bolt was driven by C.
Brown, Esq., Alderman of this city."  The vessel, which was named the
Spring (Capt. Brook), was launched on May 28th.  She had two masts,
brig-rigged fore and schooner-rigged aft, and was intended for the
general trade.

11.--Downham Theatre was opened by Mr. Smedley, in consequence of Mr.
Fisher declining that portion of the circuit.  "The painting of the
ceiling, together with the panelling and ornaments in front of the boxes
and gallery, have a very lively effect, and give it the appearance of a
neat and modern theatre."

14.--Heigham House, Norwich, was opened under the management of Mr.
Jollye, formerly of Loddon, as a retreat for insane persons.

--An extraordinary marriage took place at Yarmouth.  A boy, 15 years of
age, the son of a respectable tradesman, absconded from his home and
married a Mrs. Bull, a widow, aged 43, the mother of five children.  "The
fact was ascertained by application to the Rev. Thomas Browne, D.D., at
Gorleston."

15.--Lieut.-Col. Harvey conveyed to London a petition signed by 8,920 of
the inhabitants of Norwich against the claims of the Roman Catholics.  It
was presented in due course in the House of Commons.  On the 17th the
Mayor and Aldermen, and the members of the Common Council of Norwich,
adopted petitions in favour of the Roman Catholic claims.

21.--The "African Roscius" (known also by the name of Keene) appeared at
Norwich Theatre as Othello.  On subsequent evenings he performed the
parts of Mungo ("The Padlock"), Oroonoko, Bajazet ("Tamerlane"), Rolla
("Pizzaro"), Alambra ("Paul and Virginia"), and Sambo ("Live when you
can").

28.*--"In the Court of Exchequer, last week, an information was filed
against Robert Hudson, a paper manufacturer, of Norwich, for arrears of
duty on a quantity of paper removed from a mill at Lyng without bearing
the Excise mark.  A verdict was returned for the Crown--damages, 300
pounds.  The defendant is now in prison on a former conviction for
penalties to the amount of 1,000 pounds."


MARCH.


5.--The Westacre Staghounds had a remarkable run.  The meet was at
Watton, where the stag was turned off, and led a field of between 60 and
70 to Ovington, Shipdham, Whinbergh, over Reymerston Common, touching
Southbergh, to Carbrooke, crossing Griston Common, to Thompson Heath.
Here there was a short check, which was hit off in good style, and away
they went for Tottington, on to Wretham, leaving the decoy on the left,
thence to Kilverstone and Brettenham Heaths, to the left of Croxton, and
to the River Ouze, which was crossed between Santon Downham and Thetford.
Only nine horsemen forded the river; they dashed away across the open in
the direction of Barton Mills, where another check occurred.  They then
passed over Wangford Warren to Lakenheath Common, straight for Bramber
Hall, and the stag was killed in the plantations of Mr. Edward Bliss,
after a run of three hours and three-quarters.  (The hounds were
advertised to be sold at the first Newmarket meeting, April 22nd.)

22.--Died at Diss, aged 105 years 6 months, Mrs. Philip Bacon.

23.--A prize-fight took place at Thurton, between Garratt, the Suffolk
champion, and Mendham, the Norfolk Youth, for 10 pounds a side.  They
were also backed for 25 pounds.  Mendham was seconded by Ned Painter, and
Garratt by Wigg.  Thirty-five rounds were fought in 1 hour 25 mins.
Garratt was the winner.  "The crowd to view the fight was very large, and
consisted of a due mixture of the sexes."


APRIL.


8.--Died at Shotesham, Mr. Robert Fellowes, aged 87.  He was for many
years an active magistrate of the county, and represented Norwich in
Parliament from 1802 to 1806.

13.--Two troops of the 7th Dragoon Guards, under the command of Capt.
Nugent, arrived at Norwich, to replace the 12th Lancers, ordered to York.

18.--The execution took place on Castle Hill, Norwich, of John Wood (41)
and Thomas Butler (29), for sheep stealing, and of Richard Everett (28),
for horse stealing.  "The number of women present amounted to at least
two to one man, and, what was yet more remarkable, crowds of women
brought young children with them."

20.--Miss Foote, of Drury Lane Theatre, commenced an engagement at the
Theatre Royal, Norwich, where she appeared as Letitia Hardy ("The Belle's
Stratagem"), Variella ("The Weathercock"), Rosalind, Zephyrina ("The Lady
and the Devil"), Violante ("The Wonder"), Arinette ("The Little Jockey"),
Beatrice, and Maria Darlington ("A Roland for an Oliver").

21.--A vessel of 313 tons was launched from the yard of Messrs. H.
Fellows and Co., Yarmouth.

23.--A new suspension bridge, erected over the Bure at Yarmouth, by Mr.
Robert Cory, jun., was opened with much ceremony.  The contractor was Mr.
Godfrey Goddard.  (_See_ May 2nd, 1845.)


MAY.


1.--Mr. T. O. Springfield was elected Mayor of Norwich.

3.--The freedom of Norwich was conferred upon Mr. Edward Hall Alderson,
barrister-at-law, eldest son of Mr. Robert Alderson, Recorder of the
city.

--The Norwich Corporation voted a grant of 100 pounds to the Norfolk and
Suffolk Artists' Society, "to assist in enabling them to enlarge their
premises and to purchase casts and models, with the view to the further
promotion of the fine arts in this part of the country."

--An illuminated clock was ordered to be placed "on the top of the
Guildhall, next the Market Place."

14.--The body of a woman named Gooderham was found murdered in Broome
Lane, Diss.  After an inquiry lasting six days, during which 41 witnesses
were examined, the Coroner's jury returned a verdict of "Wilful murder
against some person or persons unknown."

20.--Died, aged 71, Mr. John Dawson Downes, of Lowestoft (formerly of
Yarmouth), "a gentleman well known to the sporting world, and in this
county as the only constant follower of that noble diversion, hawking."

23.*--[Advt.]  "Cocking: A double-day's play of cocking will be fought
between the gentlemen of Swaffham and Wisbech, on Wednesday, May 27th, at
the Coffee Pot Inn, Downham, for 10 pounds a battle and 50 pounds the
odd.  Feeders: Leech for Swaffham; Foster for Wisbech."

28.--The bounds were beaten at Lynn by the clergyman, churchwardens, and
officers of the parish, accompanied by 236 boys from the Free School.
"The place of rendezvous was St. Margaret's church, where, on entering,
each boy was supplied with a long white-wand.  At ten o'clock the
procession set out for the shore of the harbour, and at the expiration of
two hours returned again to the same place, having performed the usual
evolutions of ducking, tubbing, and other ceremonies peculiar to such
occasions.  The boundaries of this place appear to terminate in some very
singular points, as the parties had to enter several houses by the door
and make their exit through the window.  At the close of the circuit, the
boys were all seated in the Crown Yard and regaled with a large plum bun
and half a pint of beer each, and the elders dined at the Crown Tavern."

31.--At Norwich Theatre was performed, for the first time, a tragedy
written by Mr. J. Smith, entitled, "Ralph de Bigod, Earl of Norwich."


JUNE.


3.--The old City Gaol, situate opposite the Guildhall, with a frontage of
70 feet and a depth of 156 feet, was sold by auction to Messrs. De Caux,
Son, and Pratt, for 1,570 pounds; and the old Bridewell, in St. Andrew's,
with a frontage of 64 feet and a depth of 100 feet, was purchased on the
same date by Mr. J. Curr, for 1,140 pounds.

9.--Miss Paton appeared at Norwich Theatre as Rosetta ("Love in a
Village").  Her other impersonations during her engagement included
Rosina ("The Barber of Seville"), Susanna ("The Marriage of Figaro"),
Mary Copp ("Charles the Second"), Roxalana ("The Sultan").  Miss Paton
cleared 140 pounds at her benefit performance.

15.--At an assembly of the Norwich Corporation, the retiring Mayor (Mr.
Thurtell), in replying to the customary vote of thanks, complained that
he had been repeatedly insulted during his year of office.  "I have been
attacked by a bulldog," he said, "and the yap has been continually
barking at my heels, and language has been applied to me that would
disgrace Billingsgate itself."

16.--Guild Day at Norwich.  Mr. T. O. Springfield was sworn in as Mayor.
Great confusion was caused by an altercation between Mr. Thurtell and Mr.
Crisp Brown.  The Guild feast was held at St. Andrew's Hall, and a ball
took place at the Assembly Rooms.

18.--The Rev. H. R. Bowles (formerly of Norwich Theatre), master of the
Yarmouth Academy, was entertained at luncheon at the Black Lion Tavern in
that town, and presented by his former pupils with a silver salver
weighing 84 ozs.  In his reply, he said that far different pursuits had
occupied his earlier years, but for twenty years he had never been absent
a day from his school-room for pleasure.

29.--The annual cattle fair held at Shipdham, on St. Peter's-day, in
accordance with the terms of a charter granted by Henry III., was this
year revived.


JULY.


1.--Died at his house in Surrey Street, Mr. Hammond Fisk, aged 70,
Sheriff of Norwich in 1823.

11.*--"Died lately, at Keel Hall, Staffordshire, aged 78, Mr. Walter
Sneyd, formerly M.P. for the borough of Castle Rising, and many years
Colonel of the Stafford Militia."

--Died at Hanworth, Mr. J. Hicks, formerly of his Majesty's Navy, and
Provost-Marshal-General of England, aged 69.

13.--A two days' cricket match commenced on the Norwich ground, between
Norfolk and Suffolk, for 50 pounds aside.  Fuller Pilch played for
Suffolk, and William and Nathaniel Pilch for Norfolk.  Norfolk, 53--82.
Suffolk, 59--59.  The return match commenced at Bury on July 23rd.
Suffolk, 102--16.  Norfolk, 91--26.

15.--At Norwich Quarter Sessions, Mr. William Day was elected Treasurer
of the city, on the resignation of Mr. J. Patteson.

--A public dinner was given to Mr. Alderman Thurtell, by his political
friends, "in testimony of their appreciation of his honourable,
impartial, and upright conduct in the discharge of the duties of the
office of Mayor during the past year."

18.--Madame Vestris appeared at Norwich Theatre for the first time, in
the part of Madame Germance ("Home, sweet Home"), and Justine ("The
Rencontre").  She afterwards assumed the characters of Elizabeth
("Sublime and Beautiful"), Victoire ("The Invincibles"), Lady Bell ("Know
your own Mind"), Apollo (burletta of "Midas"), Laura ("Sweethearts and
Wives"), Phoebe ("Paul Pry"), Letitia Hardy ("The Belle's Stratagem"),
and Don Giovanni.

27.--Great discontent was manifested by the Norwich weavers.  At a
meeting held at the Ranelagh Gardens on this date, the operatives
petitioned the Mayor to use his influence to prevent manufacturers giving
out work at reduced prices to persons in the country.  On September 1st
the weavers stopped the carriers' carts and searched for country-made
goods.  Men in disguise entered houses and took work from the looms,
under pretence that it had been done below the scale prices.  At a
meeting at Ranelagh Gardens on October 5th, the manufacturers and
operatives drew up a form of agreement, in which the prices were
scheduled.  At the end of the month many unemployed weavers paraded the
streets, headed by a muffled drum and a shuttle bound in crope.  The
Court of Guardians on December 1st appointed a committee to advise as to
the best means of alleviating the wants of the people.  During the week
commencing December 14th there were numerous meetings of operatives, and
an attack was made on Mr. Athow's house.  Detachments of the 7th Dragoon
Guards patrolled the streets.  On December 17th a number of Norwich
weavers visited Saxlingham and destroyed a great quantity of silk and
materials; and in the following week several disguised men broke into the
house of William Springhall, Boatswain's Call Yard, St. Augustine's, cut
work from his looms, and shot at him with a pistol.  He received severe
wounds in the body, and a reward of 100 pounds was offered by the
Corporation for the apprehension of his assailants.


AUGUST.


6.--A cricket match, between the Marylebone and the Norfolk Clubs,
commenced on the Dereham ground.  "Lord Suffield, president of the county
club, with Lady Suffield, was present, and 20 or 30 gentlemen's carriages
were on the ground, whilst hundreds of spectators were gathered around."
Scores: Marylebone, 64-78; Norfolk, 95-48.

10.--Miss Paton re-appeared at Norwich Theatre for one night, as Agnes
("Der Freischutz") and Diana Vernon ("Rob Roy").

11.--Died, Mr. Richard Gurney, of the Bowling Green Inn, Norwich, aged
48.  (The "retired coachman, with one leg," in "Lavengro.")

13.--At the Norfolk Assizes, at Norwich, before Mr. Baron Garrow, Ireland
Watts and Robert Watts were charged on an information filed by the
Attorney-General, with obstructing Custom-house officers in the discharge
of their duty.  Capt. De Lafosse, the officer at Mundesley, traced
contraband goods to the house of the defendants at Antingham.  Having
obtained a writ of assistance, he proceeded to the house with Lieut. Lee,
several of the coastguard, and a peace officer.  Admittance was demanded,
and the defendants offered resistance.  The captain then drew his pistol
and threatened to fire, when Robert Watts bared his breast, exclaiming,
"Fire, and be d---d."  Capt. De Lafosse, fearing he could not enter the
house without bloodshed, withdrew his men.  Mr. Kelly, for the defence,
submitted that the captain's authority did not permit him to search the
house, but the special jury returned a verdict of guilty.  In the Court
of King's Bench, in November, Mr. Kelly moved for a rule to show why
there should not be a new trial, on the ground of the invalidity of the
officer's writ.  Lord Tenterden held that this might be a question of
great importance on public grounds, although in the individual case it
was of little consequence.  Rule granted.  (There is no further record of
this case.)

14.--At the Norwich Assizes, before Mr. Justice Parke, John Stratford
(42) was found guilty of the murder of John Burgess, an inmate of Norwich
Workhouse, by poisoning him with arsenic, on March 2nd.  The execution
took place on the roof of the new Gaol, on August 17th.  After hanging an
hour, the body was removed to the lower court at the Guildhall, where it
was publicly exposed for two hours.  Thence it was conveyed to the
Norfolk and Norwich Hospital, where Mazzotti, the modeller, took a cast
of the head; and on the 18th Mr. Crosse commenced a series of anatomical
lectures at the dissection of the body.  A public subscription was
started for the widow and family of the culprit.

25.--Mr. Charles Middleton and Mr. Samuel Shalders Beare were nominated
for the office of freemen's Sheriff.  At the poll "the partizans of Mr.
Beare announced upon their cards that they gave one shilling, but as soon
as they found that their opponents were giving 2s. 6d., they outbid the
'Purples' by offering 2s. 6d. and a pot of beer.  At three o'clock the
'Purple and Orange' party headed their opponents by 64.  The 'Blues' went
to work in purse and person, and placed themselves in a majority.  The
'Purples,' finding they could not regain the advantage, at 5.30 informed
the Mayor they did not wish to put their opponents to any further
expense.  Beare, 1,200; Middleton, 1,023."

--A singular wedding took place at Fakenham.  The bridegroom was Thomas
Hudson, aged 79, and the bride Martha Frary, aged 21.  They were followed
to church by an unfortunate cripple, driving his curricle of dogs.
Immediately after the hymeneal knot was tied, the bridegroom was torn
from his fainting partner, thrown into an open cart, decorated with ram's
horns, and drawn through the principal streets of the town, amidst the
firing of guns and the shouts and ridicule of the people.

29.--The Corporation of Lynn, according to custom, assembled at the
Guildhall on St. John's-day, and went to St. Margaret's Church.  "Groups
of persons assembled at an early hour to witness the bearing of the
branch to the house of the Mayor-elect, Mr. William Bagge."


SEPTEMBER.


2.--The new Roman Catholic church of All Saints, Norwich, was opened by
the Right Rev. Dr. Weld, Bishop of Amycloe.  "The ringing of the bells of
St. Giles' church on the occasion has been made the subject of a great
deal more exultation on the one hand, and more lamentation and
indignation on the other, than it really merits.  The truth is that the
bells were set out by the ringers upon speculation, and they were
afterwards handsomely rewarded by the Catholics for their liberalism, the
venality of which is disgusting enough."

4.--The body of a woman, named Ann Coe, buried two days previously, in
Fincham churchyard, was disinterred and stolen.  "The churchyard is _very
near the turnpike road_.  The coffin, containing the shroud, was found in
the churchyard, superficially covered with mold."

8.--The Corporation of Yarmouth voted 1,000 pounds towards the building
of a church in that borough.

11.--An auxiliary of the "British Society for Promoting the Principles of
the Reformation" was formed in Norwich.  Under its auspices a great
meeting was held at St. Andrew's Hall, on October 21st, at which some
disturbance took place.

21.--The Rev. Edward Valpy, D.D., resigned the appointment of headmaster
of the Norwich Free Grammar School, which he had held since 1811.

23.--Mary McMullen, aged 61, walked 76 miles in 24 hours, on a measured
half-mile of the Gaywood Road near Lynn.  She performed the like feat at
the Ranelagh Gardens, Norwich, on October 12th, and at North Walsham on
March 8th, 1830.  At the Ranelagh Gardens, on April 26th, 1830, she
walked 100 miles in 24 successive hours.


OCTOBER.


8.--At Swaffham Races, Mr. Shearman "made a match to trot his noted bull
a mile in 4.5 minutes the day before the fair, and Mr. Gould is in treaty
to purchase him to run over a short stage in the Stamford coach from
Swaffham to Narborough.  Mr. Farrer made a match with Mr. Cooke that he
will produce a pair of working oxen that will beat any pair of horses he
can produce to plough an acre of land, to take place the day before
Swaffham fair."

11.--Died in Union Place, Norwich, aged 102, Mr. Charles Kingaby.  He
left a widow, aged 98, and a daughter in her 70th year.

14.--The election of an Alderman to fill the vacancy caused by the death
of Mr. Alderman Steward, on October 11th, resulted in the return of Mr.
Marshall, who received 246 votes, against 207 recorded for Mr. Turner.
"Both sides bought votes as fast as possible.  From 30s. to 10 and 15
pounds was given."

--A severe gale occurred on the Norfolk coast, and several lives were
lost.  At Brancaster the preventive service picked up 291 casks of brandy
and Geneva.

20.--A new vessel, the Indian Maid, was launched from the South Gates
Dockyard, Lynn, and christened by Miss Ayre, daughter of one of the
owners.

22.--The Norfolk and Norwich Horticultural Society was formed at a
meeting held in the old Library Room, Norwich, under the presidency of
Mr. Edward Lombe, of Great Melton.  Mr. Lombe was elected president, Mr.
R. Crawshay vice-president, Mr. John Kitson treasurer, and Mr. Elias
Norgate secretary.  The first show took place at the Swan Inn, on
November 25th.

30.--A fire which occurred at Messrs. Squire, Hills, and Sons'
distillery, Norwich, did damage to the amount of 2,000 pounds.

31.--Mr. Thomas Cubitt, of Honing Hall, was presented by the yeomanry of
the Tunstead and Happing Hundred with a silver vase, in recognition of
his 45 years' active service as a magistrate.


NOVEMBER.


9.--Died at Aldborough, aged 95, Mrs. E. Dyball, a remarkable woman, "who
practised as midwife at Thurgarton near 50 years, and left 148 children,
grandchildren, great-grandchildren, and great-great-grandchildren,
besides 42 who have died" (_sic_).

17.--A 400-ton vessel, called the Duke of Cumberland, was launched from
the dockyard of Mr. F. Preston, at Yarmouth.

18.--A gang of convicts, when travelling by coach from Lynn to London,
made a desperate effort to escape.  During the greater part of the
journey the keepers stood over them with cocked pistols.  On the coach
arriving in town a London mob endeavoured to rescue the prisoners, "but
the keepers presented so formidable an appearance that they were able to
lodge the convicts in Newgate previous to their removal to the hulks."

20.--Mr. Silvers, tide surveyor at Yarmouth, after a chase of five miles,
captured on Breydon a 39 ft. smuggling galley, manned by a crew of nine
hands.  The smugglers effected their escape, but left behind them 283
half ankers of proof brandy, and about 6,000 lbs. of tobacco.

23.--The centre and south wing of Cromer Hall, the seat of Mr. Geo.
Windham, was destroyed by fire.  The damage was estimated at 12,000
pounds.

24.--During a severe gale off Yarmouth, a vessel foundered, and eight
hands perished.

28.--The Rev. Thomas Kidd, M.A., Trinity College, Cambridge, was elected
by the Court of Aldermen head master of the Free Grammar School, Norwich.


DECEMBER.


13.--Died at East Dereham, aged 85, Mr. James Philo, who had filled the
office of parish clerk for fifty years.  ("The dignified High Church
clerk" in "Lavengro.")

21.--The _Crim. Con._ action, Muskett _v._ Gurney, tried at the Thetford
Assizes in 1818, was re-opened in the Court of King's Bench, when further
evidence was adduced on behalf of the plaintiff, to whom the jury awarded
2,000 pounds damages.  (May 17th, 1830: "Married, at St. Mary's,
Marylebone, Richard Hanbury Gurney, to Mary, only daughter of Mr. William
Jary, of Burlingham.")

--A meeting of 200 insurers in the Norwich Equitable Insurance Office was
held at the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, "for the purpose of taking into
consideration the conduct and management of the funds of the society, and
of dissolving the institution, with the view of the just redistribution
of the funds, the formation of a new society under a more protective
management and control."  Mr. Skipper was elected registrar and secretary
of the new society.

26.--The pantomime, "Punch's Festival, or Harlequin Christmas-box," was
produced at Norwich Theatre, under the superintendence of Mr. T. Hill, of
Drury Lane Theatre.  Mr. Thorne painted "a grand moving panorama,
commencing with a view of the intended Port of Norwich (ships lying in
the basin), leading through the valley of Thorpe, embracing Col. Harvey's
house (Thorpe Hall), Hinsby's Gardens, and intermediate scenery to Lake
Lothing, and concluded with the grand junction lock at Lowestoft in its
present state."  The last scene, "Norwich a Port," concluded with "a
grand display of fireworks by Chevalier Southby, of the Royal Gardens,
Vauxhall, and the London theatres."

28.--Died at Lynn, Mr. Benjamin Smith, aged 93.  "He was a man of rather
eccentric habits.  His gravestone had been placed in the churchyard of
St. Margaret's nearly ten years before his death, having only a blank for
his age and day of decease.  In his personal habits he was frugal almost
to parsimony, but his benevolence was only bound by his means.  He
entirely rebuilt St. James's almshouses for 12 widows, and an abode for
the Reader; and erected and partly endowed another almshouse (called the
Wesleyan almshouse) for six poor women."



1830.


JANUARY.


1.--Died at Yarmouth, the Rev. H. R. Bowles, one of the ministers of the
Unitarian chapel in that town.  He was master of the Yarmouth Academy,
and formerly an actor on the Norwich stage.

5.--Died at his house in St, Stephen's, aged 86, Mr. James Keymer, city
surgeon, and for upwards of fifty years surgeon and apothecary to the
Norwich Bethel.  He was known as "the father" of the Norfolk and Norwich
Benevolent Medical Society (established in 1786), and "in his capacity of
accoucheur introduced no less than 8,000 children into the world, and
repeatedly attended three and four generations in succession."

5.--At the Norwich Consistory Court, the suit, Meachen _v._ Carter, was
tried.  The parties lived at East Dereham, and the dispute arose about
the use of a pew in the church.  The defendant was proceeded against for
"quarrelling, chiding, and brawling in church," and the court, in giving
judgment, declared him excommunicate, directed him to be imprisoned for
three days, and condemned him in costs.

10.--During a severe storm from the N.N.E., the streets of
Cley-next-the-Sea were inundated in places to the depth of six or eight
feet, and several families were rescued from the upper windows of the
houses.  Many vessels were wrecked along the coast.

11.--The Relief Committee of the Norwich Court of Guardians determined to
erect two looms in the Workhouse for the employment of persons who might
apply for relief on the ground of not being able to obtain work.  From
these looms, at a subsequent date, work was deliberately cut and
destroyed.  On the 12th the riotous conduct of the weavers necessitated
the calling out of the 7th Dragoon Guards; and on the 13th Mr. John
Wright, one of the principal master manufacturers, had vitriol thrown
into his face in St. Faith's Lane.  Mr. Wright, who was dreadfully
injured, discharged a pistol at his assailant, who escaped.  The
Corporation offered a reward for the apprehension and conviction of the
miscreant.  Richard Nockolds, who was executed for arson on April 9th,
1831, confessed to the perpetration of the outrage.  The distress
continued throughout the winter, and on February 6th a meeting was held
at the Guildhall, at which a relief fund was started, and nearly 3,000
pounds raised.  At the Norfolk Quarter Sessions, on March 10th, Lord
Suffield, in his charge to the Grand Jury, suggested means for the
alleviation of public distress.  Mr. Cobbett came down to Norwich and
lectured at Ranelagh Gardens on March 12th and 13th, on "The State of the
Country."  Half-a-crown admission was charged, and "he pocketed about 50
pounds, which, all things considered, was about as much as he could well
expect."  A common hall was held on March 17th, "to consider the
unprecedently distressed situation of the country," and Parliament was
petitioned on the subject.  Mr. W. J. Utten Browne, in the course of the
proceedings, described Mr. Cobbett as "one whose name it was pollution to
pronounce, and who had crawled up from the very dregs of the people to a
slimy popularity."  In the report of this meeting the term "Liberal," as
used in a political sense, appeared for the first time.  On May 15th the
welcome announcement was made that some of the principal houses in
Norwich had brought gros de Naples and other silks to such a state of
perfection that they had a decided preference in the market, and that so
numerous were the orders that scarcely a loom in this important branch of
the weaving trade was unemployed.

16.--A great meeting of freeholders of the county was held at the
Shirehall, Norwich, presided over by the High Sheriff (Mr. Andrew
Fountaine), at which a petition was adopted for presentation to
Parliament, praying for the repeal of the malt duties.  (Meetings for the
same end were held in all parts of the county.)

19.--A prize-fight took place at Thurton, between T. Riches, 11 st., and
John Clarke, 15 st., for a purse of 10 pounds.  The former was seconded
by Ned Painter and Loveday, and the latter by Gale and Mike Fenn.
Seventy-two rounds were fought in 1 hour 26 minutes.  Riches won.
"Hundreds of persons from Norwich padded it through the snow to witness
this exhibition of science."

19.--Mr. Marsham Elwin resigned the chairmanship of the Norfolk Quarter
Sessions, and was thanked by the magistrates for the important services
he had long rendered to the county.  At the April Sessions Mr. John
Weyland was elected in his place.

22.--A great fall of snow occurred in the Lynn district.  The London
coach ran into a drift at Tottenhill.  The snow was almost up to the
lamp-irons, and the vehicle was hauled out by teams of agricultural
horses.

25.--Miss S. Booth appeared at Norwich Theatre as Widow Cheerley ("The
Soldier's Daughter").  Her other impersonations included Little Pickle
("The Spoilt Child"), Sally Scraggs ("The Englishman in India"); Mary
("The Innkeeper's Daughter"), Aurelia Fairlove ("The Young Widow"); Lady
Elizabeth ("The Day after the Wedding"), Priscilla Tomboy ("The Romp"),
and Carline ("The Noyades, or the Maid of Venice").


FEBRUARY.


8.--The roads in various parts of the county were rendered impassable by
deep snow.  The Fakenham coach was three days on its journey from London.

16.--Died, Dr. Robert Gooch, of Berners Street, London, librarian to the
King.  Dr. Gooch, who was in his 45th year, was born at Yarmouth, and
married the eldest daughter of Mr. N. Bolingbroke, of Norwich.

26.--At three o'clock in the morning, John Brooks and William Brooks,
awaiting trial in Norwich Castle for a highway robbery at Middleton,
attempted to escape.  They were confined in Bigod's Tower, from the
summit of which William Brooks endeavoured to lower himself by means of
his blanket and rug.  The improvised rope gave way, and Brooks fell a
distance of 70 feet.  His thigh, pelvis, left arm, and the whole of the
ribs on his left side were broken, and a large tumour subsequently formed
at the back of his head.  Notwithstanding his terrible injuries, Brooks
recovered, and at the Summer Assizes at Norwich was borne into court on
the back of a warder to take his trial.  It was stated that he was
permanently crippled and quite disabled, but Mr. Justice Parke sentenced
him to transportation for life.

27.*--"Private Flood, 7th Dragoon Guard's, who was tried by court-martial
for sleeping at his post at Norwich, was sentenced to receive 300 lashes,
but his Majesty was graciously pleased, in consideration of the long
imprisonment he had undergone, to remit the infliction of the
punishment."


MARCH.


20.*--[Advt.]  "Dr. Johnson's Hotel and Tavern, Bolt Court, Fleet Street.
Anthony Beck, late of West Lexham, has taken the above house, and begs
leave to inform his Norfolk friends and the public in general that he has
used every exertion to render it worthy their support and patronage, and
to assure them that he has paid due attention to that grand desideratum
of Norfolk gentlemen, wines and spirits of the best quality, and good and
well-aired beds.  N.B.--Within 10 minutes' walk of Smithfield Market and
the Theatres."

20.*--"We are informed that it is in contemplation to establish a pack of
foxhounds in the western part of Norfolk, and that the kennel is to be at
Litcham.  In consequence thereof, the largest of the Kempstone hounds
will be disposed of, but the Kempstone pack will not be given up.  They
will return to their original standard of small beagles, which are better
adapted for elderly sportsmen, and will not hunt the same day as the
foxhounds do."

22.--A public meeting was held at Yarmouth, to protest against the
determination of his Majesty's Commissioners for Building Churches to
erect a church there in opposition to the desire of the inhabitants.  The
imposition already in force of 2s. in the pound on houses and grounds,
and a duty of 2s. a chaldron on coals consumed in the town, for the
support of the church and chapel, was considered oppressive.

29.--The Common Council elections, which commenced at Norwich on this
date, gave the 'Orange and Purple' party the ascendancy.  "The trade in
votes was unblushingly pursued on both sides, and the prices that were
given towards the close of each day's polling were of a heavy amount."

30.--A steeplechase took place for a silver cup valued at 30 gs., from
Fritton Church to Gorleston Church, a distance of four miles.  Horses
were run by Mr. Hector Munro, Mr. J. Fowler, Mr. S. Palmer, and Mr.
Moore.  The race was won by Mr. Munro's entry.  In the evening "the
gentlemen of Mr. Munro's hunt dined at the Bear Inn, and the company were
much gratified with an excellent local and appropriate song, the
production of Mr. Burton, of the Norwich Theatre Royal, and repeated by
that gentleman in the course of the evening with increased effect."


APRIL.


3.--At a meeting held at the King's Arms Inn, East Dereham, it was
decided to establish a pack of foxhounds in that part of the county, and
to solicit landowners to preserve foxes.

--*"Last month a number of persons left North and South Lopham in
waggons, on their way to embark at Liverpool for the United States of
America.  Between 100 and 200 persons are emigrating from these parishes,
a considerable sum of money having been borrowed on security of the rates
to defray the expenses of their passage (about 6 pounds 10s. per head),
and to furnish each family with the clear sum of 5 pounds on their
landing at New York."--[Advt.]  "Emigrants to North America.  The
Preston, A.I., Thomas Woodthorp master, burden 300 tons, being well
fitted with berths between decks, and having excellent accommodation for
cabin and steerage passengers, will sail from Yarmouth, on the 15th
inst., for Quebec.  For passage or freight apply at the Counting-house of
Isaac Preston, Esq."

5.--At the Sheriffs' Guildhall Court, Norwich, the only jury available
were so long engaged in considering a verdict that nine solicitors in
court volunteered to form a jury to try the next cause.  Those sworn were
Messrs. J. B. Daveney, H. Miller, G. Dye, R. Fickling, C. S. Gilman,
Colman, Lawter, and Marston.  Three laymen made up the requisite number.
"The swearing of the jury of legal gentlemen caused much laughter, and
what appeared most singular, after hearing evidence on both sides, they
could not agree to a verdict, but recommended the withdrawal of a juror,
which was done accordingly.  Such a jury was never heard of before in
Norwich."

10.--John Simmons, aged 31, and William Lovet, 20, convicted at Thetford
Assizes of burglaries at Thorpe, were executed on the Castle Hill,
Norwich.  Calcraft was the executioner.  "After the execution the bodies
were laid out in the mill-yard, and the different classes of prisoners
were marched past."

--*"A few weeks since a pike was caught in the North River, near St.
Benet's Abbey, which weighed 35 lbs., the extreme length of which was 49
inches.  It measured 25 inches in girth.  This astonishing fish, the
largest ever caught in this county, was presented to his Majesty by Mr.
H. N. Burroughes, of Burlingham."

12.--Mr. Power, of Covent Garden Theatre, commenced a short engagement at
Norwich Theatre, in the part of Dennis Brulgruddery.  His other
impersonations were Teddy the Tiler, Larry ("More Blunders than One"),
Dr. O'Toole, Alessandro Massaroni ("The Brigand"), and Teague ("Honest
Thieves").

13.--At a meeting of the Norwich Paving Act Commissioners, a report was
received from the Lighting and Watching Committee on the proposals of the
agents of the Norwich Gas-Light Company for extending their works through
the principal streets of the city.  There were then four miles of main
and service pipes supplied with oil gas; it was proposed to extend the
pipes to twelve miles, and to supply "purified coal gas."  It was
explained that the adoption of the proposal would result in the abolition
of 900 old oil lamps and the substitution of gas lamps, at an increased
annual charge of 500 pounds.  At an adjourned meeting on April 30th, the
scheme was adopted, and tenders were invited for carrying it into effect.
In May the Norwich Gas Company purchased five acres of land near Bishop
Bridge, on which to erect works for supplying the whole city with coal
gas.

19.--Three troops of the 1st Royal Dragoons, under the command of Major
Martin, arrived in Norwich, to replace the 7th Dragoon Guards.  The
headquarters of the regiment marched in on May 15th, from Manchester.

21.--Mrs. W. West, of Drury Lane, appeared at Norwich Theatre, as Portia.
Her other parts included Edmond ("The Blind Boy"), Juliana ("The
Honeymoon"), Mrs. Beverley, Ellen Enfield ("Falls of Clyde"), and
Therese.

23.--The Norfolk Quarter Sessions petitioned the Lord Chancellor to order
the removal of the Lent Assizes from Thetford to Norwich.  On May 3rd the
Corporation of Norwich adopted a similar petition.

--The birthday of King George IV. was celebrated for the last time.


MAY.


1.--Mr. John Angell was elected Mayor of Norwich.

3.--The Corporation of Norwich petitioned the House of Commons to
introduce legislation for remitting the punishment of death "in all cases
except murder, arson, burglary, highway robbery, and offences attended
with violence."

13.--The foundation-stone of the new Market House at Lynn was laid by the
Mayor (Mr. William Bagge).

15.--William King was publicly whipped in Norwich Market Place for
stealing a pewter pot.

--Died at his house, in Chapel Field, Norwich, aged 48, Mr. Joseph
Gibson, jun., who served the office of Sheriff in 1821.

17.--A portion of the roof over the pit of the old Theatre Royal,
Norwich, fell in with a tremendous crash.  The workmen who had been
employed there during the day had just left the building.

22.--The Rev. William Yonge, Vicar of Swaffham and Chancellor of the
Diocese of Norwich, was presented by his parishioners with a piece of
plate, of the value of 100 pounds, in recognition of his services as
their resident minister during the period of 50 years.


JUNE.


2.--Mr. Burton, comedian at the Theatre Royal, Norwich, on the occasion
of his benefit, "delivered Liston's celebrated address, riding on the
back of a real donkey."

--Died, Mr. Jeremiah Lorkin, aged 77, "well known some years since to the
then antiquaries of Norwich, an excellent classical scholar, and
conversant with the science of numismatics."

12.--A writ of mandamus was issued by the Court of King's Bench,
directing the Mayor and Corporation of Norwich, in compliance with the
Act of Parliament, to elect twenty persons to be Guardians of the Poor.
The Mayor (Mr. T. O. Springfield) had absented himself from the quarterly
assembly of the Corporation on May 3rd.  The transaction of public
business was, in consequence, prevented, and at a special assembly a
strong vote of censure was passed upon his worship for his conduct.

--A grey eagle was shot in Holkham Park.  It weighed 9.75 lbs., measured
2.5 inches round the smallest part of the leg, 3 ft from the point of the
beak to the tip of the tail, and 7 ft. 2 in. from the tip of one wing to
the tip of the other.

22.--Guild Day was observed in Norwich.  It was stated that at the
Cathedral the civic procession "passed along the rush-strewed pavement
into the choir."  In consequence of the serious illness of the King, it
was doubtful whether the Guild feast would be held.  Mr. Angell, the
Mayor-elect, issued 600 invitations, and until the guests actually
assembled there was every probability of the abandonment of the feast.

27.--Intelligence was received in Norwich of the death of George IV.  The
news came six hours in advance of the mails, by an express despatched
from the "Sun" newspaper office in London to the proprietors of the
NORFOLK CHRONICLE.  The great bell of St. Peter Mancroft Church was
tolled.  On the 29th the High Sheriff (the Hon. George Milles) proceeded
on horseback from the Norfolk Hotel, accompanied by a marshal and
javelin-men, and other officials, to the Shirehall, where the accession
of King William IV. to the Crown of these realms was proclaimed, and
three cheers given.  The King was proclaimed by the city authorities on
the 30th, from the leads of the Guildhall.  The procession round the city
was headed by the band and kettledrums of the 1st Royal Dragoons, and
five troops of the regiment, under the command of Lieut.-Colonel
Somerset.  "The Colonel politely declined the Mayor's invitation to
himself and his officers to take refreshments at the Guildhall after the
ceremony, and the offer on the part of the Corporation to present the
non-commissioned officers and men of the Royals with 10 guineas with
which to drink his Majesty's health was also declined, on the ground that
the troops, in attending the civil authorities, had only performed a
duty."  There were similar observances at Yarmouth and Lynn.


JULY.


5.--Mr. William Smith, M.P. for Norwich, in an address on this date,
intimated to the electors that, in consequence of advancing years, he
would not offer himself for re-election.  He had represented the city
twenty-eight years.

--A grand main of cocks (three double-days' play) commenced at the Maid's
Head Inn, Norwich, between the gentlemen of Norfolk (Stafford, feeder)
and the gentlemen of Suffolk (Nash, feeder), for 10 pounds a battle and
100 pounds the odd.  Norfolk won by two battles a head on the main.

6.--A cricket match was played at Lord's, between the Marylebone and the
Norfolk clubs.  The latter won by 24 runs.  Marylebone, 43-78; Norfolk,
87-58.  The return match was played on the Dereham ground, on August 19th
and 20th, when Norfolk won by eight wickets.  Marylebone, 62-44; Norfolk,
85-22.

15.--The funeral of the late King took place on this date.  The day was
observed in Norwich "with the complete features of the Sabbath."  The
Corporation attended service at the Cathedral, services were held in
other places of worship, and the great bell of St. Peter Mancroft tolled
from eight o'clock till midnight.

24.--At the General Election which took place consequent upon the death
of the King, Mr. Richard Hanbury Gurney, acceding to the urgent appeals
of the "Blue and White" party in Norwich, consented to contest the city,
in conjunction with Mr. Robert Grant.  On this date he and his colleague
made their public entry.  Col. Peel, who sought re-election, and
Vice-Admiral Sir Charles Ogle, Bart., the other "Orange and Purple"
candidate, arrived on the 26th.  The nomination took place on the 29th,
and the polling commenced immediately afterwards.  Throughout the
election great excitement prevailed, and there was much rioting.  The
poll was declared on the 30th, as follows: Gurney, 2,363; Grant, 2,279;
Peel, 1,912; Ogle, 1,762.

30.--The election at Yarmouth commenced, and, after a sharp contest, the
poll was declared, on the 31st, as follows: The Hon. George Anson, 944;
Rumbold, 944; Preston, 751; Campbell, 754.

31.--Lynn election took place, and resulted in the return of Lord George
Bentinck and Col. Walpole, with 78 and 73 votes respectively.  The
unsuccessful candidate, Sir W. B. ffolkes, polled 8 votes.


AUGUST.


3.--Mr. T. W. Coke and Mr. Edmond Wodehouse, the outgoing members,
offered themselves for re-election by the county.  Mr. Coke issued an
address on this date, asking the electors to support Sir William ffolkes,
who stood as a third candidate.  Mr. Wodehouse withdrew his candidature
rather than involve himself and his supporters in a protracted contest,
and the two first-named gentlemen were returned unopposed on the 6th.

7.--An inquest upon the body of a man accidentally killed was held _in
the porch_ of Earlham church by Mr. William Bell, Coroner.

9.--Mr. Samuel Bignold was elected one of the Sheriffs of Norwich.

--At an inquest held at Norwich on the body of John Morse, aged 38, who,
during the city election was violently struck by a stone, and received
such injuries that he died on August 6th, a verdict of wilful murder
against some person or persons unknown, was returned, and the Court of
Mayoralty offered a reward of 50 pounds for a conviction.

--Mr. Kean appeared at Norwich Theatre in the character of Richard III.,
previous to leaving England for America, and to his final retirement from
the stage.  His other impersonations included Shylock, Othello, Sir
Edward Mortimer, Sir Giles Overreach, and King Lear.

20.--Died at sea, on board the Lyra Government packet, in his 63rd year,
Mr. Crisp Brown, Alderman of Norwich, who served as Sheriff in 1814, and
Mayor in 1817.  He had taken a voyage across the Atlantic for the benefit
of his health, "but unhappily sank under the weight of affliction which
oppressed his mind."

21.--The King's birthday was celebrated in Norwich.

25.--Died at his house on Tombland, Norwich, Mr. Henry Carter, aged 40,
one of the surgeons of the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital.

31.--The election of freemen's Sheriff at Norwich resulted in the return
of Mr. Isaac Wiseman, with 1,124 votes, against 794 polled by Mr. Charles
Middleton.


SEPTEMBER.


13.--The foundation-stone of a new episcopal chapel at Yarmouth, erected
by voluntary subscriptions, from designs by Mr. Scoles, was laid by Mr.
Barth, acting for the Bishop of Norwich.

21.--The Norwich Musical Festival opened with a grand concert, given at
St. Andrew's Hall.  On the morning of the 22nd, sacred selections were
given, and in the evening Mr. Mori conducted a concert.  The "Messiah"
was performed on the morning of the 23rd, and a concert took place in the
evening.  On Friday, 24th, selections of sacred music were given in the
morning, and a fancy dress ball was held in the evening.  The principal
performers at the Festival were Madame Malibran, Madame Stockhausen,
Master Phillips, Mrs. William Knyvett, Mr. Braham, Mr. Vaughn, Mr.
Terrail, Mr. E. Taylor, and Signor De Begnes.  Sir George Smart was
conductor.

24.--A dinner was held at the Corn Exchange, Norwich, to celebrate the
return of Mr. T. W. Coke, M.P., and Sir William, ffolkes, M.P.

25.--Mr. Braham appeared at Norwich Theatre as Henry Bartram ("Guy
Mannering").


OCTOBER.


2.--Malibran appeared at Norwich Theatre, in the character of Susanna
("The Marriage of Figaro").

4.--A twin packet was launched from the shipyard of Mr. John Lubbock, at
Wells-next-the-Sea.  "She may justly be called a twin steamer, having two
stems and two stern posts, with a tunnel passing through the middle
ingeniously constructed so as to make her very stiff and of an easy
draught of water.  The vessel was built for the Aire and Calder
Navigation Company."

9.--A specimen of the _Ossifragus_, or small eagle, was shot at Barton
Turf.

11.--The new Beer Bill came into operation.  At Lynn "the day was kept as
a jubilee by all the devotees of Sir John Barleycorn.  Nearly 50 new
houses were opened for the sale of beer, and drunkenness, rioting, and
fighting were prevalent in many of the streets."

23.--Mr. J. G. Johnson was elected assistant-surgeon at the Norfolk and
Norwich Hospital, in place of Mr. B. H. Norgate, appointed one of the
surgeons.

--A county meeting was held at the Shirehall, Norwich, at which it was
decided to petition Parliament for the repeal of the duty on malt.  Great
disorder was occasioned by an operative in the gallery exhibiting a
placard bearing the words, "Englishmen, remember the expensive and bloody
reign of George III."


NOVEMBER.


2.--A common hall was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, for the purpose of
petitioning the Legislature for the repeal of the duty on coals.  The
requisition had been signed wholly by persons of the "Purple and Orange"
party, much opposition resulted, and the meeting dissolved in confusion.

10.--Mr. Edward Hall Alderson, son of the Recorder of Norwich, and Mr.
John Patteson, son of the Rev. Henry Patteson, of Drinkstone, Suffolk,
and nephew of Mr. Alderman Patteson, of Norwich, were appointed Judges of
the High Court.

--On this date began the machine-breaking riots and stack firing, which
gradually extended over the greater part of the county.  The first fire
occurred on the farm of Mr. J. Hill, of Briston, and a reward of 1,000
pounds was offered by Sir Jacob Astley for the discovery of the
offenders.  On the 16th a mob destroyed the agricultural machinery
belonging to Mr. John Girling, of Paston.  The outrages became so
numerous that the principal agriculturists got rid of their
threshing-machines, and Col. Wodehouse, the Lieutenant of the County,
issued a circular to the magistrates, requesting them to swear in special
constables in every parish.  At Melton Constable, on the 22nd, it was
feared that an attack would be made upon the Hall, but the gentlemen in
the neighbourhood went to the assistance of Sir Jacob Astley, and,
meeting the rioters at Hindolvestone, seized the ringleaders and conveyed
them to Walsingham Bridewell.  Another mob assembled on the 23rd, and
further arrests were made.  The High Sheriff (the Hon. G. J. Milles),
anticipating a further attack, despatched a messenger to Elmham Park,
requesting the assistance of the gentlemen of the Norfolk Hunt, who had a
meet there that day.  The summons was immediately obeyed, and the
horsemen, on arriving at Melton Constable, dispersed the rioters and made
several arrests.  The same day detachments of the 1st Royal Dragoons were
sent from Norwich to do duty in the disturbed districts.  At Norwich, on
the 29th, the mob destroyed the sawmills of Mr. Calver, at New Catton,
and the looms at Messrs. Willett's factory in St. Martin's, and broke the
windows of the silk factory.  The Sheriffs and the magistrates were in
daily and nightly attendance at the Guildhall, and the Chelsea pensioners
in the city, to the number of 200, were called out to assist in
preserving the peace.  On December 4th the county of Norfolk was included
in his Majesty's proclamation, offering a reward of 50 pounds in respect
of every person convicted of any outrage upon property.  At the Norfolk
Quarter Sessions, held on December 18th, two Committees were appointed,
one for East and the other for West Norfolk, "to arrange and put the
constabulary force on the most efficient footing to preserve the peace
and protect the persons and property of the inhabitants of the county."
The thanks of the Court were given to the 1st Royals for their services,
and to the Mayor and magistrates of Norwich for their cordial
co-operation with the county authorities in the suppression of the
disturbances.

20.--A whale, which had stranded upon a sandbank four miles below the
harbour, was landed on the common staith at King's Lynn.  "It was placed
on two trucks, dragged by six horses, and measured 21 ft. 3 in. in
length, and 13 ft. 6 in. in circumference."

25.--Mr. Robert Grant, one of the members for Norwich, having accepted
the office of Judge Advocate under the new Administration, a fresh
election was rendered necessary, and the writ was received on this date.
The right hon. gentleman was returned unopposed on November 30th.  He was
afterwards appointed a Government Commissioner for the affairs of India.


DECEMBER.


6.--Died at his house, St. Giles' Terrace, Norwich, Joseph Stannard,
artist.

11*.--"On Sunday, November 7th, were deposited in Lakenham churchyard the
remains of Elizabeth Watts, aged 24 years; and on the 28th of the same
month a brother of the deceased died.  He expressed the wish to be buried
in the same grave with his sister.  It was found that the grave had been
opened and the body of the sister taken away.  The shroud remained."

11.--Died, in consequence of a fall from his horse, the Very Rev. Edward
Mellish, M.A., formerly of Trinity College, Cambridge, rector of East
Tuddenham, vicar of Honingham, and Dean of Hereford.

16.--Died at Costessey, Captain William Bolton, R.N., eldest son of the
Rev. William Bolton, "and one of the few surviving Norfolk heroes who
accompanied Nelson in his deeds of fame."

18.--It was announced that Mr. Robert Alderson had resigned the
Recordership of Norwich.  Mr. Isaac Preston, Steward of the city, was, on
the 23rd, appointed to fill the vacancy.  Mr. Fitzroy Kelly was appointed
Steward on February 3rd, and presented with the freedom of the city on
April 29th, 1831.

--Official notification was given of the completion of the Gas Works at
Bishop Bridge, Norwich, and of the extended service of gas in the city.

24.--A frost commenced on Christmas-eve, and became so intense that in
the course of forty-eight hours the mill-streams and rivers were frozen
over, and navigation between Norwich and Yarmouth was obstructed by ice.
On the night of the 26th the thermometer fell to zero, "a degree of cold
never before observed in this country."  On the 27th there was a sudden
change, and on the 31st the thermometer stood at 48 degrees.

25.--Died at Lakenham Grove, aged 74, Mr. Joseph Gurney, banker, of
Norwich.  At the funeral in the Gildencroft burial-ground, "Mr. J. J.
Gurney and Mrs. Fry offered up impressive prayers."



1831.


JANUARY.


1.--The non-commissioned officers and privates of the 1st Royal Dragoons
were entertained by public subscription at dinner at the Assembly Rooms,
East Dereham, in recognition of their services during the recent
disturbances.

5.--Died at Hilborough Hall, aged 54, Mr. Ralph Caldwell.  "He was among
the first promoters of the Norfolk Foxhunting Society."

--The calendar of the Norfolk Quarter Sessions contained the names of 205
prisoners, of whom 108 were indicted for taking part in the
machine-breaking riots during November and December, 1830.  The trials,
which took place before Mr. Serjeant Frere, Lord Suffield, and other
magistrates, concluded on the 12th.  Sixty-seven of the rioters were
found guilty of machine-breaking, and 41 were acquitted or otherwise
discharged.  One was sentenced to 14 years' transportation; 8 to seven
years; 1 to two years' imprisonment; 1 to fifteen months; 4 to one year;
5 to nine months; 10 to six months; 6 to four months; 14 to three months;
8 to two months; 4 to one month, and 1 to fourteen days.  Fifty were
charged with rioting and other outrages.  Of these, 18 were discharged on
their own recognisances; 9 were acquitted, and 23 convicted.  One was
sentenced to imprisonment for two and a half years; 2 for two years; 3
for eighteen months; 4 for one year; 2 for six months; 3 for four months;
4 for three months; 2 for one month; 1 for three weeks; and 1 for one
week.  There were reserved for a higher tribunal three capital offences
of machine-breaking, and five or six cases of arson.

17.--At the Norwich Quarter Sessions, an indictment was preferred against
one William Lamb, for receiving a bribe at the election of Mr. Alderman
Steward.  The Grand Jury made a presentment that the bill of indictment
should have included Mr. Charles Turner and Mr. Samuel Woodcock Mealing,
as there was conclusive evidence that they had bribed the defendant.  The
Recorder (Mr. Preston) adjourned the case until January 31st.  A further
adjournment was made till February 1st, when the Recorder, after a long
legal argument with counsel, decided that the case could not proceed.  A
rule absolute was obtained in the Court of King's Bench against Mr.
Mealing, and the case came on for trial before Lord Lyndhurst at the
Norwich Assizes on July 29th, when the jury found the defendant guilty,
and recommended him to mercy.  In the Court of King's Bench, on November
8th, an unsuccessful motion was made for arrest of judgment.  Finally the
defendant appeared before that Court on November 23rd, and was sentenced
by Mr. Justice Parke to pay a fine of 100 pounds.

19.--The honorary freedom of the city was conferred upon the Right Hon.
Lord Viscount Sidmouth, on the occasion of a visit to his son-in-law, the
Hon. and Very Rev. the Dean of Norwich.

--The agitation for Parliamentary Reform began at Norwich, this year,
with a meeting held at St. Andrew's Hall, when resolutions were passed in
favour of the measure.  On March 19th the Right Hon. Robert Grant, member
for Norwich, presented in the House of Commons a petition signed by 7,000
citizens in support of the Bill, and Sir William ffolkes presented
similar petitions from the inhabitants of the several Hundreds in the
county.  A great meeting took place at St Andrew's Hall on September
29th, at which it was decided to petition the House of Lords on behalf of
the Bill, on the ground "that the tranquillity and happiness of this
kingdom depend on the complete passing of this great national measure."
The Bill having been thrown out by the Peers, a requisition was presented
to the Mayor of Norwich for a Common Hall, which was held at St. Andrew's
Hall on October 18th.  A procession, headed by bands of music, started
from the Castle Ditches at ten o'clock, and, after parading the streets
of the city, arrived at the Hall at noon.  About 5,000 persons were
present, and the Mayor presided.  Mr. Thomas Bignold, jun., one of the
principal speakers, moved a series of resolutions expressive of the
"ardent hope that such constitutional measures as may be completely
effectual for the attainment of this most important object will be
forthwith adopted by his Majesty, under the advice and with the
assistance of his Ministers."  An address founded on the resolutions was
ordered to be presented to the King.  A county meeting took place at the
Shirehall on November 19th, under the presidency of Mr. Anthony Hamond,
"for the purpose of expressing confidence in his Majesty's Ministers, and
of adopting such proceedings as may be deemed expedient to forward the
great measure of Reform."  On the 26th was issued for signature "the
Norfolk Declaration" which expressed "alarm at the extensive innovations
proposed by the late Reform Bill," and gratitude to the House of Lords
for "generously exercising the prerogative power vested in them for the
good of the people, and for refusing to concur in so dangerous an
experiment."  The year's agitation closed with the issue, on December
3rd, of another Declaration, "founded on a constitutional basis and
manifesting a conciliatory spirit."  This movement was known as "the
Conservative Reform."  (The word "Conservative," in the political sense,
was, on this occasion, used locally for the first time.)

21.--At the county magistrates' meeting, Mr. John Stracey reintroduced
the subject of the removal of the Lent Assizes from Thetford to Norwich,
and announced that Lord Chancellor Brougham had addressed to the
Lieutenant of the County a letter, in which he promised to advise the
Secretary of State to cause the Assizes to be held in future at Norwich.
On February 1st the Corporation of Norwich petitioned the Lord Chancellor
in favour of the removal.  On March 9th the Home Office intimated that
the Judges of Assize for the Norfolk Circuit proposed to hold an
adjourned Assizes for the trial of eight prisoners at Norwich on March
24th.  The Assizes were held accordingly on that date by adjournment from
Thetford.

26.--Died at his house in Portland Place, London, aged 86, Mr. Richard
Paul Jodrell, F.R.S., F.A.S., D.C.L., formerly member of Parliament for
the borough of Seaford.  "It may be regarded as an almost unprecedented
instance, that Mr. Jodrell had lived to be in possession of his paternal
estates 80 years, his father having died at an early age in 1751."  He
was distinguished as a scholar, and as author of "The Illustrations of
Euripides" and other literary works.  Mr. Jodrell was the last surviving
member of Dr. Johnson's Club.


FEBRUARY.


12.--Died at St. George Colegate, Norwich, James Horth, aged 42.  "He was
a journeyman dyer, but devoted his leisure hours to the highest branches
of mathematical science; his knowledge of astronomy was profound; he was
deeply read in the modern analysis of the French, and possessed the
esteem of some of the most celebrated mathematicians of this country."

13.--Died at Bath, Sir Edward Berry, Bart., K.C.B., Rear-Admiral of the
Red.  He was born in 1768, and was fourth son of a London merchant.  On
December 12th, 1797, he married Louisa, eldest daughter of the Rev.
Samuel Forster, D.D., then head-master of the Norwich Free Grammar
School.  At the restoration of peace, in 1814, Sir Edward returned to
Norfolk, and took up his residence at Catton, where he remained some
years.  Thence he proceeded to Bath, for the benefit of his health.  He
was buried at Walcot Church, Bath, on February 22nd.

14.--Died, aged 74, Mr. William Betts, Lieutenant and Quartermaster in
the West Norfolk Militia.  He entered the service as a private on April
29th, 1778; was appointed Corporal, July 18th, 1780; Sergeant, June 10th,
1790; Quarter-master, April 23rd, 1803, and held the appointment till
June 24th, 1829, after a total service of 51 years 57 days.

19.*--[Advt.]  "The annual grand main of cocks, between the gentlemen of
Norfolk and the gentlemen of Suffolk, will be fought at the Maid's Head
Inn, St. Simon's, Norwich, on Tuesday, March 8th, and two following days
(three double-days' play), for 10 pounds a battle and 100 pounds the
main.  To commence fighting each day in the morning at 12 o'clock, in the
evening at seven.  Feeders: Stafford for Norfolk; Nash for Suffolk."

23.--Died at his house, at Thorpe, Mr. Michael Stark, aged 83.  "Mr.
Stark was a native of Scotland, and descended from an ancient and
honourable family in the county of Fife.  He was apprenticed to a dyer,
and, having been engaged in London, was induced to come to Norwich.  To
Mr. Stark Norwich was indebted for the introduction of many valuable
discoveries and improvements which tended considerably to the success of
its manufactures."

27.--Died at the Royal Military College, Bagshot, Captain Charles Stone,
paymaster at that institution, aged 84.  He was a native of Norwich, and
served in the 16th Light Dragoons, which he accompanied to America in
1775, and was personally concerned in the taking of General Lee.  On his
passage home from America, in 1781, he was captured in the British
Channel by a French privateer, and carried to France, where he was
detained a prisoner 12 months.  In 1784 he was appointed Adjutant of the
16th, and in due time attained the rank of Captain.  He was appointed
paymaster of the College in 1802, and resigned in 1827.


MARCH.


2.--The freedom of the city was presented to the Hon. and Very Rev. G.
Pellew, D.D., Dean of Norwich.

6.--Died at Dulwich College, aged 66, the Rev. Ozias Thurston Linley,
A.B., a junior fellow of that institution, and formerly a Minor Canon of
Norwich Cathedral.  He was the eldest son of Mr. Thomas Linley, patentee
of Drury Lane Theatre, and brother of Mrs. Sheridan, the first wife of
Richard Brinsley Sheridan.

21.--The elections for the Common Council commenced at Norwich.  "They
were conducted upon correct principles, the voters were left free from
the temptation of corruption, and the result was the renewed ascendancy
of the 'Orange and Purple' party, who won the representation of three
wards out of four."

24.--The grave was discovered, in the south aisle of St. Stephen's
Church, of Robert Browne, a former Mayor of Norwich.  Nothing remained
but some pieces of bones.  Upon a stone was the inscription: "Of your
charitie praye for the soule of Robert Browne, Esquire, some time Mayor
of this city, who died 1534."

--The Norfolk Lent Assizes (adjourned from Thetford) were held at Norwich
for the first time.  Mr. Justice Alderson, an honorary freeman of the
city, was one of the judges.

25.--At the Norfolk Lent Assizes, at Norwich, before Mr. Justice
Alderson, Richard Nockolds was indicted for setting fire to stacks, the
property of William Blake, at Swanton Abbott, and Robert Hunt, Josiah
Davidson, and David Davidson were charged as accessaries.  The jury found
the prisoners not guilty.  On the 26th they were indicted for setting
fire to a stack the property of Richard Ducker, of the same place.
Nockolds was found guilty, and sentenced to death; Josiah Davidson was
convicted of being an accessary before the fact, recommended to mercy,
and afterwards respited; Hunt and David Davidson were acquitted.
Nockolds was executed on the Castle Hill, Norwich, on April 9th.  His
body was subsequently exhibited at his cottage opposite the Barrack
gates, Pockthorpe, "and a considerable sum of money was in this way
raised for the widow."

26.--A Bill "for the better management of the Poor in the several
parishes and hamlets of the city of Norwich," had, it was announced on
this date, been presented in the House of Commons.  The principal object
of the measure was to abolish the right of the Corporation to elect
Guardians.  It was read a first time in April, passed through its
remaining stages during the first Session of the new Parliament, and the
first meeting of the Court of Guardians elected under the new Act was
held at the Guildhall on October 4th.


APRIL.


5.--Lynn Market Cross was sold by auction for 160 pounds.  It had long
been dilapidated.  "The Market Place in its present state, covered with
vegetation sufficient to graze sheep, presents a most melancholy
appearance."

8.--Mr. Henry Dover was elected a chairman of Norfolk Quarter Sessions,
in the room of Sir E. H. Alderson, appointed one of his Majesty's Judges.

11.--Miss Smithson appeared at Norwich Theatre in the character of
Juliet; and on three subsequent evenings as Mrs. Simpson ("Simpson and
Co."), Belvidera, Mrs. Oakley ("The Jealous Wife"), and Theresa ("The
Orphan of Geneva").

13.--The new road from Acle to Yarmouth, saving a distance of three miles
five furlongs, was opened for public inspection, and was shortly
afterwards used for traffic.

14.--A ballot for filling up the peace establishment of the East Norfolk
Militia was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, before Mr. Isaac Preston,
D.L.  "Substitutes were easily obtained from 2 to 3 pounds per man."

29.--The nomination of Parliamentary candidates for Norwich took place.
Mr. R. H. Gurney and the Right Hon. Robert Grant were proposed by the
"Blue and White" party, and Sir Charles Wetherell and Mr. Michael Thomas
Sadler by the "Purple and Orange" party.  A poll was demanded, and opened
on April 30th.  The polling-booths closed on May 3rd, when the result was
declared as follows:--Gurney, 2,158; Grant, 2,163; Wetherell, 977;
Sadler, 964.

--Yarmouth election commenced on this date, and the poll closed on the
30th.  Result:--Col. Anson, 904; Mr. Rumbold, 903; Mr. Colville, 549; Mr.
Bliss, 543.

30.--Lord H. Cholmondeley and the Hon. F. G. Howard were re-elected
members of Parliament for Castle Rising.


MAY.


1.--This day (Sunday) Mr. Alderman Leman and Mr. Alderman Yallop were
elected to be returned to the Court of Aldermen for appointment to the
office of Mayor of Norwich.  Mr. Yallop was chosen Mayor on the 3rd.

2.--Lord George Bentinck and Lord William Lennox were elected without
opposition members of Parliament for King's Lynn.

3.--The use of the ballot box at meetings of the Norwich Corporation was
discontinued, on the motion of Mr. W. J. Utten Browne, who characterised
it as "a sneaking mode of proceeding."

4.--Died in Harley Street, London, aged 69, the Viscountess Nelson and
Duchess of Bronte, "widow of the immortal hero of Trafalgar."  The
funeral took place at Littleham, near Exmouth.

6.--Mr. T. W. Coke and Sir W. B. ffolkes were returned unopposed members
of Parliament for the county of Norfolk.  Mr. Coke announced that he
would not again seek re-election.

28.*--"Last week a lobster was taken out alive from one of the branches
of the river Waveney, at Frenze, in this county.  The river is
intersected by several locks, and the place where it was taken is nearly
40 miles from the sea."


JUNE.


1.--Died at Thorpe, aged 47, Mr. Marsham Elwin, of Thurning, formerly one
of the chairmen of Norfolk Quarter Sessions.

6.--A vessel named the Carrow, of 80 tons burden, was launched from the
timber-yard of Mr. Batley, at Carrow.

--A two days' cricket match commenced on Lord's ground, between Norwich
and Marylebone.  Norwich, 115-142.  Marylebone, 145-67.  Betting at the
start was 6 to 4 on Marylebone, and at the end of the first day's play
the odds were 7 and 8 to 1 in favour of Norwich.

11.*--"The census which has just been taken shows that the inhabitants of
Norwich number 60,998, an increase in ten years of 10,700.  The
population of the county, exclusive of Norwich, but including other
boroughs, is 331,014, an increase of 36,934."

20.--Mr. Alderman Patteson resigned his seat after fifty years'
membership of the Norwich Corporation.  Mr. Samuel Bignold was elected to
fill the vacancy thus created in the Great Mancroft Ward.

--A meeting, presided over by Mr. J. J. Gurney, was held at the
Guildhall, Norwich, for the purpose of promoting a subscription for the
relief of sufferers from the Irish famine.

21.--Guild Day at Norwich.  Mr. J. H. Yallop was, for the second time,
sworn in as Mayor, and afterwards entertained 800 guests at the Guild
feast.

22.--Mr. Charles Green made a balloon ascent from Richmond Hill Gardens,
Norwich, in company with Mr. Richard Crawshay, and in 1 hour 10 minutes
descended upon a marsh at Oby near Acle.  He made a second ascent from
the same gardens on July 2nd, accompanied by Mr. Alderman Marshall, and
descended at Blofield.  Mr. Crawshay accompanied the aeronaut in the
ascent at the opening of London Bridge by the King on August 1st.  Owing
to a strong wind, the ascent was made with great difficulty; the
aeronauts barely escaped with their lives, and on descending at Charlwood
were severely bruised and shaken.


JULY.


7.--The first stone of a new church at Yarmouth, dedicated to St. Peter,
and erected on a site granted by the Corporation, was laid by the Mayor
(Mr. Edmund Preston).  Mr. Scoles was the architect.  The church was
consecrated on August 16th, 1833, by the Bishop of Winchester, on behalf
of the Bishop of Norwich.

23.--The interment took place at Rainham church of the remains of General
Loftus.  He entered the Army in 1770, and in 1775 embarked with the 17th
Light Dragoons for America.  He was in the action of Bunker's Hill, at
the battle of Bedford, at the taking of New York, at the battles of
Pelham Manor and the White Plains, and led the Hessian Grenadiers across
the river Brunx, where he was wounded.  He was wounded again in the
attack on the lines at King's Bridge.  In 1794 he raised the 24th Light
Dragoons, largely composed of Norfolk men; in 1796 was made Major-General
and appointed to the English staff, and in 1797 was transferred to the
Irish staff, and commanded a brigade at the battle of Vinegar Hill.  He
commanded the Eastern District in 1809, and at the time of his death was
Lieutenant of the Tower and Colonel of the 2nd Dragoon Guards.  General
Loftus for several Sessions represented in Parliament the borough of
Great Yarmouth.

25.--At the Norfolk Assizes held at Norwich, before Lord Lyndhurst, an
indictment was preferred against several farmers and labourers living at
Edingthorpe, for having conspired to compel the rector, the Rev. Richard
Adams, to take less in tithe than he was entitled to by law.  The great
and small tithes together averaged 6s. per acre; under intimidation Mr.
Adams signed a document by which he agreed to accept 4s. per acre during
his life.  At the suggestion of his lordship, a settlement was arrived
at.  He intimated, however, that a clergyman had a right to his tithes,
and the parishioners had no authority to dictate to him.

26.--At the same Assizes, an action was brought against the Rev. Dean
Wood, vicar of Middleton, by Mr. Howes, a farmer in the same parish, for
a libel contained in a pamphlet published by the defendant, entitled, "A
Defence of the Clergy, founded upon facts."  The jury returned a verdict
for the plaintiff, damages 100 pounds.

28.--Paganini performed at a concert given under the management of Mr.
Pettet, at the Corn Exchange, Norwich.  He appeared again on the 29th,
and on the 30th was engaged at the Theatre.  He was described as "the
fascinating, but by no means fair-dealing, foreigner."


AUGUST.


1.--Mr. Wallack, of Drury Lane Theatre, commenced a short engagement at
the Theatre Royal, Norwich, in the character of Rolla ("Pizarro").  His
other impersonations included Don Felix ("The Wonder"), Sir Edward
Mortimer, Alessandro Massaroni ("The Brigand"), and Dashall ("My Aunt").

8.--A cricket match, lasting two days, between Marylebone and Norwich,
commenced on the Norwich ground.  Marylebone, 96-109.  Norwich, 69-94.
Lillywhite and Sir St. Vincent Cotton played for the former, and Fuller
Pilch, W. Pilch, and N. Pilch for the latter club.

10.--The 1st Royal Dragoons were inspected on Mousehold Heath, Norwich,
by General Sir Charles Dalbiac.  "This fine regiment, several of whose
officers are sons of Norfolk families, has been lately augmented by the
enlistment of a large number of Norfolk men."

18.--A two-days' cricket match commenced on the Dereham ground, between
Marylebone and Norfolk.  Marylebone, 44-67.  Norfolk, 11-38.  "Both at
Norwich and at Dereham the Norfolk men were evidently beaten by the
system of bowling."

30.--At the election of freemen's Sheriff, at Norwich, the candidates
were Mr. John Cozens (1,086 votes) and Mr. W. J. Utten Browne (506
votes).

31.--A camping match took place on Norwich Cricket Ground, between
Norwich and Blofield.  The latter gave up.  "Neither the camping nor the
subsequent wrestling were either of them well contested."


SEPTEMBER.


5.--Died at Heigham, Norwich, aged 75, Mr. J. Watson, one of the original
contractors of the Norwich mail coaches established in 1785.

8.--The Coronation of William IV. and Queen Adelaide was celebrated in
Norwich.  The Corporation attended service at the Cathedral, and the 1st
Royal Dragoons fired a _feu de joie_ in the Market Place.  "This day was
fixed upon to pay the freemen who voted for Messrs. Gurney and Grant
their sovereigns, which they received at different public-houses,
pursuant to notice circulated by handbills."  A dinner, attended
principally by the "Blue and White" party, took place at St. Andrew's
Hall; and the "Purple and Orange" freemen were entertained at the York
Gardens, Pockthorpe.  Celebrations were held in different parts of the
county.

10.--Mr. Richard Forby, a well-known farmer at Tittleshall, was gored to
death by a bull.

19.--Died, James Twiddy, parish clerk of St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich.
"He had a taste for poetry, and occasionally wrote in verse.  His prose
compositions displayed considerable talent, and his leisure hours were
chiefly employed in reading and improving his mind."

--Three troops of Norfolk Yeomanry Cavalry, raised in the western part of
the county, consisting of the 1st or Melton troop, Capt. Sir Jacob
Astley; the 2nd, or West Raynham troop, Capt. Lord Townshend, and the 3rd
or Elmham troop, Major the Hon. George John Milles, assembled at Lenwade
Bridge and marched to Norwich, on their way to Yarmouth for six days'
training.  The band of the 1st Royals played them into the city, where
they were billeted for the night.  The uniform of the regiment consisted
of a scarlet jacket, dark trousers, and black helmet.

27.--Died at Harold's Cross, near Dublin, aged 85, the Rev. Philip
Taylor, upwards of 60 years minister of the Unitarian congregation in
Eustace Street in that city.  Mr. Taylor was a native of Norwich, and
grandson of Dr. John Taylor, formerly minister at the Octagon chapel.


OCTOBER.


1.--At this date there were four coaches running daily on the road
between Lynn and Norwich.

12.--The Cross Keys Bridge and embankment, opened on this date, afforded
direct communication between Norfolk and Lincolnshire and the North of
England.  By these works nearly 18,000 acres of land were recovered from
the sea.  The opening ceremony commenced with a procession of carriages
over the bridge and embankment, and concluded with a dinner in a marquee
erected near the works.  Three hundred guests were present, and Sir
William ffolkes, M.P., presided.


NOVEMBER.


12.--In accordance with regulations passed by the Court of Mayoralty, the
Aldermen of the small wards in Norwich, accompanied by the parochial
officials, perambulated their respective wards, for the purpose of
reporting upon their sanitary condition.  In view of the cholera outbreak
in other parts of the country, the medical men of Norwich divided the
city into four districts, and apportioned a certain number of their body
to each.

20.--Services were resumed in Norwich Cathedral, after extensive repairs
to the fabric.


DECEMBER.


3.--At a general meeting of the county magistrates, a committee was
appointed to receive communications from the justices in the different
divisions and Hundreds, and to give their aid and assistance for the
detection and apprehension of incendiaries.  Committees were formed in
every Hundred in the county.

24.*--"The trade for turkeys was dull this Christmas, owing, no doubt, to
the depressed state of trade, but principally to the operation of the
late Act, which, by throwing a large quantity of game into the market,
has proved a losing game to our excellent farmers' wives, and prevented
them obtaining anything like remunerative prices."

25.--The Mayor of Norwich (Mr. J. H. Yallop), who had sent from the city
a swan specially fattened for the Royal table, received from his Majesty,
through the Duke of Sussex, a letter thanking him for his "dutiful
attention."



1832.


JANUARY.


6.--The Norfolk Court of Quarter Sessions made renewed efforts to procure
the removal of the Lent Assizes from Thetford to Norwich.  The Norwich
Court of Mayoralty, on the 14th, addressed a memorial to the Lord
Chancellor on the same subject; and it was officially announced on March
3rd that the Assizes would be adjourned from Thetford to Norwich, as in
the previous year.  On March 8th the Corporation conferred the honorary
freedom of the city upon Mr. John Stracey, of Sprowston, "in testimony of
the sense they entertain of that gentleman's most valuable services in
bringing under the notice of the Lord Chancellor the question of the
removal of the Lent Assizes to this city."  In the House of Commons, on
the 15th, Mr. Grant gave notice of his intention to bring in the Norwich
Assize Bill, and on April 3rd the Bill was read a first time.  The second
reading was carried by 44 to 13 on May 23rd; and on June 4th, in the face
of strong opposition, it was read a third time and passed.  The Bill was
read a first time in the House of Lords on the 5th, a second time on the
14th, and a third time on the 18th.  The Royal assent was given to the
measure on the 22nd, and on the 23rd the intelligence was received in
Norwich with the ringing of St. Peter's bells.  "It is worthy of remark
that the Lent Assizes for this county, jointly with those of Suffolk,
were held at Thetford so early as the reign of Henry II., and that the
first application for their removal to Norwich was made as far back as
the year 1649.  Applications have been frequently and unsuccessfully
repeated at intervals until the present year."

17.--A Bill for extending the time for completing the works undertaken by
the Norwich and Lowestoft Navigation Company was read a second time in
the House of Commons.  It afterwards passed through all its stages in
both Houses.  On June 4th juries were empanelled for the purpose of
hearing and determining claims in the purchase of some of the land
required by the company in making the cut for connecting the rivers Yare
and Waveney.  The directors, on July 7th, accepted the tender of Mr.
Thomas Townshend, of Birmingham, to make the cut and to complete it by
December 1st.

18.--Died at the age of 102, Mrs. Twiddy, of Snailwell, near Newmarket,
mother of Mr. James Twiddy, formerly parish clerk of St. Peter Mancroft,
Norwich.  She was a native of Attleborough.  Within a short time of her
death she frequently walked six miles a day.

23.--Norwich Theatre was re-opened for the season.  Mr. Power commenced a
short engagement, during which he appeared in a round of Irish
characters.

28.*--[Advt.]  "A great main of cocks will be fought at the Black Boys
Inn, Aylsham, on February 14th and 15th, between the gentlemen of Norwich
and Norfolk, for 5 pounds a battle and 100 pounds the odd.  On Tuesday
evening a turn-out for 10 pounds; and on Thursday a grand Welch main by
16 subscribers for a silver tankard.  All to be fought in silver spurs.
Feeders: Steward for Norwich; Overton for Norfolk."

31.--Mr. Dowton, of Drury Lane Theatre, commenced a four nights'
engagement at Norwich Theatre, as Sir John Falstaff.  His other
characters included Dr. Cantwell ("The Hypocrite"), Adam Brock ("Charles
the Twelfth"), Sir Anthony Absolute, and Abednego ("The Jew and the
Doctor").  He afterwards performed at Lynn Theatre.


FEBRUARY.


4.--The Norwich Court of Mayoralty memorialised the Committee of Buying
of the East India Company not to suspend their "usual and constant order
for camlets for the China market," as a numerous class of the
manufacturing population of the city derived their chief subsistence from
this source.  On March 21st the East India Company invited tenders for
the manufacture of 5,000 pieces.

18.--Mr. Thomas Foyson, aged 53, was accidentally drowned at Norwich by
falling into a vat of vinegar which he was in the act of gauging.

22.--At a Levee held at St. James's Palace, the King conferred the honour
of knighthood upon Mr. John Harrison Yallop, Mayor of Norwich, on his
presenting to his Majesty the address adopted at a Common Hall held in
Norwich in the previous October, on the subject of the Reform Bill.


MARCH.


2.--The funeral took place at Scole of Ann Chapman, aged 92.  "Her head
was placed contrary to the usual way, agreeably to her desire, which she
had made known to the sexton.  She was 47 years old when she married, and
her husband only 17.  She had 18 children, 13 sons and five daughters,
all of whom arrived to the age of maturity.  Five of the sons served in
the Army.  This remarkable woman seldom took more than two or three
hours' sleep of the twenty-four.  She could see to thread the finest
needle, and she retained her faculties to the latest period of her
existence."

6.--At a ploughing match at Roughton, John Colman, aged 92, beat all
competitors, and was awarded the prize.

13.--Married, at St. Cuthbert's, Thetford, Mr. Bussey, schoolmaster, aged
29, to Mrs. Judith Millen, aged 78.  "A party of heroines attended the
happy couple, and performed their melodious chorus upon saucepans and
kettles, and to complete the band a watchman's rattle was added."

14.--Beard, the guard of the Red Rover coach, "made an attempt" to play
Crack ("The Turnpike Gate"), at Lynn Theatre.  "The best advice we can
give him is to stick to his own stage in future.  His comic singing,
however, was good."

20.--Three troops of the 7th Hussars, commanded by Lieut.-Colonel Keane,
marched into Norwich from Birmingham.

21.--This day being appointed by Royal proclamation for fasting and
humiliation, the Mayor and Corporation of Norwich attended service at the
Cathedral, and collections were made at the doors for charitable uses.
Services were held at the parish churches, and alms were given for the
poor.  The day was similarly observed at Yarmouth.

23.--At the Lent Assizes at Thetford (held there for the last time),
before Mr. Baron Vaughan, the libel action, Hunter _v._ Platten, was
tried by a special jury.  Defendant was steward to Sir Thomas Hare, and
sent to the NORFOLK CHRONICLE and "Norwich Mercury," for publication, a
paragraph in which he described the plaintiff as "a person who has been
for many years a notorious game buyer and a disgrace to the name of
gentleman."  The CHRONICLE modified the expressions contained in the
paragraph; the "Mercury" published it as sent.  Witnesses for the defence
proved that they had seen 15 or 20 head of game on the plaintiff's
premises at one time, and that he had stated "he would buy game as long
as money would purchase it, as the gentry round that part of the country
were mean humbugs."  The jury returned a verdict for plaintiff, damages
one farthing, and costs.

24.--The 1st Royal Dragoons marched from Norwich for Canterbury.

--*"Died lately at Loddon, aged 86, Thomas Reynolds.  He presented to the
inhabitants and caused to be erected, at his sole expense, in 1821, a
finely-toned organ by which the church of Loddon is ornamented."

26.--Mr. T. P. Cooke made his first appearance at Norwich Theatre, in the
character of Martin Heywood ("The Rent Day").  His other impersonations
included William ("Black-eyed Susan"), Long Tom Coffin ("The Pilot"), the
Demon ("The Fate of Frankinstein"), Sir Roderick Dhu ("Lady of the
Lake"), and _poses plastique_.

30.--A jury empanelled to try a civil action at the Lent Assizes at
Thetford had a remarkable experience.  The trial commenced at four
o'clock in the afternoon of the 30th, and terminated at eight o'clock on
the evening of the 31st, when the jury retired to consider their verdict.
They were locked up all night, and did not find a verdict until 11
o'clock on the morning of April 1st.  The case came before the Court of
King's Bench on April 19th, when application was made for a new trial, on
the ground that refreshments had been given to one of the jurors!

31.--The thanks of the Norwich Court of Mayoralty were unanimously voted
to Lieut.-Col. Somerset and officers of the 1st Royal Dragoons, "for the
highly satisfactory manner in which they had conducted themselves whale
stationed in the city, and for aiding in the suppression of riotous and
tumultuous assemblies," and to the non-commissioned officers and privates
"for the way in which they had discharged their duty as connected with
the peace of the city."


APRIL.


2.--A steeplechase took place from a field near Wheatacre White House to
Thurlton Church (distance between four and five miles), between a bay
mare, the property of Mr. Charles Duppa, of Kent (owner up), and a
chestnut horse belonging to Mr. John Carr, of Beales (ridden by his
whipper-in, R. Warner).  The mare won easily.  Protest entered.  On the
same day another steeplechase was ridden from Gissing Church to Thurlton
Church, between "the celebrated little grey horse," the property of Mr.
Charles Ellis, of Shelfanger Hall, and a "grey mare of hunting
celebrity," belonging to Mr. Williams, of Diss.  The horse won.

5.--The first outbreak of cholera in Norfolk occurred at Stow Bridge, and
in two months 33 cases were reported, of which 13 terminated fatally.
The disease made its appearance at Cawston on May 25th; and in Crown
Court, St. Peter Hungate, Norwich, on August 15th.  The Board of Health
directed the bodies of all persons who had died of cholera to be interred
within twenty-four hours, the clothes and bedding of the deceased to be
destroyed, and surviving friends to be indemnified by the Corporation of
Guardians.  The medical men of the city gratuitously superintended the
parishes allotted to each.  On September 12th several cases were reported
at the Bethel, and eight inmates died.  The last official return was made
on October 18th, when it was stated that the total number of cases in
Norwich was 320, and the deaths 128.  Thanksgiving services were held at
the Cathedral and parish churches on November 11th, on the termination of
the outbreak.

9.--A sloop of 60 tons burden, intended for the coasting trade, was
launched from Mr. Thomas Bailey's yard, at Carrow.

12.--A new building, known as the Royal Norfolk and Norwich Bazaar, in
St. Andrew's Street, Norwich, was opened.  It was erected for the
encouragement of "female and domestic industry."  Counters were let at
small rents to "respectable females recommended by the lady patronesses."

14.--Died at Earl's Terrace, Kensington, aged 25, the Lady Henrietta Ann,
wife of Mr. Charles Knight Murray, and sister of the Earl of Rothes.

15.--Died at his house, at Southtown, Yarmouth, aged 69, the Rev. Edward
Valpy, B.D., for many years head master of the Norwich Free Grammar
School.  He was rector of Thwaite All Saints and vicar of South Walsham
St. Mary the Virgin.

16.--Married at the Hotel of the British Ambassador, Paris, by the Rev.
Thomas Sayers, Mr. Isaac Preston, Recorder of Norwich, to Frances,
daughter of the Rev. J. Jephson, Prebendary of Armagh, and brother of Sir
Richard Jephson, Bart.

23.--Mr. and Mrs. Wood (formerly Miss Paton) appeared at Norwich Theatre
as Hawthorn and Rosetta ("Love in a Village").  On subsequent evenings
they played the parts of Tom Tug and Wilelmina ("The Waterman"), Malcolm
and Zelinda ("The Slave"), Steady and Gillian ("The Quaker"), Henry
Bertram and Julia Mannering ("Guy Mannering"), and Masaniello and
Princess Elvira ("Masaniello").


MAY.


1.--Mr. S. W. Stevenson, one of the proprietors of the NORFOLK CHRONICLE,
was elected Mayor of Norwich.

3.--At a meeting of the Common Council at Norwich, Mr. W. J. Utten Browne
moved that a petition be presented to the House of Lords against the
Reform Bill, which he described as "a tissue of fraud, folly, and
injustice, hideous in its anomalies, and displaying more profound
ignorance of sound constitutional law than any other production he had
ever witnessed."  The motion was adopted by 40 votes against 9.  An
address to the King was circulated in Norwich on May 12th, acknowledging
"the patriotic course adopted by his Majesty in rejecting the pernicious
and unconstitutional counsel of Ministers completely to overwhelm the
free deliberations of the House of Peers by creating a large addition to
that body pledged to carry through the measure, in opposition to the
recorded sentiments of the large majority of that right honourable
House."  The address and signatures were inscribed in three
closely-written columns on thirteen yards of parchment.  On the 14th a
public meeting was held at St. Andrew's Hall, "for the purpose of
adopting such measures as may be deemed expedient at the present
momentous crisis for securing to all classes of the people the benefit of
the Reform Bill brought before Parliament by Earl Grey and members of the
late Administration."  A "Norfolk Address" to the King was circulated,
acknowledging "the recent proofs of his Majesty's desire to maintain the
rights and privileges of the House of Lords."  The intelligence of the
passing of the Bill by the House of Lords was received at Lynn and other
places on June 5th with great rejoicing.  The celebration at Norwich was
deferred to July 5th, when a procession of about 2,400 persons, decorated
with blue and white favours, marched from the Castle Ditches to the
Cricket Ground.  A cavalcade of 95 horsemen was headed by Mr. R. H.
Gurney, M.P., accompanied by Mr. W. W. Windham, Mr. Anthony Hudson, Mr.
W. Foster, and Mr. Peter Finch.  Dinner was served for 2,000 in a marquee
which extended the length of the field.  The greatest order and
regularity were observed throughout the day.

5.--His Majesty issued a writ, upon the report and recommendations of the
Committee of Privileges of the House of Lords, certifying that Col.
Wilson, of Didlington Hall, had made out his claim as the oldest co-heir
to the Barony of Berners.

12.--The Norwich and Newark Union Coach commenced to run daily (Sundays
excepted), from the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, through Dereham, Swaffham,
Lynn, Boston, and Sleaford, to Newark, where connection was effected with
the northern coaches.

27.--One of the large buildings comprised in Messrs. Grout, Baylis, and
Co.'s factory in Barrack Yard, Yarmouth, was destroyed by fire.  The
building was five storeys high, 105 ft. long, and 55 ft. wide, and its
erection, in 1818, cost about 7,000 pounds.  Between 400 and 500 girls
employed by the firm were thrown out of work, and the loss sustained was
estimated at from 12,000 to 15,000 pounds.

28.--The Rev. Arthur Iveson, of South Lynn, was murdered by a pistol shot
fired by his son, the Rev. Thomas Iveson, a person of unsound mind.  The
deceased was rector of East Bradenham and perpetual curate of Shouldham
and Shouldham Thorpe, and Tottenhill.  At Lynn Quarter Sessions, on July
9th, Thomas Iveson was placed on his trial for the murder of his father.
The jury found that he was insane at the time the crime was committed,
and he was ordered to be detained in custody.  He remained in Lynn Gaol
until September 3rd, when he was removed to "the lunatic asylum, in St.
Lawrence," Norwich.


JUNE.


16.--Dr. Yelloly resigned his office as a physician of the Norfolk and
Norwich.  Hospital.  Dr. Edward Lubbock was elected to fill the vacancy
on July 7th.

16.--The case of the King _v._ the Mayor and Recorder of Thetford came
before the Court of King's Bench.  The defendants were required to show
why they should not hold a weekly Court of Pleas at the Guildhall,
according to the charter of Queen Elizabeth, which directed that the
Court should proceed according to the rules and customs of a similar
Court at Norwich.  It was objected that the affidavits did not show the
existence of the Norwich Court at the date of the Thetford charter, but
only that a certain Court of Pleas was granted to that city by a charter
of Charles II.  On the other side it was alleged that the Thetford Court
had actually been held within fifty years.  Lord Tenterden: The charter
of Charles II. may have confirmed a previous grant.  We think the
objection has been answered.  The rule must be absolute.

18.--Robert Woodrow, gamekeeper to Col. Peel, was summoned before the
magistrates at Thetford for seizing the rods of two persons fishing in
the river of that town.  It was contended that Col. Peel merely hired the
manor of Mr. A. Baring, and that he could not show a right to the
fishing, the river being navigable, and, as such, _prima facie_ public to
the inhabitants, who had immemorially enjoyed the right.  The magistrates
decided to the contrary on both points, and dismissed the complaint.

19.--Guild Day was observed at Norwich as usual.  The Mayor-elect (Mr. S.
W. Stevenson) entertained 830 guests at the Guild feast, and gave a ball
at the Assembly Rooms in the evening.

26.--An address, congratulating the King "on his happy escape from the
late atrocious attack on his Royal person at Ascot," was presented to his
Majesty at a Levee at St. James's Palace by the Mayor (Mr. S. W.
Stevenson), the Deputy-Mayor (Sir J. H. Yallop), and Lieut.-Col. Harvey,
on behalf of the Corporation of Norwich.

30.--The electors of the division of East Norfolk, constituted under the
provisions of the new Reform Act, met at Norwich for the purpose of
adopting candidates.  The friends of Mr. Peach, M.P., and Lord Henry
Cholmondeley, M.P., the Tory candidates, met at the Rampant Horse Inn,
and the supporters of Mr. William W. Windham and Major Keppel, the Whig
candidates, at the Angel Inn.


JULY.


7.--Intelligence was received at Norwich that the Right Hon. Robert
Grant, M.P., "at about the time his constituents were remembering him in
their flowing cups at the Reform dinner," had issued an address to the
electors of Finsbury.  On the 13th Lord Stormont and Sir James Scarlett
were adopted Conservative candidates, and on the 14th it was announced
that Mr. R. H. Gurney would have as his colleague Mr. H. Bellenden Ker.
A third candidate, Mr. William Eagle, entered the field, but his
principles were doubtful.  At a meeting held at the Bowling Green Inn, on
August 7th, he stated that he belonged to neither party, for "he looked
upon the Tory as a highwayman and the Whig as a pickpocket."  Mr. Eagle
retired before the nomination took place.  The Conservative candidates
made their first public appearance at a dinner held at St. Andrew's Hall,
under the presidency of Mr. J. S. Patteson, on July 17th, and from that
date onwards prosecuted a vigorous canvass.  (_See_ December 10th.)

16.--Died at Binham, aged 98, Mrs. Elizabeth Leake, who "for upwards of
fifty years travelled as daily post from Binham to Wells, from which
employment she had retired about 14 years."

23.--Died at Hardingham Rectory, aged 74, the Rev. Walter Whiter, M.A.,
formerly Fellow of Clare Hall, Cambridge.  He was instituted to the
rectory in 1797, and was the author of some ingenious works on literature
and criticism, and more particularly of the 'Etymologicon Universale,' a
work of the greatest labour and research, and replete with new and
ingenious views of the origin and affinity of languages."

28.*--"Died in London, of cholera, last week, Mr. William Willement,
manufacturer, of Colchester.  The deceased went to London on the Saturday
previous, was taken ill on the Sunday, and died and was buried on Monday.
He served the office of Sheriff of Norwich in 1816."

30.--Norwich Theatre re-opened for the Assize week.  Mr. Gill, a comic
actor, who afterwards became a great favourite on the Norwich stage, made
his first appearance here.  Mr. Braham on this date commenced a five
nights' engagement, and appeared in a round of his principal characters.


AUGUST.


6.--George Borrow, writing to the NORFOLK CHRONICLE on this date,
suggested the derivation of the word "Tory."  "Tory," he wrote, "is
composed of three Irish words, and doubtless originated amongst the Irish
adherents of Charles II. at the time they were suffering under the sway
of Cromwell and were sighing for the Restoration.  The words are Tar a
Ri, and their pronunciation is the same as that of 'Tory,' or if there be
any difference, it consists in a scarcely distinguishable drawl.  Their
meaning is, 'Come, O King.'"

--Died at East Dereham, aged 73, Mr. Fisher, many years manager of the
Norfolk and Suffolk Company of Comedians.  "Mr. Fisher made his first
appearance as an amateur at Norwich Theatre, in the character of Lubin
('The Quaker').  Mr. Barrett, who was then manager, was so much gratified
with the performance that he persuaded him to make the stage his
profession, and offered him a liberal engagement, which he accepted, and
remained with the company some years.  As manager of the Norfolk and
Suffolk Company, he raised it to a degree of respectability equal to any
provincial theatre in the kingdom.  As a manager he was esteemed, and by
his indefatigable industry he has been enabled to leave his sons eleven
theatres, many of which have been recently built and elegantly decorated.
As an actor he displayed much talent.  He was an affectionate parent and
warm friend, and in the strictest sense an honest, just, and upright
man."

14.--Messrs. Bell and Deane, divers, engaged in exploring the Guernsey
Lily transport, lost off Yarmouth in the year 1799, recovered one of the
brass guns, which they fired in token of success.  The Guernsey Lily was
returning from Holland with a large and valuable freight of military
stores, when she got upon the Cross Sand and foundered in Yarmouth Roads,
as nearly as possible three miles due east of the jetty.  Many of her
stores were recovered, little the worse for an immersion of 33 years.

28.--A sharp contest took place at Norwich on the election of the
freemen's Sheriff.  Mr. William Foster was the "Blue and White," and Mr.
Alderman Steward the "Purple and Orange" candidate.  "Bribery to a vast
amount was resorted to, and the last few votes cost a heavy sum."
Result: Foster, 1,282; Steward, 1,275.  A scrutiny was demanded by both
sides, and was commenced by the Mayor on September 8th.  After an enquiry
lasting twelve days, Mr. Foster was declared elected.

30.--Died at Cringleford, aged 50, Mr. John Staniforth Patteson.  He was
eldest son of Mr. John Patteson, of St. Helen's, served the office of
Sheriff of Norwich in 1811, was elected Alderman for the Great Ward of
Mancroft in 1830, and was Mayor in 1823-4.  He was also a magistrate, and
a deputy-lieutenant for the county of Norfolk, and held the
Lieut.-Colonelcy of the East Norfolk Militia.  His remains were buried at
St. Peter Mancroft church, on September 4th.


SEPTEMBER.


1.*--"At a meeting of the inhabitants of Diss, held last week, it was
resolved that the present peal of eight bells should be recast, with an
additional weight of metal.  A subscription was opened which, in three
days, amounted to all the money needful, without any charge upon the
church rate of the parish."  The work was done at the Downham Market
Foundry.  The bells were met on their way to Diss by a large concourse of
the inhabitants, who assembled at Roydon White Hart, and, forming in
procession with the Diss band and the handbell ringers at their head,
escorted the trucks to the town.  The treble, sixth, seventh, and tenor
were "maiden"; the others needed but slight alteration.  The tenor
weighed 23 cwt., and the total weight of the peal was 98 cwt. 2 qrs. 10
lbs.--more than 40 cwt. heavier than the former peal.  The bells were
"opened" on January 7th, 1833, by the St. Peter Mancroft Company,
Norwich, and by other companies; public dinners were held at the
different inns, in celebration of the event, and a silver-mounted
snuff-box, made out of the polished oak of the old frame, was presented
to the rector, the Rev. William Manning.

2.--Died at Norwich, aged 67, the Rev. Joseph Kinghorn, 44 years minister
of the Baptist congregation at St. Mary's.  "His literary qualities were
unwearied diligence and deep and erudite enquiry, especially into all
subjects connected with theology and moral philosophy."

4.--Mr. Charles Turner was elected an Alderman for the Great Ward of
Mancroft, Norwich, in place of Mr. J. S. Patteson, deceased.

11.--A curious incident was witnessed at the marriage, at Guestwick, by
the Rev. J. Blake, of Mr. Samuel Goldsmith, miller, of Corpusty, to Miss
Mary Goldsmith, of the former place.  "The ceremony being over and the
clergyman about to retire, the gentleman who gave away the bride, Mr.
George Barton, of Wood Dalling, unexpectedly took another licence from
his pocket and called out, 'Stay, sir, and marry me.'  The ceremony was
again repeated, and Mr. Barton was united to the bridesmaid, Miss Hannah
Goldsmith, the sister of the other bride, Mr. and Mrs. Goldsmith
performing in their turn the necessary offices for this couple.  The
village bells rang gaily, and a great deal of merry-making followed these
nuptials."


OCTOBER.


6.--Died at his house, St. Giles', Norwich, aged 73, Mr. William Burt.
He served the office of Sheriff in 1814, was elected Alderman of the
Great Ward of Mancroft in 1815, and was Mayor in 1820.  Mr. Edmund Newton
was elected Alderman in his place.

8.--The Norwich Eldon Club held its first anniversary dinner at the
Waggon and Horses Inn, Tombland.

11.--Died at Hindolvestone, Mr. Thomas Gardner, groom of the Great
Chamber to the King.  "He had the honour to serve in that capacity during
the whole of the late reign, and also in the reign of George III., having
held the appointment upwards of thirty-three years."

17.--The first revision of voters' lists, under the Act of 2 William IV.,
c. 45, commenced in the Eastern division of the county at Long Stratton;
the revising barristers for the Western division commenced their circuit
at Thetford on the 25th.  The revision of the Norwich lists commenced on
the 22nd.  It was described "as the vexatious and irritating process
introduced by the Reform Bill"; and it resulted in the removal from the
city lists of the names of between 300 and 400 persons who had hitherto
been accustomed to vote.

23.--Mr. Cozens, of London, while shooting on the estate of Mr. Hardy, at
Letheringsett, was killed by a gunshot wound accidentally inflicted by
one of the party.

--A general court-martial, of which General Sir Robert Macfarlane,
K.C.B., G.C.H., was president, commenced an inquiry at the Cavalry
Barracks, Norwich, into charges preferred against certain privates for
disobeying the lawful commands of the Colonel of the 7th Hussars.  At a
parade of the regiment for ball practice on September 27th, Col. Keane
gave the word "Attention," when, to his surprise, not a man obeyed the
command.  Seizing one of the men, Private Philip Pitman, he marched him
to the officers' quarters, and had him tried by court-martial for
insubordination.  He was sentenced to receive 200 lashes, which were
administered immediately, in the presence of the whole regiment.  All the
men were armed with their weapons, and carried ball cartridge.  This
action on the part of the Colonel restored discipline and obedience to
orders.  Each prisoner made a long written defence.  Their principal
complaint was that the regiment was overworked.  Colonel Keane replied
that what had been ordered was by direction of the War Office; and the
men had been kept constantly employed in consequence of the prevalence of
cholera in Norwich.  The court concluded its sittings on November 10th.
The sentences, approved by his Majesty, were as follow:--Private John
Martin, transportation for life; Thomas Almond, seven years'
transportation; Henry Bone, seven years; Charles Edwards, 12 months'
imprisonment; and John Clayson, 14 years' transportation.  Five
non-commissioned officers were reduced to the ranks, and the regimental
sergt.-major suspended.  During the progress of the court-martial, a
troop of the 1st Dragoon Guards was stationed at Dereham, and a
detachment of the 12th Regiment of Foot at Wymondham.

31.--A mysterious individual, known as "The Wandering Piper," made his
appearance at Norwich.  It was stated that he had been an officer in the
Army, and had served under Sir John Moore and the Duke of Wellington, and
was piping through the country to win a wager, one of the conditions of
which was that he must subsist upon unsolicited alms given by the public.
The piper gave a performance at the Bell Inn, Orford Hill, in aid of the
newly-established Lying-in Charity.  He returned to Norwich on December
1st, and gave another entertainment at the Norfolk Hotel for the same
charity.  He re-appeared in Norwich in 1838, having, in the interval,
travelled the British Isles and the United States.  It was then announced
that his name was Graham Stuart.  His death occurred in March, 1839, at
Mercers' Hospital, Dublin, to which institution he bequeathed all his
property.


NOVEMBER.


17.--The officers of the preventive service stationed at Brancaster
seized a large tub-boat, containing 5,565 lbs. of tobacco and about 650
gallons of brandy and Geneva, the whole of which was lodged in the
Customs-house at Wells-next-the-Sea.


DECEMBER.


2.--The body of Sarah Watling, buried in the churchyard of Swanton Abbot,
was found to have been stolen from its grave.  At the Norfolk Adjourned
Quarter Sessions, held at Norwich on March 6th, 1833, George Ives and
Nathaniel Canham were indicted for stealing the body.  The prisoners were
acquitted.

10.--The nomination of candidates at the first election in Norwich under
the Reform Act took place at the Guildhall.  The nominees of the "Purple
and Orange" party were Lord Stormont and Sir James Scarlett, and of the
"Blue and White" party Mr. Richard Hanbury Gurney, the former member, and
Mr. Charles Henry Bellenden Ker.  A poll was demanded, and the election
was immediately proceeded with.  In the afternoon a riot occurred in the
Market Place; the "Purple and Orange" booth was pulled down, and a
bonfire made of the _debris_.  The "Blue and White" band, stationed near
the fire, played their favourite tunes, and men carrying the banners of
the party danced round the pile.  Stones were thrown and bludgeons used,
and a man had his arm broken.  Many other persons sustained less serious
injuries.  The 7th Hussars, who had been removed from Norwich to
Wymondham before the election commenced, were recalled to suppress the
disturbance, and many citizens were sworn in as special constables.  An
officers' guard of the Hussars was posted near the Guildhall throughout
the night, and another polling-booth was erected.  Voting recommenced at
eight o'clock on the morning of the 11th, and continued all day; the
books were again opened on the 13th, and at noon the poll finally closed,
when the result was declared as follows:--Stormont, 2,016; Scarlett,
1,962; Gurney, 1,810; Ker, 1,766.  The chairing of the new members took
place on the 14th; on the same day their friends and supporters dined at
the Norfolk Hotel, and in the evening the election ball was held at
Chapel Field House.

10.--Lord George Bentinck and Lord William Lennox were returned unopposed
for Lynn.

--Lord James FitzRoy and Mr. Francis Baring were returned without
opposition for the borough of Thetford.

13.--Mr. Shaw's granaries on the Boal at King's Lynn were destroyed by
fire.  The loss was estimated at upwards of 2,000 pounds.

15.--Sir Jacob Astley and Sir William ffolkes were nominated at Swaffham
as candidates for the representation of the Western Division of Norfolk,
and returned unopposed.  Mr. T. W. Coke formally took leave of the
electors, on his retirement from Parliamentary life.  He had represented
the county since the year 1785.

17.--The nomination of candidates for the Eastern Division of the county
took place at the Shirehall, Norwich.  Lord Henry Cholmondeley and Mr.
Peach were nominated by the "Pink and Purple," and Mr. W. W. Windham and
Major Keppel by the "Blue and White" party.  The poll was opened on the
20th, at Norwich, Yarmouth, North Walsham, and Long Stratton, and closed
on the 21st.  The result, which was not officially declared until the
24th, was as follows:--Windham, 3,304; Keppel, 3,261; Peach, 2,960;
Cholmondeley, 2,852.  The election dinner was held at the Assembly Room,
Norwich, under the presidency of the Hon. Edward Harbord.

22.--Atkins' Menagerie was exhibited at Norwich.  This was the first
occasion on which a "lion tamer" appeared with a travelling menagerie in
the city.  In the centre of the show was introduced a large iron cage,
into which the keeper entered and put the animals through their
performances.



1833.


JANUARY.


4.--Lord Suffield resigned his chairmanship of the Norfolk Court of
Quarter Sessions.

11.--In the Court of King's Bench, the Sheriff of Norwich obtained a rule
_nisi_ for a criminal information against Mr. John Teasel, carpenter and
builder, a Common Councilman of Norwich, for having taken away one of the
poll-books at the last election at Norwich, and for attempting to tear
and mutilate it.  The rule was discharged on the 31st, on the defendant
undertaking to answer an indictment at the ensuing Assizes.  At the
Norwich Assizes on March 23rd, before Mr. Justice Bolland, application
was made on behalf of the defendant to have the case tried by a county
jury, upon which it was ordered to stand over till the next Assizes.  At
the Norfolk Assizes on August 10th, before Mr. Justice Littledale, the
defendant was placed upon his trial, and the jury returned a verdict of
not guilty.

16.--Died at Bracondale, Norwich, aged 80, Mrs. White, mother of Henry
Kirke White.

22.--A meeting was held at the Baptist chapel, Orford Hill, Norwich,
presided over by Mr. John Cozens, at which a report was made by a
committee appointed "to investigate the return of Lord Stormont and Sir
James Scarlett," to the effect that sufficient evidence had been obtained
to warrant the presentation of a petition to the House of Commons on
account of the "undue election" of the members.  The Norwich Election
Petition was opened before a Committee of the House of Commons on March
20th.  The examination of witnesses commenced on March 21st, and
concluded on April 2nd.  Counsel addressed the Committee on April 3rd,
and on the same day the Chairman (Mr. Charles Shaw Lefevre) announced
that the Committee had resolved--(1) That Lord Stormont and Sir James
Scarlett were duly elected members for the city of Norwich.  (2) That the
petition of John Cozens and others was not frivolous nor vexatious.  (3)
That the opposition to such petition was not frivolous nor vexatious.


FEBRUARY.


1.--The portrait of Mr. T. W. Coke, painted by S. Lane, was hung in the
Corn Exchange, Norwich.  In celebration of the event, a dinner was held
at the Norfolk Hotel, presided over by Major Case, who said his family
had been tenants on the Holkham estate for 63 years, and his grandfather,
who owed much to Mr. Coke, died worth 150,000 pounds.

2.*--[Advt.]  "A grand main of cocks will be fought at the Black Boys
Inn, Aylsham, on February 12th, and two following days, between the
gentlemen of Norwich and Aylsham, for 5 sovereigns a battle and 50
sovereigns the odd.  Feeders: Stafford for Norwich; Overton for Aylsham."

5.--A barque of 220 tons burden, designed for the West India trade, was
launched from the yard of Mr. Preston, at Yarmouth.

22.--Died at Winfarthing, Sarah Jessup, aged 101 years, "the last 30 of
which, till a year and a half ago, she was employed as walking post from
the Post Office at Diss to Winfarthing, a distance of four miles, which
she constantly performed in all weathers, and is computed to have
travelled more than 13,400 miles.  She was married in the reign of George
II.  She had 16 children, who multiplied to the fourth generation, so
that her children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren at the time of
her decease amounted to 444.  Besides these, great-great-grandchildren,
some of every degree and age, to the number of 200 and upwards, followed
her to the grave, to which she was carried by her four sons."

26.--A desperate affray took place between the coastguard, under Lieut.
George Howes, R.N., and a large party of armed smugglers, at
Cley-next-the-Sea.  The coastguard were obliged to fire several times in
self-defence.  The contraband goods seized consisted of 127 half-ankers
of brandy and between 3,000 and 4,000 pounds of manufactured tobacco.

--At a public meeting held at the Guildhall, Norwich, under the
presidency of the Mayor, it was decided to petition the House of Commons
to protect children employed in factories from severe and injurious
labour, by limiting the hours of their employment.

26.--The Lynn and Newmarket mail was proceeding through Methwold when the
coach was upset in a deep drain, and one of the horses falling upon
Booty, the coachman, he was suffocated.


MARCH.


19.--The barque Crawford Davison (George Sandford, master), from Hamburg
to London, with 40 horses, of the value of 2,000 pounds, on board, struck
upon Happisburgh Sand and was lost.  The captain and crew were saved.
All the horses were drowned, and their carcases sold for 12 pounds.

--At a special general meeting of the subscribers to the Norfolk and
Norwich Museum, plans and specifications prepared by Mr. J. Brown,
architect, were adopted for the erection of a building "on an eligible
site in Exchange Street, near the new Post Office," at the cost of 1,500
pounds, raised in shares of 50 pounds each, to bear interest of 4 per
cent.  "The front of the intended building will be similar to that of the
Temple of Jupiter Ammon."  The first stone was laid on May 27th.

--The commissions for the holding of the first Lent Assizes at Norwich
were opened by Mr. Baron Bolland.

21.--Selections from the oratorios of "The Creation" and "Samson" were
performed at the Corn Exchange, Norwich, under the direction of Mr.
Mueller.  "The most remarkable feature of the evening's performance was a
violin concerto by Master David Fisher.  With the exception of Paganini,
Kieswelter, and Mori, no such violin-playing has been heard within our
walls."

22.--At the Norfolk Assizes, at Norwich, before Mr. Justice Bolland, Mary
Wright, aged 28, was found guilty of the murder of her husband and of
Richard Darby, by poisoning them at Wighton, and was sentenced to be
hanged on March 25th.  Pregnancy was pleaded, and a jury of matrons were
empanelled, who returned a verdict adverse to the prisoner.  By direction
of the Court, she was examined by Messrs. Crosse, Scott, and Johnson,
surgeons, upon whose certificate she was respited generally.  The
prisoner on July 11th gave birth to a female child, and sentence was
afterwards commuted to transportation for life.  The unfortunate woman
died in Norwich Castle on November 1st.

28.--The 7th Hussars commenced their march from Norwich to Glasgow.  The
Court of Mayoralty on the 16th passed a vote of thanks to the regiment
for the ready aid they had given to preserve the public peace, and
expressed their approbation of the conduct of the non-commissioned
officers and privates towards the inhabitants.  The Hussars were replaced
by the 3rd Light Dragoons.


APRIL.


1.--The Right Hon. Horatio, Earl of Orford, was elected High Steward of
Great Yarmouth, in place of Viscount Exmouth, deceased.

6.--A private still was discovered in a house in St. Faith's Lane,
Norwich.  Fifteen gallons of spirits recently worked off were seized.
The owners of the still were fined 30 pounds each, and in default of
payment were sentenced to three months' imprisonment.

9.--A new steam carriage of 2-horse power was exhibited on Foundry Bridge
Road, Norwich.  It is said to have answered the expectations of the
inventor, Mr. Watts, of Rose Lane.

12.--Between 400 and 500 of the noblemen, gentlemen, and yeomanry of
Norfolk dined at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, in honour of Mr. Coke, upon
his retirement from the representation of the county.  H.R.H. the Duke of
Sussex presided.

18.--A trotting match for 50 pounds took place between Mr. Brunning's
Queen of Diamonds and Mr. Mendham's Jack of Clubs, from Yarmouth Bridge,
_via_ Beccles to Halesworth.  "The mare was driven in harness by her
owner, who weighs 16 st., and the horse was ridden by Mr. Mendham (11
st.).  Two miles beyond Beccles the mare gave up.  The 15 miles from
Yarmouth to Beccles was done in 45 minutes, and the whole 25 miles in 1
hour 33 minutes, by Jack."

24.--Died at his house at Greenwich, aged 76, Mr. P. J. Knights, for many
years a well-known shawl manufacturer at Norwich.  He served the office
of Sheriff in 1809.

27.--Fuller Pilch advertised himself as the proprietor of a public-house
and pleasure gardens on Bracondale Hill, Norwich, and as the lessee of
the Norwich Cricket Ground, in the management of which he was assisted by
his brother, William Pilch.

--It was announced that the county justices had hired the house of Mr.
Hawkes, Bethel Street, Norwich, as lodgings for his Majesty's Judges of
Assize.

--Mdlle. Celeste commenced a six nights' engagement at the Theatre Royal,
Norwich.  "For our latitude this lady exerts herself too much in the
pirouette, considering the approximation of spectators in a provincial
theatre to the stage."


MAY.


1.--Mr. Alderman Samuel Bignold was elected Mayor of Norwich.

6.--Mr. and Mrs. Wood commenced a four nights' engagement at Norwich
Theatre, prior to their departure to America.  They appeared in "The
Barber of Seville" and the musical farce of "The Quaker."

7.--The horses of the Regulator coach, from Holt to London, started off
at full speed from Guist Post Office, during the temporary absence of the
coachman.  A girl had the presence of mind to close the tollgate, which
the horses attempted to leap, smashed it to atoms, and fell.  The animals
were severely injured, and the coach greatly damaged.

16.--Mr. Yates and Mrs. Waylett appeared at Norwich Theatre as Flutter
and Letitia Hardy ("The Belle's Stratagem").  They afterwards acted in
"Clari" (opera), "Don Giovanni," "The Four Sisters," and "Midas'"
(burletta).  Mr. Yates also gave his entertainments, "Portraits and
Sketches" and "Views of Life."


JUNE.


1.--On this date was published the first of the series of remarkable
accounts describing the ghostly visitations at Syderstone Parsonage, the
residence of the Rev. Mr. Stewart, curate, and rector of Thwaite.

3.--Died, aged 101, Richard Smith, of Swanton Morley.

18.--The Guild Day festivities at Norwich, on the occasion of the
swearing in as Mayor of Mr. Samuel Bignold, were attended by Viscount
Stormont, M.P., and Sir James Scarlett, M.P., the latter of whom took his
oath as an honorary freeman of the city.  The Mayor entertained 1,100
guests at the Guild feast at St. Andrew's Hall, and upwards of 500
attended the ball at the Assembly Rooms, where the dancing was opened by
the Mayor and Miss Wodehouse, daughter of the Lord Lieutenant.

19.--Two orange and purple banners, designed by a member of the College
of Arms, were presented by the Conservative ladies of Norwich to Viscount
Stormont, M.P., and Sir James Scarlett, M.P.  The ceremony took place at
the Guildhall, where a large company was entertained by the Mayor.

20.--Upwards of 750 electors in the "Orange and Purple" interest were
entertained at dinner at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich.  A second
contingent, numbering 1,000, dined there on the 21st.  Mr. W. J. Utten
Browne presided on both occasions, and Lord Stormont, M.P., was also
present.  The dinners were provided by public subscription.


JULY.


7.--During a severe thunderstorm "a fire-ball, apparently about the size
of a man's head," fell upon the thatched roof of the Black Tower, Butter
Hills, Norwich.  The middle and lower rooms, occupied by a person named
Brooks, and the upper storey, where a society of artisans assembled for
astronomical observations, were entirely consumed.  The society's
valuable apparatus were destroyed.

15.--The resuscitated race meeting at Holkham was attended by 10,000
spectators.  The races were held on the sands.  "By the time the hunters'
stakes had been decided the tide was fast approaching, and the leading
people retired to a booth, where dinner was served, under the presidency
of Mr. Brown, of Pudding Norton.  The tide retiring, the company again
occupied the sands."

17.--The Bishop of Lincoln, officiating for the Bishop of Norwich,
confirmed 2,000 persons at East Dereham church.  On the following day his
lordship administered the rite to 2,068 persons at Norwich Cathedral; and
on the 19th to 1,100 at Redenhall.

18.--A single wicket match between Fuller Pilch and T. Marsdon took place
on the Norwich Cricket Ground.  Pilch won, by 70 runs.  The return match
was played on Hyde Park Ground, Sheffield, on August 5th, when Pilch won
by 128 runs.

20.--The Norwich Court of Mayoralty elected Mr. W. J. Utten Browne to the
office of Sheriff.

--A duel was fought on the North Denes, Yarmouth.  "The combatants were
Mr. H. B--- and Mr. C. W---, the former seconded by Mr. J. B--- and the
latter by Mr. W. C---, of the medical profession in N---.  At the first
shot Mr. W.'s pistol missed, and his antagonist fired in the air; at the
second Mr. B. again fired in the air, and Mr. W. missed his aim.  Another
try took place, Mr. W. again missing and his antagonist firing as before.
At the fourth and last Mr. W.'s ball just grazed Mr. B.'s thumb, when the
parties appeared to have been satisfied, for they shortly after left the
ground.  The cause of the meeting arose at Maxim's Marine Hotel on the
beach."


AUGUST.


27.--Mr. Alderman Steward was elected freemen's Sheriff at Norwich.

29.--The Norwich Court of Guardians held a meeting to take into
consideration the suggestions contained in a letter received from the
Mayor (Mr. S. Bignold), for the establishment of a joint stock company
for spinning yarn on a scale calculated to give extensive employment to
the poor.  The subject was further considered at a meeting convened by
the Mayor at the Guildhall, on September 5th, when the Norwich Yarn
Company was formed, and by October 1st a capital of 26,000 pounds had
been subscribed in shares of 100 pounds each.  (_See_ February 27th,
1834.)

31.--A severe gale, which caused great damage to shipping, and resulted
in the loss of many lives, occurred on the Norfolk coast.  The Leith
smack Earl of Wemyss went ashore at Brancaster; a heavy sea broke into
the passengers' cabin, and six ladies, a gentleman, and four children
were drowned.  Among the deceased were Miss Susan Roche, a young lady of
great musical ability, and sister of Mr. A. D. Roche, the composer.
(_See_ October 16th.)


SEPTEMBER.


17.--The Norfolk and Norwich Musical Festival (held on this occasion for
the benefit of the Hospital, the Blind Institution, the Eye Infirmary,
and the Dispensary) commenced at St. Andrew's Hall.  The principal vocal
performers were Madame Malibran, Miss H. Cawse, Miss Bruce, Master Howe,
Madame De Meric, Signer Douzelli, Mr. Horncastle, Mr. Hobbs, Mr. E.
Taylor, and Mr. H. Phillips; conductor, Sir George Smart.  Selections
were given from "The Creation," "The Last Judgment," "The Deluge," and
"Israel in Egypt."  The Festival concluded on the 20th with a fancy dress
ball.  The total receipts were nearly 5,000 pounds, and the expenses
about 4,200 pounds.

20.--Died at Yaxham Rectory, the Rev. Dr. Johnson, rector of that parish,
with Welbourne annexed.  "He was the friend of Cowper, and editor of his
letters and posthumous works."

30.--Died at Gorgate, near East Dereham, aged 77, the Rev. Thomas Crowe
Munnings, M.A., rector of Beetley-cum-East Bilney.  He was a well-known
and prominent agriculturist.

--The arrival of the City of Norwich trader and the Squire (London
trader) "rendered this date ever memorable in the history of the city by
its being the day on which Norwich became a port."  These vessels, the
first that had entered the Norwich river direct from the sea by way of
the New Cut, were towed to the city from Surlingham Reach by a steam tug,
with a band playing and colours flying.  The river banks from Carrow
"balance bridge" to the Foundry were thronged by thousands of citizens,
and at Rudrum's Wharf the City of Norwich was boarded by the Mayor (Mr.
S. Bignold) and several members of the Corporation.  The bells of St.
Peter Mancroft were rung, and the directors of the Norwich and Lowestoft
Navigation entertained a large company at dinner at the Rampant Horse
Inn.  The success of the day's proceedings was marred by the drowning, in
Surlingham Reach, of a lad named Allerton, son of the master of the City
of Norwich.


OCTOBER.


4.--The first general meeting was held of the Harleston Agricultural
Society, established by the owners and occupiers of land, for the
encouragement of skill and for promoting and rewarding industry and good
conduct among cottagers, servants, and labourers.

5.--The head-mastership of Norwich Free Grammar School was rendered
vacant by the resignation of the Rev. T. Kidd.

13.--Died at Hethersett, aged 36, Mr. Elias Norgate, first secretary of
the Norfolk and Norwich Horticultural Society, the plan of which was
suggested by his father, Mr. Thomas Starling Norgate.

16.--An inquiry was opened by the magistrates at Docking, under authority
of the Secretary of State, "to ascertain for his own and the public
satisfaction whether there had been any loss of life by culpable
negligence or loss of property by dishonesty," on the occasion of the
wreck of the Earl of Wemyss smack on Brancaster beach, on August 30th.
As a result of the inquiry, Mr. William Newman Reeve was committed for
trial on the charge of removing from the wreck certain property which he
alleged he was protecting on behalf of his father-in-law, who was lord of
the manor.  At the Norfolk Lent Assizes, held at Norwich before Mr. Baron
Vaughan on March 26th, 1834, the defendant was placed upon his trial, and
was defended by Sir James Scarlett, M.P.  His lordship, in directing an
acquittal, said the evidence had utterly failed; it was unnecessary for
Mr. Reeve to say anything in support of his character, for nothing had
been made out against him.  Amid applause in court the Judge added there
was not the slightest stain upon the accused.  Another case arising out
of the same wreck was tried at the Norfolk Summer Assizes, on July 30th,
1834, before Mr. Justice Bosanquet.  The accused, Robert Allen, Charles
Oakes, and James Ward were charged with feloniously taking certain
articles from the wreck.  The jury returned a verdict of not guilty.

21.--The West Norfolk Yeomanry Cavalry commenced a week's training at
King's Lynn.

30.--Du Crow's Circus Company commenced a season's performances in a
wooden building on the Castle Meadow, Norwich.  It was known as "The
National Arena and Equestrian Studio," and was the first of the temporary
buildings periodically erected in this locality for entertainments of the
kind.


NOVEMBER.


6.--Mr. William Dalrymple was presented with a valuable silver salver by
the Mayor, Sheriffs, citizens, and commonalty of Norwich, in
acknowledgment of the care and skill he had displayed in the performance
of his duties as surgeon to the Great Hospital and Doughty's Hospital
during the period of 28 years.

9.--Died at St. Michael at Coslany, Norwich, Ann, widow of Leonard
Atkinson.  "She was born in this parish December 24th, 1728, and had
scarcely quitted it more than a week during the space of nearly 105
years.  Free from wrinkles and decrepitude, she possessed her faculties
unclouded till within a few months of her decease."

13.--The 50th anniversary of the Norwich Public Library was celebrated by
a dinner at the White Swan, presided over by Dr. England, president of
the institution.

15.--A special assembly of the Norwich Corporation was held, to take into
consideration the application of Mr. George Long and Mr. John Buckle, two
of the Commissioners named in the Municipal Commission, for the
production of charters and other muniments of the Corporation.  A
resolution was passed stating that the Corporation had no wish to
withhold the information required, "but they protested against the
Commission as illegal and unconstitutional, and denied the right of the
Commissioners to make any inquiries."  At the opening of the Commission,
on November 25th, the Sheriffs (Mr. W. J. Utten Browne and Mr. Edward
Steward) declined to attend or to allow any of their officers to give
evidence relative to the constitution of the Sheriffs Court, on the
ground that "a Commission issued by virtue of the Royal prerogative alone
was a process unknown to the law of England, and eminently hostile to
public liberty."  The inquiry lasted twenty-two days, and concluded on
December 19th.

18.--Ducrow advertised the representation of a Spanish bull-fight at his
Norwich circus.  "To prevent any misconception on the part of visitors to
the arena, and at the same time to add to the surprising nature of the
performance, ladies and others are informed that the bull is impersonated
by one of Mr. Ducrow's horses, tutored by him for the purpose, enveloped
in an elastic skin, and so managed as to deceive even the keenest eye."

22.--Died at Guanajuato, Mexico, Lieutenant John Thomas Borrow, of the
West Norfolk Militia, eldest son of Captain Borrow, of Norwich.

28.--Mr. George Long, Municipal Commissioner, held an inquiry into the
affairs of the Corporation of Castle Rising.  Mr. F. Lane, of Lynn, the
Recorder, stated that he had no charter nor papers of any kind to
produce.  The Corporation consisted of a Recorder, Mayor, one alderman,
and a serjeant-at-mace.  The Mayor and alderman served in turn the office
of Chief Magistrate.  There were about 50 burgage tenants, and the
Corporation property was about 20 pounds a year, arising from land, and
with the money the Mayor gave each year two dinners to the leet.  The
Corporation had no debts, no prison, and but one offence had been
committed in the borough for a number of years.


DECEMBER.


23.--Two leaden cases were dug up from a piece of ground at the east end
of Wymondham church.  One measured 6 ft 2 in. in length, and contained
the mummified remains of an adult female; the other, 16.25 inches in
length, a foetus of about the fourth month.  The examination of the
remains was conducted in the church on December 27th, by Mr. John
Dalrymple, of Norwich, in the presence of sixty scientific and medical
men.  "As the mummies were taken from the site of the original choir, the
female was most probably nearly allied to the founder of the abbey,
William De Abbay or Daubeny, who died in the year 1156."

24.--An altar piece, copied from Rubens' "Descent from the Cross," and
about one-fourth the size of the original picture, presented to St
Peter's church, Yarmouth, by Col. Mason, was on this day placed in
position under the personal superintendence of the donor.



1834.


JANUARY.


3.--The question of the restoration of the south and west faces of the
keep of Norwich Castle was discussed at the Norfolk Quarter Sessions, and
referred to the visiting justices, who recommended that it be undertaken;
and on May 17th the tender of Mr. Watson was accepted and the work
ordered to be proceeded with at once.  On July 28th a public meeting was
held at the Guildhall, "to take into consideration the expediency of
instituting an inquiry into the necessity for covering up the face of
such an antient relic with new building," and a resolution moved by Mr.
Samuel Bignold, and seconded by Mr. Stevenson, expressing regret at the
"demolition," and suggesting that an antiquary and architect be consulted
before it was further proceeded with, was unanimously adopted.  A
deputation was also appointed to wait upon the Gaol Committee.  At a
meeting of the county magistrates, on October 17th, it was decided to
employ Mr. Blore, a well-known architect and antiquary, "to survey and
report upon the present state of the Castle, and the best mode of
proceeding with the repairs."  Mr. Blore reported on November 10th that
the masonry was in a very bad state; that the then face of the building
was not altogether original, but that the repairs and restorations it had
undergone at various periods had been closely assimilated with the
original work.  He recommended that what was needed to be done should be
judiciously incorporated with the ancient work.  It was finally decided,
on January 9th, 1835, that the visiting justices be authorised to
continue the work as originally intended, and that they be empowered to
consult Mr. Blore or any other architect they might think proper to
employ.

9.--At a meeting of the Norwich Corporation, a resolution was passed
protesting against any report that might be made by the Municipal
Commissioners respecting the Corporation, "based on statements so utterly
unfit to justify Parliament in legislating on so important a subject,"
and inviting the various Corporations throughout the kingdom "to make
common cause with them in endeavouring to defeat any design that might be
in contemplation for wresting from them their antient charters,
franchises, and liberties."

12.--The organ of Norwich Cathedral was re-opened by Mr. Buck, after its
thorough reparation by Bishop, of Lisson Grove, London.  The sermon on
the occasion was preached by the Right Hon. and Rev. Lord Bayning.  The
instrument was the original work of Father Schmidt.

21.--The first of the Choral Concerts inaugurated "for the purpose of
obtaining a reserve fund for the support of the choral band at the
Musical Festival and for maintaining and keeping together the great body
of musical talent existing in the locality," was held at St. Andrew's
Hall, Norwich.

25.--During a performance by a company of comedians at Cley-next-the-Sea,
a pistol was fired, and the ramrod, which had been left in the barrel,
entered the side of an actor named Leary, who was badly injured.

27.--Mr. Frederick Vining, of Covent Garden and the Haymarket Theatres,
commenced a short engagement at Norwich Theatre, where he was formerly a
favourite actor.  His impersonations included Young Rapid ("A Cure for
the Heartache"), Martin Heywood ("The Rent-day"), Sidney Maynard ("The
Housekeeper"), Templeton ("Deaf as a Post"), Frank Bramble ("The Poor
Gentleman"), and Harry Villars ("Open House").


FEBRUARY.


6.--Mr. Thomas Jefferson Hogg and Mr. John Buckle, Municipal
Commissioners, opened an inquiry at the Tolhouse Hall into the corporate
affairs of Yarmouth.  After sitting for 20 days the Commissioners
adjourned _sine die_.

14.--A _fete_ was given at Yarmouth Barracks by Captain Manby, "to mark
the close of the labours that had so long engaged his attention for
saving life."  This was the twenty-seventh anniversary of "the saving of
the first crew by the projection of a rope from the shore by the force of
gunpowder, and thus effecting communication with a vessel on a lee shore.
By this expedient upwards of 600 British sailors have been saved."

26.--Died at Lynn, Mr. Ezekiel Walker, aged 94.  He was for many years a
regular contributor to Nicholson and Tillock's "Philosophical Magazine,"
and published a collection of his essays, chiefly on electrochemical
subjects.

27.--The ceremony of laying the first stone of the new Yarn Factory at
Norwich was performed by the Mayor (Mr. Bignold).  A procession, in which
were characters representing Bishop Blaize, shepherds and shepherdesses,
together with 80 wool combers, and many women and children, marched from
Lakenham to the site of the new building in St. Edmund's.  The directors
and shareholders afterwards dined at the Norfolk Hotel.


MARCH.


11.--The lake at Scottow was drawn by Sir Henry Durrant, when five pike
of large size were captured.  The finest measured 4 ft. in length, 2 ft 3
in. in girth, and weighed 37 lbs.; the smallest was 3 ft 4 in. long, 20.5
inches in girth, and weighed 18.5 lbs.  They were all taken at one haul.

--Resolutions in favour of the repeal of the Malt Tax were passed at a
large meeting of the owners and occupiers of land in the Hundred of South
Erpingham, held at the Black Boys Inn, Aylsham, under the presidency of
Mr. Robert Marsham.  Similar meetings were held throughout the county,
and petitions were numerously signed in every Hundred.

22.--Miss Kelly appeared at Norwich Theatre in her entertainments,
"Dramatic Recollections," "A Study of Character," and "Mrs. Parthian at
Home."


APRIL.


12.--William Thirkettle, 27; William Pye, 32; and Gilpin Reynolds, 24,
were executed on Castle Hill, Norwich, the first-named for the attempted
murder of his wife, and the others for arson.

14.--The two troops of the King's Own Light Dragoons marched from Norwich
for Hampton Court and Kensington Barracks.

25.--The Yarmouth Port and Haven Bill was considered by the House of
Commons' Committee, presided over by Mr. William Windham.  On the 28th
the petitioners announced the abandonment of the Bill.

30.--The Bishop of Rochester, officiating for the Bishop of Norwich (who
was then in his 90th year), confirmed 1,700 persons at North Walsham.  On
subsequent days 1,000 were confirmed at Holt, and 1,050 at Diss.

--Fifty-four convicts, sentenced at the County Assizes and Sessions to
transportation, were taken on board the Sarah (Capt. Moore), lying in
Norwich river.  "The hatchways were closed at twenty minutes after two in
the morning, and this London trader sailed immediately for Lowestoft,
which harbour was reached about eleven o'clock; in three hours the vessel
was out of sight and on her way to Portsmouth.  Their being sent off by
sea (through the Norwich and Lowestoft Navigation) instead of by land
conveyance will be a very considerable saving of expense to the county of
Norfolk."


MAY.


1.--Mr. Charles Turner and Mr. William Moore were returned to the Court
of Aldermen, who elected the former as Mayor of Norwich for the year
ensuing.

--May Day was celebrated at Lynn with the usual display of garlands and
devices emblematical of the season, by persons arrayed in fancy costumes.

5.--Two troops of the 2nd Queen's Dragoon Guards, under the command of
Major Kearney, marched into Norwich Barracks from Nottingham, to relieve
the 3rd Dragoons, who, on the same day, marched for Ipswich.

8.--The leading postmasters of Norwich announced that they had reduced
the rate of posting to 1s. 4d. per mile.

13.--A petition to Parliament against the proposed measure for separating
religious instruction from the system of education hitherto prevailing at
the Universities was unanimously adopted at a meeting summoned by
requisition and held at the Guildhall, Norwich, under the presidency of
the Mayor (Mr. Bignold).

16.--The dwelling-house, outbuildings, and corn stacks of Mr. Helsden
Larner, at North Walsham, were destroyed by fire.  A labourer named
Jeremiah Cutting was buried beneath the falling roof of the stable and
burned to death.

21.--The West Norfolk Agricultural Association held its first annual
meeting at Downham Market.  A second division of the society was formed
at Fakenham on June 19th.

26.--A new drama, entitled, "Sir Roger de Coverley, or the Old English
Gentleman," written by Mr. G. Smith, second son of the manager, was
produced for the first time at Norwich Theatre.  It was described as "a
composition which exhibited talent of no common order."

28.--The King's birthday was observed in Norwich with great festivity.
The first business at the special Assembly of the Corporation was to pass
an address of congratulation to his Majesty, "praying him not to sanction
the proposed measure for admitting Dissenters to graduate in the
Universities of Oxford and Cambridge."  The Mayor and Corporation then
went to service at the Cathedral, and at noon the Queen's Bays fired a
_feu de joie_ in the Market Place.  The officers were entertained at the
Guildhall, the sum of 5 pounds was distributed among the privates, and in
the evening the Mayor (Mr. Bignold) gave a dinner at Chapel Field House.

29.--Died at Hingham, aged 93, the Right Hon. Lord Wodehouse.  He was
elevated from a baronetcy to a seat in the House of Lords in 1797, after
having represented the county for many years.  His lordship was succeeded
in his title and estates by Col. Wodehouse, Lord Lieutenant of the
county.  The remains of the deceased nobleman were buried at Kimberley
with great pomp on June 9th.

31.--At the close of the Norwich theatrical season, Mr. George Smith
delivered an address, in which he lamented that "theatrical taste had of
late years declined in the city, either from commercial depression or
from the still more fatal growth of indifference."


JUNE.


13.--Died at Southampton, aged 65, Rear-Admiral Manby, of Northwold.  He
was one of the companions of Captain Vancouver, in his voyage round the
world; was actively employed in conveying troops to Ireland at the time
of the Rebellion; and during the war with France commanded the
Bourdelais, Thalia, and Africaine frigates on various important services.
Admiral Manby was a native of Norfolk.

17.--Guild Day was observed in Norwich.  "When the civic procession
arrived at the west door of the Cathedral, the nine knocks were given
according to immemorial usage, and the Corporation passed in regular
order through the rush-strewn nave."  The Latin oration at the porch of
the Free Grammar School was delivered by Fred Norgate, youngest son of
Mr. T. S. Norgate, of Hethersett; Mr. Charles Turner was sworn in as
Mayor at the Guildhall, and entertained 800 guests at the Guild feast
held at St. Andrew's Hall.  The festivities concluded with a ball at the
Assembly Rooms.

18.--The great cricket match, Yorkshire _v._ Norfolk, for 100 gs. a side,
commenced on the Norwich ground, and was continued on the 19th.  Among
the players were Marsden, Dearman, and the three Pilches.  Norfolk: 1st
innings, 216 (Fuller Pilch 87); 2nd innings, 91.  Yorkshire: 1st innings,
37; 2nd innings, 97.  The return match was commenced on Hyde Park Ground,
Sheffield, on July 21st, when Yorkshire won by 123 runs.  Yorkshire: 1st
innings, 191; 2nd innings, 296.  Norfolk: 1st innings, 75; 2nd innings,
289.  Norfolk abandoned the match in consequence of the rain.  "Many
thought that with three bats to go in and Fuller Pilch still standing,
the game might have been won had there been the means of playing it out."

21.--A severe thunderstorm occurred.  Many cattle were killed by
lightning, and the tower of Redenhall church sustained considerable
damage.

27.--Died at Yarmouth, aged 92, Mrs. Hannah Diboll, "the celebrated
twisterer, who had been accustomed from childhood to rise every morning
at four o'clock, and persevered in the practice till within two or three
years of her death."


JULY.


12.--The public gaslamps in Norwich at this date numbered 423, and the
lighting of the city cost upwards of 2,000 pounds per annum.

18.--Mr. Richard Hanbury Gurney, formerly one of the Parliamentary
representatives of Norwich, was presented with a massive silver
candelabrum, purchased with the subscriptions of 1,250 citizens, chiefly
of the working classes, "in testimony of their regard for his universal
benevolence and sincerity in upholding the just rights of mankind, and of
their admiration of his inflexible advocacy in the Senate to obtain for
his country a salutary reform in the House of Commons."

19.*--"Died, a few days since, in his 62nd year, Mr. Philip Mallet Case,
of Testerton House.  On Sunday, July 13th, his remains were deposited in
the family vault at Dunton.  The procession from Testerton to the place
of interment was respectably and numerously attended, and it is computed
that there were no less than 3,000 persons present."

26.--Died in Clarges Street, London, aged 30, Lord James Henry FitzRoy,
youngest son of the Duke of Grafton.  His lordship was a captain in the
10th Hussars, and had represented Thetford since 1831.

--*"One of the attractions at Norwich Theatre during the Assize week was
the unique and wonderful invention patented and exhibited by Mr. H.
Childe, called Dissolvent Views."

26.*--"Died, last week, in the 105th year of her age, Mary Wratham,
widow, Downham Market."

27.--Died at Litcham, Captain Thomas Edward Hoste, R.N., aged 40.  He was
fifth son of the Rev. Dixon Hoste, rector of Tittleshall and Godwick, and
commenced his career at the age of 13, on the Amphion, commanded by his
distinguished brother, Sir William Hoste.  In 1809 he joined the Spartan
frigate, served in the Mediterranean, Ireland, and South America, was
promoted Commander in 1825, and was for a short time employed in
coastguard service.

31.--The great doors at the west entrance to Norwich Cathedral were taken
down for restoration and repair.  "They had maintained their honourable
station upwards of 400 years, and had received nine times that number of
knocks on the Guild Day for the admission of the Corporation to Divine
service."


AUGUST.


1.--The termination of slavery in the British possessions on this day was
celebrated by a "Negro Jubilee" _fete_, given at Sheringham by Mrs.
Upcher and her family, and by special services at the churches and
chapels in Norwich.

8.--The Earl of Euston was elected, unopposed, representative of the
borough of Thetford, in succession to Lord James FitzRoy, deceased.

--A case of great importance was tried by a special jury in the Sheriff's
Court at Norwich.  John Burrows, a butcher, had refused to pay the
stallage charged by the Corporation for his meat stall in the Market
Place, on the ground that the patent of his freedom exempted him from
such charges.  The Corporation, in an action against him, recovered the
charges, which amounted to 16s. 4d., and defendant had suffered judgment
to go by default.  The special jury now found for the full amount
claimed.  Defendant resisted payment, and in the second week of September
was arrested by virtue of a special writ, taken to London, and by Mr.
Baron Alderson was committed to the Fleet Prison.  At a quarterly
assembly of the Corporation, on Sept. 22nd, Mr. William Wilde moved that
it be an instruction to the Market Committee not to collect stallage in
future from freemen selling provisions.  Burrows had acted on the advice
of the Municipal Commissioners in this matter, and these proceedings
would probably be his ruin.  The motion was negatived by 19 votes to 9.

9.*--"Workmen excavating at the lower part of the west side of Exchange
Street have found a number of human skulls and bones.  This was the site
of the church of St. Crowche or St. Cross, and the public-house by the
name of the Hole-in-the-Wall was built upon it.  The church was
demolished on October 14th, 1551, and the parish consolidated with St.
John Maddermarket."

18.--A meeting was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, at which Mr. Gibbs,
C.E., explained the facilities and advantages of a projected railroad
from London to Dunmow, and thence to Norwich, with a branch to Cambridge,
and an ultimate extension to the North of England.  The length of line
from Whitechapel to Norwich would be 97 miles; the cost of construction
and compensation for land 1,000,000 pounds, and of machinery, depots,
&c., 600,000 pounds.  On the motion of Mr. Samuel Bignold, a provisional
committee was formed for the purpose of promoting the object.  On August
30th notice was given that application would be made in the next Session
of Parliament for the construction of "the grand Eastern Counties
Railway" from London to Norwich and Yarmouth, _via_ Romford, Chelmsford,
Colchester, Ipswich, and Eye, at the estimated cost of 1,500,000 pounds,
to be raised in 30,000 shares of 50 pounds each.  A meeting was held at
the Guildhall on Sept. 13th, for the purpose of considering the
expediency of forming a railway from London to Norwich _via_ Bishop's
Stortford, Cambridge, and Bury, to join the trunk of the Grand Northern
Railway from London to York, Leeds, and Hull.  Mr. William Cundy, C.E.,
described the plans, stating that in less than 18 months the railway from
London to Norwich would be completed; and said that the estimated cost
was 1,600,000 pounds.  A local committee was appointed to enquire into
the merits of the respective schemes.  A public meeting of the county
gentry and representatives of the agricultural and commercial interests
was held at the Guildhall on October 16th, at which the committee
reported that the line proposed by Mr. Gibbs was best entitled to the
support of the city and county.

26.--Mr. John Marshall was elected freemen's Sheriff at Norwich by 817
votes, as against 585 recorded for Mr. John Culley.

31.--A terrible panic took place at St. Margaret's church, Lynn, owing to
the failure of the gas.  A rush was made for the doors, and a lad who
fell from the organ loft received dreadful injuries.


SEPTEMBER.


6.--Died, aged 85, Mrs. Bray, wife of Mr. Thomas Bray, "proprietor of the
Diss and Norwich waggons to Ipswich, which have regularly travelled from
the Star in the Market Place, Diss, to the Star in the Market Place,
Norwich, under the name of Bray, for more than a century and a half."

10.--Died, aged 77, Mr. Edmund Reeve, of St. Augustine's, Norwich.  He
served the office of Sheriff in 1796.

15.--On the Abbey Farm, Thetford, Sir Richard Sutton, Bart., in the
presence of a large gathering of sportsmen, killed in seven hours 222
head of partridges, in 246 shots.


OCTOBER.


6.--At the Guildhall, Norwich, John Cozens, merchant, and Joseph Colman,
solicitor, were summoned by George Arthur Dye for endeavouring, by
threatening to prosecute an action in the Court of King's Bench, for
supposed acts of bribery alleged to have been committed by the
complainant, to extort from him a large sum of money, viz., the sum which
he (Cozens) had expended in petitioning the House of Commons against the
return of Lord Viscount Stormont and Sir James Scarlett, as members of
Parliament for Norwich.  The defendants were committed for trial, and at
the adjourned Quarter Sessions for the city, on October 28th, a true bill
was found against them.  They entered into recognisances to appear at the
Lent Assizes, which were held in March, 1835, before Mr. Baron Vaughan,
when the case was settled without proceeding to trial.

9.--The Hall Concert Room, St. George's Bridge Street, Norwich, was sold
by auction.  It was afterwards converted into a carpenter's workshop.
"The Hall Concert Society, after existing for upwards of half a century,
has been dissolved.  Without the assistance of this amateur musical
society, the Norwich Musical Festival, and its most prominent feature,
the chorus, would never have been called into existence."

11.*--"Died, lately, at Swainsthorpe, aged 75, Robert Utting, commonly
called 'Blind Bob.'  He could find any place to which he was sent in
Norwich, and was for more than 50 years postman from that city to
Swainsthorpe."

27.--The Pilot coach was on its journey from Norwich to Lowestoft, with
eight outside and two inside passengers, when the leader of the unicorn
team became restive, on Bracondale Hill, and turning sharply into
Martineau's Lane, overturned the vehicle.  Mr. Benson Rathbone, of
Geldeston, one of the passengers, sustained a fracture of the skull, from
which he died an hour afterwards, at the Pine Apple public-house, at
Trowse.  Several other passengers were injured.


NOVEMBER.


4.--The members of the Orange and Purple Club (president, Mr. W. J. Utten
Browne), at the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, presented a piece of silver plate
to Mr. A. A. H. Beckwith, in recognition of his important services to the
Conservative cause.

19.--At the Guildhall, Norwich, Mr. Samuel Bignold was presented with a
silver candelabrum, valued at 200 pounds, "to perpetuate the remembrance
of his ability and independence as a magistrate, his munificent
hospitality, and his important public services."

--The Hon. W. H. Beresford and Mr. W. M. Praed were adopted Conservative
candidates at Yarmouth.  Mr. Beresford afterwards withdrew in favour of
Mr. Thomas Baring.

26.--The annual meeting of the Norfolk and Norwich Museum was held for
the first time "in the new building in Exchange Street," which was
informally opened on that occasion.

29.--The Rev. A. Sedgwick, M.A., F.R.S., Woodwardian Professor in the
University of Cambridge, was installed a Prebendary of Norwich Cathedral.


DECEMBER.


2.--A meeting of Nonconformists was held at Edwards' Room, Orford Hill,
Norwich, in defence of their civil and religious liberty.  Alarm was
expressed at the dismissal of Lord Melbourne and his colleagues from
office, and at the management of the affairs of State "being consigned to
individuals who had proved themselves the enemies of Reform and of the
claims of Protestant Dissenters."  The Hon. Edward Vernon Harbord was
requested to become a candidate for the representation of Norwich.

5.--Died at his house in St. Giles', Mr. William Simpson, Town Clerk of
Norwich and Treasurer of the County.

8.--Died at Carlton Hall, Mr. Thomas Marsham.  "He commenced farming with
slender means, and notwithstanding his liberality to the labourers on his
estate, and his hospitality to his brother farmers, he accumulated a
property of near 30,000 pounds."

13.*--"Died, last week, Mr. Richard Mingay, well known in Norwich as a
violin player.  He was a man of many and very versatile talents, which,
among other modes, have been displayed upon the stage in the character of
Crack, in 'The Turnpike Gate,' which he performed with great humour."

15.--At a special assembly of the Common Council, Mr. Beckwith, City
Chamberlain, was elected Town Clerk of Norwich; Mr. Skipper, Speaker of
the Common Council, was appointed City Chamberlain; and Mr. James Winter
was elected Speaker.

17.--The Orange and Purple Club entertained 768 Conservative voters at
dinner at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich.  It was announced by the Mayor that
Sir James Scarlett, M.P., had been appointed Lord Chief Baron of the
Exchequer.  Lord Stormont and Mr. Robert Campbell Scarlett, the
prospective candidates for the city, were received with great enthusiasm.
On the 18th dinner was served to 1,004 Conservative electors.  Mr. W. J.
Utten Browne presided on both occasions.

20.--Mr. Richard Hanbury Gurney and Mr. W. Windham were announced to be
the "Blue and White" candidates for East Norfolk.  The former gentleman
addressed the merchants at the Norwich Corn Exchange.  Lord Stormont and
Mr. Scarlett also spoke, and were attacked by a disorderly crowd.  Mr.
Gurney went to the assistance of his lordship.  On the 22nd Mr. Edward
Butcher was ordered by the magistrates to find sureties for having taken
part in the disturbance.  At a subsequent meeting of the Orange and
Purple Club, Lord Stormont acknowledged the "honourable conduct" of Mr.
Gurney.

24.--Died at Cork, Major-General Sir Robert Travers, elder brother of Sir
Eaton Travers, of Ditchingham Lodge, and of Major Travers, of Hedenham
Hall.  He was riding in Patrick Street, Cork, when his horse was
frightened by the band of Wombwell's Menagerie.  The general was thrown,
and received fatal injuries.

27.--The Hon. E. V. Harbord and Mr. Frank Offley Martin were adopted
Liberal candidates for the representation of Norwich.



1835.


JANUARY.


5.--Yarmouth Election--T. Baring (C), 777; W. M. Praed (C), 768
(elected).  Hon. Col. Anson (L), 680; C. E. Rumbold (L), 675.

6.--Norwich Election--Lord Viscount Stormont and the Hon. Robert Campbell
Scarlett, Conservatives; the Hon. E. Vernon Harbord and Mr. Francis
Offley Martin, Liberals, were nominated, and polling commenced on the
same date.  The books remained open until 5.30 p.m. on the 7th, when the
result was declared as follows:--Stormont, 1,892; Scarlett, 1,878
(elected).  Harbord, 1,592; Martin, 1,585.

7.--Lynn Election--The polling commenced on this date, and concluded on
the 8th.  Lord George Bentinck, 531; Sir Stratford Canning, 416
(elected); Sir John S. Lillie, 238.

12.--The nomination of candidates for the representation of West Norfolk
took place at Swaffham.  Mr. William Bagge, the Conservative candidate,
was escorted to the town by a procession, headed by the hunting
establishment of Mr. Henry Villebois.  Sir William ffolkes and Sir Jacob
Astley were accompanied by Mr. T. W. Coke and numerous supporters.  A
dispute arose between Lord Charles Townshend and Sir Jacob Astley, who
were ordered by the justices to enter into their recognisances to keep
the peace towards each other.  The polling commenced on January 15th, at
Swaffham, Downham, Fakenham, Lynn, Thetford, and East Dereham, and closed
on the 16th.  The poll was declared on the 19th.--ffolkes, 2,299; Astley,
2,134; Bagge, 1,880.  The two first-named were elected.

17.--The nomination of candidates for the East Norfolk Division took
place at Norwich.  Lord Walpole and Mr. Wodehouse, Conservatives, entered
the city by St. Giles' Gates, escorted by between three hundred and four
hundred horsemen; Mr. W. Windham and Mr. R. H. Gurney (Liberals) rode at
the head of 196 mounted supporters.  The polling commenced on the 20th,
at Norwich, Yarmouth, Long Stratton, and Reepham, and concluded on the
21st.  The poll was declared on the 23rd, as follows:--Walpole, 3,188;
Wodehouse, 3,474; Windham, 3,089; Gurney, 2,879.  The two first-named
were elected.

--At the Norwich Court of Mayoralty, Mr. Alderman Bignold read a letter
from the Right Hon. Lord Abinger, Baron of Abinger in the county of
Surrey and of the city of Norwich, intimating his lordship's desire that
the Mayor and Corporation would permit him to take as the supporters of
his arms the supporters of the arms of the city.  The Court unanimously
granted the request.  It was also announced that his lordship had
appointed as his chaplain the Rev. Charles Turner, son of the Mayor.

27.--The supporters of Messrs. Harbord and Martin, to the number of 900,
were entertained at dinner at St. Andrew's Hall by leading persons of the
Liberal party.  On the 28th 1,000 were similarly entertained.  Mr. W.
Foster presided on both occasions, and on the second day Mr. Martin
delivered a speech of two hours' duration.


FEBRUARY.


7.--A "moveable panorama" of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway,
painted by Mr. Thorne, was exhibited at the Theatre Royal, Norwich.

19.--Married, Mr. J. V. Jermay, of Wroxham, to Mrs. Sarah Landimore, of
the same place.  "The above-named female has been twice married, having
entered the matrimonial state at the age of 14.  She became a widow at
15, and is now a wife again at 17."

23.--Died, at New Lakenham, aged 66, Mr. William Cole, the author of
"Rural Months," and other poems.

24.--The Corporation of Norwich voted the honorary freedom of the city to
the Hon. Robert Campbell Scarlett, M.P.

--A committee was appointed by the Corporation of Norwich to prepare a
memorial to the Postmaster-General, for an acceleration of the mail coach
service.  A letter was received from Lord Stormont, M.P., on March 27th,
stating that the Postmaster-General had made the following arrangements:
the Norwich and Yarmouth letters to go by the Ipswich mail instead of by
the Newmarket coach, the Ipswich mail to arrive at Norwich at 7.30 a.m.,
and to leave Norwich at 7 p.m.

28.--Died at his residence in Portman Square, London, aged 78, the Right
Hon. and Rev. Earl Nelson, Duke of Bronte, "brother of the hero of
Trafalgar."  The title and estates descended to Mr. Thomas Bolton, jun.,
son of Susannah Nelson, sister of the first two Earls, and of Thomas
Bolton, who was born in 1786, and married, in 1821, Elizabeth, daughter
and sole heir of John Maurice.


MARCH.


14.*--"At Didlington Hall, the only place in England at which the antient
amusement of flying hawks at herons is practised, it has been customary
to turn off the birds taken alive, with a ring attached to one leg,
showing the time and place at which they were captured.  In a late
Bristol paper there is an account of a heron having been shot near
Carmarthen with a ring round one leg having the inscription: 'Major
Wilson, Didlington Hall, Norfolk, 1822.'"


APRIL.


3.--Lord Chief Baron Abinger, one of the Judges of Assize at Norwich, was
waited upon at the Judges' lodgings, in Bethel Street, by the Mayor and
Corporation, and presented with an address, on this his first visit to
the city in a judicial capacity.

4.--At the Norwich Assizes, before Mr. Justice Vaughan, Johnstone
Wardell, aged 23, a bank clerk, was charged with embezzling the sum of
1,431 pounds 18s. 7d. belonging to the Governor and Company of the Bank
of England.  Mr. Kelly was retained for the defence at the fee of 100
gs., and, after a trial lasting ten hours, the jury acquitted the
prisoner.  The defence was that the accused had been knocked down and
robbed of the money on the Castle Ditches.  A few months afterwards he
confessed his guilt and refunded the full amount.

7.--Three hundred emigrants left Yarmouth Quay by the Baltic (Captain
Newson), Venus (Captain Simmons), and Wellington (Captain Gilham), for
Quebec.  The Shannon sailed from Lynn for Quebec on April 16th, with 90
emigrants.

18.--James Clarke, aged 20, was executed on Castle Hill, Norwich, for
setting fire to a wheat stack at Buxton.  "The most singular feature
attending the execution was that an old man named Wyer, a person well
known for his eccentricities, declared on the Hill that he would take the
sufferer's place for five shillings.  The man made good his word, went
home and hanged himself."

20.--Mr. Macready commenced a four nights' engagement at Norwich Theatre
in the part of Macbeth.  His other impersonations included Hamlet,
Virginius, Werner, and Puff ("The Critic").  On the 23rd an outrage was
committed by a person who "threw a chemical substance capable of
ignition, in different parts of the building."  A reward of 20 gs. was
offered for the apprehension of the offender.

25.--The West Norfolk and Lynn Hospital, designed by Mr. Angel and built
by Mr. Sugars, was opened for the reception of patients.

--A troop of the 6th Inniskilling Dragoons arrived at Norwich Barracks,
and were followed by two other troops of the same regiment, from
Sheffield and Nottingham.


MAY.


1.--Mr. Moore and Mr. Steward were returned to the Norwich Court of
Aldermen for election as Mayor.  The first-named was chosen.

4.--The 2nd Dragoon Guards marched from Norwich Barracks, on their way to
Liverpool, for embarcation for Dublin.  The Mayor and Corporation
testified to the excellent conduct of the regiment, and expressed regret
at their departure.

--The Norwich Corporation agreed not to dispose of the old City Gaol
without reserving a portion of the site for the purposes of the Norwich
Public Library.  On September 21st a lease was granted of part of the
site (70 ft. by 70 ft.) to the trustees of the Library for the term of 99
years, at the annual rent of 1 pound, "for the erection of a library room
or other building connected therewith."  At a special meeting of the
subscribers, on October 29th, the contract of Messrs. Darkins and Blake
for the erection of the new building, at the total cost of 1,820 pounds,
was confirmed, and it was decided to raise the amount in shares of 5
pounds each.

--The honorary freedom of the city was voted by the Corporation of
Norwich to Lord Walpole, M.P., and Mr. Edmond Wodehouse, M.P.  Both
gentlemen were sworn in on May 8th.

5.--Died of dysentery at Calcutta, aged 70, Mr. Thomas Hoseason, formerly
of Banklands, near Lynn.

6.--Died, aged 69, at Furnival's Inn, Mr. Linley, "son of the writer of
the music in 'The Duenna,' and brother of the first Mrs. Sheridan and of
the Rev. O. T. Linley, formerly of Norwich Cathedral.  He was a good
composer and excellent judge of music."

8.--A dinner, attended by 650 guests, was given at St. Andrew's Hall,
Norwich, to celebrate the establishment at the Rampant Horse Inn of the
East Norfolk Conservative Association.  The Earl of Orford presided.
Prior to the dinner the members of the association proceeded to the
Guildhall, to witness the swearing in of Lord Walpole and Mr. Wodehouse
as hon. freemen of Norwich.

9.--Died, aged 66, Mr. William Blanchard, "the celebrated comedian,
formerly of the Norwich Company."

11.--Mr. Butler, of Covent Garden, appeared at Norwich Theatre in the
part of Hamlet.  He performed on subsequent evenings the parts of
Coriolanus and David Duvigne ("The Hazard of the Die").

18.--The Bill for renewing the Yarmouth Port and Haven Act, which would
otherwise have expired in 1836, went into Committee in the House of
Commons, and was finally agreed to by all parties.

25.--Died in Norwich, aged 67, Mr. George Lindley, author of the "Guide
to the Orchard and Kitchen Garden, " &c., and father of Dr. Lindley,
Professor of Botany at the Royal Institution and the University of
London.

26.--Died at his house in Magdalen Street, Norwich, aged 91, Mr. Barnabas
Leman, who was elected Alderman in 1797, Sheriff in 1804, and twice
served the office of Mayor, 1813-1818.

27.--Captain Sir Edward Parry, R.N., the celebrated navigator, made an
official visit to Norwich, on his appointment as an Assistant
Commissioner under the new Poor Laws Amendment Act.

29.--At the Guildhall, Norwich, John Pilgrim, described as an attorney,
was charged before Mr. Samuel Bignold and Mr. E. T. Booth with embezzling
the sum of 6 pounds 13s. belonging to his employers, Messrs. Sewell,
Blake, Keith, and Blake, solicitors.  The case was adjourned till
Saturday, the 30th, and the hearing lasted till midnight.  On Sunday, the
31st, the magistrates again sat, and remanded the defendant in custody.
On June 1st it was stated that Mr. Parraman, Governor of the City Gaol,
had handed the prisoner over to the custody of the Serjeant-at-Arms of
the House of Commons, on a warrant from the Speaker.  The Bench then
adjourned the hearing _sine die_.  In order to explain these proceedings,
it is necessary to state the following facts:--A petition had been
presented against the return of Mr. Dundas and Mr. Kelly as members for
Ipswich, and the Committee of the House of Commons, in reporting the
election void, passed a series of special resolutions to the effect that
John Pilgrim and others were guilty of bribery and of absconding to avoid
the Speaker's warrant; that Pilgrim, having at length been served, was
prevented attending the Committee by being arrested on a charge of
embezzlement, and that the conduct of the magistrates before whom he was
charged appeared to the Committee to be a breach of the privileges of the
House.  On June 29th it was moved that the committing magistrates be sent
to Newgate, but instead they were ordered to attend before the House on
July 3rd.  That order was discharged, and the inquiry was referred to the
same Select Committee that was to investigate the charges against
Pilgrim's employers.  At the Norwich Assizes on August 8th, before Mr.
Baron Bolland, the bill in the case of embezzlement was respited to the
next court.  A meeting of the Norwich Corporation was held on September
21st, at which a vote of thanks was accorded to Mr. Bignold and Mr. Booth
"for the performance of their duty as magistrates, which led to their
being summoned before the Committee of the House of Commons on the charge
of alleged breach of privileges of the House," and it was ordered that
their expenses in London be defrayed by the city.  (_See_ March 29th,
1836. )

31.--Died at his house in Bedford Square, London, Mr. William Smith,
formerly one of the representatives of Norwich in Parliament.  Mr. Smith
was first elected member for the city in 1802, and retired in 1830.


JUNE.


3.--Mr. Beacham, a favourite actor at Norwich Theatre, took his final
leave of the stage after a service of more than half a century.

6.--The erection of gas works at East Dereham commenced.

10.--A new drama, entitled, "The Puritan's Sister," written by Mr. George
Smith, was produced for the first time at Norwich Theatre.

14.--Died at Brighton, aged 72, Sir John Harrison Yallop, an alderman of
Norwich.  He served the office of Sheriff in 1805, and of Mayor in 1815
and 1831.

15.--Sir Edward Parry, R.N., attended a meeting of the Norwich Court of
Guardians, and laid before them the views and intentions of the Poor-law
Commissioners.  Sir Edward also visited other unions in the district.

16.--Guild Day was celebrated in Norwich for the last time.  The civic
procession to the Cathedral was headed by the regalia borne by the
respective officers on horseback.  "Snap," too, made his final
appearance.  Chambers, the senior boy at the Free Grammar School, under
the Rev. Henry Banfather, delivered the Latin oration, and was presented
with five guineas' worth of books by the Mayor-elect (Mr. Moore), who
made a similar present to Norgate, the orator on the preceding Guild Day.
In the course of the proceedings at the Guildhall, it was decided to
petition the House of Lords against the Bill to provide for the
regulation of Municipal Corporations in England and Wales.  Eight hundred
guests attended the Guild feast at St. Andrew's Hall, and a ball was
given at the Assembly Rooms in the evening.

19.--Mr. Richard Shaw was elected an alderman of the Northern Ward,
Norwich, in succession to Sir J. H. Yallop, deceased.  He polled 345
votes, as against 109 recorded for his opponent, Mr. J. Winter.

26.--Petitions were presented from Yarmouth, complaining that bribery had
been practised at the election of members for that borough.  They were
not election petitions; they did not complain of the return; and did not
impute bribery to the members or their agents.  But it was alleged that
two guineas had been paid to many of the voters at the house of a person
who had been an active partisan of the sitting members.  The petitions
were referred to a Committee of the House.  On July 30th the Chairman of
the Committee reported that Mr. Prentice, one of the witnesses, refused
to answer certain questions, on the ground that the answers would
incriminate himself.  He was sent to Newgate on August 6th.  On the same
day the Chairman reported that three other witnesses, Messrs. Preston,
Lacon, and Green, had refused to answer any questions at all.  Mr.
Preston was brought to the bar and informed by the Speaker that the House
had decided he was bound to submit to be examined by the Committee
without prejudice to his right to object to any questions, the answers to
which might tend to criminate himself.  Mr. Preston and Messrs. Lacon and
Green attended the Committee.  They objected to the very first question
which at all tended to bear on the matter, because, they said, the
answers might criminate them.  The Committee agreed that the answers
would have that tendency, and discharged the witnesses from further
attendance.  On August 11th Mr. Prentice was likewise discharged from
Newgate, and on his arrival at Yarmouth, on August 14th, was welcomed by
a large crowd, who escorted his carriage through the town, with a band
playing.  At the Norfolk Assizes, on March 31st, 1836, before Mr. Justice
Parke, Messrs. Preston, Green, and Lacon were charged with the alleged
acts of bribery, but each case was disposed of without one of the persons
against whom the charges were preferred being required to enter upon any
defence whatever.

29.--In consequence of the general recommendation of the Poor-law
Commissioners that the allowances to the "surplus poor" be made in kind,
instead of in money, the labourers at Great Bircham and Bircham Tofts
struck work, and caused a riot, upon the ground that labourers had been
imported from neighbouring villages.  The houses of Mr. Ketton and Mr.
Hebgin were attacked, and the Melton and Rainham troops of Yeomanry
Cavalry were called out to quell the disturbance.  The preventive men
from the coast and the 6th Inniskillings from Norwich were also summoned.
At Walsingham Quarter Sessions, on July 10th, several persons were
sentenced to terms of imprisonment for participating in the riot.


JULY.


6.--The Royal Mail coach from Yarmouth (through Norwich) to Birmingham
commenced running.  "In equipment and management this coach is not
excelled by any in the kingdom."

--Died at Vernon House, London, from the effects of injuries received by
a fall from his horse in St. James's Park, on June 30th, the Right Hon.
Lord Suffield, aged 54.  The intelligence arrived at North Walsham at the
time fixed for the celebration of his lordship's birthday by a dinner at
the King's Arms Inn.  The body of the deceased nobleman reached Norwich
on July 15th, and remained at the Rampant Horse Inn that night.  On the
following day it was conveyed to Gunton, and buried in the chapel in the
park.

14.--A handbill was circulated in Norwich announcing that "the Dutch
Hercules, Mynheer Kousewinkeler van Raachboomstadt, professor of
gymnastics and Maitre des Armes to the 5th Regiment of Royal Jaagers,"
would give his "celebrated series of gymnastic exercises" in Chapel
Field.  Some thousands of persons were hoaxed.


AUGUST.


1.--Mr. Charles Kemble made his first appearance at Norwich Theatre in
the character of Julian St. Pierre ("The Wife").  During the remaining
nights of his engagement he performed the parts of Benedict, Mercutio,
Colonel Freelove ("The Day after the Wedding"), Octavian ("The
Mountaineers"), Petruchio, and Charles Surface.  He afterwards visited
Yarmouth.

6.--Evidence was given before the House of Lords in opposition to the
Municipal Reform Bill by Mr. E. T. Booth, Col. Harvey, Mr. Isaac Preston
(Recorder), and Mr. E. Newton, of Norwich.  A petition, adopted at a
meeting of the freemen on July 11th, and signed by 1,600 persons of both
parties, had already been presented, praying their lordships "to preserve
to Norwich the privileges granted by the charters of 700 years ago."  The
Bill was passed on September 9th, and on October 3rd the NORFOLK
CHRONICLE stated: "St. Michael 'shone no festive holiday' either at
Norwich, Lynn, or Yarmouth.  For many centuries until this _annus
mirabilis_ of _Liberalism_ the Sheriffs of Norwich (from 1403), the
Mayors of Lynn (from 1268) and of Yarmouth (from 1684), were sworn into
office on new Michaelmas day. . . .  Under the new Act the present Mayors
and Sheriffs are to continue to hold their respective offices until
January 1st next, and their immediate successors--_one_ Sheriff until the
first, and the Mayors until the 9th of November, on which days the
elections of Sheriffs and Mayors of boroughs will in future take place."

7.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Mr. Justice Bolland, Frances Billing,
aged 46, and Catherine Frarey, aged 40, were found guilty of the murder
of Mary Taylor, of Burnham Westgate, by administering arsenic to her.
They were also convicted of the murder of Robert Frarey, husband of the
last-named prisoner.  The execution took place on the Castle Hill,
Norwich, on August 10th.  Frarey was dressed in deep mourning for her
husband, and wore a widow's cap.  They held each other by the hand when
upon the scaffold.  "The silence which had hitherto pervaded the immense
concourse who stood intently gazing on this dreadful exhibition was
broken by a piercing shriek when the drop fell; then all was still
again."  Mrs. Billing had had eleven children, eight of whom were living
at the time of the execution.  Both women had been in the habit of
consulting reputed witches at Burnham and Sall (_See_ April 1st, 1836.)

14.--Died, aged 79, Mr. William Mason, of Necton.  "He was accomplished
in literature, and was one of the favourite scholars of the late Dr.
Parr."

22.--Died, aged 78, the Hon. George Walpole, second son of Horatio, first
Earl of Orford and fourth Lord Walpole of Walpole.  He commanded the
troops employed in suppressing the rebellion of the Maroons in Jamaica.
On his retirement from the Army he went into Parliament, and was
Under-Secretary of State during the Fox Administration in 1806.

23.--Died, aged 65, Mr. Francis Stone, architect, Norwich, and for nearly
30 years Surveyor of the County of Norfolk.

25.--The last election for the office of freemen's Sheriff took place at
Norwich.  Mr. Paul Squire was returned, with 829 votes.  Mr. Edward
Willett, his opponent, polled 437.


SEPTEMBER.


18.--At nine o'clock in the morning, Mr. Green, the aeronaut, who had
ascended in his balloon from Vauxhall Gardens, London, at six o'clock in
the evening of the 17th, descended between North Runcton and Hardwick,
about a mile from Lynn South Gates.

22.--The Duchess of Kent and Princess Victoria, on their way from
Burleigh House, Stamford, to Holkham Park, on a visit to Mr. Coke, passed
through Lynn, and were received with great enthusiasm.  The horses were
removed from the Royal carriage, which was dragged through the town to
the Duke's Head Inn.  The relay of horses having been sent towards
Gaywood, the populace drew the carriage, amid most loyal demonstrations,
to the eastern boundary of the town, where the horses were put to and the
journey resumed.  At Holkham the preventive service formed a guard of
honour, and the whole of the tenantry were in attendance.  On the 23rd
their Royal Highnesses were presented by the inhabitants of Wells with a
loyal address, to which the Duchess of Kent graciously replied.  Their
Royal Highnesses left Holkham on the 24th for the seat of the Duke of
Grafton at Euston, and passed through Swaffham, where the race meeting
was delayed in order to give the large concourse the opportunity of
greeting their future Sovereign.


OCTOBER.


6.--The Young Company's yawl Increase was launched from Yarmouth beach at
one p.m., with a crew of eight hands, Budds (a pilot), and a Mr. Layton.
It went to the assistance of a brig flying a signal of distress.  Layton
and one of the men remained on board the brig.  The yawl, when returning
to shore, was capsized in a squall, and seven of the crew drowned.  Two,
named Brock and Emmerson, swam for their lives.  Emmerson sank, but Brock
continued swimming until he reached Corton Bay, where he was picked up by
a vessel after he had been seven hours in the water and had swum fourteen
miles.

10.--The Revising Barristers (Mr. S. Gazelee and Mr. W. A. Collins)
commenced an inquiry at Norwich as to the settlement of the new municipal
boundaries.  On the 13th they announced that they had decided to arrange
the city in eight wards, based upon the relative proportions of property
and population.

13.--At a convivial meeting at the Three Turks public-house, Charing
Cross, Norwich, William Cork, an artisan, was singing "the well-known
song written on the death of General Wolfe," and after repeating the
words, "And I to death must yield," fell down and, to the consternation
of the company, instantly expired.

23.--At a meeting held at the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, under the
presidency of Sir Jacob Astley, Bart., M.P., it was agreed that the line
of railway most advantageous to Norfolk and Norwich was that proposed by
Mr. James Walker, engineer, from Yarmouth to Norwich and thence to
Cambridge and London.  A similar opinion was expressed at meetings held
at Yarmouth on October 30th and at Thetford on November 3rd.

28.--The libraries, works of art, curiosities, &c., of Captain Marryat,
C.B., were sold by auction at his residence, Langham, near Holt.
"Captain Marryat has broken up his establishment in Norfolk as his
devotion to literature will oblige him to reside constantly in London."


NOVEMBER.


1.--Died at his house, Buckworth, near Romsey, the Right Hon. Earl
Nelson, aged 50.  He was born at St. Michael-at-Plea, Norwich, and
married, in 1821, Frances Elizabeth, daughter and heiress of Mr. John
Maurice, and was succeeded in his titles and estates by his eldest son,
Horatio Bolton Nelson, Viscount Trafalgar, aged 12 years.

9.--The schooner Harriet, on her passage from St. Petersburg to
Liverpool, was lost, with her crew of eight hands, off Hunstanton.  "The
wreckage washed ashore was immediately broken up, and part of it
converted to private purposes.  It is shocking to contemplate the lawless
scrambling of the wreckers of this coast to obtain possession of their
prey, in which they appear to be encouraged by the conduct of persons
whose especial duty it is to prevent rather than to encourage the
abominable plunder here carried on."

14.--Extensive flour mills at Hardingham, occupied by Messrs. Taylor and
Tingay, were destroyed by fire.

27.--Mr. Charles Turner, Deputy-Mayor of Norwich, was presented with a
piece of plate by the subscribers who had placed his portrait in St.
Andrew's Hall.  The portrait was painted by H. P. Briggs, R.A.


DECEMBER.


1.--Messrs. Collins and Gazelee, revising barristers, commenced at
Norwich the first revision of the municipal voters' lists.

7.--A fine male specimen of the sea eagle was shot at Hunstanton Hall.
The crop and stomach contained 15 herring; the wings from tip to tip
measured 7 ft. 3 in.

9.--Professor Sedgwick commenced his course of lectures on geology at the
Norfolk and Norwich Museum.  Upwards of 200 new subscribers added their
names, in order to have the privilege of attending.

15.--Died at his uncle's house, Lancaster Place, London, Mr. James Smith,
surgeon, son of the manager of Norwich Theatre.

22.--The first general meeting of the proprietors of the East of England
Bank was held at the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, the Mayor (Mr. W. Moore)
presiding.

--Forty _amateurs de bonne chere_ presented Mr. William Snow, "the Ude of
Norwich," with a silver gridiron, on the occasion of his 64th birthday.

24.--The new Octagon chapel at Diss was opened.  Sermons were preached by
the Revs.  J. Alexander and J. B. Innes, of Norwich.

26.--The first elections under the new Municipal Reform Act took place at
Norwich.  The polling commenced at eight polling-places at nine o'clock,
and closed at four o'clock, "when the Mayor went round to the different
departments and received the boxes from his deputies."  The method of
voting was thus described: "The voters delivered to the deputies their
signed lists containing the names of the candidates for whom they gave
their suffrages.  A clerk entered the name of the voter and the
candidates in a book, and the list was then deposited in a box by the
deputy."  The election resulted in the return of the Whig-Radicals by a
majority of eight.



1836.


JANUARY.


1.--The first quarterly meeting of the new City Council was held at the
Guildhall, Norwich.  Mr. T. O. Springfield was elected Mayor.

4.--The first act of the Yarmouth reformed Town Council was to remove
from office the Earl of Orford, Lord High Steward of the borough, and to
elect the Earl of Lichfield in his place.  The Earl, writing from
Wolterton on January 26th, informed the Mayor that the only intimation he
had received of his dismissal was through the newspaper paragraph in
which it was announced, and added: "The honour which your late
Corporation conferred upon me was received with pride and gratitude.  My
dismissal by the present Corporation confers almost equal honour, upon,
Sir, your obedient servant, ORFORD."

13.--The Norwich Corporation voted an address to his Majesty, expressing
gratitude to him for effecting the moral alterations in the state of his
Empire called for by the progress of knowledge, and confidence in his
Majesty's advisers, and promising to make effectual for the general
happiness, comfort, and prosperity of the citizens the new Corporation
Act, under authority of which they were met together.

22.--Italian opera was produced at Norwich Theatre, under the management
of Miss Leslie.  The works included "Il Barbiere di Siviligia," "La
Ceverentola," and "Il Don Giovanni."  The principal artistes were Madame
Carri Paltoni, Miss M. A. Leslie, Signor De Val, Signor Paltoni, Signor
Giubelli, Signora Cellini, and Signor Tryano.  Mr. Schipins was
conductor, and Mr. T. Jackson leader.

26.--A meeting was held at the Town Hall, Lynn, to petition Parliament to
grant a Committee to enquire into the distresses of agriculture.  The
High Sheriff (Mr. Hudson Gurney) presided.  It was represented that the
price of corn and wheat was barely equal to what it was in 1793, while
the taxation of the country was three times greater than at that period.
The meeting agreed that the prices of agricultural produce be raised to
meet existing burdens, or such burdens be lowered to meet existing
prices.


FEBRUARY.


1.--Mr. Sheridan Knowles and Miss Elphinstone made their first appearance
in a four nights' engagement at Norwich Theatre, as Master Walter and
Julia, in his play "The Hunchback."  They also appeared on ensuing
evenings as St. Pierre and Mariana ("The Wife"), Pierre and Velerdera
("Venice Preserved"), William Tell and Emma ("William Tell"), and as
Petruchio and Catherine.

7.--Died, aged 71, Mr. Richard Langton, many years librarian at the
Public Library, Norwich.

17.--The north segment of North Walsham steeple was blown down.  The
bells fell in a mass of ruins.

17.--During a heavy gale at Yarmouth the tide overflowed many parts of
the Quay, and inundated the houses.  The foundations of several buildings
fronting the beach were undermined by the water, and the sands presented
a scene of devastation and ruin.

20.--A facing of brickwork by which the south side of the Guildhall had
been disfigured for more than a century was removed and replaced by a
beautiful specimen of flint work and masonry, from designs by Mr. J.
Stannard, architect.

21.--Died at Ipswich, aged 64, Mrs. Cockle, daughter of Mr. Charles
Roope, of Pulham Market.  "She was well-known as the author of some
valuable works on female education, and of literary and poetical
productions."

25.--The Northern and Eastern Railway Bill, for making a line from London
to Cambridge, and thence to Norwich and Yarmouth, as planned by Mr. James
Walker, was read a first time in the House of Commons.  It passed the
remaining stages, and was read a third time in the House of Lords on July
27th.  On February 25th also the Commons Committee on the Eastern
Counties Railway Bill determined that the standing orders had been
complied with.  This Bill was read a first time on March 10th.  During
that month a deputation from the London directors met the friends and
supporters of the line at Norwich, Lynn, and Yarmouth; and on April 14th
petitions in favour of the railway were presented in the House of Commons
from Norwich by Lord Stormont, and from Yarmouth by Mr. Praed.  The
second reading was carried by a majority of 74.  Mr. Gladstone remarked,
in the course of the debate, that the petition from Norwich "had been got
up by the foulest means--by means of eating and drinking.  Every person
who went in and put his name to the petition got a good lunch."  On May
2nd and 3rd Norwich and Norfolk witnesses gave evidence in favour of the
Bill, which was read a third time on June 1st.  It was announced on July
2nd that the Bill had passed through all stages in both Houses of
Parliament.


MARCH.


1.--The new police went on duty for the first time at Norwich.  "The 18
new policemen under the superintendence of Mr. Wright appeared for the
first time on Tuesday last in an uniform dark blue dress with waterproof
capes similar to those worn by the police in London."

5.--Died at his house in King Street, aged 69, Mr. William Taylor, "a
gentleman whose intellectual endowments and extraordinary range of varied
acquirements had gained for his name a celebrity which, far from being
confined within the walls of his native city, extended itself widely
through the world of British, European, and Trans-Atlantic literature.
The friend and biographer of Dr. Sayers, the associate of Dr. Southey and
other distinguished characters, Mr. Taylor stood pre-eminent for his
scholastic and critical knowledge of the great writers of Germany."

12.*--"The Gas Company of this city (Norwich) have determined to reduce
the price to those who consume by meter from 13s. per 1,000 cubic feet to
10s.  This reduction will place Norwich in a much better situation than
almost any town in the kingdom."

22.--Five hundred children under seven years of age assembled at St.
Andrew's Hall, Norwich, and underwent the system of examination
introduced by Mr. Wilderspin, the originator of infant schools.  On April
7th a public meeting was held at the Guildhall, at which it was decided
to establish a society to promote the extension of the infant school
system in the county and city.

--Died, suddenly, of apoplexy, while hunting with Sir James Flowers'
hounds at Tibenham, Mr. William Chambers, of Norwich, who served the
office of Sheriff from Michaelmas, 1834, to January 1st of this year, and
was the last Sheriff elected under the old system.  Mr. Chambers was in
his 45th year.

24.--Died at his house in Bethel Street, Norwich, aged 62, Mr. Robert
Hawkes, who was elected Alderman of the Mancroft Ward in 1818, served the
office of Sheriff in 1819, and that of Mayor in 1822.  In consequence of
Mr. Hawkes' death, the Judges of Assize, whose official lodgings were at
his house, were invited by the Very Rev. Dr. Pellew to stay at the
Deanery.  At the Norfolk Quarter Sessions, on April 8th, the thanks of
the county were accorded to Dr. Pellew.

29.--At the Norwich Assizes, before Mr. Justice Gaselee, the case of John
Pilgrim was further respited, in consequence of the illness of one of the
prosecutors.  (There is no further record of this case.)


APRIL.


1.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Mr. Justice Gaselee, Peter Taylor was
found guilty, as an accessary before the fact, of the murder of Mary
Taylor, his wife, at Burnham Westgate, on March 12th, 1835.  The
prosecution arose out of the trial of the women Frarey and Billing, who
were executed as principals in the murder.  Taylor, who to the last
protested his innocence, was hanged on the Castle Hill, Norwich, on April
23rd.

--At the same Assizes, before Mr. Justice Gaselee, John Sucker (23),
Thomas Bassett (40), Joseph Bruce (21), Thomas Dawes (25), and James
Staines (37) were indicted, Sucker and Bassett for the murder of William
Case, on November 30th, 1835, and the other prisoners for aiding and
assisting in the commission of the crime while poaching on the lands of
Mr. W. L. Jones, at Methwold.  They were found guilty and sentenced to
death.  The jury subsequently delivered to his lordship at the Deanery
the following declaration: "Our opinion is that the prisoners were guilty
of manslaughter, not murder, and it was our intention so to find had we
not been called upon to give our opinion as to the facts."  The execution
was deferred for the opinion of the Judges assembled in the Court of
Exchequer.  On April 23rd Lord Denman stated that the Judges, after
hearing counsel on both sides, were of opinion it would not be proper to
execute the prisoners for the crime of murder.

2.--A vessel of 500 tons burden, intended for the trade between England
and the Mauritius, was launched from the ship-yard of Mr. Richardson,
Friars' Fleet, Lynn.

4.--On the occasion of the presentation of a piece of plate to the Rev.
A. Goode, of Terrington St. Clement, 800 villagers accompanied the
deputation, with flags and banners, and "86 young females attending the
Sunday School bore branches of laurel."  The plate was borne upon a tray
by "two respectable parishioners," supported by "some emblematical
characters, one of whom personated the renowned Tom Hickathrift, the
Marshland giant of the olden time, and the bold defender of the ancient
rights of Marshland Smeeth.  The representative of Hickathrift delivered
an appropriate speech."

8.--At the Norfolk county magistrates' meeting, Mr. J. Brown was elected
Surveyor of the county, and Mr. James Watson surveyor of bridges.

--The Lord Lieutenant of the county, accompanied by Mr. Samuel Bignold,
visited the factory of the Norwich Yarn Company.  "There are now 300
workmen, upwards of 60 reelers, and about 200 children constantly at work
in the establishment, and the labour bill exceeds 200 pounds a week."

--Francis Widdows, "who was upwards of 50 years leader of the company of
singers in St. Mary's chapel," died at Doughty's Hospital, Norwich, in
his 80th year.

13.--One hundred and ninety-five emigrants from villages in the
neighbourhood embarked at Friars' Fleet, Lynn, on board the ship Anne,
bound for Quebec.  Mr. Daniel Gurney distributed among them Bibles,
Prayer-books, &c.  Large numbers of emigrants left the county during the
spring.  By May 17th 1,625 had sailed from Yarmouth.  From the same port,
on May 25th, sailed the Morning Star, with 212 emigrants, chiefly
labourers, from Suffolk, and the Brunswick, with 447 agriculturists from
East Norfolk.  By July 2nd the total number embarked at Yarmouth for
Quebec and Port St. Francis on the St. Lawrence was 3,200.

22.--Died, aged 72, at St. John Timberhill, Norwich, Mr. J. P. Cocksedge,
who served the office of Sheriff in 1827.

27.--Died, aged 37, "the eccentric and whimsical John Gudgeon, the
celebrated shuttle-maker, of Norwich."

28.--In consequence of the Mayor and Sheriff of Norwich having declined
to extend the customary patronage to the Theatre, the performance on this
night was under "the immediate patronage of the Conservatives of
Norwich."  The pieces produced were "The Rivals" and "The Mayor of
Garrat."

--The three troops of the 6th Inniskilling Dragoons stationed at Norwich
Cavalry Barracks, marched on their route to Canterbury and Brighton, and
were replaced by three troops of the 17th Lancers from Manchester.

30.*--"The King has been pleased to confer the honour of knighthood on a
native of Norwich, Dr. W. J. Hooker, Professor of Botany at Glasgow, and
a Companion of the Third Class of the Royal Guelphio Hanoverian Order."


MAY.


1.--The celebration of May Day, which, from time immemorial, has been
observed at Lynn by children parading the streets with garlands of
flowers and the sounding of horns, was this year prohibited by the
authorities of the borough.

25.--Miss Read, a native of the city, appeared at Norwich Theatre as
Belvedera ("Venice Preserved").  "Her performance was marked by talent
and feeling very creditable in so young an actress."

26.--A specimen of the common plant _valerian rubra_ was exhibited at the
show of the Norfolk and Norwich Horticultural Society with the following
inscription upon the label attached: "This plant was raised from seed
found in a cement coffin discovered beneath the ruins of Wymondham Priory
church.  The period of interment is proved antecedent to 1300."

31.--Married at Kensington, by the Rev. T. B. Murray, the Rev. George
William Murray, of Merton College, Oxford, assistant minister of St.
Peter's, Pimlico, fifth son of Charles Murray, formerly of Norwich, to
Marianne, second daughter of Major-General Sir William Douglas, K.C.B.,
of Timperdean, Roxburghshire.


JUNE.


4.*--"Died lately, aged 68, William Brett, an ingenious and eccentric
individual, generally known as 'Duke Brett,' of Swaffham, by trade a
shoemaker, but a perfect factotum in all manner of handicraft, and a
celebrated opium-eater, having for many years consumed large quantities
of this drug daily."

8.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council, Capt. Money moved a
resolution in favour of the admission of the public to the discussions of
that body, "because it would make the members more measured in their
language, more careful, and more honest."  Mr. Burt moved a negative
resolution, and stated that "if they could not restrain their language in
the company of gentlemen of education and respectability, they would not
do so in the presence of a school of persons casually admitted."  Capt
Money's motion was negatived.

28.--A meeting of the directors and proprietors of the Norwich Yarn
Company was held at the Guildhall, at which it was stated that the
factory was incapable of supplying even one-third of the quantity of yarn
required for manufacturing purposes in the city and neighbourhood.  It
was decided that the capital be increased by the creation of 700
additional shares of 100 pounds each.  (_See_ December 1st, 1836.)


JULY.


4.--A novel feat of pedestrianism was performed on the Norwich Cricket
Ground, in the presence of a great number of spectators.  "Sixty yards of
cord were wound round a pole one foot in circumference.  The pedestrian
took the end of the cord and ran round the pole until the whole was off,
which was to be completed in the space of four hours, the distance being
computed to be 20 miles.  The pedestrian, John Baldwin, a native of
Norwich, performed the arduous task in less than three and a half hours."

7.--The Yarmouth Town Council ordered the removal of the Market Cross,
upon the petition of certain inhabitants of the borough.

9.*--"Died, lately, Mr. William Read, farmer, of Dumpling Green, East
Dereham.  His remains were conveyed to the grave by his express desire in
one of his waggons, drawn by four of his best horses, of which he prided
himself in having the first in the county, and attended by an immense
concourse of persons, drawn together by the novelty of the scene."

--Mr. J. Gotobed, one of the proprietors of the Lynn coach, was fined 50
pounds "for having driven away the coach after it had been seized by his
Majesty's officers of Excise for conveying contraband spirits."

16.*--"Many hundred tons of oysters have been caught off Cley, where
there are very extensive beds, during the last season, and sold to the
Kent dealers at less than sixpence a bushel."

19.--The Sandringham Hall Estate was sold by Mr. W. W. Simpson, at the
Auction Mart, London, after a spirited competition, for 76,000 pounds.
It was the property of Mr. Henry Hoste Henly.

29.--Died at Longford, Derbyshire, Mr. Edward Coke, brother of Mr. T. W.
Coke, of Holkham.  Mr. Coke for several Sessions represented Derby in
Parliament, and was returned for Norfolk in 1807.


AUGUST.


1.--Norwich Theatre was re-opened after thorough renovation.  Gas light
was used for the first time.  Mrs. Yates appeared as Rachael ("The
Jewess"), and in the petite comedy, "An Actress of All Work," in which
she sustained six distinct characters.  On the 6th Mr. Yates appeared in
conjunction with his wife.  Norwich Theatre was described as "one of the
handsomest, most comfortable, and best lighted of the minor theatres in
this kingdom."

4.--A two-days' cricket match, between Yorkshire and Norfolk, commenced
on the Norwich Ground.  Yorkshire won, by 25 runs.


SEPTEMBER.


5.--Died, at his residence on the Castle Ditches, Norwich, in his 89th
year, Mr. Robert Ward, who served the office of Sheriff in 1800, and was
for upwards of 45 years a member of the Court of Guardians.

13.--A petition by Mr. Samuel Bignold and Mr. William Rackham on the one
part, and Mr. T. O. Springfield on the other part, having been presented
to the Lord Chancellor relative to the composition of the trustees of the
Norwich charities, the matter was argued on this date before the Master
in Chancery, who ruled that in composing the list of trustees he would
not admit more than four Dissenters out of the 21; further, that in the
execution of their official duties, the trustees should be divided into
two classes, and that none but those who were members of the Church of
England should have a voice in the presentation to any Church living.  On
December 23rd the Master presented a draft report, stating the
composition of the "Church list" and of the "general list."  The former
contained eleven selected from the twenty-one names submitted by Messrs.
Springfield, Finch, and Willett, and ten from the twenty-one names
submitted by Messrs. Bignold and Rackham.  The "general list" contained
twelve names submitted by the former and eight by the latter.  (_See_
March 18th, 1837.)

20.--The Norwich Musical Festival, "for the benefit of the Norfolk and
Norwich and West Norfolk Hospitals, the School for the Indigent Blind,
the Eye Infirmary, and the Dispensary," commenced.  The principals were
Madame Caradori Allan, Miss Bruce, Miss Rainforth, Mrs. A. Shaw, Miss
Tipping, Signora Assandri, Signer Ivanoff, Mr. Hobbs, Mr. Hawking, Mr. H.
Phillips, Mr. E. Taylor, and Signor Lablach.  Messrs. Cramer and Blagrove
were leaders of the band, and Sir George Smart conductor.  Miscellaneous
concerts were given on the evenings of the 20th, 21st, and 22nd; on the
morning of the 21st a selection of sacred music and "The Redemption"; on
the 22nd "The Creation" and "The Seventh Day"; and on the 23rd "The
Christian's Prayer" and "Israel in Egypt."  The Festival concluded on the
night of the 23rd with a fancy dress ball, at which "masks and dominoes"
were prohibited.

--The Wendling Estate, near East Dereham, was sold at Garraway's, by Mr.
Spelman, of Norwich, for 14,000 pounds.

29.--A new fire escape, invented by the Rev. Mr. Arthy, of Caistor near
Norwich, was exhibited in front of the Union Office, Surrey Street.  "It
consists of a jointed ladder, the first length 10 ft. and seven others 6
ft. 7 in. long, with a pulley inserted in the head of the first length,
over which a chain passes, to one end of which a large basket is
attached, and two rollers are affixed to the under side of the top
length, to enable the ladder to pass freely over the brickwork, and two
ropes are attached to the outer sides of the top, to guide the ladder in
raising it, to bring it forward where projections occur, and to keep it
from slipping either way.  After the ladder is raised to the proper
height, the ropes pass under the basket to keep it steady in going up or
down.  The machine is constructed on a small platform, mounted on wheels,
and can be conveyed with great rapidity to any given point."


OCTOBER.


24.--Ole B. Bull, the Norwegian violinist, appeared at a morning concert
held at the Assembly Rooms, Norwich.  The vocalists were Mdlle. De
Angiole, Signor Curioni, and Mr. Bochisa.


NOVEMBER.


1.--Municipal elections were held for the first time on this date, under
the Municipal Reform Act.  At Norwich the contests in the eight wards
resulted in the return of eight Conservatives and eight Whig-Radicals.

--Died at King's Lynn, Mr. Joseph Waters, for many years a prominent
merchant in that town.  "This melancholy event took place owing to a
violent fright which he received in the Theatre on that day."

4.--In the Court of King's Bench commenced a long course of litigation in
which the Corporation of Norwich was concerned.  Sir W. Follett applied
for a rule to shew cause why a _quo warranto_ should not be filed calling
upon Mr. Thomas Brightwell to show by what authority he claimed to
exercise the office of Alderman.  It was explained that after the passing
of the Municipal Reform Act a certain number of Aldermen were elected for
the city.  Instead of each being nominated separately, they were all
proposed and elected in a batch, which, it was contended, was clearly
illegal.  The court granted the application.  A similar rule was applied
for against the Mayor, Mr. Springfield, for, it was argued, if the
Aldermen had not themselves been properly elected, they could not elect a
Mayor.  A rule was also granted in this case.  On November 24th the rule
was made absolute in the case of Mr. Brightwell, and enlarged in the case
of Mr. Springfield.  In the Bail Court on the same date Mr. Kelly
obtained rules _nisi_ calling upon fourteen persons to show by what
authority they took upon themselves to act as Aldermen.  On December 19th
the Attorney-General applied in the Rolls Court for an injunction to
restrain the Mayor and Corporation from defraying out of the municipal
funds the expenses incurred in defending the _quo warrantos_ in the Court
of King's Bench, calling upon Messrs. Springfield and Brightwell to show
cause by what authority they held the offices, the former of Mayor and
the latter of Alderman, as well as the expenses attending the
presentation of a petition to the Lord Chancellor to appoint new trustees
of the funds of the public charities, the management of which was vested
in the Corporation.  The bill charged the defendants with applying the
Corporation funds wrongfully, in a manner inconsistent with the duties of
a Mayor and Corporation, and in direct violation of the provisions of the
Municipal Corporation Act, by applying them for the aforesaid purposes,
in consequence of certain resolutions to which the corporate body had
come.  The effect of these resolutions was that the City Treasurer should
from time to time pay out of the city funds such sums of money as the
committee of the Corporation should deem necessary towards defraying the
expenses of the _quo warrantos_ and petition above-named.  The defendants
put in two demurrers to the bill, and Lord Langdale said he would
consider the case before pronouncing judgment.  (_See_ January 13th,
1837.)

5.*--"We wish to direct the attention of landowners and farmers in
Norfolk to the extraordinary success which has attended the attempt of
Mr. R. Crawshay, of Honingham Hall, to cultivate hops in Norfolk.  A
sample of them may now be seen at Norgate and Co.'s, which competent
judges have declared to surpass the growth of any other county in the
kingdom.  Our agriculturists will be deeply indebted to this gentleman
for proving to them that a valuable plant indigenous to the soil may be
cultivated with profitable success in Norfolk."

9.--Mr. Thomas Brightwell was elected Mayor, and Mr. John Bateman
appointed Sheriff, of Norwich.

23.--A musical festival took place at Fakenham parish church.  "The
Messiah" was rendered in the morning, and "Judas Maccabeus" in the
evening.  The soloists were supplied by the choir of Norwich Cathedral.
"Admission, middle aisle, 3s.; other parts, 2s."

26.*--"The allotment system has been tried on a tolerably large scale in
the parish of Attleborough, by Sir John Smyth, Bart., of Woodmarston
Hall, Surrey, lord of the manor of Attleborough.  The allotments are let
at moderate rents, not exceeding the rent of similar lands in farm, with
the addition of the tithes and other charges which are paid by the
landlord."

28.--Sir James Flower's hounds met at Stow, where the stag was turned off
and was taken at Garboldisham Lings, after a run of five hours.  The
distance from point to point was about eleven miles, but the stag ran at
least 40 miles, and the only horsemen up at the finish were the huntsman
and first whip.

29.--A severe gale occurred.  A large wooden building erected at the
Ranelagh Gardens, Norwich, for circus performances, was blown down by the
tremendous violence of the wind.  "The great oak at Necton, for which the
late Mr. William Mason was offered by a shipwright at Lynn, in 1812, 120
guineas, had two arms blown off it, each the size of ordinary timber
trees."  Barns and wheat stacks were blown down at Necton, Ashill, West
Bradenham, and Beeston.  At Carbrooke a windmill, the property of Mr.
Robert Homes, was wrecked, and his son killed.

--The Freebridge Lynn Hundred Association for the encouragement of
agricultural labourers and servants was formed at a meeting held at the
Duke's Head Inn, Lynn.  Sir W. B. ffolkes was elected president; the Rev.
C. D. Brereton, of Little Massingham, secretary; and Mr. B. Aldham,
treasurer.


DECEMBER.


1.--The directors of the Norwich Yarn Company having obtained the minimum
sum necessary for commencing their new works on the ground purchased of
Mr. Youngman, the first stone of the new factory was laid on this day.
The event was celebrated by a procession in honour of Bishop Blaize, to
illustrate the pagan story of Jason's argonautic expedition to Colchis in
search of the Golden Fleece.  The last celebration of the kind took place
in 1783.  The character of Bishop Blaize was impersonated "most
appropriately, both as to age and gravity, by Richard Dickerson, comber,
who had taken part in the former procession."  Starting from the premises
of the company, the procession paraded the principal streets of the city,
and halted opposite Mr. Bignold's house in Surrey Street, where an
"oratorical address" was delivered by the senior orator, Edward Warman.
At noon the procession arrived at St. Edmund's, where Mr. Bignold laid
the foundation stone, and, in addressing the company, stated that the
building about to be erected would be 163 ft. in length, by 42 feet in
width, and four storeys high.  As the works already in operation afforded
employment to 800 people, this mill, which would be one-third larger,
would yield employment to 1,200.  Upwards of 15,000 pounds had been
raised for defraying the cost of the works.  The procession afterwards
moved by a circuitous route to St. Andrew's Hall, where the directors
entertained 900 persons who had taken part in the proceedings.  John Sell
Cotman, who had sketched the pageant, announced the issue and sale of
folio prints illustrating the event.  He stated: "In pure regard of the
children of the industrious poor of my native city, I give my labour,
with the entire profits of the work."

10.--The skeleton of a gigantic whale, taken at Plymouth in October,
1831, was exhibited on the Castle Hill, Norwich.  It measured 85 feet in
length, and was advertised as "The Prince of Whales at Home."

25.--Christmas Day was ushered in with snowstorms and hailstorms,
thunder, and lightning.  On the 26th the roads were rendered almost
impassable by the drifting snow, which, in some localities, was from ten
to twelve feet deep.  Soon all vehicular traffic was stopped.  The
Ipswich mail coach, which should have arrived at Norwich on Christmas
Day, did not reach the city until eleven o'clock on the night of the
29th.  It was detained at Thwaite Duke's Head, whence the letter bags
were despatched in the charge of mounted messengers.  One of the
passengers, Capt. Petre, undertook to walk to Norwich, a distance of
twenty-eight miles; he arrived in the city on the 28th, and thence
proceeded on his journey to Westwick House.  The Newmarket mail could get
no further than Bury St. Edmund's, and all other public vehicles were
delayed.  On the Dereham, Fakenham, and other turnpikes gangs of
labourers were employed to remove the snowdrifts.  There were many
shipping casualties on the Norfolk coast.  Such severe weather had not
been experienced since 1799.  The thaw commenced in the middle of
January, 1837, and high floods occurred in the neighbourhood of Norwich
and in other localities.

26.--Ryan's Royal Circus was opened for the season in a large wooden
building erected at the Ranelagh Gardens, Norwich, by Mr. Bunn.



1837.


JANUARY.


3.--Hannah Manfield (or Saddler), aged 50, a woman of eccentric habits,
residing on Denver Common, was found dead in her cottage, with her throat
cut.  A considerable quantity of plate had been taken from a cupboard,
and a sum of money, supposed to be nearly 20 pounds, was also stolen.  On
the 14th Mr. Wright, a police-officer of Lynn, apprehended at Doncaster
John Smith, aged 25, John Varnhem, 23, and George Timms, 22, who were
committed for trial on the capital charge.  (_See_ April 6th, 1837.)

5.--In consequence of a resolution passed at a special meeting of the
Town Council, the Mayor of Norwich convened a meeting at the Guildhall on
this date, "to take into consideration the sufferings of the poor in this
inclement season, and to adopt measures for relieving the same."  A
public subscription was opened.  At a general meeting of the subscribers,
on March 21st, Mr. W. G. Edwards, one of the secretaries, reported that
the amount subscribed was 2,008 pounds 7s. 3d., out of which a grant of
300 pounds was made to the Sick Poor Society; 20,093 coal tickets, and
37,831 bread tickets were distributed, and 423 pounds 3s. 5d. was placed
in the treasurer's hands to meet future emergencies.

7.--Wombwell's Menagerie was exhibited on the Castle Meadow, Norwich.
The proprietor presented to the Museum fine specimens of a lioness, boa
constrictor, racoon, and kangaroo.

13.--In the Rolls Court, Lord Langdale gave judgment in the action the
Attorney-General _v._ the Corporation of Norwich.  He said that, as far
as regarded the _quo warrantos_, if a Corporation was not allowed to
defend an election duly made, the interests of corporations would be
hazarded in every case where a Mayor or other officer did not chose to be
at the expense of defending his own election against a rule _nisi_.  It
was not a reasonable construction of the new statute that corporations
had no interests whatever in the charitable trusts of boroughs.  It was
true that the administration of charitable estates was distinct from the
administration of borough funds, and that neither a corporation as a body
nor any member thereof in his corporate capacity ought to be trustees of
such estates; still, a corporation, in attending to the public benefits
of the inhabitants of a borough, had a due interest in the appointment of
those trustees.  Under all the circumstances of the case, therefore, he
was of opinion that the demurrers must be allowed.  At Norwich Assizes on
April 6th, before Mr. Justice Parke, the case Rex _v._ Brightwell was
tried by a special jury.  This was an information in the nature of a _quo
warranto_, calling upon the defendant to show by what authority he
exercised the office of Alderman.  Mr. Andrews, for the defendant,
contended that if he was not a good Alderman he was not a good Mayor; and
if he had not been legally elected Alderman, then all the other Aldermen
who had been elected in the same way were elected equally contrary to the
law, and all the proceedings which had taken place respecting the police
and borough rates would be bad, and the Corporation of the city entirely
dissolved, and nothing could cure the defect but a fresh Act of
Parliament.  Mr. Kelly, for the Crown, urged that the law of England had
fixed from time immemorial that corporate officers should not be elected
in one batch, but that they must be proposed and voted for separately,
and that all elections conducted in any other way were null and void.
The jury returned a verdict for the Crown.  In the Court of King's Bench,
on April 19th, application was made to move a rule to show cause why the
verdict for the Crown could not be set aside, on the ground that the
election was perfectly fair, and there was no pretence for saying that
the wishes and intentions of the electors had not been carried into
effect.  A rule was granted.  In the Court of Chancery, on May 6th, the
case assumed another phase.  An information was filed against the
Corporation by Mr. Samuel Bignold, alleging that they intended to divert
their funds from corporate purposes by paying the expenses incurred by
the Town Clerk and other persons who had proceeded to London to support a
petition presented to the Lord Chancellor, in order to secure the return
of certain persons as trustees of the charities hitherto vested in the
old Corporation; and by paying the expenses arising out of the
proceedings by _quo warranto_ in the cases of Mr. Springfield and Mr.
Brightwell.  The further hearing was adjourned till next term.  On May
22nd it was reported to the Court of King's Bench that at a meeting of
the Town Council on the 19th, an order was passed "that 1,000 pounds be
paid to the Town Clerk on account of disbursements by him relative to law
proceedings," such law proceedings being the matter in which the
injunction had been applied for.  The Lord Chancellor, on the 24th,
granted an order to restrain the payment of the amount.  The appeal from
the decision of the Master of the Rolls, allowing a demurrer on the
information filed by Mr. Bignold, came before the Court of Chancery on
May 27th.  The Lord Chancellor, after adjournment, gave judgment on the
demurrer against the injunction, and confirmed the decision of the Master
of the Rolls, with costs.  At a meeting of the Town Council on June 2nd,
Mr. Bignold expressed his intention to carry the case to the House of
Lords.

13.--Died at St. Gregory's, Norwich, aged 81, Mr. William Lorkin.  "He
was for 65 years a member of the Wesleyan Methodist body, having joined
them soon after Mr. Wesley first visited Norwich."  In 1825 he published
a work entitled "A concise history of the establishment of Wesleyan
Methodism in Norwich."

28.--The influenza epidemic at this date prevailed in city and county,
and cases occurred in almost every family.

--An omnibus "upon the London plan" commenced running between Norwich and
North Walsham.

--The Magnet coach, from the Swan and Rampant Horse Inns, was advertised
to do the journey from Norwich to London, through Thetford and Newmarket,
every night, in twelve hours.  "The proprietors, in returning thanks for
the very liberal patronage bestowed on them, beg most respectfully to
inform their friends and the public that they have, at an additional
expense, fixed a light inside this coach, which, having given such
universal satisfaction, will be continued."

31.--At a meeting of the Conservative party at the Norfolk Hotel,
Norwich, held under the presidency of Col. Harvey, the Marquis of Douro
was asked to become a candidate for the representation of the city, in
place of Lord Viscount Stormont, M.P., who had acceded to the request of
the electors of his own county, Perthshire, to offer himself as their
candidate on the dissolution of Parliament.  The requisition to the
Marquis was signed by 1,600 of the electors of Norwich; his lordship
complied with the request and issued his address on February 13th.  Lord
Douro and the sitting member, the Hon. Robert Campbell Scarlett,
commenced a personal canvass of the city on June 16th, and in the evening
attended a meeting of the Orange and Purple Club, at the Maid's Head
Hotel, at which they were unanimously adopted Conservative candidates.


FEBRUARY.


24.--During a severe gale from the N.N.W., accompanied by heavy snow
squalls, the Raby Castle, of 60 tons burden (Greensides, master), went
ashore at Salthouse, and became a total wreck.  She was bound from London
to Stockton, with a valuable cargo.  The crew and passengers were saved.
"When she broke up the beach was strewed with spirits, wine, oranges,
nuts, teas, toys, hampers, boxes, &c.  The scene beggared description.
The most outrageous and beastly conduct was exhibited.  Here might be
observed a group broaching a spirit cask, and letting it run into their
oil-skin hats, shoes, &c.  There another stood filling their pockets and
handkerchiefs.  Plunder, wholesale plunder, appeared to be the order of
the day, in spite of contingents of coastguard men.  Many who were
charged to watch the property became themselves intoxicated.  Many were
conveyed from the beach literally dead drunk, and it is with disgust we
add that many women were in the same state."  The cargo of the Raby
Castle was worth 5,000 pounds; about 800 pounds worth was recovered.  The
vessel was sold by auction for 41 pounds.


MARCH.


3.--A fine specimen of the sea eagle was shot at Blickling.  It measured
from tip to tip of the extended wings 7 ft. 3.5 inches, and from the head
to the tail 3 ft.  Dowager Lady Suffield presented it to the Norfolk and
Norwich Museum.

13.--The tolls arising from the Norwich provision and cattle markets, and
from Tombland Fair, were, for the first time, put up to public auction
and let for the term of two years.  The dues and stallage accruing from
the provision and vegetable markets were let to Mr. Eccleston, jun., for
985 pounds; of the cattle market on the Castle Ditches to Mr. Liddelow,
for 480 pounds; and of Tombland Fair, &c., to Mr. Cooke for 250 pounds.

16.--Died at his residence, Chapel Field, Norwich, aged 48, Mr. Alfred
Pettet, organist of St. Peter Mancroft and St. Stephen's.  Mr. S.
Critchfield was elected his successor at St. Peter's, and Mr. Harcourt
was appointed organist at St. Stephen's.  A performance of "The Messiah"
was given at St. Andrew's Hall on May 26th for the benefit of the widow
and family of the deceased, by the choir of the Cathedral and the members
of the Choral Society, under the direction of Mr. Buck.

18.*--"From an idea that when the new Registration Act comes into
operation the fees will be increased, numbers of persons have thronged
Yarmouth parish church for several Sundays past, to have their children
baptised, in order to avoid additional expense."

--Matters were brought before the Lord Chancellor in relation to affairs
of the Norwich charities arising from the Master's report assigning the
several charities to certain lists of trustees, and naming the parties to
execute the respective trusts.  The only new point noticed was the
exception taken by a cross petition on the part of Mr. Bignold and Mr.
Rackham to the Master's report, first as to his rejecting _en masse_
every individual who was at its close, or ever had been, a member of the
old Corporation; and, secondly, in not assigning to the Church list the
Boys' and Girls' Hospital trusts.  The Chancellor decided against the
cross petition.  (The leading charity of the city, the Bishopgate Street
Hospital, whose revenues formed two-thirds of the whole of the trusts,
was secured to a body of trustees composed exclusively of members of the
Church of England.)  In the House of Lords on April 24th Mr. Samuel
Bignold and Mr. William Rackham appealed from the order of the Lord
Chancellor referring it to the Master to approve of the trustees of the
charity estates of the Corporation.  Their lordships decided that they
had jurisdiction to hear the appeal, and time was given for the
respondents to prepare their case.

20.--Mr. Villebois' staghounds had a remarkable run.  The stag was
uncarted on Bradenham Green, and ran to Shipdham.  It was then headed
back to Saham, after which it went to Ovingon, and thence to Watton,
Scoulton, Ellingham, Caston, and Rocklands.  Bearing away for
Attleborough and Besthorpe, it crossed the stream and went through
Snetterton, Eccles, and Larlingford, to Roudham, where it was taken after
a run of 35 miles.  "James Lynn, the huntsman, rode his favourite horse,
Cockfighter, which carried him at least eighty miles that day.  What
makes the run more remarkable is that the deer did not run more than 200
yards upon any roads during the whole distance."

22.--A fire occurred at Rollesby Workhouse, which completely destroyed
one half of the building.  "The clause of the Poor Law Bill, by which men
are separated from their wives, being carried into effect, caused a great
disturbance," and it was supposed that the fire resulted from motives of
revenge.

27.--Mr. G. V. Brooke appeared at Lynn Theatre in the character of Romeo.

30.--At a meeting held at the King's Head Inn, Diss, the Rev. William
Manning, rector of the parish, made a voluntary commutation of the
tithes.


APRIL.


5.--Died at his house in Hereford Street, London, the Right Rev. Henry
Bathurst, Lord Bishop of Norwich.  His lordship was in the 94th year of
his age, and had been Bishop of the diocese for 32 years.  He was
appointed in 1805 when Bishop Manners Sutton was translated to the
Archbishopric of Canterbury.  The funeral took place on the 14th at
Malvern Church, Worcestershire, and a memorial service was held on the
same day at Norwich Cathedral.  A funeral sermon was preached on the 16th
by the Dean of Norwich.  The sale of the late Bishop's effects, by Mr.
William Spelman, commenced at the Palace on June 26th, and concluded on
July 5th.  The stock of wine consisted of 2,650 bottles, and the library
of 2,000 volumes.

6.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Mr. Justice Coltman, John Smith,
George Timms, and John Varnham, were indicted for the murder of Hannah
Manfield (or Saddler), on the night of the 2nd, or morning of the 3rd of
January.  The trial commenced at 10.20 in the morning, and concluded at
fifteen minutes past midnight, when the jury returned a verdict of
guilty, and the prisoners were sentenced to death.  The sentence on
Varnham was commuted on an ample confession by the other prisoners.
Large numbers of persons arrived at Norwich on April 22nd, to witness the
execution, which, however, had been ordered for the 29th.  A full
descriptive account of the supposed execution, and of the behaviour of
the men on the gallows, with a copy of their confessions and their "last
dying words," was hawked about the streets of the city.  The capital
sentence was duly carried out on the 29th.  The procession issued from
the castle doors at noon, headed by a number of javelin men of the High
Sheriff's posse.  Smith, who was in the last stage of a rapid decline,
was assisted to the scaffold.  "After the bolt was drawn and the bodies
swung round, a piercing cry of horror rose from the dense mass of people
of both sexes.  After hanging the usual space of time the bodies were
taken down and carried into the interior of the gaol, when all the
prisoners were brought forward to view them in the place where they lay."

7.--North Walsham Steeplechases took place over a four mile course on the
estate of Mr. Bidwell, at Swafield.  The heavy weight race was won by
Lord Suffield's Metternich (Capt. Lawrenson, 17th Lancers), second Mr.
Thompson's Mungo (owner); and the light weight race by Mr. Sandiford's
Gulnoire (Mr. Brown); Mr. Hornor's O'Connell (owner) second.  Lord
Suffield presided at the race dinner, afterwards held at the King's Arms
Inn, and presented the silver tankard, given and won by himself in the
heavy weight race, to Capt. Lawrenson.  A large coloured plate,
illustrating the start of the eleven horses for the heavy weight race,
"with a distant view of the country, from sketches made on the spot by
George Fenn, animal portrait painter, Beccles," was subsequently
advertised.

11.--James Greenacre, who on this day was found guilty, at the Central
Criminal Court, of the murder of Hannah Brown, in the Edgeware Road, was
a Norfolk man, and was born in 1785, at North Runcton, near Lynn.  His
victim, whose maiden name was Gay, was a Norfolk woman, and was in the
service of Lord Wodehouse, at Kimberley Hall, where she remained four
years.  Greenacre (who was executed on May 2nd) was concerned in the Cato
Street Conspiracy.

14.--Sir James Flower closed his hunting season by entertaining his
sporting friend's at the Swan Inn, East Harling.  The dinner was of the
most sumptuous character, and "a band of fourteen men in scarlet played
numerous airs and concerted pieces."

19.--Mr. G. V. Brooke (then under twenty years of age) made his first
appearance at Norwich Theatre as Romeo.  "His performance was of that
superior kind, exhibiting all the fervour and enthusiasm of youth
attempered by that discriminating judgment and illumined by those nice
and acute perceptions which belong to the faculties of much maturer
years."  He afterwards appeared as Ion, Othello, Rolla, Richard the
Third, William Tell, Hamlet, Rosenberg ("Ella Rosenberg"), Macbeth, and
Teddy ("Teddy the Tiler"), and concluded his engagement on May 20th.
Brooke was re-engaged for two nights' performances, commencing on August
1st, when he played the part of Walter Tyrrel, in a new drama of that
title, and of Frederick Bury ("The Youthful Queen").

20.--A meeting, presided over by Col. Harvey, was held at the Guildhall,
Norwich, when, on the motion of Mr. J. J. Gurney, it was decided to form
a District Provident Society, for the promotion of frugal and provident
habits among the industrial poor.

--The ship Anne, of 400 tons burden (Captain John Long), sailed from Lynn
with 171 emigrants, for Quebec.

22.--The announcement was made on this date: "The Eastern Counties
Railway has been commenced in good earnest."

24.--A curious wager was decided at the Angel Gardens, New Catton,
Norwich.  "Joseph Turtle, aged 60, engaged to pick up 100 eggs laid at a
yard distance from each other, in a shorter time than David Lambert, aged
20, should pick up 100 stones at the same distance, which was won by
Lambert only by half a minute."

29.--Announcement was made of the appointment of the Rev. Edward Stanley,
rector of Alderley, Cheshire, to the Bishopric of Norwich.  Agreeable to
the _conge d'elire_, the Dean and Chapter elected him Bishop on April
29th; by Royal command the degree of Doctor of Divinity was conferred
upon him on May 10th, and on May 11th he arrived at Norwich, accompanied
by Mrs. Stanley and his daughters.  On June 29th his lordship was
consecrated by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and on the same day did
homage to Queen Victoria at Kensington Palace.  The enthronement took
place at Norwich Cathedral on August 17th, when all the usual ceremonies
were observed, and the sermon was preached by his lordship.  "The
interior of the Cathedral presented a most magnificent _coup d'oeil_.  A
gallery had been erected from the foot of the railing before the altar up
to the centre of the east window, and occupied the entire breadth of the
east end.  It afforded accommodation for 1,150 children of the city.  All
the side galleries and closets were filled with ladies elegantly dressed,
and even the walks above were crowded with spectators."  At five o'clock
the Bishop attended a dinner, presided over by the High Sheriff (Mr. J.
Petre) at the Norfolk Hotel.  On the 18th the Mayor, Sheriff, and several
members of the Corporation waited upon his lordship at the Palace, and
presented him with a congratulatory address.


MAY.


3.--At the Norwich Theatre was produced for the first time "an entirely
new comedy, written by a gentleman of the city, called 'Come of Age, or
the Happy Return.'"  The critic of the NORFOLK CHRONICLE described it as
"a play without a plot, and a comedy without comicality."

4.--Mr. Clifford, who had been for thirty-six years a member of the
Norwich Company, took his farewell benefit at the Theatre.  Mr. G. V.
Brooke appeared in the character of Virginius.  Clifford died on June
8th, aged 68.  "During the 36 years that he filled the office of
prompter, he discharged his arduous duties in a way that ensured him the
attachment of every member of the company.  A man of highly-cultivated
intellect, Mr. Clifford was not less distinguished for his goodness of
heart, manliness of disposition, and integrity of principle."

11.--Mr. Gepps, of the White Lion Inn, Beccles, for a wager of 200
pounds, drove his "celebrated bay pony" one hundred miles in twelve
hours.  He started from the Swan Inn, Harleston, at 4 a.m., drove to the
Ram Inn, Newmarket, and returned to the Round House at Denton, midway
between Harleston and Bungay.  The journey was performed 35 minutes
within the time stipulated.  "The pony received no punishment from the
whip, yet the wantonness of the act is much to be regretted."

19.--Died at Kempstone, Lieut.-General the Hon. William FitzRoy.  He was
the seventh son of Charles, first Lord Southampton, and had served in the
campaigns in Holland and Egypt.  Upon retiring from the Army, he applied
himself to agricultural pursuits.

20.--Two prisoners, named Smith and Middleton, escaped from the Norwich
City Gaol.  "One lowered himself by a rope of blankets from the cell, and
the other leaped down a depth of 25 ft., by which he sprained his ankle,
so that they got no further than Dereham, where they were both retaken on
the 22nd."

24.--At Norwich Theatre was produced, for the benefit of Mr. Smith, "an
entirely new drama written for the occasion by T. Dibden, called 'The
Factory.'"  The performance concluded with a new drama, also acted for
the first time, entitled, "Margaret of Ragensburg," written by Mr. G.
Smith.  The plot of "The Factory" had a local setting, and the scenery,
painted by Thorne, "consisted of accurate views of the Yarn Factories at
Lakenham and St. Edmund's, and the interior of St. Andrew's Hall at the
late commemoration of Bishop Blaize."

24.--The attainment by her Royal Highness the Princess Victoria of her
legal majority on her eighteenth birthday was celebrated with much
enthusiasm.  The Corporation of Norwich held a special meeting, at which,
on the motion of Mr. Bignold, seconded by Mr. Barwell, an address was
voted to her Royal Highness.  The members then proceeded in state to the
Cathedral, where a special service was held and the sermon preached by
Prebendary Wodehouse.  Upon returning to the Guildhall, refreshments were
provided by the Mayor, who, in the evening, gave a dinner at the Swan
Inn.  At Yarmouth a Royal salute was fired in the Roads by his Majesty's
revenue cutters; and at East Dereham the West Norfolk Conservatives
celebrated the event by dining at the Assembly Rooms, under the
presidency of Mr. Charles Loftus.  The day was also observed in other
towns and villages.

25.--At a meeting held at the Guildhall, Norwich, under the presidency of
the Mayor, a movement was inaugurated for the erection of a monument in
the Cathedral to the memory of Bishop Bathurst.

29.--The birthday of William IV. falling this year on Sunday, was
celebrated, for the last time, on the following day (the 29th), the
anniversary of the Restoration of Charles II.


JUNE.


3.--At the Assembly Rooms, Norwich, was exhibited "Monsieur Daguire and
Co.'s celebrated grand spectacular revolving dioramic panorama,
representing views of the city of Paris and the conflicts of the
memorable days of July, 1830, and also the battle of Navarino."  There
were ten views, each 35 ft. in width, and the whole painted on 16,000
square feet of canvas.

7.--The first annual general meeting of the proprietors of the East of
England Bank was held "in the board room of the extensive premises now
rapidly completing for the Bank in the Old Haymarket, Norwich."

10.*--"Married, lately, at Stoke Dammeral, Devon, Mr. Charles Thurtell,
R.N., to Ann Augusta, youngest daughter of Mr. John Morgan, surgeon,
R.N."

21.--This day was received at Norwich intelligence of the death of his
Majesty King William IV.  The bells of all the city churches were tolled
throughout the day.  On the 25th (Sunday) the pulpits, communion tables,
and reading-desks of all churches were draped in black, and special
sermons were preached.  In consequence of the funeral taking place on
Saturday, the 7th, the public markets at Norwich were held on the 6th.
On the day of the interment, the shops in the city, without a single
exception, were closed, and public business entirely suspended.  The
Mayor and Sheriff, with members of the Corporation, attended the special
service at the Cathedral, where the sermon was preached by Dean Pellew.

23.--The accession of her Royal Highness the Princess Alexandrina
Victoria to the Crown of the United Kingdom was proclaimed in Norwich
with the customary formalities.  The members of the Corporation assembled
at the Guildhall and took the oath of allegiance, after which they
proceeded to the leads, where, amid a scene of great enthusiasm, the
Mayor read the Proclamation, and "God save the Queen" was played by a
band in the Market Place.  The civic procession, escorted by the 17th
Lancers, under the command of Major St. Quintin, made a detour of the
city, and the Proclamation was read at various places _en route_.  The
accession was officially proclaimed also at Yarmouth and Lynn.

27.--The 17th Lancers, commanded by Major St. Quintin, marched from
Norwich Barracks, and were replaced by three troops of the 3rd Dragoon
Guards, under the command of Major Huntly.


JULY.


1.--Mr. W. J. Utten Browne, one of the leaders of the Conservative party
in Norwich, issued his address as Parliamentary candidate for Ashburton,
Devonshire.  (At the election Mr. Browne polled 83 votes, against 98
recorded for his opponent, Mr. Lushington.)

6.--Notice was given of the appointment of Mr. Charles Drake as registrar
for the Conesford district; Mr. W. P. Nichols, Mancroft district; Mr.
William Henry Taylor, West Wymer district; and Mr. William Tawell Roper,
Coslany district, under the new Act of Parliament for the registration of
births, deaths, and marriages.  Mr. John Oddin Taylor was appointed
registrar of marriages for the whole of the districts above-named, and
Mr. Francis John Blake was superintendent registrar.

9.--At a special meeting of the Norwich Town Council, addresses of
congratulation to the Queen and of condolence with the Queen Dowager were
unanimously adopted.

21.--The elevation to the Peerage of Mr. T. W. Coke, of Holkham; by the
names, styles, and titles of Viscount Coke and Earl of Leicester, was
announced in the "London Gazette" of this date.

24.--The nomination of candidates for the representation of Norwich took
place, consequent upon the death of the King, at the Guildhall.  Arthur
Richard Wellesley, Marquis of Douro, was nominated by Sir Robert John
Harvey, and seconded by Mr. Samuel Bignold; the Hon. Robert Campbell
Scarlett by Lieut.-Col. Harvey, seconded by Mr. E. T. Booth; Mr. Benjamin
Smith (son of the late member) by Mr. Edward Trafford, seconded by Mr. W.
Dalrymple; and Mr. W. Mountford Nurse by Mr. J. W. Robberds, seconded by
Dr. Evans.  Polling commenced on the 25th, and the result was declared on
the 26th, as follows:--Douro (C), 1,863; Scarlett (C), 1,865; Smith (L),
1,843; Nurse (L), 1,831.  On the 27th the newly-elected members dined
with their supporters at the Norfolk Hotel, and the chairing took place
on the 28th.

--The nomination of candidates took place at the Town Hall, Yarmouth, and
the polling on the 25th resulted as follows:--C. E. Rumbold (L), 790; W.
Wilshere, 779; Lord Baring, 699; and C. S. Gambier, 685.  The two
first-named were elected.

--Major Keppel, the Liberal candidate, made a triumphal entry into Lynn,
accompanied by a band of music and escorted by the Holkham tenantry and
the tenantry of Sir W. B. ffolkes.  The nomination took place on the
25th, and upon a poll being demanded voting commenced at once.  The
result was declared as follows:--Lord George Bentinck (C), 473; Sir
Stratford Canning (C), 389; Major Keppel (L), 367.  The two first-named
were declared elected.


AUGUST.


4.--The result of the polling at the West Norfolk election was declared
at Swaffham; Mr. William Bagge (C), 3,178; Mr. W. L. W. Chute (C), 2,877;
Sir W. B. ffolkes (L), 2,838; Sir Jacob Astley (L), 2,713.

5.--The nomination of candidates for East Norfolk took place at Norwich.
Mr. Edmond Wodehouse and Mr. H. N. Burroughes (Conservatives) entered the
city escorted by upwards of 400 horsemen.  The Liberal candidates were
Mr. William Howe Windham and Mr. Richard Hanbury Gurney (who was confined
to his house by a severe attack of gout).  The polling was held on the
8th and 9th, and the result was declared on the 10th:--Wodehouse, 3,645;
Burroughes, 3,523; Windham, 3,237; Gurney, 2,978.  The majority on the
first day's poll being 170 against them, the Liberal candidates withdrew
from the contest.  Mr. Burroughes celebrated his return by giving a _fete
champetre_ at Burlingham Hall on the 16th.

12.--A dreadful murder was committed at Aylmerton.  James Moy, a
labourer, after rocking his infant son to sleep, cut the child's throat
with a pocket-knife.  At the inquest the Coroner's jury returned a
verdict of wilful murder, and the prisoner was committed to Norwich
Castle to await his trial.  At the Norfolk Assizes, in April, 1838,
before Mr. Justice Bolland, the jury found that the man was insane and
incapable of pleading, and his lordship directed his detention at Thorpe
Asylum.

23.--Died at Ramsey Abbey, Huntingdonshire, Mr. William Henry Fellowes,
of Haveringland Hall, aged 69.  "He was for upwards of 30 years one of
the representatives of that county in Parliament, and was universally
esteemed in all relations of life, and particularly by his extensive
tenantry, to whom he was a kind and indulgent landlord."

24.--A public discussion took place at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich,
between the notorious Richard Carlile and the Rev. John Green, a
Dissenting minister, upon the subject of the validity of the Scriptures.
"The discussion was conducted in an orderly and peaceable manner.  Mr.
Green held Carlile firmly to the point on all questions, and compelled
him to acknowledge himself unable to overthrow the testimony he quoted."
A second discussion was held on the 28th, when Carlile was again beaten
by his opponent; and on the 29th he was hooted from the Market Place for
attempting to address a meeting.  On Jan. 5th, 1838, Mr. Green was
presented with a set of books purchased by public subscription, "as a
testimony of esteem and gratitude for the very able and satisfactory
manner in which he had conducted the controversy."

26.--Royal licence and authority were granted to Mr. William Blake, of
Swanton Abbots, to assume and use the surname of Jex in addition to and
before that of Blake, and to bear the arms of Jex quarterly in the second
quarter with those of Blake.

26.*--"The Incorporation of Tunstead and Happing comprises 41 parishes,
and it is remarkable that there is not one able-bodied man either an
inmate of the Workhouse or receiving parochial relief.  Such has not been
known since the Workhouse was built in the year 1787."

--*"Last week a number of youngsters at Norwich had an election for the
members of the Lilliput Parliament.  The polling took place at the Old
Library.  After a severe contest, during which it was alleged by the
'Purples' that a great deal of cooping, bribery, treating, and double
voting took place on the part of the 'Blues,' and that sums to the amount
of two pence were given for a vote, the 'Blues' claimed the victory, and
chaired their members on the following day, with a splendid procession,
banners and flags flying, and the band playing, 'Wave your Blues and
Whites.'  The 'Purples' did not acknowledge this defeat, and on Tuesday
last they also chaired their candidate with a procession equal in
grandeur, after which the leading characters dined at the Bell Inn, and
an election ball took place in the evening, at which 320 persons were
present."


SEPTEMBER.


1.--Heavy rain and hailstorms occurred throughout the county.  "At
Stibbard and Guist during a severe thunderstorm 300 pounds worth of
damage was done on several occupations.  Barley and wheat were completely
beaten out by the hailstones, which lay six inches deep in places on the
following morning."

9.--A shocking affair took place at Catton.  Mr. Jonathan Whitley Cooper,
an attorney practising in Norwich, was driving in a gig with his clerk
(Thirkettle), when he was accosted by a man named Cornelius Moor.  Mr.
Cooper drew a pistol, discharged it at the man, and wounded him severely.
Moor was conveyed to the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital, where he died the
same night.  On the following day Mr. Cooper was apprehended and
committed to the Castle on the charge of killing Moor, and also of
shooting at a man named Ford near the same place, on the same evening,
with intent to murder.  The case caused great excitement in Norwich.  It
was alleged that the prisoner had entertained malice towards the deceased
arising out of circumstances connected with the Norwich election.  Mr.
Cooper had been professionally engaged on the Conservative side, and it
was stated that the deceased, having promised to vote for that party,
voted for the Liberals.  At the Coroner's inquest the imputation of
malice or any preconceived design was so completely negatived by the
evidence, and more especially by the dying declaration of Moor, who was
quite unknown to the prisoner, that the jury returned a verdict of
manslaughter, which so greatly excited the indignation of the populace
that they were with difficulty prevented from assaulting the jurymen on
their leaving the Coroner's court.  There was also a hearing of the case
before the Recorder (Mr. Preston) and another magistrate, with the result
that the prisoner was committed to the Castle on the _mittimus_ of the
magistrates, and confined in one of the felons' cells.  Application was
made to the county magistrates for bail, and was refused.  Under these
circumstances, counsel was instructed to apply to the Judge of the
Queen's Bench for an order on the Norfolk justices to admit the prisoner
to bail.  Mr. Justice Littledale made the order accordingly, and the
accused was released in his own recognisances of 500 pounds and four
sureties of 100 pounds each.  (_See_ April 4th, 1838.)

17.--Died in Norwich, aged 77, Mr. John Whitaker Robberds.  He was
elected Alderman in 1806, served the office of Sheriff in 1807, and was
Mayor in 1814.

25.--A prize-fight took place at Thurton for 5 pounds a side, between
Ostler and Cricknell, well-known Norwich pugilists.  "After a contest of
one hour and a quarter, Ostler having broken a bone in his hand by a
fall, was obliged to give in, and Cricknell was declared the victor."

--"What was termed a temperance festival" took place at St. Andrew's
Hall, Norwich.  Upwards of one thousand persons were present, and five
hundred applications for tea tickets were refused.  The Lord Bishop of
Norwich delivered an address.  Supper followed, and "everything was
conducted in good order."


OCTOBER.


2.--Died at Rome, Mr. Henry Bernes.  "This artist was not long since a
visitor in Norwich, and was known as Mr. Burlowe, a name he took to
distinguish himself from his brother, the celebrated sculptor, which
branch of art he also followed.  Amongst other works of his hand is the
last bust taken of Dr. Bathurst, our late venerable Bishop, in his 88th
year."

8.--Died at Grosvenor Street, London, in her 75th year, the Dowager
Duchess of Leeds.  Her grace was mistress of the robes to the Queen
Dowager.  She was a daughter of Mr. Thomas Anguish, and married the Duke
of Leeds in October, 1788.

9.--Died in St. Clement's, Norwich, aged 55, Mr. Richard Shaw, who was
elected Sheriff in 1818, Alderman in 1835, and was one of the Town
Councillors for the Seventh Ward.

16.--M. Thalberg, "the extraordinary pianist," appeared at a concert
given at the Assembly Room, Norwich, by Mr. Mori.  Miss Fanny Woodham and
Mr. Parry, jun., were the other performers.

--The Bishop of Norwich concluded his "circuit of confirmations."  The
total numbers confirmed during the circuit were 3,354 males and 6,919
females.

18.--Died, at the age of 77, Mr. James Robinson, of St. John
Maddermarket, "the oldest medical practitioner in Norwich."  For 38 years
he filled the office of City Surgeon, and was for 45 years surgeon to the
House of Correction.

23.--Mr. R. W. Dowson, of Geldeston, was presented with a piece of plate
by the agriculturists of Norfolk and Suffolk, "as a testimony of their
sincere regard and high estimation of his strict integrity in mercantile
pursuits manifested during the last half century."

29.--At St. Swithin's Church, Norwich, were baptised "a Jewish Israelite
and his two children, on which interesting occasion his wife, who from
Christianity had lapsed into Judaism, was again received into the
Church."


NOVEMBER.


9.--At the meeting of the Norwich Town Council for the election of Mayor,
Mr. T. O. Springfield nominated Mr. Samuel Shalders Beare, and Mr.
Bignold Mr. William Martin Seppings.  The former was elected, by 28 votes
to 17.  Mr. Massey moved the appointment of Mr. John Francis as Sheriff,
and Mr. Rackham proposed Mr. James Steward.  Mr. Francis was appointed,
by 27 votes to 12.

11.*--"The tobacco manufacturers residing in Norwich have obtained from
the Lords of the Treasury and the Commissioners of Customs the privilege
of bonding that article at Yarmouth, where a warehouse has been specially
fitted up for the purpose, and is now stored with manufactured tobacco of
the value of about 5,000 pounds when the duty is paid on it.  Mr.
Newbegin and Mr. Wigham are the first importers."

18.*--"By the official account of the duty on hops of the growth of 1837
we find Norfolk makes a return of 48 pounds 10s. 0d."

21.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council, it was agreed, on the
motion of Mr. Barwell, to appoint a committee to consider the propriety
of encouraging the establishment of a school of design, with the view to
the improvement of the manufactures of the city.  (_See_ May 9th, 1838.)

29.--Died at his house, St. Catherine's Close, Norwich, in his 92nd year,
Mr. John Morse.  "This justly respected gentleman was Father of the old
Corporation of Norwich."  He was elected an alderman of the North
Mancroft Ward in 1777, served the office of Sheriff in 1779, and was
twice Mayor, namely, in 1781 and 1803.

30.--The 24th Article of the Deed of Settlement having empowered a
general meeting of the members to make bylaws for the regulation and
government of the Norwich Union Life Insurance Society, to be binding
when confirmed by two other general meetings summoned for that purpose,
the third general meeting was held on this date, with the object of
finally confirming the bylaws adopted at a general meeting on November
2nd, and confirmed by a second general meeting on November 16th.  An
extraordinary degree of interest was manifested, and deputations arrived
at Norwich from all parts of the kingdom.  The meeting, which was held in
a booth erected in Mr. Bignold's garden, was attended by about 300 or 400
persons.  Mr. O'Connell, M.P., the famous Irish agitator, was present.
"On this occasion his whole course was pre-eminently marked by good
feeling, excellent temper, and discreet judgment, united to a
gentlemanlike exercise of his acknowledged tact and talent in furtherance
of a most salutory object, in which he was happily successful," namely,
the obtaining of a unanimous expression of approval of the reports made
by the committee for revising the bylaws.

--Mr. O'Connell, M.P., was entertained at dinner at the Angel Inn,
Norwich, by members of the Whig-Radical interest.  Mr. T. O. Springfield
presided.  At nine o'clock on the following morning, prior to his
departure from the city, Mr. O'Connell addressed a large meeting at St.
Andrew's Hall.


DECEMBER.


4.--In the House of Commons a petition was presented by Sir F. Burdett
against the return of Messrs. Rumbold and Wilshere as members for
Yarmouth.  It was alleged that the grossest bribery had been practised.
(_See_ April 28th, 1838.)

14.--A pauper named John Cawdron died at Norwich Workhouse, of which
institution he had been an inmate 47 years, 8 months, 3 days, at the cost
of 350 pounds 16s. 7d.

16.--At this date the following coaches ran from the Norfolk Hotel,
Norwich:--To London, the Phenomena, every morning at 6.30.  To Newark,
the Union, every morning, except Sunday, at 7.  To Birmingham, the Royal
Mail, every evening at 7 (through Lynn, Spalding, &c.).  To Lynn, the Day
coach.  To Yarmouth, coaches three times a day.  To Lowestoft, the Pilot,
every afternoon.  To Fakenham and Wells, a coach every afternoon at 4.
To Watton, the Royal George.

18.--On the occasion of the benefit of Mr. and Mrs. Atkins, at the Royal
Amphitheatre, Ranelagh Gardens, Norwich, was produced "a grand local
historical and romantic original drama, written expressly for this
entertainment by Mr. R. F. Rayner, called 'Etheldrida, Princess of
Norwich, or the Kings of Mercia and East Anglia and the Wild Woman of
Mosswold Heath.'"

21.--The load of Christmas fare which left Swaffham for London on this
date "did not reach the Golden Cross, Charing Cross, until half-past four
on the following morning, although drawn by relays of six horses all the
way from Brandon."

25.--"For its extreme mildness and sunny brightness this was more like
May Day than Christmas Day, with the thermometer at 55 and a southern
breeze."

30.*--"The town of Diss has been lighted with gas, which produces a
splendid effect, and reflects great credit on Messrs. J. and T. Whaite,
ironfounders, by whom it is supplied."



1838.


JANUARY.


1.--The weather on this day was of a beautiful and spring-like character.
During the remainder of the week "the moon in her first quarter and the
planet Venus made the evenings most brilliant.  Never in the memory of
man did the old year go out or the new one come in with such splendour as
the last and the present.  Both days in all respects resembled April or
even May much more than December or January."

3.--A public meeting was held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, "for the
purpose of taking into consideration the present dreadful condition of
the negroes, with the view of petitioning both Houses of Parliament for
the abolition of the system of apprenticeship."  The Mayor presided, and
the principal speakers were Mr. George Thompson, the eloquent advocate of
the negroes' cause, and Mr. Thomas Fowell Buxton.  Similar meetings were
held in various parts of the county.

5.--The new District Schools at St. Augustine's Gates, Norwich, were
opened by the Lord Bishop.  They were intended to accommodate 450
children, and were supported by voluntary subscriptions.

6.--Wintry weather set in with great severity.  The frost commenced on
the 7th, and continued to increase in intensity till the 20th, "when the
thermometer recorded 30 degrees below freezing point, a depression
greater than in the intense frost of 1814, when, on January 9th, it stood
at 28 degrees below freezing."  There was a thaw on the 21st, but on the
23rd the frost recommenced, and on the 24th the weather was bitterly
cold.  Remarkable snowdrifts occurred on roads near the coast.  "The
river at Lynn was a solid bed of ice.  From the eastern side to the
opposite shores of West Lynn and North Lynn persons passed and re-passed
with the same facility and safety as if it had been land.  A similar
circumstance had not occurred for half a century."  A second thaw, with a
southerly wind, commenced on the 29th, but on February 1st the wind
veered to the east, and another frost set in.  From February 13th to the
15th the weather was so severe that water indoors was frozen, and on the
16th the thermometer stood at 16 degrees below freezing point.  A decided
thaw took place on the 22nd, but on the 23rd a fourth frost occurred.  In
the week commencing March 4th a rapid thaw was followed by heavy rains,
ice and snow vanished with surprising rapidity, and business was resumed
on the navigable streams, which for so long had been impassable.
Throughout the frost "the poulterers were abundantly supplied with
British and foreign wild fowl of all descriptions."

12.--Died at Downham Market, in his 69th year, Mr. G. W. Lemon, son of
the Rev. G. W. Lemon, formerly vicar of East Walton and rector of Gayton
Thorpe.  He was for 40 years an annual contributor to "Fulcher's Ladies'
Pocket Book," and wrote for the newspaper Press many articles on a
variety of subjects.

15.--The members of the Norwich Madrigal Society held their first public
meeting at the old Library Room, St. Andrew's Hall.  The programme
contained a composition by Mr. J. F. Hill, son of Mr. John Hill, the
Festival chorus master, entitled, "I saw fair Chloris."  "It is a
madrigal truly worthy of the Elizabethan age, and has been recognised as
such by the London Madrigal Society, into whose stock it has been
received.  Not a single modern phrase is to be detected."

18.--The old Norwich Glee Club, revived under the title of "The Norwich
Glee and Harmonic Society," gave its first concert under the
conductorship of Mr. Harcourt, organist of St. Stephen's church.

22.--The tide in Yarmouth Harbour was the lowest ever recorded.  "The bed
of the river was left dry more than 20 feet from the quay head."

27.*--"The severity of the weather has induced several families in the
neighbourhood of Holt to adopt the American fashion of travelling in
sledges.  The greatest curiosity is caused among the natives."


FEBRUARY.


5.--Norwich Theatre was opened for the season with the engagement of the
Boleno family, who appeared in a pantomime-ballet, followed by tableaux,
&c.

7.--At a general meeting of the shareholders of the Norfolk and Norwich
Museum, it was resolved "that the property lately used as a public
library be purchased, and the building committee authorised to make such
alterations and additions thereto as may be requisite for affording
accommodation to the Museum, the Literary Institution, the Norfolk and
Norwich United Medical Book Society, and any other institution of a
literary or scientific nature who may wish to take rooms under the same
roof as the Museum, the money to be raised by voluntary donations and
shares of 5 pounds each, bearing interest at three per cent. per annum."

9.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council, Mr. Bignold moved the
appointment of a committee to draw up a petition to both Houses of
Parliament in favour of the adoption of the penny postage.  The petition
was adopted on February 22nd.

16.--Died, aged 83, Mr. Edmund Manning, of London Street, Norwich, "the
oldest and wealthiest retired tradesman in St. Peter Mancroft."  He was a
brazier by trade.  "Some property which his father left him with what he
had himself industriously acquired, was so parsimoniously hoarded during
his long-protracted life it accumulated the immense sum of 70,000 pounds,
of which between 50,000 and 60,000 pounds were in the Funds.  His annual
income at the time of his death was upwards of 2,100 pounds a year, and
his expenses were probably not 20s. a week.  The great bulk of his
property was left to distant relations for whom he affected to have no
regard, whilst those whose expectations he had raised (even on the day
before his death) had reason to be dissatisfied.  He gave to Mr. T. S.
Norgate 29,000 pounds, and to the Rev. T. S. Buckle 14,500 pounds, and to
Mr. Manning, of London, 14,500 pounds.  The remainder he has bequeathed,
in various sums, from 1 to 300 pounds, to friends and acquaintances and
to certain charitable institutions.  He also bequeathed 4,000 pounds
three per cent. Consols to the trustees of the charity schools, the
dividends to be applied annually to apprenticing poor boys."

19.--A prize-fight took place at Bedingham, between Cricknell and Balls,
of Norwich.  "After a contest of 53 minutes, Balls was obliged to give
in."

24.*--"Died lately, in the Workhouse at Downham Market, at the advanced
age of 100 years, Samuel Simpson.  He retained his faculties to the last,
and was able to walk with astonishing alacrity."

--*"We cannot but lament the loss which science sustains in the death of
Mr. Samuel Woodward.  He was an excellent geologist, particularly as
regards his native county.  His principal works were 'The Outline of the
Geology of Norfolk' and 'Synopsis of British Organic Remains.'  He was a
skilful and unwearied antiquary, and through his means were recorded many
valuable notices of Norfolk antiquities."

--The ship Benwell, Captain Moody, 300 tons burden, bound from Newcastle
to London, with a cargo valued at 20,000 pounds, was lost on Sheringham
Shoals.  "The crew of eleven hands, two male and five female passengers,
were landed on Burnham beach almost in a state of nudity."


MARCH.


5.--Died, aged 82, Mr. Edward Roger Pratt, of Ryston House, near Downham
Market, "of whom it may be said that he exhibited in every relation of
life a perfect picture of the old English gentleman."  On the death of
Sir Jacob Astley, in 1817, he unsuccessfully contested the county.

12.--Lord Suffield's staghounds met on Crostwight Common.  The stag
crossed the road to Beeston Hall, and ran thence by Rackheath to Wroxham,
Salhouse, Woodbastwick, Ranworth, Burlingham, Upton, and Acle; crossed
the Bure and made for Stokesby, Thrigby, and Caister, going within a mile
of Yarmouth.  He then took to Breydon, where he was secured.  Distance
from point to point, 18 miles; country covered, from 25 to 30 miles.

16.--At the meeting of the county magistrates, at Norwich, it was decided
that in future the Quarter Sessions be adjourned to Swaffham instead of
to Lynn.

17.--Died at Diss, in his 83rd year, Mr. Meadows Taylor.  "It is a
singular fact that Mr. Taylor and his uncle, the late Mr. Meadows, had
carried on business as solicitors in the same town and the same house for
the long period of 97 years."

19.--Died, Mr. Thomas Bray, farmer, of Diss, aged 79.  "He was the sole
proprietor of Bray's Diss waggon, which has travelled over the road under
the same name for upwards of a century.  He was interred on the 26th,
when the hearse was followed by his children and descendants in eight
gigs."

22.--Henry Pettett, a convict under sentence of fifteen years'
transportation for horse stealing, broke out of his cell at Norwich
Castle.  "He made a rope of his blanket, which he tied round a ring in
his cell and the rest round his irons, to prevent their clanking, and let
himself down into the arch.  Thence he proceeded to the top of the
Castle, but suddenly falling down he pitched his head into a bucket, by
which he was somewhat seriously injured."

28.--In a letter addressed to the officers, non-commissioned officers,
and privates of the Norfolk Yeomanry Cavalry, Lord Sondes announced that
the Government had disbanded a great part of the Yeomanry force raised
under precisely similar conditions to their own.  He added that he had
resigned his commission as Major-Commandant, and advised the regiment to
disband themselves and not wait to be dismissed.  The Lord Lieutenant
afterwards appointed Capt. Loftus to the vacant command; and the Dereham
troop, partially disorganized by Lord Sondes' resignation, was re-formed
in the Eastern division as the Hingham troop, and placed under the
command of Captain Ives.  The uniform of the regiment at this date "was
like that of the 2nd Life Guards, with silver instead of gold lace."

--Sir James Flower, of Eccles Hall, accompanied by Lady Flower, arrived
in Norwich to attend the Judges of Assize as High Sheriff of Norfolk.  He
was escorted to the Swan Inn by a cavalcade of farmers.  At Attleborough
and Wymondham crowds of people welcomed the High Sheriff with bands of
music.  Throughout the Assize week he gave official and other dinners,
upon a scale of princely magnificence, and the festivities, for such they
were, concluded with a bespeak at the Theatre, where "Mr. Martin sang the
song of the Eccles Hunt, 'The Apple-green Coats with the Collars of
Blue.'"

30.--Died at Little Walsingham, Mrs. Elizabeth Jackson, aged 82.  "She
was one of the earliest supporters of the Wesleyan Methodists in Lynn,
and often enjoyed the honour of entertaining the venerable founder of the
society, the late Rev. John Wesley, Dr. Coke, and others."

31.*--"Last week was buried, at Diss church, Susanna Baldry, widow, in
the 104th year of her age.  She was born in the year 1734, in the seventh
of George II., and was a subject of four Kings and a Queen."

--*"We regret to announce the death, in his 77th year, of Lord Berners,
so long known as the sporting Col. Wilson, of Newmarket.  His lordship's
falconry establishment at Didlington was also well known, as he gave
annually several flights of hawks at the Newmarket meetings."  His horse
Phosphorus won the Derby in 1837.  His lordship was succeeded in his
title and estates by his brother, the Rev. Henry Wilson.


APRIL.


4.--At the Norwich Assizes, before Mr. Baron Bolland, Jonathan Whitley
Cooper, gentleman, was placed at the bar charged with the wilful murder
of Cornelius Moor, at Catton.  Mr. Byles and Mr. Roberts were for the
prosecution, and Mr. Fitzroy Kelly, Mr. O'Mally, and Mr. William Cooper
for the defence.  The jury returned a verdict of not guilty of murder,
but guilty of manslaughter.  A verdict of acquittal was taken in the
further charge against the prisoner of maliciously shooting at a man
named Ford.  He was sentenced to be imprisoned in the House of Correction
for one year.

11.--An election petition, presented by Mr. T. O. Springfield and others,
against the return of Mr. Edmond Wodehouse and Mr. H. N. Burroughes for
East Norfolk, was withdrawn.

16.--The popular burletta, "Jim Crow, or the Flight to America," was
produced at Norwich Theatre.  Mr. Dunn appeared as Jim Crow, and "gave
the celebrated song as sung by him upwards of 3,000 times."  "We dare
scarcely give our opinion of this composition, finding ourselves, as we
do, at such complete variance with the taste of the great Metropolis,
which has run wild in ecstatic enthusiasm over this precious piece of
jingling nonsense."

18.--Died at Binham, aged 89, Thomas Row, "the last of a body of
woolcombers who had been employed there from time immemorial."

23.--The cuckoo was not heard until this date, "being the latest
indication of the vernal season since 1767, in which year it did not sing
till May 7th, and the latest ever known in 51 years, according to the
late Mr. Marsham's observations at Stratton Strawless."

28.--The hearing of the petition against the return of Mr. C. E. Rumbold
and Mr. William Wilshere, as members for Yarmouth, commenced before a
Committee of the House of Commons.  "A compromise was effected, by which
one of the members vacates, and Mr. Baring is to succeed.  Counsel for
the petitioners unfolded a scene of profligate corruption to an
unparalleled extent.  If the petition had been prosecuted with the
vindictive feeling and party spirit exhibited on a former occasion, the
committals to Newgate would have been so numerous and the prosecutions so
sweeping as to have carried ruin into many of the principal families."
At the election, which took place on August 23rd, Mr. Baring was opposed
by Mr. Wilshere, and the poll was declared as follows:--Wilshere, 735;
Baring, 702.  "A poor man who felt much interest in the result of the
election declared that if Mr. Baring lost he would hang himself in less
than an hour after the poll closed, and he actually did it."


MAY.


7.--Mr. Sinclair, of Drury Lane and Covent Garden, appeared for a short
season, commencing on this date, in a round of operatic parts at Norwich
Theatre, after an absence of seventeen years.

9.--The Norwich Town Council adopted, on the motion of Mr. Barwell, a
memorial to the Board of Trade in favour of the establishment of a school
of design.

11.--A Committee of the House of Commons commenced the hearing of the
petition of Isaac Wiseman and others against the return of the Hon.
Robert Campbell Scarlett and the Marquis of Douro, as members for the
city of Norwich.  The principal allegations were bribery and corruption
and the improper keeping of the poll.  On May 12th, after an examination
of the poll-books, the Committee passed the following resolution:--"That
Arthur Wellesley, commonly called the Marquis of Douro, is duly elected;
that Robert Campbell Scarlett is not duly elected; and that Benjamin
Smith is duly elected, and ought to have been returned."  The Orange and
Purple Club, at a meeting held at the Norfolk Hotel, on May 30th, under
the presidency of Mr. W. J. Utten Browne, voted an address to Mr.
Scarlett, acknowledging the services he had rendered to the Conservative
cause.

18.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council, Mr. Brightwell moved that
a petition be presented to the House of Commons in favour of a national
system of education.  The proposed petition stated that "every individual
in the country in early life, without regard to sect or party, should be
afforded the opportunity of obtaining the elements of useful knowledge
and an acquaintance with the sacred Scriptures."  Mr. Barwell seconded.
Mr. Seppings moved, as an amendment, the insertion of the clause: "Your
petitioners pray that you will not sanction any schemes of education
which do not include with the daily reading of the Holy Scriptures a full
measure of religious instruction based upon the Word of God, nor any
general system of national education which does not secure the careful
assistance and superintendence of the National Church."  The amendment
was negatived, and the original motion adopted.

24.--At Norwich Theatre was performed for the first time a drama
entitled, "The Siege of Lynn."  Another new piece was produced on May
31st, called "Pickwick, or the Sayings and Doings of Sam Weller."

26.--John Folker, a mariner, who had seen much active service, died at
Lynn at the age of 86.  "He was the only survivor of the many Lynn seamen
who fought in the memorable battle of April 12th, 1782, when the British
Fleet, under the command of Sir George Bridges Rodney (afterwards Lord
Rodney), engaged and defeated the French Fleet, under Count de Grasse, in
the West Indies.  Folker steered Admiral Rodney's flagship through the
whole of that eventful conflict.  He was buried in St. Margaret's
churchyard, and was carried to the grave by six seamen on a bier over
which was the Union flag, supported by six naval warriors who had served
on board the British Fleet."


JUNE.


2.*--"It was Mr. George Borrow, formerly of this city, who was arrested
in Spain for publishing the Testament in Spanish and the translation of
the Gospel of St. Luke into the gipsy language, but was liberated at Sir
George Villiers' request.  Count Ofalia declared that Mr. Borrow had been
discharged from his confinement with unspotted honour and reputation.
He, moreover, ordered the policeman on whose evidence he had been
arrested to be punished, and promised the expenses should be paid by the
Government."

17.--Upwell church was opened after restoration.  The Bishop of Norwich,
who preached the sermon, referred to "the boundless munificence of the
Rev. W. Gale Townley, through whose exertions and mainly at his expense
had been produced one of the most richly ornamented edifices in the
kingdom."

19.--Pockthorpe Guild was held at Norwich.  "The annual amusements took
place, and the 'Mayor,' upon taking office, delivered an address on the
green at Patteson's Cellar House, to the effect that he would endeavour
to remove the duty off tea and sugar, which was received with great
cheering.  The evening terminated with the accustomed sports, as climbing
the greasy pole, grinning through collars, and a variety of other
entertainments.  The celebration of the anniversary of Pockthorpe Guild
can be traced as far back as the year 1772."

28.--The Coronation of Queen Victoria was celebrated in Norwich with
great rejoicings.  At half-past ten the Mayor and members of the
Corporation assembled at the Free School, and proceeded thence to the
Cathedral, where the sermon was preached by the Rev. Samuel Stone, the
Mayor's chaplain, from the text, "And who knoweth whether thou art come
to the kingdom for such a time as this?" (Esther iv. 14.)  The
"Hallelujah Chorus" was rendered.  At noon a troop of the 4th Dragoon
Guards, under Major Makepeace, formed up in the Market Place "and fired a
_feu de joie_ with their pistols, and afterwards gave three cheers,
flourishing their drawn swords above their heads in honour of the Queen."
The officers then retired to the Guildhall, where the Mayor, in the
presence of a large company, proposed the Queen's health.  The
parishioners of St. Peter Mancroft entertained, at the Corn Exchange, 750
poor persons, and similar feasts were given to the poor of other
parishes.  One thousand workpeople employed at the Yarn Factory dined in
ten parties at ten public-houses, and formed afterwards an imposing
procession, with Mr. Bignold at their head.  In the evening the city was
illuminated, and there was a grand display of fireworks in the Market
Place.  The Mayor entertained 160 guests at dinner at Chapel Field House,
and the members of the Orange and Purple Club dined at the Theatre,
"which, by throwing a flooring of boards from the stage over the pit, was
converted into a commodious banqueting room.  In the background was a
drop scene, giving a view of St. Andrew's Hall on a banqueting day."  Mr.
W. J. Utten Browne presided, and many ladies who graced the gathering by
their attendance were provided with seats in the dress circle.  Similar
celebrations took place at Yarmouth, Lynn, and other towns in the county.
Every village commemorated the event, "and everywhere it was a joyous
day, for

    The squire's wide hall
    And the cottage small
    Were full of good English cheer."

On the 29th the Corporation of Norwich held a special meeting, and voted
an address to the Queen, "after a long and angry debate, in consequence
of the address containing sentiments in which the Conservative party
could not concur."  The result was the framing of another address, signed
by 5,000 freemen, freeholders, and citizens, praying her Majesty "to
preserve inviolate the Union between Church and State."

28.--The Norwich Race Meeting, called on this occasion the "Coronation
Races," took place on Mousehold Heath, and was attended by 30,000
spectators.


JULY.


6.--At the county magistrates' meeting, at Norwich, a resolution was
adopted for the erection of a new Shirehall at Swaffham, and at the
meeting on October 9th a committee was appointed to further the scheme,
which was estimated to cost 1,750 pounds.  On January 4th, 1839, the
justices ordered the carrying out of plans prepared by Mr. Browne, the
cost not to exceed 2,141 pounds.

7.*--"A handsome boat, completely fitted out as a phaeton, has been built
by Mr. Philip Neale, of St. Giles's Gates, and is now exhibited to the
public.  It is built for a sporting gentleman, and is capable of
containing bedding and luggage, the fore part being enclosed by hatches,
and altogether of a novel description."

11.--A meeting of Norwich camlet weavers was held at the Green Hill
Gardens, for the purpose of hearing a report from the deputation sent to
Yorkshire by the union to enquire into the truth of the statement of the
employers with reference to the cause of the reduction of wages, namely,
the great quantity of camlets manufactured in and exported from
Yorkshire.  It was resolved, after hearing the deputation, "that the
proposed reduction was perfectly unnecessary, and that they were
determined to support a strike by all legal means in their power."  The
business of Mr. Robberds was obstructed by persons being prevented from
taking work at reduced prices.  On August 27th a number of weavers
complained to the magistrates that they had been subjected to
intimidation on proceeding to work at Mr. Robberds', and on the 29th they
were escorted to the factory by a large force of police.  The military
were held in readiness in case of disturbance.  In consequence of work
having been cut from the looms, the houses of all the weavers were
strongly guarded.

19.--Mr. Owen, of New Lanark, expounded "his visionary projects for the
new organization and classification of society," in a series of lectures
which commenced at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, on this date.

23.--A remarkable case of body-stealing came before the Norwich
magistrates.  Mary Maxey, the widow of John Maxey, complained that Mr.
George Perowne, a veterinary surgeon, practising in the parish of All
Saints, had gone to her house during her absence and removed the body of
her husband, who died on July 8th.  On the 12th she saw the body at Mr.
Perowne's, where the deceased had formerly worked; and on the 14th she
saw it again, but the heart had been taken out and the corpse otherwise
"cut and hackled."  On the 15th, accompanied by the mourners, she went to
take the body away for burial, but Mr. Perowne drove them out of the yard
with a gun, alleging that the corpse was his property, and that he had
paid for it sixteen years previously.  It was afterwards taken to the
steeple of All Saints' church, where it remained without a shroud.  Mr.
Perowne was too drunk to appear at court on that day, but he was
apprehended, and on the 24th taken before the magistrates, to whom he
stated that he had purchased the body of the deceased during his
lifetime, and contended that it was his property.  He had "cut it up" in
the interests of science.  The magistrates reminded Mr. Perowne that his
practice did not require a knowledge of the anatomy of the human body,
and that his premises were not licensed for anatomical studies.  Mr.
Perowne replied that he was a member of St. Bartholomew's Hospital.  The
Bench committed him for trial at the Assizes, which were held on August
6th, before Mr. Justice Littledale, who said he understood that no bill
would be presented in the case.  The accused was called upon and formally
discharged.

30.--Mr. Farren, of Drury Lane and Covent Garden, commenced a six nights'
engagement at Norwich Theatre, as Lord Ogleby ("The Clandestine
Marriage").  His other characters were Uncle Foozle, Sir Peter Teazle,
Pierre Galliard ("The Soldier of 102"), Admiral Kingston ("Naval
Engagements"), Robert Bramble ("The Poor Gentleman"), Odbody ("Advice
Gratis"), Sir Abel Hardy ("Speed the Plough"), &c.  Mr. Farren afterwards
performed at Yarmouth Theatre.

--Violent hailstorms, accompanied by thunder and lightning, occurred in
many parts of the county.  At Cockley Cley great damage was done.
"Pieces of ice as big as walnuts were found lying under the hedges next
morning, and the turnips were out into shreds."


AUGUST.


1.--This being the day on which the "negro apprentices" of the West
Indies were admitted to freedom, the event was commemorated by a united
prayer meeting, presided over by Mr. Alexander, at Prince's Street
chapel, Norwich.

2.--A "foot-steeplechase" took place at Whitlingham.  The competitors had
to pass several times through the river.  The event was chiefly
remarkable for "the perfect deluge of base coin put in circulation by the
swell mob from London."  The landlord of Whitlingham Gardens alone took 4
pounds worth of bad silver.  In the disturbance which ensued a constable
named Hansell had his leg broken.

3.--The High Sheriff (Sir James Flower) arrived at Norwich to attend the
Judges of Assize, Mr. Justice Parke and Mr. Justice Littledale.  With
Lady Flower he took up his quarters at the Norfolk Hotel, and, as at
previous Assizes, dispensed hospitality with most ostentatious
liberality.

13.--Died in Norwich, aged 38, Mr. Horatio Beevor Love, portrait painter.

17.--Died at her house in Surrey Street, Norwich, in her 96th year, Miss
Elizabeth Lany, the last survivor of the three daughters and sole
children of the Rev. Benjamin Lany, rector of Mulbarton.  "On both
paternal and maternal sides she was allied to some of the best families
in Norfolk and Suffolk."

21.--A grand bazaar was held at the New Inn, Cromer, in aid of the fund
for maintaining the "defence wall."  After the sale "the jetty, the
Victoria Parade (between the walls), and the cliffs were thronged with
fashionable promenaders," and in the evening "120 ladies and gentlemen
repaired to the New Inn ball room, where quadrilles and waltzes were got
up."

28.--This was the hottest day of the summer.  The thermometer stood at 83
degrees in the shade.  A thunderstorm occurred in the evening, and Mrs.
Roach, a schoolmistress at Wroxham, was killed by lightning.  The weather
on the 29th was cold, wet, and boisterous.


SEPTEMBER.


1.--A white sparrowhawk was shot in Lakenham valley.

6.--The "London Gazette" of this date contained the announcement that the
Queen had granted to Mr. Isaac Preston, of Stanfield Hall, Recorder of
Norwich, her Royal licence and authority to use the surname of Jermy, in
lieu of that of Preston.

8.*--"A porpoise, weighing 1 cwt. and upwards, was lately taken at West
Somerton, near the free staith adjoining lands occupied by Mr. H. M.
Thompson.  Its length was 5 ft. 3 in., and after being boiled it produced
5.5 gallons of oil.  The distance from the sea is at least 25 miles."

10.--Mdlle. Placci gave an Italian concert at the Assembly Rooms,
Norwich.  She was assisted by Signor Paltoni, Signor Bogrey, Signor Puzzi
(horn), and Mr. Harcourt (pianoforte).

12.--A public meeting was held in Surlingham parish church, presided over
by the Rev. E. Day, rector of Kirby, in aid of the Church Missionary
Society.  Addresses were given by the Hon. and Rev. J. T. Pelham, the
Rev. E. C. Brewer, Mr. W. Sparkes, and the Rev. J. Patteson.  Similar
meetings, some of a purely secular character, were held in parish
churches at this date.

20.--Mr. Joseph Wiggins, a well-known and popular coachman, was
presented, at the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, with a handsome silver cup, "in
testimony of the respect for his general good conduct during his
dragmanship of eleven years on the Norwich and Lynn road."

21.--The Norwich fillover weavers passed a resolution "that the system of
copying patterns from manufactured fillover work, as is now practised by
Scotch manufacturers, is the principal cause of the depression of our
branch of the manufacture, and loudly appeals to the Legislature for
their interference."

24.--An extraordinary riot occurred at Stanfield Hall, the seat of Mr.
Isaac Jermy.  The mob, led by a person named Larner, who professed to be
a claimant to the Stanfield property, took forcible possession of the
mansion.  The 4th Dragoon Guards were summoned from Norwich to aid the
civil power.  The intruder and his followers were expelled from the
premises, and about 80 taken into custody and lodged in Norwich Castle.
At the Norfolk Assizes, on April 13th, 1839, before Mr. Justice Vaugham,
70 of the accused were sentenced to one week's imprisonment, and the
remainder to terms varying from three months to two months.


OCTOBER.


6.*--"A female specimen of the Peregrine falcon was lately shot by Mr.
Walter Roper, of Norwich, whilst it was in the act of stooping at some
pigeons at Duke's Palace Bridge.  It is almost an unprecedented
occurrence for a bird of retired habits like the peregrine, and so rare
in Norfolk, to have been killed in the centre of a large city."

11.--During a gale in the night, 2,000 sail of ships sought refuge in
Yarmouth Roads.  "To supply their wants more than 3,000 pounds were laid
out in Yarmouth on Saturday alone, and the butchers were obliged to kill
every bullock, sheep, &c., that they could get."

15.--The Hingham Troop of Yeomanry Cavalry, commanded by Capt. Ives, were
presented with a standard by the Lord Lieutenant of the county.

20.*--"The match trade, which for many years has been an excuse for
begging, is likely soon to be ruined by the superior demand for lucifers
for obtaining an instantaneous light, which are now selling at so cheap a
rate.  One tradesman alone in Norwich (Mr. Wiles, of Exchange Street) has
had delivered this week by water and land carriage 20,000 boxes."

28.--The Chartist movement commenced in Norwich.  Mr. J. R. Stephens,
from Ashton, and Mr. Julian Harney addressed meetings in the Market Place
in support of the "people's charter," which, amongst other things,
demanded universal suffrage, annual Parliaments, the ballot, and the
non-property qualification for members of Parliament.  On the 29th a
meeting was held at St. Andrew's Hall, the use of which was granted by
the Mayor.


NOVEMBER.


5.--A meeting was held at Yarmouth in furtherance of the movement for
decreasing the hours of shop assistants.  The employers were asked to
close their shops at eight o'clock from Michaelmas to Lady Day, and at
nine in the summer months, except on Saturday, when they should close at
ten o'clock in the evening.  Like meetings were held at Norwich and Lynn.

9.--Mr. John Marshall was elected Mayor of Norwich, and Mr. Henry
Woodcock appointed Sheriff.

10.--The completion of the building of the new chimney of the Yarn
Factory near Whitefriars Bridge, Norwich, "was celebrated by a band of
music placed on the top playing national airs and 'God save the Queen,'
accompanied by the workmen joining in chorus, when a flag was hoisted and
several guns fired from the top.  The shaft is 165 feet high, with a
coping of cast-iron weighing upwards of 4 tons."  The builders were Mr.
Everett Cattermoul and Mr. C. Darkins.

22.--Tom Allen, "the faithful servant of Lord Nelson," died at Greenwich
Hospital.  He was born at Burnham Thorpe, in 1764, and joined the Navy in
1793.  He first served on board the Agamemnon, under the command of
Captain Nelson.  After the death of Nelson, Allen entered the service of
Sir William Boston, R.N., at Costessey, and by the influence of Sir
Thomas Hardy, one of the Lords of the Admiralty, was enabled to end his
days at Greenwich.

24.--Died in Norwich, Mr. James Lambe, aged 56.  "He was well known to
the managers of the Festivals and to many musical people as a noted and
accurate copyist.  His endowments were not of an ordinary kind.  He was a
ready versifier, with considerable humour and some share of imagination.
With the works of Shakespeare, Milton, and the poets of Queen Anne's time
he was intimately acquainted.  He had lived on terms of familiarity with
Crabbe, to whom he had acted as amanuensis.  Like many other sons of
genius, he had endured the extremes of poverty; but under every privation
and under many temptations he uniformly preserved his cheerfulness and
his integrity.  His latter years were passed in comparative comfort,
through the kindness of a professional gentleman, who gave him constant
employment."

26.--North Walsham was lighted with gas for the first time, in
celebration of which a band of music paraded the town and a dinner took
place at the King's Arms Inn.  The gas works were erected by Mr. John
Malem.

--The sloop Volharden, of Flushing, with a crew of nine hands, was
brought into Yarmouth Roads by the Badger Revenue cutter, Lieut. R.
Perceval, R.N., on suspicion of smuggling.  Spirits in large quantities
were found on board.  Two of the crew were sentenced to six months'
imprisonment by the Yarmouth magistrates on December 7th.  Lieut.
Perceval recommended them to mercy, on the ground that they had rendered
valuable assistance to the Badger when she was in difficulties, and the
sentences were commuted to three months' imprisonment.


DECEMBER.


3.--A fine specimen of the little bustard was shot in a turnip field at
Old Buckenham.

--Cushing and Smith, Norwich pugilists, seconded by Cricknell and
Perowne, fought 13 severe rounds on Mousehold Heath.  Throughout Cushing
had the advantage of his opponent, and won.

6.--The Royal Amphitheatre and Circus at the Pantheon, Ranelagh Gardens,
Norwich, opened for the season, under the management of Mr. Atkins.  In
addition to the circus performance, equestrian spectacles, ballets,
"musical soirees," and comic pantomimes were produced.

14.--The "London Gazette" of this date contained the announcement that
the 4th Royal Irish Dragoons, a portion of which regiment was then
stationed in Norwich, had permission to wear upon their standards and
appointments the harp, crown, and star of the most illustrious Order of
St. Patrick.

18.--Died in Friar's Street, Lynn, Mrs. Ann Larner, aged 100 years.

22.--The weight of turkeys sent by Messrs. Mack and Co.'s. van from
Norwich to London on this day was 6 tons 18 cwt.; before the end of the
journey the load was increased to 10 tons.

26.--The Theatre Royal, Norwich, was occupied during the Christmas
holidays by Mr. Ducrow's equestrian company from the Royal Amphitheatre,
London.  Among the pageants produced were "Charlemagne," "St. George and
the Dragon," "Mazeppa," and "Timour the Tartar."  The season closed on
January 26th, 1839.



1839.


JANUARY.


5.--Died at Braconash, aged 85, Elizabeth, widow of Mr. Thomas Berney,
and third and last surviving daughter of Sir George Duckett, Bart., of
Hartham, Wilts.  "Mrs. Berney was a true representative of an English
lady of times past, in its dignified and most attractive form."  At the
funeral at Braconash, on the 15th, the hearse was preceded by "a canopy
of plumes of feathers, borne by a mute with two others, one on each
side."

7.--A severe gale raged on the Norfolk coast, and many vessels were
wrecked.  Thirteen sail of vessels belonging to Yarmouth, with 100 hands
on board, were missing, and at a public meeting held in the borough on
the 23rd, a fund was started for the relief of the widows and children.

14.--At Lynn Quarter Sessions, before the Recorder (Mr. Martin John
West), an indictment was preferred by Dr. John Tweedale, of that town,
against Mr. William Drake, of East Dereham, and Mr. James Bowker,
charging the defendants with provoking him to fight a duel, and with
common assault.  Mr. Drake, a solicitor, was employed by the Conservative
party in the borough to attend the revision of the municipal voters'
lists, and a quarrel arose in consequence of certain evidence given by
Dr. Tweedale as a charity trustee.  The defendant Drake was found guilty
of a common assault, and fined 5 pounds; and Bowker was acquitted.

--The agitation for the repeal of the Corn Laws was commenced in Norwich
by the holding of a preliminary meeting, at which a petition in favour of
the movement was agreed to.  A common hall was held on February 7th,
presided over by the Mayor (Mr. J. Marshall), when the Chartists attended
and created a great disturbance.  A resolution in favour of repeal was
adopted.  The Town Council discussed the subject on February 8th and
11th, and a motion for petitioning both Houses of Parliament for a total
repeal was carried by 26 votes to 20.  Meetings with the same object
became general throughout the county.

16.--Heigham Episcopal chapel, Norwich, was consecrated by the Bishop of
the Diocese, and was known afterwards as the chapel of the Holy Trinity.

21.--Died at Catton, aged 38, the Rev. Dacre Barrett Lennard, sixth son
of Sir Thomas Barrett Lennard, of Belhus, Essex, rector of St. Michael at
Plea, Norwich, and chaplain to H.R.H. the Duke of Sussex and Lord
Western.  His remains were interred on the 28th "in a vault near the
altar of his church."

28.--Died at Hampstead, Sir William Beechey, R.A., aged 86.  He was a
native of Burford, Oxfordshire, and in early life settled and married in
Norwich.  Elected an associate of the Royal Academy in 1793, he painted
in the same year a full-length portrait of Queen Charlotte, who honoured
him with the appointment of Queen's portrait painter.  In 1798 he painted
an equestrian portrait of George III., with the Prince of Wales and Duke
of York, reviewing the 3rd and 10th Dragoons, attended by Lieut.-General
Dundas, General Sir William Fawcett, and Major George Goldsworthy.  In
the same year he received the honour of knighthood, the first instance of
its being conferred on an artist since the time of Sir Joshua Reynolds.
At St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, there are four portraits by Sir William,
namely, those of Admiral Lord Nelson, Mr. John Patteson, Mr. Elisha de
Hague, and Mr. J. S. Patteson.  His son, Capt. Beechey, R.N., was one of
Capt. Sir Edward Parry's lieutenants in his second expedition towards the
North Pole.


FEBRUARY.


3.--This day (Sunday) a prize-fight took place on Costessey Common,
between Rix and Clarke, of Norwich, seconded by Cricknell and
Blanchflower, "of the new scientific school."  Sixty-three rounds were
fought, in 1 hr. 20 mins.  Rix was the victor.  "Never were two men more
severely punished by each other."

6.--The Rev. W. J. Bakewell, upwards of eleven years minister of the
Unitarian chapel, Norwich, "who is about to embark for America," was
presented by his congregation with a purse of 105 sovs.

10.*--"The week before last, in a little more than three days, Sir
Richard Sutton, Bart., and a small party of friends shot 1,313 pheasants
and an immense quantity of hares, rabbits, partridges, and woodcock, on
his estate at Lynford and Tofts."  (This was described as "killing, not
sporting.")

--Mr. William Dalrymple resigned office as one of the surgeons of the
Norfolk and Norwich Hospital, and Mr. J. Godwin Johnson was elected in
his place.

11.--A trotting match took place at Attleborough, between a horse named
Scroggins, belonging to Mr. Ling, of Besthorpe, and a cob the property of
Mr. Robert Large, of Ellingham.  The match was run in two mile heats, and
was won by the former, in the presence of upwards of 3,000 spectators.

19.--Mr. Hotson, solicitor, of Long Stratton, while driving to Norwich,
was robbed of a purse of money and a case of bank notes, near Harford
Bridges.  One of his assailants pulled him back in the gig and covered
his mouth with his hand while three others rifled his pockets.  At the
Norwich Quarter Sessions, in April, a man named Daniel Archer was charged
with the offence, and acquitted.

21.--The litigation respecting the Norwich charities entered upon its
final stage in the House of Lords, when the appeal, Bignold and others
_v._ Springfield came on for hearing.  Lord Wynford said the question he
had to propose was that the judges should state their opinion whether,
having reference to the 74th section of the Municipal Corporation Act,
the administration of the charities continued in the old Corporation
after August 1st, 1836.  Mr. Justice Littledale asked for time to
consider the question.  On June 24th the House decided in favour of the
then trustees.  Lord Chief Justice Tindal said: "Upon the whole we think
the administration of the charity estates did not continue in the persons
described in the 71st section of the 5th and 6th William IV. after August
1st."  The order was confirmed, with costs against the appellants.

--The Marquis of Douro presented to the House of Commons a petition
signed by 1,600 of the inhabitants of Norwich for leave to bring in the
Norwich Improvement Bill.  The Bill was read a first time.  It passed its
second reading on March 21st, and was read a third time on June 19th.
The object of the Bill was to repeal the then existing Acts and to
substitute a more effectual provision for the better paving, lighting,
and improvement of the city.  At a special meeting of the Town Council on
July 16th it was agreed to petition the House of Lords in opposition to
the Bill "in the way it should come from the Commons."  When the Bill was
before the Committee of the House of Lords on July 23rd objection was
taken that the notices on the part of the promoters were insufficient,
and the Bill was consequently lost.  At a meeting of the Paving
Commissioners on December 17th it was reported that costs amounting to
1,500 pounds had been incurred in opposing the Bill.


MARCH.


2.--Smallpox was reported to be very prevalent in Norwich.  Within the
preceding month one hundred persons died of the disease.

5.--An alarming report was circulated about the arming of the Chartists
in Norwich, where, it was stated, a club had been formed for the more
extensive distribution of pikes and other weapons.  "Some are formed like
a common halbert, others have a crescent at the bottom and the blade
pointed forward, with a sharp edge, supposed to be designed for cutting
the girths or reins of horses.  It is said that about 60 will leave
Norwich armed with these weapons, and some of them with pistols, for the
north of England."  At a meeting of the Town Council on March 11th the
Mayor said, in reply to questions by Mr. Bignold, that the report had
been greatly exaggerated.  Pikes had been manufactured, but there was not
a great number of them.  Meanwhile the Chartists held meetings in Norwich
Market Place, on Mousehold Heath, and elsewhere.  In August pikes and
guns were taken by the police from various persons, and on the 10th of
that month John Dover, the keeper of a beer shop in St. Paul's, was
apprehended on the charge of giving an order to James Tillett, a smith,
to make pikes for unlawful purposes, and was bound over to appear at the
Assizes.  On the 14th the Chartists made a demonstration on Mousehold
Heath; the police force was strengthened in consequence, special
constables sworn in, and the staff of the West Norfolk Militia held in
readiness for immediate action.  On Sunday, the 18th, the Chartists
attended the Cathedral service in a body, and were appealed to by the
Bishop to take to heart the words of advice he addressed to them.  On the
evening of the same day they attended St. Stephen's church and
interrupted the preacher, the Rev. P. Booth, with hisses and noise.  The
church of SS. Simon and Jude was visited on Sunday, the 25th, and
hundreds were unable to gain admission in consequence of the crowd.  "A
text had been sent to the Rev. John Owen by some of the Chartists, with a
respectful request that he would preach from it, and the greatest order
prevailed."

8.--A heavy fall of snow took place.  The Birmingham mail coach arrived
in Norwich ten hours late, and on the 9th several carriers were unable to
reach the city.

11.--At a meeting of the Norwich Town Council a petition "from certain
persons, denominating themselves anglers," was read, requesting that
means should be taken to prevent the dragging of the river for fish.  It
was stated that fishing for smelts was at one time a source of income to
many persons, several boats having earned as much as 23 pounds a year.
The petition was referred to the magistrates, who were asked to prohibit
illegal fishing.

16.*--"A fine white-tailed eagle was last week shot on Beachamwell
Warren.  It measured between the tips of the wings 7 ft. 5 ins., and
weighed 10.75 lbs.  It has been preserved by the Rev. H. Dugmore, of
Swaffham."

20.--Fakenham Steeplechases took place.  Among the other meetings this
season were Eccles Hunt Steeplechases, March 26th; North Walsham, April
12th; and Barnham Broom, April 18th.

21.--Died at his apartments in London, Mr. Edmund Henry Barker, of
Thetford.  "He had rendered valuable services to literature; in early
life he was an intimate and respected friend of Dr. Parr; and his labours
on the Thesaurus of Stephens will remain a noble monument of his
indefatigable zeal in the cause of Greek literature."  He was buried at
St. Andrew's, Holborn.

24.--Died, aged 85, Mary, wife of Captain Richard Browne, of the
Cathedral precincts, Norwich, and eldest daughter of Dr. John Murray.

26.--The troop of the 4th Royal Irish Dragoon Guards, stationed at
Norwich, marched thence for Clifton.  They were replaced in April by two
troops of the 9th Lancers, commanded by Capt. Fullarton.


APRIL.


1.--Mr. G. V. Brooke appeared at Norwich Theatre as Sir Edward Mortimer
("The Iron Chest").  During the short season he performed a round of his
favourite characters.

6.*--"We regret to find our anticipations that the Eastern Counties'
Railway is to terminate at Colchester have been realised, as it seems the
directors have come to the conclusion not to carry it further, in
accordance with the wishes of the Lancashire proprietors, who hare so
great a stake in the undertaking."  On May 6th a rule _nisi_ was granted
in the Bail Court to compel the Company to proceed with the works in
accordance with their original contract with the public.  (The Act of
Parliament was obtained upon the representation that the line should be
carried from London to Yarmouth.)  In the Court of Queen's Bench on June
22nd Lord Chief Justice Denman, in delivering judgment on the points
raised, said: "Upon the whole, without coming to any final decision, we
think the case is involved in such doubt as to require the return of the
mandamus, and that a writ should go for that purpose."

9.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Mr. Justice Vaughan, John Hall and Wm.
Palmer were indicted upon the unusual charge of stealing a bell from a
parish church.  The bell was lying in the west end of North Walsham
church, and the prisoners, with the assistance of a man named John
Daniels (who turned Queen's evidence), took it away in a cart, broke it
up, and endeavoured to dispose of the metal in Norwich.  The prisoners
were sentenced to one year's imprisonment, with hard labour.  (For an
account of a similar theft see December 28th, 1839.)

10.--At the same Assizes, before Lord Chief Justice Tindal, an action was
brought against an overseer named Burrell, of Lynn, for the recovery of a
penalty of 50 pounds for failing to deliver a signed list of persons
claiming to be registered as voters under the Municipal Reform Act.  A
verdict was given for the plaintiff, a Mr. King, for the amount claimed.

11.--Charles Daines was indicted at the Norfolk Assizes, before Mr.
Justice Vaughan, for the wilful murder of Elizabeth Daines, his infant
daughter, by poisoning her at Hempnall on March 11th.  The prisoner was
acquitted.  He was then charged with attempting to murder his wife by
poisoning her with arsenic, found guilty, and sentenced to death.  The
execution took place on the Castle Hill, Norwich, on April 27th.  "He
appeared to die an exceedingly hard death.  He clasped his hands, and
raised his arms several times towards his breast, as if in the act of
prayer, unquestionably showing that consciousness had not left him.  His
remains were buried in St. Michael-at-Thorn churchyard."

13.*--"We understand it is in contemplation to revive in Norwich under
different regulations and on a more extensive scale those annual art
exhibitions, which for the last six years have ceased to take place.  It
is proposed to form a society, through the medium of which artists and
amateurs in Norwich and its neighbourhood may have the opportunity of
offering to public inspection and patronage productions in any department
of art.  The large room in the building, lately occupied as a bazaar in
St. Andrew's, is to form the gallery."  (The exhibition was opened on
August 16th.)

--*"An enormous eel was lately brought to Norwich Fish-market.  It
weighed 25 lbs., and was sold to be placed in the collection of a London
naturalist."

13.--Died at Doughty's Hospital, Norwich, Elizabeth Bentley, "the Norwich
poetess," in the 72nd year of her age.  She was born in the parish of All
Saints, and was the only child of Daniel Bentley, a journeyman shoemaker,
who died in 1783.  Two years after her father's death she developed a
taste for versification, and in 1791 appeared the first volume of her
poems, dedicated to Mr. Wm. Drake, jun., M.P.  The profits of the
publication (from the contributions of nearly 2,000 subscribers) enabled
her for many years, with the income arising from a small school, to
support the declining age of her mother.  Another volume of her poems was
published in 1821.


MAY.


6.--At the sale of effects at Gunton Hall, very high prices were realised
for the wine, liquors, and ale.  Griffith's port (1830) sold at 81s. per
dozen; Fontignac, at 8 pounds per dozen; curacoa, 13 pounds per dozen;
brandy, 9 pounds per dozen; ale, 4 pounds per barrel.  At Tattersall's,
49 horses and colts belonging to Lord Suffield produced 4,400 pounds, and
the pack of 47 couples and 13 bitches with their whelps 280 pounds.

9.--The Yarmouth Town Council accepted the tender of the Rev. Mark Waters
for the presentation to St. George's chapel.  The minimum price fixed was
620 pounds; the highest tender 661 pounds.

14.--The Purple and Orange Club, at a meeting presided over by Mr. W. J.
Utten Browne, and held at the Maid's Head Inn, adopted an address to the
Queen, expressing regret at the threatening aspect of affairs in our
Colonial possessions, and of sedition manifest in England, and imploring
her Majesty to summon to her counsels "all those upright and enlightened
statesmen whose consistent advocacy of Conservative principles has
obtained for them the respect and confidence of the nation."  On the 23rd
the Norwich Town Council adopted a counter address, "thanking her Majesty
for her choice of ministers who deserve the regard of the nation by
righteous taxation, by extending commerce, by improving criminal and
civil laws, by commuting tithes, by amending the Poor-laws, by granting
self-government to the people by municipal corporations, and by making
provision for national education."

15.--By the fall of a floor at Taverham paper-mills, a man and a woman
were killed.

25.*--"A tomb of novel construction has lately been erected in Diss
churchyard.  It is constructed entirely of cast-iron, and for neatness,
security, and durability excels anything of the kind we have ever
noticed."

27.--The Norfolk and Norwich Literary Institution closed its rooms at the
Assembly House, Norwich.  The library was opened at the new rooms
adjoining the Museum in St. Andrew's Street, on July 8th.

--The Norfolk Yeomanry Cavalry mustered on Thornage Green and marched to
Holt for six days' permanent duty, under the command of Major Loftus.


JUNE.


1.*--"A respectable young man a few days since, at Norwich, undertook for
a wager that he would take the sum of five shillings in one hour by
travelling the city with a basket containing threads, tapes, cottons,
&c., which he accomplished, and proceeded on the second hour, when he
took 4s. 6d. more."

5.--The Norwich Tonnage Bill was read a third time in the House of
Commons.  This measure was intended to provide a new mode of application
of the tolls and dues, first to defray the expenses of obtaining the Act;
secondly, to pay interest on all sums borrowed under the powers of the
Act, and to promote an accumulative fund for the purpose of paying off
all the principal monies; and thirdly to keep in repair bridges, &c., to
free Carrow Bridge, Duke's Palace Bridge, and Foundry Bridge, to keep in
repair St. Andrew's Hall and the Guildhall, and to pay for any permanent
improvement, such as widening streets, &c.

7.--Died at Shadwell Lodge, in his 86th year, Sir Robert John Buxton,
Bart.  He had successively represented in Parliament for several years
the borough of Thetford, and the borough of Bedwin, Wilts.

11.--A prize-fight for 25 pounds a side was fought at Pulham, between
Brassey and Bailey, of Norwich.  In 1 hour 8 minutes 72 rounds were
contested, "during which time Bailey never had a chance."  Brassey was
seconded by John Stanfield and Charles Utting, and Bailey by Jem Perowne
and Bounce Brown.  "On Sunday, the 9th inst., no less than five of these
disgraceful scenes took place in the parish of Earlham."

15.*--"A full length portrait of the rector, the Rev. William Manning, by
Mr. Thomas Ronds, of London, formerly of Diss, has been placed in the
committee room of the Diss Hospital, the result of a subscription set on
foot by the inhabitants."

22.*--"'The Tour,' a poem written anonymously, published by Simpkin,
Marshall, and Co., and printed by Gowing, of Swaffham, is, independent of
its literary merits, highly creditable to the West Norfolk press.  The
frontispiece, Lake Lucerne, is drawn by Wright, of Swaffham."

26.--A fire occurred on the premises of Mr. Bush, cabinet maker, Roach's
Court, Fisher's Lane, Norwich, and was one of the most destructive that
had taken place in the city for many years.  The factory was destroyed,
and with it the adjoining house, occupied by a silk weaver, who lost his
stock of silk and machinery.  "The fire engines were not in a state for
such an emergency, and many of the leather pipes had to be tied up with
handkerchiefs."


JULY.


6.*--"Mr. Smith, who has managed the Norwich Theatre for the last 25
years, has retired altogether from the concern, which is now in the hands
of his son, Mr. George Smith."

13.--A person of eccentric character, named John Coe, of Chapel Street,
Crook's Place, Norwich, died on this date.  "For 34 years he was a trunk
maker in St. Lawrence'.  Deceased had made his own coffin five years ago,
of old soap chests and tea chests, and had polished it up so that it
looked like mahogany.  It was composed of 165 pieces, and on the lid was
a black plate, bearing a quotation from the Burial Service.  The deceased
had also made a coffin for his wife, who survives him, but this had to be
disposed of to inter the remains of a poor woman whose friends could not
find the money to purchase one."

15.--A prize-fight took place on Mousehold Heath, Norwich, between
Brundell and Thetford, who were seconded respectively by Perowne and
Cricknell.  Fifty-two rounds were fought, in 1 hour 15 minutes.  Both men
were severely punished.  Brundell was the winner.

--Died at his house, Chester Square, London, Mr. Praed, M.P. for
Aylesbury.  The deceased, who was in his 37th year, was Deputy High
Steward of Cambridge University, and formerly Conservative member for
Great Yarmouth.

16.--The "London Gazette" of this date contained the announcement: "The
Queen has been pleased to grant unto Henry le Strange Styleman, of
Hunstanton Hall, Esquire, her Royal licence and authority that he and his
issue may, out of respect for the memory of his great grandmother, Armine
Styleman, eldest of the two daughters of Sir Nicholas le Strange, take
and use the name of le Strange in addition to and after that of
Styleman."

17.--Two musical artistes who afterwards achieved much local celebrity,
Madame de Belleville Oury (pianist to H.R.H. Princess Frederick of
Prussia) and Mr. Oury (principal violinist at the Italian Opera in
Paris), made their first appearance in Norwich at a _matinee musicale_,
given at the house of Madame Oury Crook, Chapel Field, Norwich.

20.*--"A fine specimen of that rare and exquisitely beautiful fish, the
Opah, or _Zeus Imperialis_ was taken alive at Hunstanton.  It measured 3
ft. 3 ins. in length, 1 ft. 10 ins. across, and 7 ins. thick.  It was
purchased for Wisbech Museum."

25.--Died, aged 66, Mr. William Snow, many years master of the Black Bull
Coffee House, in Norwich Market Place.  "He was a man of superior ability
in his profession as a cook and purveyor for festive parties."

29.--Mr. George Smith commenced the first season of his management at
Norwich Theatre by engaging Madame Vestris and Mr. Charles Mathews.  The
pieces produced during the visit of these eminent performers were "The
Welsh Girl," "Patter _versus_ Clatter," and "Loan of a Lover."


AUGUST.


6.--A correspondent, in a letter of this date, called attention in the
NORFOLK CHRONICLE to the use of dogs as animals of draught.  "I saw," he
wrote, "in a big, overloaded baker's cart this week a disproportioned
dog, willing but quite unable to pull his cruel load up Market Place
Hill.  Let the inhabitants of Norwich withdraw their custom from any
baker who is guilty of this barbarism."

14.--The Fakenham coach, on its journey to Norwich, was descending Guist
Hill, when one of the leaders fell, the pole broke, and the coach was
overturned.  The only person seriously injured was a Mrs. Flowers, of
London, who sustained a broken thigh and received a severe wound in the
neck.

28.--The Cley estate, the property of Mr. John William Tomlinson, was
sold by auction in London by Mr. W. W. Simpson, for 32,000 pounds.


SEPTEMBER.


2.--Died at Annesley Place, Cambridge, aged 61, Mr. W. Wilkins, M.A.,
R.A.  He was the architect of Downing College and of the new buildings at
King's, Trinity, and Corpus Christi Colleges; the University College,
London, and the National Gallery were erected from his designs, as were
also the Shirehall and the Theatre Royal at Norwich.  Mr. Wilkins
graduated as a member of Caius College, of which he was afterwards
Fellow.  He was the author of "Magna Graecia" and other works on
architecture.  With his father, Mr. William Wilkins, F.S.A., he resided
some years in Norwich.

15.--A cuckoo, in fine plumage, was shot in the garden of Messrs. Howes,
Red Lion Street, Norwich.

17.--At the Norfolk and Norwich Musical Festival, which began on this
date, the programme included "Israel in Egypt," the new oratorio
"Calvary," produced on the 19th and conducted in person by the composer,
Spohr; selections from the "Redemption," and the "Messiah."  A
miscellaneous concert took place each evening, and the Festival concluded
with a fancy dress ball.  The principal artistes were Signora Persiani,
Signora Placci, Miss Birch, Miss Hawes, Madame Stockhausen, Mr. Hobbs,
Mr. H. Phillips, Mr. Balfe, Mr. Young, Mr. Francis, Signor Tamburini; Mr.
F. Cramer was leader of the band, and Professor Taylor conducted.  The
gross receipts were 5,639 pounds 0s. 5d., and the gross expenses 4,343
pounds 4s. 2d.

--A two days' race meeting commenced on Mousehold Heath, Norwich, and was
attended by 30,000 persons.

23.--The foundation-stone of Yarmouth Hospital was laid by Mr. Simon
Cobb, Mayor of the borough.

25.--Mr. Hampton made a balloon ascent from the Gas Works, Bishop Bridge,
Norwich, at 4.30 p.m., and descended prematurely in a field at Rackheath.
A parachute containing a monkey was detached from the car as the balloon
passed over Mousehold Heath.


OCTOBER.


2.--A great demonstration took place at Norwich, on the occasion of the
third anniversary of the "Teetotalist" Society.  A procession, headed by
a band of music, started from Castle Meadow, paraded the principal
streets of the city, and arrived at St. Andrew's Hall at five o'clock.
After tea the Bishop addressed the meeting, and "declared in the most
positive manner his deep conviction of the value of the society."  Mr.
Samuel Wiseman and Mr. James Jarrold were presented with silver medals by
the temperance workers in the city.

8.--The Norwich Paving Commissioners adopted ground plans and elevations
for the widening and improvement of Briggs Street, and it was agreed that
the cost be met proportionately by the trustees of D'Oyley's fund, the
Paving Commissioners, and the Tonnage Commissioners.  At a meeting of the
Paving Commissioners, on December 10th, it was decided to carry out the
contemplated improvements on the east side of the street, and that
conjointly with the Tonnage Commissioners, they should spend a sum not
exceeding 2,000 pounds.

9.--Mr. Hampton made a second balloon ascent at Norwich.  The balloon was
filled at the Gas Works, and floated thence by means of guide ropes to
the yard of the Cavalry Barracks.  Among the persons who availed
themselves of the opportunity of ascending in the balloon while in its
captive state was Col. Harvey, who, on September 7th, 1825, made an
ascent from Richmond Hill Gardens with Mrs. Graham (_q.v._).  Mr. Hampton
was accompanied by Mr. William Shalders, jun., and the balloon descended
on the estate of the Rev. T. Mack, of Tunstead, ten miles distant from
Norwich.  On October 16th Mr. Green, the celebrated aeronaut, then on a
visit to Mr. R. Crawshay, of Honingham, ascended in his "Coronation"
balloon, from Norwich Gas Works.  "A parachute with a cat in the basket
was thrown out, and descended at Catton."  The balloon descended at
Trunch, after a journey of twenty-five minutes' duration.

16.--At the Norfolk Quarter Sessions, William Wales was indicted for
maliciously shooting cattle, the property of Mr. Robert Mack, jun., at
Hainford, on August 18th.  It was proved that the prisoner had shot
several valuable beasts.  He had already served seven years'
transportation, and, on being found guilty, was sentenced to
transportation for the term of his natural life.

--Died in London, Mr. Charles M. Curtis, aged 44, an artist of
considerable merit.  He was a native of Norwich, a brother of the
accomplished author of "British Entomology," and for several years
devoted his talents to drawing objects of natural history and to the
illustration of scientific works.

25.--The centenary of Wesleyanism was commemorated at Norwich.  On the
28th 1,000 members of the body had tea at St. Andrew's Hall, which was
also attended by 1,200 children from the Wesleyan Sunday schools in the
city.

30.--St. Mary's Baptist chapel, Norwich, which had been closed for four
months, for the purpose of enlargement, was re-opened for public worship.
The preachers were the Rev. Dr. Andrew Reed, of London, and the Rev.
Eustace Giles, of Leeds.  "The chapel, which is now one of the most
elegant in this part of the kingdom, and is capable of seating more than
one thousand persons, was densely crowded by a congregation amounting to
nearly 1,600 persons."


NOVEMBER.


5.--At Yarmouth Quarter Sessions, before the Recorder, Mr. N. Palmer,
Fortunatus Robert Townshend Crisp was indicted for publishing, in a paper
called the "Paul Pry," a slanderous and malicious libel upon Henry Holmes
Baker.  Many persons in Yarmouth had, it was stated, been grossly
libelled in this notorious publication.  Defendant was found guilty, and
ordered to pay damages amounting to 5 pounds.

9.--Capt. Philip John Money was elected Mayor, and Mr. John Barwell
appointed Sheriff, of Norwich.

11.--Mr. Arrow, auctioneer, of Lynn, was served with an Exchequer writ
under peculiar circumstances.  Proceedings had been taken against several
individuals in St. Margaret's parish for non-payment of Church rates, and
their goods were distrained and put up for auction in the Saturday Market
Place.  Among other articles offered was a silver-cased watch.  Mr. Arrow
not having a licence to sell plate, offered the works only, and proposed
to make a present of the case to the person who purchased the works, and
in this manner the watch was disposed of.  On receiving the writ, Mr.
Arrow wrote to the Commissioners of Stamps and Taxes, giving a full
explanation of the circumstances, whereupon further proceedings were
stayed.

16.*--"A new Paving Bill is being prepared by Mr. C. S. Gilman, and its
entire management is to be entrusted to a committee of inhabitants and
owners of property in Norwich and the hamlets."  Among its objects were
the prevention of the erection or maintenance of any toll-gate in any
part of the hamlets, the acquisition of powers to widen Briggs Street,
Theatre Street, and London Street; to open a carriage way through the
Back of the Inns from London Street to White Lion Street; to afford
public carriage communication from the Back of the Inns through Angel
Street to the Castle Ditches, and to effect other improvements conducive
to the health, cleanliness, and security of the inhabitants.  (_See_
January 31st, 1840.)

22.--At a meeting of the county magistrates, held at the Shirehall,
Norwich, the Hon. and Rev. R. Wilson moved, Lord Wodehouse seconded, and
it was resolved by a large majority to adopt the new Constabulary Act
throughout the county.  The force, known as the "Rural Police," was
constituted as follows:--One chief constable, at the salary of 500 pounds
per annum; 12 superintendents, at 100 pounds each; and 120 petty
constables, at 1 pound each per week.  Each superintendent was allotted a
district of twelve square miles.  On January 3rd, 1840, Lieut.-Col.
Richard Montague Oakes was appointed Chief Constable.

23.--Ducrow's Circus was opened at the Ranelagh Gardens, Norwich.

26.--A meeting of the insurers in the Norwich Union Life Office was held
at the Assembly Rooms, Norwich, "to take into consideration the
examiners' report, agreeable to the resolutions of the meeting held on
the 6th inst."  These proceedings arose mainly because of long-continued
personal attacks made upon Mr. Bignold by Mr. Bacon, editor of the
"Norwich Mercury."  "The character of Mr. Bignold was placed on the
highest pinnacle of unimpeachable honour and good fame; and the present
state of the society's affairs is founded on that firm and equitable
basis of adjustment which fully warrants its members in looking forward
to years of increasing prosperity and success for the establishment."


DECEMBER.


21.--Wombwell's Menagerie was exhibited at Norwich.  The collection had
largely increased in extent since its previous visit, and included three
elephants.  "In consequence of the rapid growth of the enormous elephant,
G. W. has been obliged to erect the largest machine in the form of a
waggon that was ever built, so ponderous as to require six roller wheels
to support it, and from 12 to 18 horses to draw it."

21.--Died in St. Stephen's, Norwich, aged 65, Mr. William Moore.  He
served the office of Sheriff in 1824, and of Mayor in 1835.  Mr. Moore
was the last Mayor elected by the old Corporation before the Municipal
Corporations Act came into force.

24.--The weather on this day was only ten degrees colder than on June
24th.  "The thermometer out of doors remained at 50."

28.*--"One night last week some persons stole from the church at
Swardeston one of the bells.  The rogues broke the bell to pieces on the
spot, and although the blows must have made a great noise, the villagers
were not alarmed, and the sacrilegious depredators were enabled to carry
off their booty unmolested."



1840.


JANUARY.


1.--At the Norwich Quarter Sessions, before the Recorder, Mr. Jermy,
James Ollett Marshall and James Darkin were indicted for publishing in a
paper called "The Searcher" a libellous article on Mr. Sparkall, of
Norwich.  Marshall was sentenced to two months' imprisonment, and Darkin
fined 5 pounds.

4.--Died at Hempnall, in his 101st year, William Reed, cordwainer.

7.--A prize-fight took place on Pulham North Green, between Cricknell and
Cain.  After six rounds had been fought, Cricknell was taken into custody
by the "Rural Police," conveyed to Harleston, and bound over to keep the
peace for twelve months.  "The concourse of persons was not so numerous
as has been noticed on similar occasions.  Whether this arose from the
necessary secrecy of the scene of action, on account of the declared
intentions of the magistrates to put a stop to these demoralising sights,
or the early hour (ten o'clock) the combatants set-to, cannot be fully
determined.  But that these brutal attacks are fast declining in the
estimation of the middle classes may be fairly presumed by the paucity in
number and the circuitous route taken by many of them to the
battlefield."

10.--The Penny Postage "came into operation this day, according to the
official regulations.  Our advertising friends and correspondents will
also be pleased to observe that unless the penny postage be prepaid the
expense of them will be DOUBLE on their orders or communications.  Since
the 'schoolmaster has been abroad' the plural of penny is twopence.  A
letter not exceeding half-an-ounce in weight may be sent from any part of
the United Kingdom to any other part for one penny, if paid when posted,
or for twopence if paid when delivered."  On January 18th it was
announced "the penny postage reduction has about trebled the number of
letters in Norwich and in other towns, but printed circulars have formed
a great proportion of this temporary increase.  A tradesman in this city,
we are informed, has sent out several thousands of such penny postpaid
circulars."

15.--Died, Mr. J. Purdy Beacham, aged 70, for 54 years a highly-respected
member of the Norwich Theatrical Company.

19.--A severe thunderstorm occurred.  A stack of barley at Overstrand was
struck by lightning and entirely consumed; and on the 20th, during a
heavy gale at Carlton Forehoe, a barn was blown down.  On the 21st the
thunderstorm raged with increased fury at Carlton Rode, where the
lightning struck the premises of Mr. James Ringer, a miller, and set the
thatch roof on fire.  "His married daughter (Mrs. Matthews) was struck,
and her clothes set on fire in twenty different places.  Her sister was
also enveloped in flames.  The lightning inflamed her neck and shoulders,
ran down her back, her side and breast, ran down her legs, and burned her
heels, even the bottoms thereof, but neither her stockings nor boots were
the least injured.  Of her upper apparel, every article was burnt through
and through."

23.--A fine schooner, named the Lady Sondes, was launched from the
shipyard of Mr. Lubbock, at Wells-next-the-Sea.  The vessel was built for
Messrs. R. and R. Brereton, of Blakeney, and was intended for the foreign
trade.  This was a very busy year for Norfolk shipbuilders.  From Mr. J.
Parker's yard at the same town was launched, on May 20th, the Saucy Lass
schooner; from Mr. Joseph Hastings' yard at Yarmouth, on June 16th, a
vessel of 200 tons burden; from Mr. F. Preston's yard at Yarmouth, on
July 16th, a fine vessel named the Maid of Athens; from Mr. Fellowes'
yard at Yarmouth on September 15th, the Earl of Leicester brig; and from
the yard of Mr. Ambrose Palmer, Yarmouth, on October 28th, a vessel of
400 tons, called the Hamlet.

28.--Steeplechases took place at Long Stratton.  Among the other meetings
this season were the military steeplechases by the officers of the 9th
Royal Lancers at Shimpling Hall on March 3rd; the Fakenham Steeplechases
on March 13th, over a four-mile course, with the winning-post on Hempton
Green, where, in the heavy weight race, the silver cup, value 100 pounds,
with 50 sovs. added, was won by Mr. Skelton's ch.h. Colonel, ridden by
Wright (sixty-five years of age), and Mr. J. Elmere's br.h. Lottery
(winner of the Liverpool stakes) was unplaced; the Norfolk and Suffolk
Steeplechases, at Diss, on March 17th; the Loddon Steeplechases, on March
27th; and the Yarmouth Steeplechases, on March 31st.

31.--The petition for the new Norwich Improvement Bill was presented in
the House of Commons by the Marquis of Douro, who, on February 26th,
introduced the Bill.  On the previous day (February 25th) a common hall
was held at the Guildhall, at which it was resolved that there was no
necessity for the Bill, and a petition was drawn up in opposition to it.


FEBRUARY.


1.--Norwich Theatre opened for the season with the production of "The
Lady of Lyons," in which the part of Claude Melnotte was played by Mr. G.
V. Brooke.  "When we see the huge amphitheatre which is now in rapid
progress towards completion on the Castle Meadow, under the sanction of
the constituted authorities, for the reception of another batch of horse
riders so soon after the visit of Ducrow's troupe, and just at the very
moment the players are come, we are constrained to observe that the jewel
of fair play does not appear likely to be awarded as it ought to be to a
class of her Majesty's servants."  On February 4th Mr. J. Russell, of
Drury Lane and Covent Garden, appeared in the parts of Dominique ("The
Deserter") and Pat Murphy ("The Happy Man").  Before the end of the
season it was announced that Mr. G. V. Brooke had been added to the
permanent strength of the Norwich Company.

2.--A remarkable case of somnolence was reported at Norwich.  John
Browne, master of the Yarmouth Bridge public-house, Red Lion Street, who
died on this day, aged 39, and was reputed to be the heaviest man in the
city, had been constantly afflicted with sleepiness.  "He weighed at the
time of his death nearly 27 st., and had generally slept away his time.
He kept awake only a few minutes at a time, and even in conversation fell
asleep.  Browne was several years turnkey at the City Gaol, and was then
by no means a man of over size, but he had been increasing in bulk for
several years, notwithstanding the rigid temperance which he observed,
living entirely upon dry toast and tea.  His coffin was 3 ft. across, 6
ft. long, and 1 ft. 9 in. in height."

10.--The marriage of her Majesty the Queen was celebrated in Norwich.
The Mayor and members of the Corporation, wearing white favours, attended
service at the Cathedral, where the sermon was preached by the Rev.
Prebendary Wodehouse.  After service the quarterly meeting of the Town
Council was held at the Guildhall, when congratulatory addresses to her
Majesty and Prince Albert were adopted.  At one o'clock the 9th Lancers,
under the command of Capt. Arthur Williams, entered the Market Place and
fired a _feu de joie_ with their pistols; "the trumpeters played 'God
save the Queen,' and the soldiers gave three hearty cheers, flourishing
their sabres in the air."  Luncheon was afterwards served in the Council
Chamber, "the principal object on the table being a large wedding-cake,
lavishly decorated."  At five o'clock one hundred gentlemen dined at the
Swan Inn, under the presidency of the Mayor.  At night there was a
firework display in the Market Place.  On the staging at the north-east
angle of the Market Place the fireworks were prematurely exploded; a
rocket was driven through the shutters of a shop on the Walk, and another
entered the second storey window of a house in London Street.  A man was
severely wounded in the face, and others were also injured.  A ball took
place at the Assembly Room, "and in conformity with the wishes of the
committee of the Council, the pit and gallery of the Theatre were thrown
open gratis."  The pieces performed were "The Wedding Day" and "The
Illustrious Stranger," followed by the pantomime, "The House that Jack
Built."  There were many parochial celebrations.  At Yarmouth the vessels
in the harbour were decorated with flags, the Revenue cutter in the Roads
fired a royal salute, and a public dinner was held at the Town Hall.  At
a county meeting held at the Shirehall, Norwich, on March 21st, at which
Mr. Henry Villebois, High Sheriff, presided, congratulatory addresses
were ordered to be sent to her Majesty and Prince Albert.

12.--At the Norfolk and Norwich Museum, Mr. William Stark delivered a
lecture on "The functions of the brain phrenologically considered."  It
was really a defence of the theory of phrenology, and gave rise to much
adverse comment.

15.--Died, aged 31, Mr. George Stannard, younger brother of Mr. A
Stannard, the Norwich artist.  The deceased was described as "an artist
of superior talents."

19.--Died, in his 108th year, Richard Pattle, of Rudham.  "He was a poor
but honest man, and had through life earned his bread by the sweat of his
brow, and was so respected by his neighbours that they some time ago
employed an artist to take his likeness, from which a print was
published, and is now in possession of most of the neighbouring gentry
and farmers."

27.--A fire occurred on the newly-erected premises of Mr. Thorrold,
engineer and ironfounder, near Foundry Bridge, Norwich, "and totally
consumed all but the bare walls."


MARCH.


2.--Batty's Royal Circus commenced a season in "the most elegant,
spacious, and substantial building ever erected in Norwich."  Its site
was on the Castle Meadow.  One of the principal productions of the season
was the spectacle, "The Council of Clermont," in which trained lions and
leopards were introduced.

7.--At a meeting of the owners and occupiers of land in the Hundred of
Henstead, held at the Bell Inn, Orford Hill, Norwich, under the
presidency of Mr. Robert Fellowes, it was determined to present a
petition to Parliament against any alteration in the Corn Laws.  The
question was discussed at a meeting of the Norwich Town Council on March
24th, on a motion by Mr. Marshall that a petition be presented to
Parliament "to repeal the present laws affecting the importation of
foreign corn, and to substitute such a duty as shall secure to the
agriculturists of the country present protection, with the prospect of a
progressive diminution of that duty as well as of others which form our
commercial code."  The motion was negatived.  Mr. Bell, of the "Farmers'
Journal," delivered a lecture in Norwich Corn Hall at the close of the
market on March 28th, and argued that the theory of Free Trade was false
in the principle on which it professed to be founded.  On the 11th a
public discussion took place at St. Andrew's Hall between Mr. Bell and
Mr. Ackland, one of the lecturers of the Manchester Anti-Corn Law League.
Many meetings were held, for and against repeal, in different parts of
the county.

--*"Died, lately, Mr. Robin Wade, of Ditchingham, aged 102."

--*"Mr. William Bagge, M.P. for West Norfolk, has lately purchased Col.
Say's estate at Crimplesham, for 35,000 pounds, including the timber."

14.--At the Norfolk Sheriff's Court at Norwich, a jury was empanelled to
assess damages in a case of _crim. con._, in which the plaintiff was Mr.
Edward William Trafford, and the defendant Mr. Ellis, a lieutenant in the
9th Royal Lancers stationed at Norwich in 1839.  The Attorney-General
(Sir John Campbell) was one of the counsel for the plaintiff, Mr.
Thesiger was leading counsel for defendant, and Mrs. Opie was a witness
in the case.  Mr. N. Palmer, barrister, was deputed by the High Sheriff
to preside.  The damages were laid at 5,000 pounds, and the special jury,
composed of county gentlemen, assessed them at 500 pounds.  On August 4th
the Royal assent was given to Mr. and Mrs. Trafford's Divorce Bill.

20.--At a meeting of the county magistrates, held at the Shirehall,
Norwich, Mr. Henry Champion Partridge and Mr. Isaac Jermy, Recorder of
Norwich, were elected Chairmen of the Norfolk Quarter Sessions.

29.--Died in St. Giles' Street, Norwich, aged 47, Mr. Christopher
Edwards, formerly a solicitor.  "The deceased was better known by the
appellation Cutty Edwards, and was possessed of considerable talent and
natural wit.  No man experienced more the vicissitudes of fortune.  He
once had a comfortable property, but latterly felt the bitter pangs of
want."

30.--Norman's School, erected in the parish of St. Paul, Norwich, by the
trustees of Alderman Norman, who died May 10th, 1724, "he bequeathing his
property upon trust for ever for the purpose of boarding, clothing, and
educating the sons of his own and his first wife's relations," was
opened.  The "claimants," with their children, marched in procession from
Chapel Field to the bowling-green of the New Inn, St. Augustine's Gates,
where the boys were regaled with buns.  A party numbering 500 was
entertained to tea in the school-room, when Mr. Samuel Daynes proposed
"The Memory of Alderman Norman."  On July 28th the "claimants" presented
a silver cup to Mr. Daynes, "as a memorial of their esteem for his
indefatigable exertions in obtaining and establishing the claims of those
who could prove descent from their munificent benefactor."

31.--The Judges of Assize, Sir James Parke and the Hon. Sir Edward Hall
Alderson, arrived at Norwich.  Their lodgings on this occasion were at
St. Catherine's Hill.


APRIL.


1.--A match against time took place on Swaffham Racecourse.  "Mr. B.
Land's celebrated chestnut mare Lady Jane was backed to do 20 miles in an
hour for 100 guineas."  Odds of 5 to 4 were laid against the mare, "but
she accomplished the task with the greatest ease, having one minute and a
half to spare, and trotted in the last few yards."

6.--A meeting of the freemen of Norwich was held at St. Andrew's Hall,
for the purpose of petitioning Parliament "to repeal so much of the
Municipal Reform Act as debars freemen of the right to be enrolled as
burgesses under the same, and to confer on the freemen and burgesses of
all cities, boroughs, and towns corporate within the operation of the Act
the right to vote at all municipal elections."  Mr. John Culley presided,
in the absence of the Mayor, and the petition was adopted.  On May 4th
the freemen went in procession with a band of music and numerous flags
and banners, from the Pope's Head to the Greyhound Inn, Surrey Street,
where, through Col. Harvey, they presented the petition to the Marquis of
Douro, M.P., who promised to support it in the House of Commons.  The
petition to the House of Lords was presented by Lord Mansfield, formerly
Lord Stormont, one of the members for Norwich.

17.--Died in St. George Colegate, Norwich, aged 41, Emily, eldest
daughter of John Crome, founder of the Norwich Society of Artists.  "In
her pictures of fish, fruit, and flowers it may be justly said that no
one has represented these objects with greater fidelity to nature,
combined with a tasteful and picturesque manner of grouping them."

18.*--"Children who are sickly are taken to a woman living in St.
Lawrence, Norwich, for the purpose of being cut for a supposed disease
called the spinnage.  The infants are on a Monday morning taken to this
woman's, who, for threepence, with a pair of scissors cuts through the
lobe of the right ear, then makes a cross with the blood upon the
forehead and breast of the child.  On the following Monday the same
barbarous and superstitious ceremony is performed upon the left ear, and
on the succeeding Monday the right ear is again condemned to undergo the
same ceremony, and in some cases it is deemed necessary to perform the
ridiculous operation nine times."


MAY.


2.*--"Married lately at St. Peter's, in London, by the Rev. Thomas Grose,
George Henry Borrow, Esq., for many years a resident in Spain, and a
native of Norwich, and only surviving son of the late Captain Borrow, to
Mrs. Mary Clarke, of Oulton Cottage, in Suffolk."

3.--Died at Bath, Mr. Thomas Manning, of Orange Grove, Dartford, and
formerly of Diss.  "An eminent linguist, he accompanied Lord Amherst's
embassy to China, and was considered the best Siamese scholar in Europe,
Dr. Morrison and Mr. St. Julien being his only rivals.  He was able to
speak fluently fifteen languages, and maintained a correspondence with
the _literati_ of the world.  For months he resided at H'lassa, in the
kingdom of Thibet, and was the only Englishman who had ever penetrated to
the metropolis of the Lama.  There he spoke during his sojourn only
Latin, and on his departure received the benediction of the Lama."

6.--Died, aged 76, Mr. James Sillett, of King Street, Norwich.  "As an
artist he stood unrivalled in his minute and accurate delineations of
fish, fruit, and flowers.  From 1781 to 1790 he studied from the figure
at the Royal Academy, under Professors Reynolds, Barry, and others, whose
lectures he also attended.  He began to exhibit at Somerset House in
1796, which he continued at intervals for upwards of 30 years, part of
which time he practised as a miniature painter with great success.  He
afterwards settled in his native city, and gained pre-eminence in his
skilful and faithful delineations in oil and water colours.  In later
days he undertook architectural subjects.  In 1815 he was President of
the Norwich Artists' Society, of which he was one of the original
members, but, in consequence of disputes arising, he and two other of the
original members quitted it.  He continued annually to exhibit, although
he never afterwards joined the society, which, from want of
encouragement, gradually dissolved in a few years."

7.--A public meeting was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, "to take into
consideration the propriety of petitioning Parliament to afford to every
part of the United Kingdom the advantage now enjoyed by the Metropolis of
not having any post delivery on the Sabbath day."

9.*--"Married lately at Catfield, by the Rev. J. Prowett, Mr. John
Curtiss, aged 85, to Miss Rogers, an agreeable young lady.  The morning
was ushered in with the ringing of bells and firing of guns.  A large
barge was prepared for the accommodation of the company to row on the
lake in front of his mansion.  In the evening an excellent band of music
tended to the great amusement of hundreds who assembled on the cheerful
occasion, when all the younger ones joined in the rustic dance, which was
kept up till a late hour, after which there was a grand display of
fireworks."

13.--Matthew Rackham, over seventy years of age, started from Norwich at
four o'clock in the morning and walked to Yarmouth, where he arrived at
nine o'clock, and returned to Norwich by six o'clock in the evening,
"without experiencing any fatigue, although he had to contend with an
adverse wind accompanied with rain during the whole of his journey out."

18.--Mr. G. V. Brooke took his benefit at Norwich Theatre as Hotspur in
"King Henry the Fourth" (Part 1).  "The degree of estimation in which
this young actor is held was displayed in a general call for him at the
end of the piece, a proceeding which is frequently resorted to in London,
but which we are not aware of having seen occur here before."

22.--The remaining troop of the 9th Royal Lancers marched from Norwich
Barracks, under the command of Capt. Whalley.  Two troops and the
headquarters of the 8th Royal Irish Hussars, commanded by Col. the Hon.
G. B. Molyneaux, took over the Barracks on June 5th.

25.--The Norfolk Yeomanry Cavalry, commanded by Major Loftus, commenced
permanent duty at Cromer.  The regiment consisted of three troops,
namely, the Rainham Troop (Capt. H. B. Caldwell); the Hingham Troop
(Capt. Ferdinand Ives); and the Holt Troop (Capt. John Mott).  "The
uniform and appointments assimilate closely in cut and other details with
those of her Majesty's regiments of Dragoon Guards."


JUNE.


1.--Died at Thetford, aged 63, Mr. Thomas Withers Gill, an alderman of
the borough, who had twice served the office of Mayor.

--The publication commenced in bi-monthly shilling parts of "The Eastern
Arboretum: a new Botanical Work on the Trees of Norfolk," by James
Grigor; illustrated by T. Ninham.  London: Longman and Co.; Norwich: John
Stacy, Old Haymarket.

4.--A public meeting, presided over by the Dean, was held in Norwich, "to
receive a report on the city National Schools, established in the year
1708, and to consider the best means of advancing the benevolent objects
of these most ancient charitable institutions."  Resolutions were passed
pledging the meeting to support the schools, "which were the first and
for a long time the sole means of educating the children of the poor, and
also the cause of similar institutions in later years."

5.--The tender of the Rev. Mr. Kent, of East Winch, for the purchase of
the patronage of St. Mary's Church, Bury St. Edmund's, at 3,000 guineas,
was opened and accepted by the Ecclesiastical Commissioners.

9.--Mr. W. M. Warcup, surgeon, of East Dereham, was presented with a
piece of plate by the inhabitants of Swanton Morley, "in testimony of
their respect for his skilful and successful treatment of the poor of
that parish during fourteen months when typhus fever of a very malignant
character extended itself into the family of almost every poor person in
the village."

--The question of the practicability of paving Guildhall Hill, Norwich,
with wood, "in order to prevent the noise and interruption from carriages
passing up and down the hill during the holding of Quarter Sessions,
Assizes, and magistrates' sittings," was introduced by the Mayor (Capt.
Money) and referred to a Committee of the Paving Commissioners, who, on
October 13th, reported that "a wood pavement was not suitable for
declivities."  A macadamised road was thereupon ordered to be made.

13.*--"We regret to find some of the finest parts of the antient church
of Yarmouth are doomed to destruction.  Handbills inviting tenders for
the work have for some time been in circulation.  The principal object of
demolition is the splendid east window of the south isle, one of the most
elaborate examples of a highly-enriched style of architecture in the
county.  This capacious building has long been suffering from the effects
of mutilations which every admirer of our antient ecclesiastical
architecture must lament.  The modern and ghastly eastern windows of the
north isle and chancel are deformities which would disgrace a dilapidated
church of the meanest village."

15.--Mr. Farren, of Covent Garden, and Mr. J. Vining, of the same
theatre, formerly a favourite actor in the Norwich Company, commenced a
short engagement at Norwich Theatre.  The plays in which they appeared
included "The Clandestine Marriage," "The Day after the Wedding," "The
School for Scandal," &c.

--A public meeting, convened by the Mayor, was held at the Guildhall,
Norwich, "for the purpose of congratulating her Most Gracious Majesty and
his Royal Highness Prince Albert on their late most happy escape from the
atrocious attempt at assassination."  The address was moved by Col.
Harvey, and seconded by Dr. Wright.  The notorious Chartist, Dover, moved
a direct negative, which the Mayor refused to accept.  The address was
then adopted.  An address was also agreed to by the Town Council on the
15th, and on the 21st the Mayor and Corporation attended the thanksgiving
service at the Cathedral.  Addresses were adopted by the Corporations of
Yarmouth and Lynn, by the clergy of the diocese, and by various public
bodies in the city and county, and a special form of prayer was used at
all the churches.  A county meeting took place at the Shirehall, Norwich,
on June 27th, at which congratulatory addresses to the Queen, the Prince
Consort, and the Duchess of Kent were adopted.  Dover and a party of
Norwich Chartists occupied the gallery and created much disturbance.

16.--John Mountjoy, the pedestrian, commenced a series of remarkable
feats at Norwich.  At Ranelagh Gardens he performed the task of taking up
with his mouth, without touching the ground with his knees, 100 eggs
placed a yard apart and dropping them into a bucket of water without
breaking them, and leaping over 50 hurdles 4 ft. high placed ten yards
apart, making a distance of 6.5 miles.  He undertook to do this in one
hour, and accomplished it in 58 minutes 56 seconds.  On June 22nd he
began his walk from the Shirehall Tavern, Castle Ditches, to Symonds'
Gardens, Yarmouth, and back twice a day for six successive days, a
distance of 76 miles.  He finished the undertaking on Saturday, June
27th.  After he had crossed Foundry Bridge on his last return journey he
was followed by a tremendous crowd, who bore the toll collectors before
them and made a free passage.  The only remuneration Mountjoy received
for his self-imposed task were the contributions prompted by the
generosity of the public.  On July 13th, at Ranelagh Gardens, he ran a
mile, walked backwards a mile, ran a wheelbarrow half a mile, trundled a
hoop a mile, hopped 200 yards, picked up with his mouth 40 hazel nuts
placed a yard apart without putting his knees to the ground, and jumped
over 30 hurdles ten yards apart within five minutes of the time
stipulated, one hour.  On August 31st he started to walk to London and
back, by way of Cambridge, in 48 hours.  Leaving Ranelagh Gardens at four
o'clock in the morning, he reached Wymondham at 5.5 and Thetford at 9.20,
Barton Mills before 11, and Newmarket at 12.45.  After leaving Newmarket,
he incautiously drank some cold water, which had such an effect upon him
that he lay for an hour and a quarter outside the Swan Inn at Bottisham.
Having somewhat recovered, he resumed his walk and reached Cambridge a
little before five o'clock, and Melbourne at nine, where he was again
taken ill and obliged to lie down for an hour.  He then struggled on to
Royston, where "he was obliged to lie down under a hedge, with none but
strangers around him."  On reaching Buntingford he was advised to give
in, but he pursued his course to within a mile of Ware, when he was
obliged to relinquish the undertaking.  Mountjoy, on September 10th,
jumped 144 hurdles and ran twelve times round the racecourse on Mousehold
Heath in 1 min. 4 sees, under the hour (distance not stated); and on
September 13th walked 20 miles backwards and 20 forwards on the Catton
Road, starting at 9 a.m. and finishing at 7.4 p.m.

18.--Died at Coltishall, aged 62, Mr. Thomas Stallard Webb, historical
engraver to the Queen.  "For the long term of 38 years this eminent
artist most assiduously devoted his great talents, in conjunction with
the late Thomas Holloway and Richard Slann, who survives, exclusively to
the engraving of the celebrated cartoons of Raphael from the original
paintings in the possession of her Majesty, the last plate of which
series was completed only a few weeks before his death.  This splendid
work will carry down his name to posterity amongst the first artists of
the age."

23.--The foundation-stone of Christ church, New Catton, was laid by the
Hon. and Very Rev. Dean Pellew, after a special service at the mother
church of St. Clement, at which the sermon was preached by the Hon. and
Rev. J. T. Pelham, rector of Bergh Apton.  The architect was Mr. Brown,
the contractors Messrs. Wright and Cattermoul and Messrs. Watson and
Neale, the site was given by Mr. S. D. Page, and the entire cost of the
work was 2,400 pounds.  "More than 300 years have elapsed since a parish
church has been raised in this city.  Of the 36 churches, St. Andrew's is
the last that was erected, or rather rebuilt, about the year 1500, on the
site of an ancient church."


JULY.


1.--On the opening of the Eastern Counties Railway from Shoreditch to
Brentwood, the London coaches from Norwich, Yarmouth, and other places in
Norfolk and Suffolk there transferred their passengers and mails to the
trains in communication with the Metropolis.

4.*--"The very antient _lectorium_ or reading-desk which has for many
years lain neglected in Norwich Cathedral has, by order of the Hon. the
Very Rev. the Dean, recently been restored, and is now placed in the
choir.  It was originally adorned with figures, which, in the time of the
usurpation, were destroyed or mutilated.  These figures have been
replaced by others cast in brass and elaborately chased by Mr. John
Herbert, from models furnished by Mr. Ollett."

9.--Died in St. Stephen's, Norwich, aged 81, Mr. John Stafford, "a man
well known in the sporting world, having been many years a noted
cock-feeder."

18.*--[Advt.]  "The public are respectfully informed that the Angel Inn,
Market Place, Norwich, having been recently disposed of, is now
refurnishing and fitting up with every convenience for the reception of
families and commercial gentlemen, and will in future be known as the
Royal Hotel."

23.--In recording the anniversary of an Oddfellows' Lodge at Lynn on this
date, the NORFOLK CHRONICLE stated: "The name 'Oddfellows,' by which the
Order is distinguished, scarcely does justice to the institution, as
corresponding with its importance and its noble and generous principles.
To those who are unacquainted with the real merits of the society, there
is a sort of peculiarity in the title of 'Oddfellows' which may seem to
imply something of buffoonery united with thoughtless revelling."

30.--Died, aged 50, Mr. B. Harrison, many years a popular actor on the
Norwich stage.

31.--Married, Mr. Charles Fisher, of the Norfolk and Suffolk Company of
Comedians, to Miss Richardson, only daughter of Richard Richardson,
gent., of Swafield, North Walsham.

--The non-commissioned officers and men of the East Norfolk Yeomanry
Cavalry presented to Major Charles Loftus a silver candelabrum, in
"testimony of the sincere regard and admiration which they bear towards
him both as their commanding officer and as a private gentleman."  The
presentation was made by Lord James Townshend, at a dinner given at the
King's Arms Inn, East Dereham, under the presidency of Quarter-Master
Wood.


AUGUST.


1.--Sir John Patteson and Sir Edward Hall Alderson, the Judges of Assize,
arrived at Norwich.

3.--Mr. Yates, Mr. and Mrs. Keeley, and Mr. Paul Bedford commenced a six
nights' engagement at Norwich Theatre for the Assize week, in the new
drama, "Jack Shephard."  Mrs. Keeley appeared in the title _role_, Mr.
Yates as Abram Monday, and Mr. Bedford as Joe Blueskin.  Mrs. Keeley
(_nee_ Goward) was formerly a member of the Norwich Company.  On the 10th
Miss Ellen Tree and Mr. George Bennett, of Covent Garden and Drury Lane,
appeared in Sheridan Knowles' play, "Love."  Mr. Bennett was the son of
an old actor on the Norwich stage, and of Miss Tree it was said: "She is
indeed one of Nature's _noblesse_, an histrionic genius of the first
order, an ornament to her arduous, anxious, and ill-requited profession."

--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Mr. Justice Patteson, John Randalsome,
aged 40, was indicted for the murder of his wife, at Thwaite, on June
19th.  A singular feature of the case was that none of the murdered
woman's relatives were aware that she was married to the prisoner.
Randalsome had formed an illicit acquaintance with a girl named Punchard,
and desired to be rid of his wife.  Having enticed her from the house of
her father, with whom she resided, he wounded her severely about the head
and face with a hedge stake, and threw her into a pond.  The medical
evidence proved that death resulted from drowning.  The jury returned a
verdict of guilty, and the prisoner was executed on the Castle Hill,
Norwich, on August 22nd.

--The new Amphitheatre and Royal Albert Saloon, Ranelagh Gardens, St.
Stephen's Gates, Norwich, was opened.  "The building is after a new
design, constructed with great solidarity, and on a considerably
increased scale of dimensions.  The circle is about 150 feet in
circumference, lighted up with a splendid chandelier of 20 gas burners,
suspended from the centre of the cone, which is glazed from the top
downwards about 15 ft.  Round the spacious arena rise lower and upper
tiers of boxes splendidly fitted up.  The entrance to the circle and
boxes is through a lofty and well-proportioned saloon, about 70 ft. long
and 30 ft. wide.  The facade of the building presents above the principal
entrance an open portico of three arches looking into the gardens; and
there is an exactly similar arcade opening internally towards the
theatre."  A portion of the building here described is now the Victoria
Station of the Great Eastern Railway.


SEPTEMBER.


2.--At the King's Head Inn, Diss, the brewery, public-houses, mansion,
farm, and other property of Mr. Robert Sheriffe, of Diss, were sold by
auction by Mr. W. W. Simpson, of London.  The brewery and public-houses
were purchased by Mr. Samuel Farrow, and the amount realised by the three
days' sale was 50,000 pounds.  "The great increase in the value of
country public-houses apparent from the enormous prices which have lately
been realised for this description of property leads us to believe that
the shook which the trade suffered on the passing of the Beer Bill some
years since has been entirely recovered, and that country public-houses
are now even of greater value than they were antecedent to the passing of
that measure."

9.--The two days' annual race meeting commenced on the Mousehold course,
Norwich.

10.--A "great ringing festival" took place at Heydon, to celebrate the
opening of the new peal of bells put up by Thomas and Joshua Hurry, of
Norwich.  Prizes were competed for by the ringers, and a "farmers' ball"
concluded the festivities.

12.--On this date was reported the discovery of the remains of Sir Thomas
Browne, in the church of St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich.  "The bones of the
skeleton were found to be in good preservation, particularly those of the
skull.  The brain was considerable in quantity, but changed to a state of
adipocere resembling ointment of a dark brown hue.  The hair and the
beard remained profuse and perfect, though the flesh of the face as well
as of every other part was totally gone.  With respect to the formation
of the head, we are informed that the forehead was remarkably low, but
the back of the cranium exhibited an unusual degree of depth and
capaciousness.  Sir Thomas Browne died on October 12th, 1682."

14.--Died at Honing, Thomas Holt, aged 105.

21.--M. Liszt, the celebrated pianist, performed at two grand concerts at
Norwich, in the morning at the Assembly Rooms, and in the evening at the
Theatre.  The other artistes were Mr. Mori, Mdlle. de Varny, Miss Louisa
Bassano, and Mr. J. Parry.

22.--Under the management of Messrs. Hewlett and Trory, a morning concert
was given at the Assembly Rooms, and an evening concert at St. Andrew's
Hall, Norwich, at which the performers were Madame Persiani, Signor
Negri, Signor Rubini, and Signor Puzzi.  "In two consecutive days we have
had four concerts and heard four of the greatest performers of the
present day--Persiani, Puzzi, Rubini, and Liszt."

24.--From a meadow near Bishop Bridge, Norwich, Mr. Charles Green
ascended in the Nassau balloon, accompanied by Mr. R. Crawshay and his
sons, Messrs. F. and E. Crawshay, Mr. Nicholas Bacon, Mr. Shalders, and
Mr. Andrews.  The balloon rose at four o'clock, and descended at five
o'clock, at Metton, near Felbrigg.


OCTOBER.


1.--Died at his residence in the Lower Close, Norwich, aged 90, Sylas
Neville, M.D.  "Of this venerable gentleman, for a great many years an
inhabitant of this city, living as he did in a state of perfect
seclusion, there is little to record beyond the fact of his having been
born in London and having taken his doctor's degree at Edinburgh, in
1775.  His inaugural essay, 'De Prognosi in Febribus,' delivered on the
occasion, is in print, and bears testimony to his acquirements both as a
classic and as a pathologist.  During many years and to the last moments
of his existence, Dr. Neville was chiefly indebted to the kindness of
friends around him for the means of subsistence."

5.--George Edward Seales, known as a common informer, procured the
conviction of a coach proprietor, at the Norwich Police Court, for
carrying more than the regulation number of passengers.  Seales, on
leaving the Guildhall, was violently assaulted by the mob, and was
escorted to his home by twenty police-officers.

6.--Col. Petre, of Westwick, presided at a meeting at the Assembly Rooms,
Norwich, at which was formed, for the prevention of cruelty to animals, a
society known as "The Animals' Friend Society."

--The Countess of Leicester sustained a compound fracture of the leg by a
fall from her horse whilst riding in Holkham Park.

16.--A brace of trout was taken in an eel net at the New Mills, Norwich.
The female weighed 6 lbs. 8 oz., and was 23.5 inches in length; the male
was 4 lbs. 12 oz. in weight, and 23 inches in length.


NOVEMBER.


2.--On Mr. T. R. Buckworth's estate at Cockley Cley, near Swaffham, "a
party of several gentlemen killed the extraordinary number of 630 head of
game, consisting of 331 pheasants, 15 partridges, 176 hares, and 108
rabbits."

5.--Gaslight was used for the first time at Harleston; to celebrate the
event a public dinner was held at the Magpie Inn.

6.--A public meeting was held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, presided
over by Mr. John Joseph Gurney, at which an auxiliary of the British and
Foreign Anti-Slavery Society, for the purpose of abolishing slavery
throughout the world, was formed.  Mr. Henry B. Stanton, secretary of the
New York Anti-Slavery Society, was the principal speaker.

9.--Mr. Edward Willett was elected Mayor, and Mr. Richard Coaks appointed
Sheriff, of Norwich.

--Died at his residence, St. Margaret's Place, Lynn, aged 63, Mr. John
Prescott Blencowe, who had several times served the office of Mayor of
that borough.

10.--The Norwich Polytechnic Exhibition was opened in the premises known
as the Royal Bazaar, St. Andrew's.  The exhibition consisted of
scientific objects, paintings, drawings, machinery, &c.  Professor
Partington delivered a course of lectures on arts and manufactures.

18.--A county meeting was held at St. Andrew's Hall, in furtherance of
the movement for suppressing the slave trade in Africa.  The High Sheriff
(Mr. H. Villebois) presided.  The Chartists attended in force, and "gave
groans for the Whigs of Norwich, for Mr. J. J. Gurney, the Bishop of
Norwich, and Sir T. Fowell Buxton."  The ringleader, Dover, moved a
resolution affirming that the meeting "views with deep regret the many
proofs of despotic slavery now increasing at home, and it therefore
pledges itself to use all its exertions to put a final stop to slavery
wherever it is found to exist."  This was negatived, amid great uproar,
and the resolutions drafted by the promoters of the meeting adopted.

22.--Intelligence was received in Norwich of the birth of a Princess
(Princess Royal).  The bells of St. Peter Mancroft were rung, and next
day (Monday) there were further demonstrations of joy.  On December 2nd a
special meeting of the Norwich Court of Guardians was held, "to drink the
health of the Queen and the Princess Royal"; and on the same day the
Bishop, in celebration of the birth, entertained the inmates of the
Workhouse.  The Town Council, on the 10th, adopted a loyal and dutiful
address of congratulation.

22.--A severe gale occurred on the Norfolk coast, and resulted in the
loss of several lives.  Ships were driven ashore at Cromer.


DECEMBER.


14.--A young man named William Bunting appeared before the Norwich
magistrates, charged with using threatening language to Mr. R. N. Bacon,
of the "Norwich Mercury."  The defendant, a groom in the service of Capt.
Ives, rode a horse named Newman Nogs at Long Stratton steeplechases on
December 9th.  The animal was injured, and had to be destroyed.  The
complainant, in his report in the "Mercury," insinuated that the rider
"had too much nog in his head"; and Bunting, taking offence, called at
the office, and threatened to horsewhip Mr. Bacon.  It was alleged that,
during the interview, Capt. Ives rode backwards and forwards in front of
the office.  Defendant was ordered to find sureties, and keep the peace.

26.--Navigation between Norwich and Yarmouth was obstructed by the frozen
state of the river.

28.--A cricket match was played on the ice on Scoulton Mere, between two
selected elevens from the parish of Hingham.  "Mr. W. Waller's side went
in first, and after some fine play, and still finer falls, were out for
66 runs.  Mr. W. Roberts' side then took the bat, and scored 170 runs in
the most slashing style, hitting the ball quite off the ice in all
directions.  Some of the players wore skaits, and others their stump
shoes, &c., to prevent falling."

30.--At a meeting held at the East India and Colonial Rooms, Pall Mall,
under the presidency of Mr. W. L. W. Chute, M.P., the Norfolk, Suffolk,
and Cambridge Railway Company was formed, for the purpose of constructing
a line to proceed from Yarmouth to Bishop's Stortford, by way of Norwich,
Wymondham, Attleborough, Thetford, Newmarket and Cambridge.  The
principal promoter was Mr. J. W. Rastrick, and the adoption of the scheme
was agreed to on the motion of the Marquis of Douro, seconded by Mr.
Samuel Bignold.  The estimated cost of the line was two millions, and of
locomotives and carriages, 200,000 pounds.

31.--The weather "was warmer and more brilliant than the last days of May
are sometimes found to be."  In the previous week the thermometer stood
at eleven degrees below freezing point.



1841.


JANUARY.


3.--A severe gale, with thunder, lightning, and hailstorms, occurred.

4.--A correspondent writing to the NORFOLK CHRONICLE on this date
announced the discovery, in the old Library Room at St. Andrew's Hall,
Norwich, of an antique chest containing the remains of a valuable
collection of Roman and English coins.  John Kirkpatrick, in his will,
dated July, 1727, made the following bequest: "I give to the Mayor,
Sheriffs, citizens and commonalty of Norwich all my ancient MSS. and all
my medals and antient coins of silver and brass, to be deposited in the
library of the new Hall" (the Guildhall).  The coins found at St.
Andrew's Hall formed the remnant of that collection.

7.--The thermometer fell to zero at Norwich.  The cold was so intense
that fowls under cover were frozen to death.  Great distress prevailed,
and meetings were held at Norwich, Yarmouth, and Lynn, to adopt measures
for the relief of the poor.

9.--Died in the Cathedral Precincts, Norwich, in his 77th year, the Rev.
Peter Hansell, one of the Minor Canons of the Cathedral, an office which
he had held for upwards of fifty-four years.  For more than half a
century he was minister of St. John de Sepulchre.  His remains were
interred, on the 15th, in the south transept of the Cathedral.

--Died, aged 52, Samuel Thurston, for more than 30 years a ringer at St.
Peter Mancroft, Norwich.  "As a practical ringer and theorist combined,
the art has lost one of its brightest ornaments.  The date tablets
erected in different parishes throughout the city and county record his
fame as a ringer."

16.--All the marshes and low-lying lands in the vicinity of Norwich were
flooded upon the breaking up of the frost.  Owing to the heavy state of
the roads, the mail and stage coaches were delayed several hours beyond
their usual time.  The weather was remarkably warm and brilliant in the
last week of the month.


FEBRUARY.


3.--Wintry weather set in with increased severity, the rivers were
icebound, and navigation was completely stopped at Lynn.

--The Mayor of Norwich (Mr. Ed. Willett) entertained a large party at the
Royal Hotel, in celebration of the christening of the Princess Royal.
"Four swans formed a conspicuous figure in the second course, and the
ancient and costly Corporation plate was brought into requisition on this
occasion.  Previous to the removal of the cloth the beautiful antique
massive gilt dishes were passed round with rose water in them."  In the
evening a ball was held at the Assembly Rooms.

8.--Miss Ellen Tree commenced a six nights' engagement at Norwich
Theatre.  Her impersonations included Julia ("The Hunchback"), Letitia
Hardy, Mrs. Haller, Constance ("The Love Chase"), Juliana ("The
Honeymoon"), and Pauline.

12.--Died, at East Dereham, in her 101st year, Mrs. Carter, widow of the
Rev. John Carter, formerly minister of the Independent chapel,
Mattishall.

--Died, Sir Astley Paston Cooper, Bart., aged 78 years.

27.--Died at Scarning, aged 67, the Rev. L. Walton, perpetual curate of
Wendling and Longham, and many years master of the Free Grammar School,
Scarning.


MARCH.


5.--The Norwich Philharmonic Society, established on the dissolution of
the Hall Concert, gave its first concert.

22.--The Mayor of Yarmouth (Mr. S. Palmer), "assisted by the lodge of
Free and Accepted Masons," laid the first stone of the Victoria Hotel at
Yarmouth.  "Corn, wine, and oil, emblems of plenty, were offered and
poured upon the stone."  The hotel, and adjoining houses known as
Kimberley Terrace, were erected by the Victoria Building Company, "for
the reception of families of the highest distinction."


APRIL.


5.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Mr. Justice Bosanquet, Charlotte
Yaxley, _alias_ Middleton, aged 22, was indicted for the murder of
Lavinia Kerrison, the thirteen months old illegitimate child of her
husband, by drowning it in a duck-pond at Yarmouth, on March 23rd.  She
was found guilty, and sentenced to transportation for life.

10.--Intelligence was received at Norwich of the massacre, by Malay
pirates, in the Straits of Timor, of the crew of the Pilot Southseaman in
June, 1840.  The captain, first officer (Mr. Gidney, brother of Mr. J. W.
Gidney, of East Dereham), and twenty-five seamen fell victims whilst
gallantly defending the ship.

13.--Died, aged 85, John Rayson, of Pulham.  "For nearly half a century
he had been deprived of the use of his legs, but this did not prevent his
travelling daily between Pulham and Harleston as postman or letter
carrier, for 47 years."

17.--A new "local drama," entitled, "Rose Maynard, the Factory Girl of
Norwich," was produced for the first time at Norwich Theatre.  "The piece
is of home manufacture, but we cannot compliment the _weaver_ of this
dramatic _warp_ and _woof_ of his judgment in laying such a _fabric_
before an audience in Norwich."  The scenery, by Thorne, included views
of St. Saviour's church, the Palace Gate, St. Martin-at-Palace Plain, and
Whitefriars' Bridge.

27.--Died at South Walsham, aged 75, Mr. Henry Codling.  "Unassisted by
the aid of any tutor, he acquired no mean degree of mathematical
knowledge.  He understood the doctrine of fluxions, and delighted in his
favourite author, Maclaurin.  He was a constant annual correspondent with
the 'Ladies' Diary,' to within a few years of the close of his life, and
received prizes for the solution of the most knotty questions contained
therein."

28.--The headquarters of the 8th Royal Irish Hussars marched from Norwich
for Manchester, and on the same day two troops of the 7th Dragoon Guards
marched in, under the command of Major Bolton.

--Died at Chigwell Row, Mr. Luke Greaves Hansard, aged 61.  "He was
printer to the House of Commons, and eldest son of Luke Hansard, a native
of Norfolk."


MAY.


5.--The Bishop of Norwich confirmed 500 persons at Diss.  His lordship,
in the course of this visitation, confirmed 10,464 young persons.

11.--Mr. Carter, "the celebrated African Lion King," appeared at Norwich
Theatre "with his troupe of acting animals, consisting of lions, tigers,
leopards, and panthers, in a new drama, entitled, 'The Lion of the
Desert.'"  Mr. Carter took the part of "Abdallah, a dumb Arab."  "It
requires no little nerve on the part of the actors and actresses to play
to such rough customers, and much credit is due to the members of the
Norwich Company who took a share in the performance."

17.--At Norwich, R. Coates, "the great London pedestrian," walked 50
miles in twelve hours; on the 18th ran 50 miles, on the 19th ran 40 miles
backwards, on the 20th ran a pair of wheels 22 miles, rowed a boat 10
miles, jumped 300 flights of hurdles placed ten yards apart, and threw
100 somersaults.  "All these events on the several days were performed in
the space of twelve hours."  At the Green Hill Gardens, Norwich, Coates
undertook to walk, on June 1st, 2nd, and 3rd, fifty miles in twelve hours
each day, "half backwards and half forwards, and accomplished this
extraordinary feat the last day with ten minutes to spare."  At the same
gardens, on June 30th, he commenced walking 1,000 half miles in 1,000
successive hours.  "He has to walk a half mile every succeeding half hour
day and night, but he has the privilege of walking two half miles
together, the last and first part of the hour."  Coates was credited with
the due accomplishment of the feat.  On August 10th a man named Charles
Thurlow began a walk of 1,000 miles in 1,000 hours at Richmond Hill
Gardens, Norwich, and completed what was said to have been a genuine
performance on September 21st.  Another pedestrian named Henry Raven,
started to walk the same distance in the same time on the Lord Nelson
ground, Lakenham, on September 29th, and completed his undertaking on
November 10th.

--The Norfolk Yeomanry Cavalry, under the command of Major Loftus,
marched into Norwich, headed by their brass band, and on the following
day proceeded to Yarmouth for a week's permanent duty.

18.--Sir Jacob Astley, of Melton Constable, Norfolk, and of Seaton
Delaval, Northumberland, took his seat in the House of Peers as Baron
Hastings.  The termination of the long-pending abeyance of the Barony of
Hastings in favour of Sir Jacob was celebrated with great festivities at
Foulsham and Holt.  "According to the date of his barony, the 18th of
Edward I., 1290, next below Lord de Roos, Baron Hastings is the most
ancient baron of the United Kingdom."

20.--Mr. G. V. Brooke commenced a six nights' engagement at Norwich
Theatre.


JUNE.


2.--At a meeting held at the Assembly Rooms, East Dereham, under the
presidency of Lord Sondes, it was agreed "that in consequence of the
unprincipled attacks made upon the owners and cultivators of the soil by
the employment of hired agitators to inflame the minds of the lower
orders of society against them, it is expedient that some steps be
adopted for the protection and defence of those interests."  It was also
decided to form an association which was known as the Central Norfolk
Society for the Protection of Agriculture, and was affiliated to the
British Agricultural Protection Association, an organization which worked
in opposition to the Anti-Corn Law League.

2.--A meeting was held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, in pursuance of a
requisition addressed to the Mayor, stating that "her Majesty's Ministers
had been guilty of an act of gross and wanton injustice and spoliation in
depriving the freemen of this and other cities and boroughs of their
vested municipal rights; that by their unremitting endeavours to uphold
and perpetuate in all their unmitigated harshness and severity the
heartless and oppressive provisions of the new Poor Law they had evinced
an utter disregard to the wants, feelings, and rights of the poor, and
that their recent attempts to deprive the colonial and agricultural
interests of the empire of a just protection under the specious and
delusive pretext of supplying a deficiency in the revenue which their own
mismanagement had occasioned, had rendered them wholly unworthy of the
confidence of the country."  Between two thousand and three thousand
persons were present, and the greatest confusion prevailed, owing to the
action of a large body of Chartists, led by the notorious John Dover.  It
was proposed that Col. Harvey should take the chair, but the Chartists
elected one Matthew Smith, a working man.  On the latter assuming the
presidency of the meeting, Col. Harvey, Mr. Bignold, and other gentlemen
left the hall.  A number of resolutions of a revolutionary character were
adopted, and Dover, at the conclusion of the meeting, congratulated his
followers on the success of the gathering, remarking that "it had cost
the Tories 20 pounds for bills, and the Whigs 20 pounds for bullies."
The proceedings, which were of a very orderly character, concluded with
three cheers for Fergus O'Connor.  Meanwhile the gentlemen who had
convened the original meeting adjourned to the Norfolk Hotel, where they
passed a series of resolutions emphasising the statements contained in
the requisition.  During the whole of the proceedings the hotel was
besieged by a riotous mob, several serious assaults were committed, and
on the 3rd some of the rioters were charged before the magistrates.

9.--Litcham Races took place on this date.  Among the other local
meetings was that at East Dereham, on June 23rd, where the commencement
of the sport was announced by the ringing of the church bells, and the
cup was won by Mr. Column's c.g. Day Star.  The trophy "weighed 41 oz.,
and contained by admeasurement eight pints of Howard's sparkling
champaign, which the fortunate winner twice filled, and the company
partook of it with true English feeling."  The Yarmouth meeting took
place on July 20th and 21st, the Norfolk and Norwich Races were held on
Mousehold Heath, Norwich, on September 8th and 9th, and Swaffham Races on
September 15th.

19.*--"For nearly the middle of June, so cold a season has never perhaps
been experienced as during all last week.  Fires and great coats were in
general requisition, and coachmen and guards were to be seen muffled up
as if we had been in the depth of winter."

28.--The Marquis of Douro and Mr. Benjamin Smith, the retiring members,
were nominated for the representation of Norwich in Parliament.  Dover,
the Chartist, nominated a third candidate, Mr. William Eagle, of
Lakenheath, Suffolk.  "Conservatives and Whigs, in the show of hands,
voted against Eagle, and the Sheriff declared the Marquis of Douro and
Mr. Smith duly elected."  Dover thereupon demanded a poll for Eagle, but
was unable to deposit one-third of the expense (about 200 pounds).  The
proceedings were temporarily adjourned.  "Dover then went out of the
room, and, after the lapse of half an hour, _something_ took place which
our readers will guess by the result.  When Dover came back there was no
further demand for a poll--we believe Dover received 50 pounds to
withdraw the nomination."  The rumour quickly spread among the Chartists
that Dover had "sold" them.  The mob waylaid him in Dove Lane, and he
retreated to the Guildhall for protection.  The windows of the room in
which he was supposed to have taken refuge were demolished by the stones
thrown by the mob, and the police who went out to quell the disturbance
were assailed by volleys of brickbats and other missiles.  The 7th
Dragoon Guards were called out, the Mayor read the Riot Act, and in the
excitement and confusion Dover left the Guildhall unnoticed.  On the 29th
the Chartists assembled in force and went to the King's Head, St.
George's Colegate, where Dover lived with a woman named Charlotte
Humphrey.  They burst into the house and found him armed with his
Chartist weapons, which were wrested from him; he was knocked down,
brutally belaboured, and hurried to the river, and would have been thrown
from the bridge had it not been for the piteous intercession of one of
his children.  The mob were moving towards the Market Place with their
prisoner when he was rescued by the police.  At the same time a
detachment of dragoons, commanded by Cornet Crofts, with the Mayor at
their head, rode up, a coach was procured, and Dover, having been placed
inside, was conveyed, under military escort, to the City Gaol, where his
serious injuries were attended to by the surgeon of the prison.  On the
30th several persons appeared before the magistrates and were punished
for taking part in the disturbances.  Public tranquillity was somewhat
restored the same day by a procession in which "Philip Augustus, the
musical pieman," and "Jerry, the lucifer match seller, in a military
costume, with an immense plume of feathers in his cap," were "chaired."

28.--Lord George Bentinck and Sir Stratford Canning were returned
unopposed for the borough of King's Lynn.

--Mr. W. Wilshere, Mr. C. E. Rumbold, Mr. Thomas Baring, and Mr. Joseph
Soames were nominated candidates for the representation of Yarmouth.  The
proceedings were marked by great disorder.  The polling, on the 29th,
resulted as follows:--Wilshere, 945; Rumbold, 943; Baring, 501; Soames,
494.  The two first named were declared elected.

30.--Thetford election took place.  The Hon. W. Bingham Baring
(Conservative), 86; Lord Euston (Whig), 71; Sir James Flower
(Conservative), 71.  Before a Committee of the House of Commons, on May
4th, 1842, a petition was presented on behalf of Sir James Flower, on the
ground that several votes polled for Lord Euston were bad, as the voters
had lost their qualifications.  His lordship declined to take any part in
these proceedings.  The objection against one voter having been
sustained, Sir James Flower was placed in a majority, and the Committee
then passed the following resolution:--"That the Right Hen. Henry
FitzRoy, commonly called the Earl of Euston, was not duly elected member
for the borough of Thetford; that Sir James Flower, Bart., was duly
elected, and ought to have been returned; and that the Committee have
altered the poll by striking off the vote of William Burlingham from the
poll of the Earl of Euston."


JULY.


5.--Mr. William Bagge and Mr. W. Lyde Wiggett Chute, the former members,
were nominated and returned unopposed as members for West Norfolk.  "The
town of Swaffham was one blaze of pink and purple."  The candidates were
escorted to the Shirehall by an imposing procession, and after the
nomination the election dinner was held at the Assembly Rooms, under the
presidency of the Hon. Francis Baring.

10.--Mr. Edmond Wodehouse and Mr. Henry Negus Burroughes, the former
Conservative members for East Norfolk, entered Norwich at the head of a
great cavalcade of freeholders, and were nominated at the Shirehall.  Mr.
Palmer, Recorder of Yarmouth, and Mr. William Wilde, Coroner for Norwich,
nominated and seconded Sir William J. H. B. ffolkes as the Whig
candidate.  The polling, on the 13th, was declared as
follows:--Wodehouse, 3,498; Burroughes, 3,437; ffolkes, 1,379.

12.--Died at Denton, near Harleston, Sarah Witton, aged 100 years,
"leaving twenty-nine great-grandchildren still living, they being the
origin of one daughter."  The deceased was "the daughter of John and
Eleanor Middleton, who lived to attain to the great age of 105 years."

15.--Died in the Chantry, Norwich, Monsieur De Rouillon, "an eminent
professor and teacher of French, and extensively known as the author of
several grammatical and other useful literary works."

26.--At the Norwich Assizes, before Mr. Justice Williams, a special jury
tried the important action, Palmer and another _v._ Irving, chairman of
the Alliance Insurance Company.  The action was brought by the executors
of a person of the name of Howes to recover from the company the sum of
1,503 pounds, the amount of a policy on the life of Howes.  The defendant
disputed the liability to pay, on the ground that Howes had suffered from
consumption, was addicted to habits prejudicial to life, and that the
policy had been obtained by fraud.  After a long trial, an arrangement
was arrived at, and a verdict given for the defendant, both sides to pay
their own costs, and the policy to become void.  Policies with other
offices were similarly affected by the result of the trial.

28.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Mr. Justice Williams, John Self, aged
20, was charged with the murder of Jemima Stimpson, aged 15, at
Wymondham, on July 17th.  The prisoner killed the girl by striking her on
the head with a spade, and afterwards threw the body into a pond.  He was
found guilty, sentenced to death, and on August 14th executed on the
Castle Hill, Norwich.


AUGUST.


16.--The two troops of the 7th Dragoon Guards marched from the Cavalry
Barracks, Norwich, _en route_ for Ireland.  On the 25th a portion of the
13th Light Dragoons, recently returned from active service in India,
marched in.  The headquarters of the regiment were stationed at Ipswich.
The commanding officer was Lieut.-Col. Richard Brunton, youngest son of
Mr. John Brunton, formerly manager of Norwich Theatre, and brother of the
Dowager Countess Craven.

17.--Experiments were made on Yarmouth beach, in the presence of
coastguard officers, with the view of testing the capabilities of Manby's
mortar and Dennett's rocket in carrying out a line for effecting
communication with stranded vessels.  "The result of the experiments
appears to be that each apparatus is possessed of qualities peculiar to
itself.  The rocket unquestionably carries the furthest, and flies with
great precision.  It is also more portable, but the unanimous opinion was
that the rocket and mortar should go together, and so far from being
considered rivals, they should be regarded as coadjutors in promoting the
beneficent object which each must have in view."

26.--A four-oared match between London and Norwich crews, for 50 pounds a
side, took place from Coldham Hall to Thorpe Gardens, distance seven
miles.  The crews were composed as follow: London--Lett (stroke),
Moulton, Maynard, Perry, G. Maynard (cox.).  Norwich--William Gurling
(stroke), Henry Gurling, Clarke, Tom Lefevre, W. Buttle (cox.).  The
boats started at 4.30 p.m.; the Londoners rowed the distance in 53
minutes, and the Norwich men in 56 minutes.  The London boat, the most
perfect specimen of a four-oar ever seen in Norwich, weighed 124 lbs.  In
a second match, on August 28th, in Norwich-built boats, from Bramerton to
Thorpe, the London crew won by 25 seconds.  On the same day a match
between London and Norwich amateurs (London: Messrs. Chinery and
Thompson; Norwich: Messrs. Clabburn and Russell), was rowed from Postwick
to Thorpe (two miles), stakes 10 pounds.  "The striking of the flags was
nearly simultaneous, but the Londoners were declared the winners."

--A balloon ascent was made from Lynn Gasworks by Mr. Gypson, accompanied
by Mr. Thomas Oxley and Mr. D. Nelson.  A second ascent took place on
September 9th.  On September 18th Mr. Gypson ascended from Swaffham
Gasworks.


SEPTEMBER.


6.--Mr. and Mrs. Wood commenced an operatic engagement at Norwich
Theatre.  The productions included "La Somnambula," "Fra Diavolo," "Love
in a Village," and "The Waterman."

14.--The Coltishall Brewery estate, consisting of a residence and
cottages, 53 inns and public-houses, and about 260 acres of land,
formerly the property of Mr. Robert Howes, deceased, was offered for sale
by auction, at the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, by Mr. W. W. Simpson, of
London, and realised about 50,000 pounds.


OCTOBER.


13.--Van Amburgh, with his collection of trained animals, performed at
Lynn.  "The elephant arrived covered with a sort of coat _a la
__Mackintosh_, and, to prevent injury to his feet, he had something on in
the shape of boots."  The show also visited Norwich, and was located in
the Ranelagh Gardens.  "As a menagerie it is inferior to Wombwell's; as a
spectacle it is scarcely to be compared with Carter's."

19.--At the Norwich Quarter Sessions, before Mr. Isaac Jermy, Recorder,
Jacob Macro, woollen draper, refused to take the oath as a member of the
grand jury, "because Scripture said 'Swear not at all.'  The Recorder:
Then, sir, I think it right to fine you the sum of 50 pounds, to be paid
to the use of her Majesty."  The fine was subsequently reduced to 20
pounds.


NOVEMBER.


8.--An exceedingly rare fish, the maigre (_sciaena aquila_), was captured
off Sheringham.  It measured 5 ft. 2 in. in length, weighed 68.5 lbs.,
and was preserved by Mr. George Johnson, chemist, of Norwich.

9.--At a meeting of the Norwich Paving Commissioners, it was decided to
try the experiment of paving Briggs' Street with wood.  It was suggested
that "pieces of fir 14 in. or 15 in. long, having been peeled, be put
down as they grow, with gravel between each."

--Mr. John Marshall was elected Mayor of Norwich, and Mr. William Storey
appointed Sheriff.

10.--On the arrival at Norwich of the intelligence of the birth of the
Prince of Wales, the Union flag was hoisted on the towers of St. Peter
Mancroft, St. Stephen, St. Giles, and of other parish churches, and the
bells of St. Peter rang rejoicing peals.  On Sunday, the 14th, a special
form of thanksgiving was used at the church services; on November 16th
and December 4th the Norwich Town Council and the county magistrates
voted addresses of congratulation to the Queen and Prince Albert; and on
December 7th the Bishop of Norwich gave a dinner to the inmates of the
Workhouse.  "The Queen graciously received the congratulations of the
boys of Paston Grammar School, North Walsham, and requested that an
additional week of holidays be granted to them at the ensuing Christmas
vacation, in commemoration of the happy event."

13.--On this date was published the judgment given in the Consistory
Court of Norwich, by Mr. Evans, in the suit, Loftus husband _v._ Loftus
wife.  The suit was brought by the Rev. Arthur Loftus, of Fincham,
against Mary Anna Ray Loftus, for restitution of the conjugal rights of
marriage.  The Court ruled that Mr. Loftus was fully entitled to
judgment, and admonished Mrs. Loftus to return to her husband.

14.--Died at Blickling Hall, the seat of the Dowager Lady Suffield, John
William Robert Kerr, Marquis and Earl of Lothian, aged 48.  The funeral
of the deceased nobleman took place at Blickling church, on November
24th.

16.--Christ church, New Catton, was consecrated by the Bishop of Norwich,
and the sermon was preached by the Hon. and Rev. J. T. Pelham, rector of
Berghapton.  "The Chartists marched in procession to the church and were
refused admission, and then commenced every possible description of
insult and injury.  The Bishop and other gentlemen, on leaving the
church, were scandalously assailed by the mob; near St. Clement's church
some stones were thrown, and it was with difficulty that the crowd was
kept off.  The Right Rev. prelate was escorted to the Palace, and at the
gate three cheers were given for his lordship."  Eleven arrests were
made, and several convictions were recorded during the two days' hearing
at the Police Court.  The ringleader, a man named Hewett, was committed
for trial at the Quarter Sessions, and on January 4th, 1842, the Recorder
(Mr. Isaac Jermy) sentenced him to two calendar months' imprisonment,
ordered him to find two sureties and keep the peace for twelve months,
and to remain in custody until such sureties were forthcoming.

17.--At the dinner of the Marham Hunt, held at the Crown Inn, Swaffham,
Mr. Henry Villebois was presented with a silver candelabrum, weighing 200
oz., in recognition of "the liberal and sporting manner in which he had
contributed to the general amusement" of the members of the Hunt.

19.--A meeting of landowners and others was held at Yarmouth, for the
purpose of considering a scheme proposed by Mr. Robert Stephenson, for
constructing a railway from Yarmouth to Norwich.  Two other proposed
railways were before the public, and in both cases it was proposed to
construct bridges over the river.  Mr. Stephenson's railway, first known
as the Valley Line, pursued a route which obviated the necessity of
crossing the river, but the scheme included a plan for diverting the
course of the stream at Thorpe for a distance of about 50 chains.  The
scheme, which was estimated to cost 150,000 pounds, was adopted, and the
line, the first to be opened in Norfolk, was called afterwards the
Yarmouth and Norwich Railway.

24.--The celebrated Distin family gave the first of three concerts at the
Theatre Royal, Norwich.

27.*--"The memorial statue of the late venerable Bishop Bathurst, by the
far-famed hand of Chantrey, has been erected this week in Norwich
Cathedral."  This was the last work of Chantrey, who died in London
shortly after his departure from Norwich.  "The estimate for the monument
of Bishop Bathurst was 2,500 pounds; Chantrey took it for 1,500 pounds;
the block of Carrara marble alone must have cost him nearly 1,000
pounds."

--The Census returns were published on this date.  The statistics
affecting Norwich were as follow:--Houses, inhabited, 13,889;
uninhabited, 805; building, 53; persons--males, 28,014; females, 33,832;
total, 61,846.  The population of Norfolk, exclusive of Norwich, was
350,775.


DECEMBER.


7.--A flood occurred at Norwich, after twenty-four hours' rain.  It was
the sixth that had taken place since October 5th.  "The waters were as
high if not higher than on any former inundation of our marshes."

23.--The Phenomena coach, with its Christmas load, started from Norwich,
drawn by a team of six greys, "which were all managed by Mr. Thomas
Wiggins, in a style which would have done credit to a first-rate whip,
and which was never before attempted by any coachman on the road."

24.*--"We have lately had exhibited in Norwich a new system of skaiting
on the saloon in the Ranelagh Gardens and at the Corn Exchange.  It is
called Tachypos, and is a kind of skait each running on two iron wheels
about six inches in diameter, and fastens on to the foot in a similar way
to the common skait, with protection to the legs up to the knees.  With
these persons may travel at the rate of nine miles an hour upon the
common road.  The Tachypos is invented by Mr. J. Ayton, of this city, and
differs considerably from the Tachypos lately exhibited at the principal
theatres in London.  There are at this moment boys exhibiting upon them,
and are cutting round the corners and corn-stands with all imaginable
ease and rapidity."

--Wombwell's Menagerie arrived at Norwich, and was exhibited on the
Castle Hill.  The collection included a pair of giraffes, one of which
was killed by an accidental fall.  "The elephant is a magnificent animal,
but we think the walking exercise which Van Amburgh's elephant is obliged
to take, instead of being drawn from place to place by some twelve
horses, conduces to a clearer complexion and a better state of health."
For the first time, Wombwell advertised that he had a keeper "who goes
into the den of the trained lions and tigers."



1842.


JANUARY.


7.--At a meeting of the county magistrates, held at Norwich, the Earl of
Orford presented a petition signed by a very large number of occupiers of
land, "praying for a considerable change, if not a total abrogation, of
the police force, as the introduction of the force had not decreased
either the number of robberies or cases of vagrancy, while the expenses
of the county were much increased by the costs arising from the
prosecution of persons apprehended by the police for offences of a very
trivial nature."  The Rev. J. C. Collyer presented a counter petition
from the clergy, landowners, and inhabitants of Reepham, "praying that no
alteration take place in the county police, which had been found a most
useful body in that part of the county."  A resolution was unanimously
adopted affirming that great benefits had been derived from the
introduction of the police, and thanking Col. Oakes, the Chief Constable,
for his exertions in the formation of the force.

8.--Deputations from the various agricultural societies in East Norfolk
attended a meeting at the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, at which the East
Norfolk Agricultural Association was formed, for the exhibition of stock
and agricultural implements in Norwich or its vicinity.  Lord Wodehouse
was elected president, and Mr. E. C. Bailey secretary.  The first show
was held on Norwich Cricket Ground, on September 13th.  There were
twenty-four classes of live stock, and four entries of implements; 800
persons were present, and the sum of 40 pounds was taken at the gates.
Lord Wodehouse presided at the dinner, held at the Assembly Rooms.

14.--The Lynn mail coach, on its journey to London, overturned between
Melbourne and Royston, and Simpson, the coachman, was killed.

15.--"Died last week, in the 85th year of his age, Mr. Thos. Leech,
hosier, one of the oldest inhabitants of Diss.  He was the representative
of the venerable Bishop Blaize in the last procession of the wool-combers
held at Diss at about the same time the like pageant was exhibited at
Norwich, Diss having been esteemed a great manufactory of hosiery, and
one of the chief in Norfolk and Suffolk."

19.--At a meeting held at the Guildhall, Norwich, it was decided to
celebrate the christening of the Prince of Wales by the erection of an
almshouse, and to raise 1,000 pounds for carrying out the scheme.  At an
adjourned meeting, on January 25th, the resolution was rescinded, because
"the opening of an alms-house was only the opening of a pauper warren."
On the same day a dinner was given at the Royal Hotel, a ball took place
at the Assembly Rooms, and the inmates of the Workhouse were entertained.


FEBRUARY.


5.--Richard Cricknell, the Norwich pugilist, died on this date.  "He had
never been well since he fought with Cain (on January 7th, 1840, _q.v._);
the injury which he received to his head deprived him of his reason, and
he had since been in the Bethel."

6.--Died at Budleigh-Salterton, near Exeter, aged 70, the Rev. William
Gilpin, who had been twice stationed in Norwich as Wesleyan
Superintendent, namely, in 1809 and 1824, during which periods "the great
chapels" in Calvert Street and St. Peter Mancroft were erected.

9.--Died at his seat at Thorpe Lodge, aged 87, Lieut.-Col. Harvey, a
magistrate and deputy-lieutenant of the county, and a justice of the
peace for Norwich.  He was also "Father of the City."  Born in 1755, he
was elected Sheriff of Norwich in 1784, Alderman for the Middle Wymer
Ward in 1787, and Mayor in 1792.  During the war which was terminated by
the Treaty of Amiens he raised and commanded a troop of Volunteer
Cavalry, called the Norwich Light Horse, which, on the renewal of
hostilities with France, was augmented to a squadron, of which he was
appointed Major.  In 1824 he became by seniority Lieut.-Col. Commandant
of the 3rd Regiment of Norfolk Yeomanry Cavalry and continued at the head
of the corps until the three county regiments were disembodied.  In
1825-26 he served the office of High Sheriff of Norfolk.  The Thorpe
Lodge estate was sold at the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, by Mr. Culley on
June 9th and 10th.  The amount realised by the auction was 35,000 pounds
and sales by private contract brought the amount to 50,000 pounds.

10.--Lord Jocelyn was elected unopposed Member of Parliament for Lynn, to
fill the vacancy caused by the appointment of Sir Stratford Canning as
Ambassador at Constantinople.

26.--A prospectus was issued inviting the public to subscribe 800 pounds
in 40 shares of 20 pounds each, for the purchase of a steam carriage
(patented by Mr. W. Parr) to run for hire between Norwich and Yarmouth.
(There is no further record of the proposed undertaking.)


MARCH.


7.--The Norwich weavers commenced a strike to enforce a return to the
scheduled prices paid in 1836.  The women and girls employed at Mr.
Wright's factory struck on July 19th, and paraded the streets with
alms-boxes; and on August 22nd the jacquard weavers adopted a similar
course.  In the latter case Mr. Hinde and Mr. Steward agreed to their
demands, and Messrs. Willett and Francis urged the making of mutual
concessions.

--Died, aged 86, Elizabeth Hawes, widow, of Coltishall.  "She was born
and reared in humble life, and was the only sister of that eminent
scholar, Richard Porson, and though under widely different circumstances,
her mind showed traces of the relationship in perception, memory, and the
power of application."

23.--Disturbances took place at Lynn in consequence of a reduction in the
wages of coal porters and sailors.  The rural police were summoned,
special constables sworn in, and a troop of the 13th Light Dragoons were
ordered from Norwich.  Several of the ringleaders were sent to jail.

26.--The publication of Part I. of Mr. David Hodgson's "Antiquarian
Remains, Principally Confined to Norwich and Norfolk," was announced on
this date.

--*"A plan has been set on foot for the establishment of an Art Union for
East Anglia, with the view of giving encouragement to the fine arts in
this county and its vicinity.  The exhibition is intended to be opened at
Norwich at or prior to the Festival week."  The society was known as the
East of England Art Union, and the first exhibition was opened "at their
well-lighted gallery in Exchange Street," on July 27th.  The exhibitors
included J. Stark, J. B. Crome, S. B. Colkett, M. E. Cotman, A. Stannard,
R. Ladbrooke, J. B. Ladbrooke, T. Lound, R. Leman, &c.


APRIL.


4.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Mr. Serjeant Atcherley, George Barber,
aged ten years, was indicted, upon the Coroner's inquisition, for
murdering John Smith, aged eight, by throwing him over Shotford Bridge
into the river Waveney, on November 6th, 1841.  The only direct evidence
to criminate the prisoner was his own confession, which was extracted
from him by a witness who had chained him up and frightened him by
threats.  The Commissioner directed the jury to acquit the prisoner, who
was afterwards received into the establishment of the Philanthropic
Society, St. George's Fields, London.

5.--A singular case was tried at the Norfolk Assizes, before Lord Chief
Justice Tindal.  The defendants, John Utting and Anna Bunn, were indicted
for conspiring against one Daniel Durrant, of Winterton, a criminal then
under sentence of transportation for life.  Durrant, at the Summer
Assizes in 1841, was charged with committing a rape upon Bunn, on whose
evidence and that of John Utting, a constable at Filby, he was convicted
and sentenced.  Soon afterwards Durrant's wife died of grief, and Bunn,
labouring under the pangs of remorse, confessed to the Rev. Mr. Sidney,
of Acle, that the statements which procured the conviction of Durrant
were false.  It was further shown that Utting had planned with Bunn to
ruin Durrant.  The jury now found that Durrant was not guilty of the
charge on which he was convicted, and returned a verdict of guilty
against Utting, while Bunn, who had not been called upon to plead, was
discharged.  Utting was taken before the Court of Queen's Bench, on May
9th, and was there sentenced by Mr. Justice Patteson to twelve calendar
months' imprisonment in Norwich Castle.  "The issue of the prosecution
was that Durrant was restored to liberty and returned home.  Only three
years ago he would have been executed for this crime.  He was formerly an
innkeeper, with a good business.  Through this unfounded charge he has
lost his wife, who died of a broken heart, and he and his three young
children are now destitute."  Public subscriptions were made on behalf of
this unfortunate man.

16.*--"During the Assizes the Norwich Scholars ascended the tower of St.
Peter Mancroft and made a grand attempt to ring 6,729 changes of
Stedman's Cinques.  They attained about 6,000, in four hours and a half,
after which the gudgeon of the tenor broke, which, with the stock and
implements, weighs 5,000 lbs. and upwards.  It fell on the beams beneath
with a tremendous crash, but sustained no injury.  The ringers were more
frightened than hurt."

--*"Messrs. Whaites, of Ingham, have, in two days during the last
fortnight, killed 116 couples of snipes; on the first day 54 couples, on
the second day 62 couples."  Other remarkable feats of snipe shooting
were recorded during the year.  On October 15th Mr. Robert Fellowes,
jun., killed, on Sir William Beauchamp Proctor's marshes at Langley, 60
couple; and on November 17th, at Rockland, Mr. Richard Crawshay killed,
at one shot, four snipe on the wing.

--The publication, by subscription, was announced of a new tragedy,
entitled, "De Valencourt, or the Fate of Extremes," by Mr. William Henry
Hoskins, principal tragedian and deputy stage manager at the Theatre
Royal, Norwich, and Mr. H. H. Hoskins, author of "The Spaniards' Ransom,"
&c.  The publishers were C. Mitchell, Red Lion Court, Fleet Street,
London; Matchett and Co. and Bacon and Co., Norwich.  The play was
produced at Norwich Theatre for the first time on May 14th.  "In the
piece there is an imitation of Shakesperian language and dialogue; there
are many striking, and some touching passages, but allied with much that
is very strained and exaggerated."

23.--Mr. Abington, "a graduated member of Trinity College, Cambridge, and
also of the English Bar," who had adopted the stage as a profession, made
his first appearance at Norwich Theatre, as Hamlet.


MAY.


1.--A serious fire occurred at Hillington Hall, the seat of Sir William
ffolkes, Bart.  The fire was confined to the servants' apartments, which
were totally destroyed, and the main building was saved by the unroofing
of the intervening structure.

6.--Samuel Wilkinson, of Mill Street, Peafield, appeared before the
Norwich magistrates and stated that he wished to sell his wife.  The
magistrates referred him to the Ecclesiastical Court, but he said he
would effect the sale and take the risk.  On the 7th, at or near the
Prussia Gardens, he sold his wife for a guinea, and received a sovereign
on account.  On the 10th Wilkinson was bound over to keep the peace for
assaulting his wife.  In the course of the hearing the following written
agreement was produced:--

    "This is to satfy that I Samyoul Wilkerson sold my wife to Mr. Gorge
    Springle for the sum of one pound one before witness.

                                                       Samyoul X Wilkerson
                                              Maryann Wilkerson X her mark
                                                 Gorge Springle X his mark
                                              Frederick Cornish, witness."

7.--Died, Mr. George Cooke Tucker, landlord of the New Inn, Cromer.  "The
present flourishing establishment was built and raised by him.  Possessed
of a peculiar courteousness of manner, and endowed with great kindness of
disposition, he was alike esteemed by the resident gentry and the general
inhabitants of the place and neighbourhood.  He had reached the
patriarchal age of ninety years."

11.--Died, aged 62, Mr. William Norman, Windsor Place, New Lakenham,
"many years hair dresser to his late Majesty George III."

18.--At Norwich Theatre was produced, for the first time, a new
melodrama, in three acts, entitled, "The Student of Jena," by Mr. Wm.
Cooper, B.A., barrister, of Norwich.  "The play is founded on the romance
of the 'Diamond Watch,' a piece of _diablerie_, emanating from the German
school."

26.--Thurlow, the pedestrian, commenced a walk of 2,000 miles in one
thousand hours, at Richmond Hill Gardens, Norwich.  (No further record.)
Robert Skipper, "the celebrated pedestrian, of Norfolk and Norwich,
having been absent on the Continent and in different counties, where he
has won several matches, and is now in his 55th year," began a walk on
June 21st, of 50 miles per day for twenty successive days, at the Green
Hill Gardens, St. Augustine's Gates, Norwich.  He completed the task on
Sunday, July 10th, "and did not appear to be in the least distressed."

28.--Mr. and Mrs. Wood commenced, at Norwich Theatre, a five nights'
engagement, prior to their final retirement from the stage.  The operas
produced included "Fra Diavolo," "Midas," "La Somnambula," and "Norma."

--The Norfolk Yeomanry Cavalry assembled at Swaffham for eight days'
permanent duty, under the command of Major Loftus.

30.--Cricket was revived in Norwich by a match played on this date,
between the Norwich Club and the officers and privates of the 13th Light
Dragoons.  "Considerable fluctuation has for the last few years in
Norwich marked the practice of this celebrated manly game, and about two
years since nothing appeared more probable than its extinction."


JUNE.


1.--Another instance of the holding in church of a public meeting for
secular purposes occurred on this date.  The inhabitants of Stoke Holy
Cross assembled at the parish church to discuss the propriety of
establishing a benefit society.  Mr. T. Brightwell presided over the
meeting.

14.--Died, aged 65, at Long Island, United States, Mr. John Hunt,
engraver, formerly of Norwich.  He was the author of a work on British
ornithology.

19.--A severe thunderstorm occurred at Norwich.  "The wind blew a perfect
hurricane.  Rushing in a straight line for Catton, it caught the high
wall in St. Clement's Square, and blew down about 30 yards of solid
brickwork."  The sails of Catton mill were blown off, trees were torn up
by the roots, and the river suddenly rose above the banks in places.  At
Harleston a marsh mill was overturned and houses were unroofed.

21.--Died at the Euston Hotel, London, Mr. Fred. Yates, aged 45, manager
of the Adelphi Theatre.  He married, in 1823, Miss F. Brunton,
granddaughter of Mr. John Brunton, of Norwich.

30.--Died at Longford Hall, Derbyshire, aged 88, Thomas William Coke,
Earl of Leicester.  His lordship was born on May 6th, 1753, and was
returned for Norfolk in 1776.  With one brief intermission, he continued
to represent the county until 1832.  He was created Earl of Leicester in
1837.  He married, in his twenty-third year, his cousin Jane, youngest
daughter of Mr. James Dutton, who died June 2nd, 1800, leaving no male
issue.  After remaining twenty-two years a widower, he married, February
26th, 1822, Lady Anne Amelia Keppel, third daughter of the Earl of
Albemarle, her ladyship being then 19 and Mr. Coke 70 years of age.  The
issue of the marriage were Thomas William, born in 1822; Edward Keppel,
1824; Henry Coke, 1827; Wenman Clarence Walpole, 1828; and Margaret
Sophia, who, at the Earl's death was only ten years of age.  The remains
of the deceased nobleman arrived at Swaffham on July 10th, and were
placed in the large room at the Crown Inn.  From four o'clock in the
afternoon until nine in the evening the body lay in state, and immense
numbers of persons passed through the apartment.  At nine o'clock on the
morning of the 11th, muffled peals were rung, and at eleven o'clock the
funeral procession started for Tittleshall.  It passed through
Castle-acre, the Lexhams, and Litcham.  "At every spot where the main
road crossed the cross roads were carriages in waiting to fall into the
procession, which, marching in close order, was two miles in length."  At
Tittleshall church, where the interment took place, there was a great
gathering of the personal friends and tenantry of the deceased earl.


JULY.


2.--Died at Hexham, Northumberland, aged 86, Mr. William Cooke, formerly
of North Creake.  "About 60 years ago, under the auspices of Mr. T. W.
Coke, and upon the estate of Earl Spencer, he introduced into Norfolk the
drill system for corn.  He subsequently introduced into the same county
the Northumberland turnip husbandry, and, in conjunction with Sir
Mordaunt Martin and Dr. Letsome, established the cultivation of mangold
wurzle in England.  During his latter years he devoted much time and his
high mathematical attainments to perfecting the plough."

4.--The first meeting for enforcing the Income-Tax was held at the
Shirehall, Norwich, when Commissioners were appointed for the several
Hundreds named in the Act of Parliament.  Similar meetings took place at
Yarmouth and Lynn.

6.--Races were held at East Dereham.  The other meetings this season were
at Norwich on July 12th and 13th, Downham July 22nd, and Yarmouth
September 6th and 7th.

9.--The funeral of Lord Townshend, who died at Hutton Lodge, Yorkshire,
on June 28th, aged 56 years, took place at Bintry church.

14.--Major Boxall, of Swaffham, was killed at the brewery of Mr. Morse,
in that town, by the fall of a portion of the roof.

16.--At a meeting of the yeomanry and tenantry of both political parties,
held at the Swan Inn, Norwich, it was decided to erect, by public
subscription, a monument to the memory of the late Earl of Leicester.
(_See_ January 7th, 1843.)

23.--A correspondent, writing under this date to the NORFOLK CHRONICLE,
complained of the danger and annoyance caused on the public roads by
vehicles drawn by dogs.  "If," he wrote, "Parliament deemed it necessary
two years ago to pass an Act prohibiting, under a severe penalty, the use
of dogs as beasts of draught or burden in London and its neighbourhood
for twenty miles around, surely the same necessity, as well on the score
of humanity as of personal security to the public, does exist in
reference to every other portion of the kingdom."

24.--Died, aged 60, at Hunter Street, Brunswick Square, London, John Sell
Cotman.


AUGUST.


1.--An acrobat, named Alleni, was descending a rope "in his chariot of
fire," at the Greyhound Gardens, Ber Street, Norwich, when his apparatus
failed, the rope broke, and the unfortunate performer, falling a distance
of thirty feet, was seriously injured.

6.--A correspondent complained that the "unrivalled tower" of Norwich
Cathedral, then undergoing restoration, was "under the care of a
plasterer, to be patched and pieced in his best manner with a compound of
villainous ingredients scarcely tolerable on a shop front."  Mr. John
Brown, the Cathedral architect, replied, on August 10th, to the effect
that the substance used was not plaster, but "hydraulic cement, calcined
limestone and sand, which is more durable than stone."  Much newspaper
controversy ensued.

20.*--"Last week a block of granite of nearly two tons weight was fixed
on the south battlement of Norwich Castle, containing the following
inscription:--"This Royal Castle, built by William Rufus, as Knychton
testifies in his Chronicle, on the site of one much more ancient, has
been used as a county gaol since the year 1345, and was finally vested in
the magistrates of Norfolk for that purpose by Royal grant confirmed by
Parliament in 1806.  The ornamental work and facing of the exterior
having fallen into a state of extreme decay, the same was ordered to be
restored at the expense of the county by the Court of Quarter Sessions,
in April, 1834.  Its restoration was carried into effect with the most
careful adherence to the details of the antient work in Bath stone, as
most resembling that of Normandy, which had been originally used, under
the superintendence of the visiting justices, and completed in 1839.  The
battlements and corbel table were designed from the best discoverable
authorities, as no portion remained of the original termination of the
building.  Anthony Salvin, Esq., of London, architect; Mr. James Watson,
of Norwich, stonemason."  [The NORFOLK CHRONICLE expressed regret "at the
necessity, if any such existed, for the adoption of a process which has
for ever hidden from human eyes the whole exterior of this celebrated
Anglo-Norman keep."]

27.--A finner whale, discovered stranded upon a shoal in Lynn Roads, was
secured by a boat's crew who fastened a rope to its tail.  When the tide
rose the whale dragged the boat with great velocity towards the town.
After a struggle of seven hours, it was landed.  It measured 50 ft. in
length.

--*"Her Majesty has been pleased to grant unto William Hardy Cozens,
Esq., of Letheringsett, her Royal licence to take and use the surname and
arms of Hardy, in addition to his present name, in compliance with a
condition contained in the will of his late uncle, William Hardy, Esq.,
of Letheringsett Hall."

30.--A great rowing match took place on the Yare, at Norwich, in the
presence of thousands of spectators.  The match, which was open to all
England, was for a subscription cup or purse of 50 pounds, and was to be
rowed in four-oared 36ft. boats, by amateurs.  Competing crews were
entered by the Leander Club, London; King's College Club, London; the
Cambridge Amateur Club, and the Norwich Amateur Club.  The odds
throughout were greatly in favour of the Londoners, and many heavy bets
were made on Cambridge.  The course, about three miles, was from stakes
on Bramerton Common to a spot nearly opposite Thorpe Gardens.  "The boats
started two and two; the first two boats were started 100 yards apart at
the same time; the winning boat of each pair had therefore to row another
heat.  By the casting of lots, the Leander was pitted against King's
College, and Norwich against Cambridge.  The Leander had the lead of
King's College, and Cambridge the lead of Norwich."  King's College and
Norwich won the first heat--the former in 22 minutes 30 seconds, and the
latter in 21 minutes 30 seconds.  In the final heat Norwich beat King's
College easily.  The winning crew were composed as follow:--J. Kidd, 9
st. 10 lb.; J. Wigham, 10 st. 9 lb.; W. Clabburn, 11 st. 7 lb.; T.
Clabburn (stroke), 9 st. 2 lb.; F. Bolingbroke (cox.), 8 st. 11 lb.
Trained by Noulton.

--The Royal squadron accompanying the Queen on her voyage to Scotland
passed Yarmouth at five am.  On the return of her Majesty, on the evening
of September 16th, several yawls put out to sea, and the occupants were
gratified with a sight of the Queen and Prince Albert on the main deck of
the Trident steamer.  Loud cheers were given for the Sovereign and her
Consort.


SEPTEMBER.


10.--The publication of Part I. of Mr. Henry Ninham's "Picturesque
Antiquities of Norwich" was announced.

13.--The Norfolk and Norwich Musical Festival commenced.  Miscellaneous
concerts were given at St. Andrew's Hall on the evenings of the 13th,
14th, and 15th.  The morning performances included, on the 14th, Parts
II. and III. of the "Creation"; on the 15th, Parts II. and III. of "The
Fall of Babylon" (composed expressly for the Festival by Spohr); and on
the 16th, "Samson."  A fancy dress ball was given on the night of the
16th.  The artistes engaged at the Festival were: Madame Caradori Allan,
Miss Rainforth, Miss Maria B. Hawes, Miss Bassano, and Signora Pacini;
Mr. Hobbs, Mr. Phillips, Mr. Balfe, Mr. Bradbury, Mr. Young, Mr. Walton,
and Signor Rubini.  Professor Taylor conducted.  The surplus amounted to
716 pounds 15s. 2d.

--A circus company, under the management of Madame Ducrow, commenced a
series of performances at Norwich Theatre.  "The whole of the stage, 43
ft. square, was formed into a circus ring, decorated round with
appropriate devices.  The circle was rendered moveable, so that dramatic
representations similar to the late Astley's Amphitheatre were
introduced."  These included "The Spanish Bullfight, or the Muleteer,"
"Mazeppa," "The Secret Mine, or the Hindoos of the Ruby Cliffs," &c.  To
enable the audience to obtain a full view of the ring performances, the
floor of the pit was raised.

14.--Died at Yarmouth, in his 49th year, Mr. J. B. Crome.  "Besides
inheriting the talents of that well-known 'Father' of the Norwich school
of painting, he possessed literary attainments and theoretical knowledge
which conferred both honour and advantage on his practical pursuits of
Art."

24.*--"The Queen has been pleased to grant unto the Rev. James Tooke
Hales, of Glazenwood, in Essex, and of Thompson, in Norfolk, her Royal
license and authority to assume the surname of Tooke in addition to and
after that of Hales, and to bear the arms of Tooke."

--*"Mr. C. F. Hall, of Norwich, has been appointed second leader of the
orchestra of Drury Lane Theatre, after a contest of skill.  He is the
composer of two ballads, 'I have dream'd of hopes defeated' and 'The
Inconstant.'"


OCTOBER.


8.*--"At a late sitting of the magistrates at Litcham to hear appeals
against assessed taxes, Mr. Lynes, one of the appellants, accused the
Surveyor of Taxes of partial conduct.  He alleged that Mr. F. Beck, of
Mileham, owned greyhounds for which he was not charged duty.  Mr. Beck
jumped up and got hold of Mr. Lynes' nose, which he held for some time.
Mr. Lynes retaliated by striking Mr. Beck several blows on the head and
face, and a battle ensued.  The police interfered, and Capt. Fitzroy
ordered the parties into custody.  It was stated that there had
previously been a quarrel between Mr. King, the magistrates' clerk, Mr.
Beck, and Mr. Lynes, and Mr. King had challenged the latter to fight a
duel.  Mr. King acknowledged that he had sent a challenge.  For the fight
in the magistrates' room Mr. Beck and Mr. Lynes were bound over to keep
the peace for twelve months.  Mr. King was also bound over in sureties to
keep the peace towards Mr. Lynes for twelve months."  At the Norfolk
Assizes, on April 3rd, 1843, the action Lynes _v._ Beck, for assault, was
tried before Lord Chief Justice Tindal, and judgment was given for the
plaintiff, damages one shilling.  The Judge remarked that the assault was
of a very degrading and contumacious character.

11.--Died at his house on Scoles' Green, Norwich, Mr. Robert Ladbrooke,
artist, in his 73rd year.

13.--Died at Tunbridge Wells, aged 55, Sir John Jacob Buxton, Bart., of
Shadwell Park, Norfolk, and of Tockenham House, Wilts.  He served the
office of High Sheriff of Norfolk in 1841-2.

19.--At the Norfolk Quarter Sessions, Johnson Hemnell was sentenced to
fifteen years' transportation for stealing promissory notes, gold, and
silver, to the amount of 150 pounds, the property of Mr. Harrison Wells,
of Dilham.  On the night after his conviction the convict accompanied two
of the prison warders to Seething, where he showed them a garden bank in
which 108 pounds of the stolen money was found concealed.


NOVEMBER.


7.--An inquest was held at the Hare Arms, Stow Bardolph, on the body of
John Vare, who died under singular circumstances.  On October 24th, at
the Swan Inn, Downham, "he recited with considerable spirit to a party of
tradesmen a piece out of 'Othello,' and at the finish, where Othello
dies, deceased, as in the character, fell with considerable violence on
the hearthrug at full length with his face down wards.  He complained of
considerable pain, went home, and died."

9.--Mr. Alderman Mitchell was elected Mayor, and Mr. William Freeman
appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

18.--Died at Rawal Pindi, Lieut. Richard Edward Frere, 13th Light
Infantry, aged 25.  He had been in every action throughout the war in
Afghanistan, was repeatedly wounded, and was mentioned with distinction
in dispatches.

19.*--"Messrs. Wells and Gardner, of Birmingham, have entered into an
arrangement with T. T. Berney, Esq., of Morton Hall, Norfolk, for the
manufacture of his patent cartridges so much approved by gentlemen and
sportsmen generally, and have appointed local agents."

26.*--"Sir Robert Peel has recommended her Majesty to grant an annual
pension of 100 pounts to Mr. John Curtis, the eminent naturalist and
author of the great work, 'British Entomology.'"  Curtis was a native of
Norwich.


DECEMBER.


24.--A singular story of a supposed murder was published.  A human
skeleton was recovered from the bed of the river at Costessey Mills by a
"didling" boat owned by Messrs. Culley.  The circumstance was recalled
that a Jew pedlar, known as "Old Abraham," had mysteriously disappeared
eight years previously.  It was also remembered that one Robert Page,
sentenced to transportation for life for sheep stealing at Drayton, on
March 27th, 1834, had told the prison warders that if he were taken to
Costessey he could show them, beneath a willow tree, "something that
would make their hair stand on end."  By a curious coincidence, the
skeleton was found beneath a willow which overhung the river.  It was
stated that the body had been staked down in the bed of the stream.

31.*--"During last week the coaches and vans were laden with turkeys and
game for London.  From the Magnet Office alone upwards of 1,600 packages
were consigned, containing at least 2,400 turkeys, besides geese and
game.  The other coaches have had their share.  One manufacturing firm in
the city sent 1,000 lbs. weight."



1843.


JANUARY.


2.--Norwich Theatre opened for the season at reduced prices of admission,
namely, boxes, single ticket, 4s., half price 2s., family tickets to
admit six 1 pound; upper boxes 2s., half price 1s.; pit 1s.  (no half
price); gallery 6d.  The entire house had been redecorated by Mr. Thorne.
Mr. Frederick Vining, of the Haymarket Theatre, London, and his daughter,
Miss Vining, appeared on the 16th in the parts of Benedict and Beatrice,
and fulfilled an engagement of seven weeks.  The season, one of the most
successful that Mr. Smith had experienced, was chiefly remarkable for the
large number of "bespeaks" given, amongst others, by the officers of the
13th Light Dragoons, the Royal and Norfolk Hotel Wine Clubs, the Governor
and Deputy-Governor of the Court of Guardians, &c.

5.--A heavy fall of snow on this day was accompanied by lightning and
thunder.

6.--The first annual meeting of the Norfolk Flax Society, the object of
which was "to promote the cultivation of a plant for the produce of which
vast sums of money are annually sent abroad," was held at Norwich.  It
was stated that the soil and climate of the county were "equal and
perhaps superior to any in the world for the growth and perfection of the
plant, and its cultivation would be more profitable than that of any
other crop."  The method of "forming linseed into compound to fatten
cattle" was demonstrated in a booth on the Castle Meadow, and an
exhibition of articles manufactured from flax was held at St. Andrew's
Hall.  The Hon. W. R Rous was President of the Society, to which about
eighty prominent agriculturists belonged.  M. Demann, a Belgian
agriculturist, was engaged as the Society's agent, and many meetings were
held in the county in furtherance of the movement.

7.--The promoters of the scheme for the erection of the Leicester
monument appointed a "committee of taste," who recommended the building
of a column, of artistic design.  At a meeting held at the Norfolk Hotel,
on January 21st, the much vexed question of the site was discussed and a
decision was given in favour of Holkham Park, mainly by the votes of a
number of subscribers of ten shillings each in the neighbourhood of
Wells.  Efforts were made to secure the erection of the monument at
Norwich, and the supporters of either place were invited to vote upon the
subject.  After the poll a scrutiny was held, and on August 5th it was
announced that 322 votes had been given in favour of Holkham, and 281 in
favour of Norwich.

9.--Died, aged 60, at Birmingham, Mr. Vaughan, "the highly respectable
musician and once excellent tenor singer."  He was a native of Norwich,
and when quite young was a member of the choir of St. George's Chapel,
Windsor.  He was afterwards engaged at Westminster Abbey, St. Paul's
Cathedral, and the Chapel Royal.  On the death of Mr. Harrison, in 1812,
Mr. Vaughan was appointed principal tenor at the King's Concerts of
Ancient Music, he sang at most of the provincial musical festivals, and
was a member of several musical clubs in the Metropolis.


FEBRUARY.


14.--The first touring circus in Norfolk at which performances were given
under canvas was that belonging to Batty, "sole proprietor of Astley's
Royal Amphitheatre," who on this date erected at Lynn Mart a tent 65 ft.
in height and 300 ft. in circumference.  It was the same tent placed on
the site of the Royal Exchange when Prince Albert laid the first stone of
the new building, and on that occasion it afforded accommodation for
1,400 persons.  In the autumn of the same year Richard Sands' American
circus toured the county, giving one performance only in a "spacious
pavilion" at each town visited.  A procession of "twenty-five caparisoned
horses" was a feature of the show.  After this date the circus touring
system became general during the summer and autumn months.

22.--Died at Caen, Normandy, aged 76, the Rev. T. D'Eterville, "a
well-known and respected inhabitant of Norwich for upwards of forty
years, who retired a few months ago to end his days in his native
country."  [Borrow's "preceptor in the French and Italian tongues."]

23.--The coach from London to Norwich, driven by Thomas Wiggins, ran into
a brewer's dray at Tasburgh, during a thick fog and was overturned.  Mr.
Scott, of Newton Maid's Head, one of the outside passengers, was jammed
between the coach and a tree, which had to be cut down to extricate him,
Wiggins was thrown head first off the box seat and severely injured, and
the guard, Thomas, was dashed against a tree stump and killed outright,
"his head being completely split open."  It was not until January 22nd,
1844, that Wiggins was able to resume his duties.  It was then stated:
"So highly is this excellent whip esteemed along the line of road, that
at the several inns where the coach stopped to change horses it appeared
as if the landlords had determined to celebrate the circumstance by
making it a general gala day."

26.--Died at Cheltenham, aged 60, Major-General Sir John Thomas Jones,
Bart., K.C.B., of Cranmer Hall.  He served in the Royal Engineers during
the campaign in Calabria, and was present at the Battle of Maida and the
attack on Scylla Castle; in the Peninsular campaign he was in the retreat
to Corunna; he accompanied the expedition to Walcheren and was present at
the reduction of Flushing, served in the campaigns of 1810, 1811, and
1812 in the Peninsula, received the medal for Badajos, and was shot
through the ankle joint at the siege of Burgos, in October, 1812.  He
entered the service as second-lieutenant on August 30th, 1798, and
retired with the rank of major-general on January 10th, 1837.

27.--Yarmouth Orange Fair was held.  "Like the generality of fairs, it
has fallen sadly out of repute, and but for the immense quantity of fruit
from which it takes its name anyone might have passed the Market Place
without noticing it."


MARCH.


17.--At a special meeting of the Norwich Town Council, on the motion of
Mr. A. Dalrymple, a petition to Parliament was adopted in opposition to
the Income Tax, on the ground that it was "unjust, unwise, repugnant, and
unproductive."

18.--The Watton coach, on its way from Norwich, with six female outside
passengers, stopped at Barford Cock.  During the temporary absence of
Allen, the coachman, the horses started off at full gallop, and were not
stopped till they arrived at Hingham.  With the exception of a wheel
being taken off a passing vehicle, no damage was done.


APRIL.


4.--At the Norwich Assizes, before Lord Chief Justice Tindal, was tried
the case, the Queen against Edward Painter.  The prosecution, for
assault, was instituted by Mr. Jeremiah Cross, corn merchant, of Norwich.
An indictment had been preferred at the Norwich Quarter Sessions and a
true bill returned, which the defendant removed by writ of _certiorari_,
and the case now came on for trial on the civil side of the Court.  The
plaintiff, in June, 1842, was invited to the Rising Sun Inn, kept by Mr.
John Abel, and he was there met by Painter, who for several minutes
thrashed him with an ash stick so severely that for a considerable time
afterwards plaintiff was under medical treatment.  For the defence it was
alleged that Cross had grossly insulted the defendant's daughter, hence
the thrashing.  The jury found a verdict of guilty, and on May 10th, when
defendant appeared before the Court of Queen's Bench to receive judgment,
he was fined one shilling and discharged.  On June 24th the following
advertisement was published: "Ned Painter having been subjected to the
expense of wanton and persecuting litigation, his friends intend giving
him a benefit at the Pantheon, Royal Victoria Gardens, on which occasion
the Stars of the Fancy have resolved to rally round and support an old
and tried veteran of the Prize Ring.  Among the prominent professors of
the Pugilistic Art who will appear are Tom Spring, Champion of England,
and Ben Caunt, the modern champion."

7.--Great excitement was created in Norwich by the conviction at the
Assizes before Mr. Justice Coleridge, of John Harper, a well-known
auctioneer, on the charge of stealing cloth entrusted to him for sale at
North Walsham by a Leeds manufacturer named Jonas Driver.  Mr. S.
Bignold, Mr. Beckwith, solicitor; Mr. T. M. Keith, solicitor; the Rev. S.
Stone, the Rev. W. Hull, and other prominent citizens testified to the
general honesty and integrity of the prisoner, who, amid a strong
manifestation of feeling in Court, was sentenced to seven years'
transportation.

7.--Mr. Cobden, M.P., Col. Thompson, and Mr. Moore, representatives of
the Anti-Corn Law League, addressed a large meeting held at St. Andrew's
Hall, under the presidency of Mr. J. H. Tillett.  A body of Chartists
created some disorder.  On the 8th a meeting of farmers "of the most
complete party complexion" took place at the Hall, when Mr. A. Morse, of
Swaffham, "author of one of the prize essays of the League," presided,
and addresses were delivered by Mr. Cobden and his friends.  The League
at this date was actively promulgating its principles in all parts of the
county.

15.--The ship Phya sailed from Lynn for Quebec, with emigrants.  "Whilst
the population keeps increasing, and machinery keeps lessening the demand
for manual labour, many thousands must seek to provide for themselves and
families in distant regions."

20.--The construction of the Yarmouth and Norwich Railway commenced on
this date on the Postwick Hall Farm (in the occupation of Mr. Gillett),
near Thorpe Asylum.  The excavation of the New Cut from Trowse Hythe to
Whitlingham Reach was begun on May 6th.  In October an engine with
ballast waggons was running between Reedham and Yarmouth; and in November
another engine appeared on the Postwick end of the line.  "Its marvellous
facility in whirling along any number of loaded waggons elicited
exclamations of astonishment from the many hundreds of Norwich people who
went out to see it."  (_See_ April 12th, 1844.)

--In the waistband of the trousers of a notorious housebreaker, named
James Fisk, who was apprehended at Surlingham on this date, "was found
sewed up the Lord's Prayer, written backwards, which he carried about
with him as a fancied protection against the power of human law."

--The marriage of the Earl of Leicester and Miss Whitbread, daughter of
Mr. S. C. Whitbread, at Cardington church, Bedfordshire, was celebrated
with great rejoicings at Wells-next-the-Sea, where 800 school children
were entertained, and 1,400 of the poor inhabitants had dinner on the
Buttlands.

21.--At Norwich Theatre was performed a new drama, entitled, "Mokanna, or
the Veiled Prophet of Khorassan," written by Mr. William Cooper,
barrister, and originally produced at Lynn Theatre.  An anonymous
handbill, printed by J. Fletcher, Upper Haymarket, Norwich, was
afterwards circulated, describing the play as a "barefaced exhibition of
profligacy," and calling upon the citizens to denounce it.  The
strictures were grossly unfair.

25.--The foundation-stone of St. Mark's church, Lakenham, was laid by the
Very Rev. Dean Pellew.  The architect was Mr. John Brown, and the builder
Mr. James Worman.  The church was consecrated by the Bishop of Norwich on
September 24th, 1844.

28.--The two troops of the 13th Light Dragoons marched from Norwich
Barracks for Hounslow.  They were replaced on May 22nd by the Scots
Greys, commanded by Col. Clarke.  Mainly through the influence of the
Duke of Wellington and the Marquis of Douro, the headquarters of the
regiment were stationed at Norwich.


MAY.


4.--Business was entirely suspended in Norwich on the occasion of the
funeral of H.R.H. the Duke of Sussex.  The Corporation attended service
at the Cathedral, and afterwards assembled at the Guildhall and adopted
addresses of sympathy.

6.--At the Norwich Police Court, a woman named Kedge complained to the
magistrates that another woman, of the name of Clarke, had bewitched her
"by sending her and her children a vast number of vermin."  Clarke
replied that Mrs. Kedge had harboured her (Mrs. Clarke's) husband, and
had given her a small piece of paper, whereon was very small writing.  It
was found to be the Lord's Prayer.  Mrs. Kedge acknowledged having given
this to Mrs. Clarke, and said it would "prevent her from doing her
further injury, for when she had herself put it in defendant's hands, all
danger from witchery was over."

13.*--"One day last week a steam coach, constructed on a new principle,
was tried at Witton, on the Yarmouth road, before a large concourse of
spectators, but although the steam was put on, the coach would not move
an inch.  When pushed it proceeded a short distance and stopped.  The
experimenters at last lifted the coach from the road, when the wheels
went round with alarming velocity."  On May 27th the carriage was
advertised for sale by private contract, by Mr. Joseph Emmerson Bane, at
the King's Head Inn, Blofield.

--The Norfolk Yeomanry Cavalry, commanded by Major Loftus, commenced
their annual eight days' training at Fakenham.

17.--The inhabitants residing in the vicinity of Duke's Palace Bridge
memorialised the Norwich Town Council to take the necessary steps to free
the bridge from toll.

18.--Died at his residence in Union Street, South Lynn, Mr. Peter Lewis
Dacheux, an immigrant from France, aged 83.  "He had resided at Lynn for
many years, and had long officiated as Roman Catholic priest in that
town.  He was a schoolfellow of Bonaparte, and in his boyish days had
many a scuffle with that celebrated personage."

23.--Mr. Braham, assisted by his son and pupil, Mr. Charles Braham, gave
a concert at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich.


JUNE.


13.--The Norwich Town Council decided, on the motion of Mr. Barwell, to
memorialise the House of Commons in favour of Mr. Rowland Hill's scheme
of penny postage.

14.--Norwich Theatre was re-opened for a limited number of nights at the
close of the regular season, when "The Tempest" was produced from the
original text, with Miss Grant as Ariel, and Miss Vining as Miranda.  On
the occasion of her benefit, on June 27th, Miss Grant took the part of
Tom Tug, in "The Waterman."

15.--On opening the East of England Bank at Lynn, it was discovered that
during the preceding night upwards of 4,000 pounds had been stolen.  A
clerk, named William Henry Sangar, aged nineteen, had committed the
theft, in the absence of Mr. Spiller, the manager, and had absconded.  He
was apprehended on July 3rd, at Pooley Bridge, Ullswater, with 4,300
pounds in his possession.  At Lynn Quarter Sessions, on July 17th, he was
charged before the Recorder, Mr. Martin J. West, with stealing 4,362
pounds 1s. 6d., and, on pleading guilty, was sentenced to fourteen years'
transportation.  The Recorder expressed the hope that he would not have
to appear at the Assizes to answer the still more serious charge of
forgery.  He was, however, indicted at the Norfolk Assizes on August 3rd,
on two counts, for forgery, and on pleading guilty was sentenced by Baron
Alderson to transportation for life.

16.--For nearly three hours "the sun was surrounded by a bright and
beautiful halo, whilst several others appeared in its vicinity,
intersecting the main one in several directions."  A similar appearance
was observed in the summer of 1826.


JULY.


1.--The fares by the Royal Norwich mail from the Star, Haymarket, to the
Belle Sauvage, Ludgate Hill, were reduced from this date to 16s. inside
and 8s. outside.

4.--Mr. Charles Gill and Miss Vining, two popular performers with the
Norwich Company, eloped from the city.  "The attachment between the
parties has been of long standing, but it was opposed by the young lady's
friends, on account of the disparity of years."  Mr. and Mrs. Gill
appeared at Yarmouth Theatre on September 8th.

--Died at North Walsham, Captain Thomas Withers, R.N., aged 73.  He
entered the service in 1793, joined Nelson in the Agamemnon, which formed
part of Lord Hood's fleet at the occupation of Toulon, and took part in
the reduction of Bastia and Calvi, and in the several actions in which
the ship was engaged.  In 1796 he joined the Captain, and in the
following year, in the battle off Cape St. Vincent, had the distinguished
honour of commanding the division which boarded the San Nicolas, and from
that ship the San Josef.  He was made lieutenant next day, and soon after
appointed to the Terrible, under the command of Sir Richard Bickerton,
and served during the expedition against the French in Egypt.  In April,
1803, he was appointed to the command of the Expedition (44 guns), and
was chiefly engaged in the Mediterranean until 1804.  In 1805 he accepted
employment under the Transport Board, and in 1809 received post rank.

8.--A whirlwind occurred at Blakeney.  In its course it carried away
several yards of a wall two feet thick, took from some smacks the
hatchings, which were blown upon the marshes, and blew a man off the seat
of a threshing machine.  The stable at the White Horse was unroofed, and
a quantity of Mr. Temple's hay was blown to the distance of a mile.

15.--Arising out of an assault case, a curious story about witchcraft was
told to the Norwich magistrates.  Mr. and Mrs. Curtis alleged that a Mrs.
Bell had bewitched them three days after Tombland Fair, and they had been
bewitched ever since.  "Mrs. Curtis saw Mrs. Bell light a candle and fill
it with pins.  She then put some red dragon's blood, with some water,
into an oyster-shell, and having repeated a form of words over it, her
(Mr. Curtis') husband's arms and legs were set fast, and when he lay down
he could not get up again without somebody helping him."  The man made a
similar statement, and said that to the dragon's blood and water Mrs.
Bell added some parings of her own nails, put the mixture over the fire,
and muttered an incantation.

19.--A young man named Robert Smithson "wagered that he would run over
the nine bridges in Norwich in twenty-five minutes."  He performed the
distance, nearly four miles, in twenty-two minutes.

24.--Died at Shotley Parsonage, Ipswich, aged 91, the Rev. Samuel
Forster, D.D., formerly head-master of Norwich Free Grammar School.  On
resigning, in 1811, Dr. Forster became private tutor to the son of the
Marquis of Bristol.  Sir Edward Berry, Nelson's flag captain at the
Battle of the Nile, married the doctor's eldest daughter.

29.*--"In the melancholy list of passengers on board the Pegasus, lost
off the Fern Islands on July 19th, we are sorry to observe the name of
Mr. Elton, for many years a favourite tragedian in the Norwich Company,
and latterly holding a most respectable station on the London boards."

--The Assize week performances at Norwich Theatre opened with the
appearance of Miss Montague, of Drury Lane, as Juliet.  On July 31st Miss
Clara Novello, Miss Sybella Novello, Mr. Manvers, and Mr. Stretton, of
Drury Lane, performed in Belleni's opera, "Norma," and in "Acis and
Galatea"; and on August 7th Madame Celeste and Mr. Webster commenced a
four nights' engagement in "St. Mary's Eve," "The Woman Hater," and "The
French Spy."


AUGUST.


6.--Died at Gaywood, aged 70, Mr. Thomas Marsters, for many years the
representative at Lynn of the NORFOLK CHRONICLE.  "He was extensively
read in the poets and classics, and his taste for the drama induced him,
when he resided at Gaywood Hall, to become lessee of Lynn Theatre, on the
boards of which he occasionally performed as an amateur."

9.--Norwich and many parts of the county were visited by one of the
severest thunderstorms that had occurred for many years.  It was
accompanied by a hailstorm which did immense damage--in the city windows
and conservatories were smashed, in the county garden and field crops
were destroyed.  The first floors and cellars in Surrey Street, St.
Stephen's Street, Rampant Horse Street, the Market Place, and London
Street were flooded, and in places morsels of ice lay from four to five
inches deep.  The storm lasted half an hour.  The performance at the
Theatre was stopped, and the terrified audience in the gallery rushed
down the stairs and found the passage filled with water, which prevented
their escape.  The river at Bishop Bridge rose one foot in five minutes.
At two o'clock on the morning of the 10th, the rain and hail again
descended with great violence, and "a surface of flame spread across the
heavens, followed by a clap of thunder which seemed to rend the welkin."
Another storm occurred on the 15th, and on the 18th waterspouts were
observed at Rushall and Dickleburgh.  At a meeting at the Bishop's Palace
on the 19th, steps were taken for the relief of the sufferers, a public
subscription organized, and surveyors appointed to assess the damage.  In
September the Committee reported that the total losses amounted to 30,770
pounds 2s. 3d.  In some parishes a voluntary rate of threepence in the
pound was paid to assist the relief fund.  The contributions from the
parishes amounted to 5,622 pounds, and individual subscriptions to 4,391
pounds.

16.--The left wing of the Cavalry Barracks at Norwich was destroyed by a
fire which originated in the forage barn.  The men of the Scots Greys
succeeded in saving the remainder of the buildings.

31.--Died at Stisted Hall, Essex, aged 87, Mr. Charles Savill Onley,
bencher of the Middle Temple.  He was third son of Mr. Robert Harvey,
merchant and banker, of Norwich, by Judith, daughter of Capt. Onley, R.N.
Mr. Onley (then Mr. Charles Harvey) was called to the Bar on November
24th, 1790.  In 1783 he was elected Steward, and in 1801 Recorder, of
Norwich.  In 1804 his portrait was painted by Lawrence, at the expense of
the Corporation, and hung in St. Andrew's Hall.  In 1812 he was returned
to Parliament, and at the dissolution in 1818 retired from the
representation of the city, but sat for Carlow from 1820 to 1826.  It was
in December, 1822, that he took the name of Savill Onley, on the death of
his maternal uncle, the Rev. Charles Onley, through whom he came to the
possession of a fine estate in Essex, besides a large personal property.
He resigned his Recordership in 1826.  He was lieutenant-colonel of Col.
Patteson's battalion of Norwich Volunteers, enrolled in 1808 as a
regiment of Local Militia.  He married, first, Sarah, daughter of Mr. J.
Haynes, by whom he had issue one son, Onley Savill Onley, who married his
cousin Caroline, daughter of Mr. John Harvey, of Thorpe; and two
daughters, Sarah, married to Mr. William Harvey, and Judith, to Mr.
Charles Turner.  Mrs. Harvey died in 1800, and he married, secondly,
Charlotte, sister of his former wife.


SEPTEMBER.


7.--Father Mathew attended a temperance festival at Norwich.  He
addressed a meeting on St. Martin-at-Palace Plain in the morning, and a
public gathering at St. Andrew's Hall in the evening, at which the Lord
Bishop and Mr. J. J. Gurney were present.  On the 8th Father Mathew, from
twelve to six o'clock, "administered the pledge to all who cared to
receive it."  The NORFOLK CHRONICLE observed: "We cannot but feel that
the members of the Church of England are pledged to temperance already,
and have therefore no necessity to repeat the pledge before a Romish
priest."

11.--The Earl of Leicester laid the foundation-stone of the new quay at
Wells-next-the-Sea.

16.--A platform was erected on the summit of the spire of Norwich
Cathedral by a party of Sappers and Miners, to support an observatory for
the purpose of the trigonometrical survey then being made throughout the
kingdom, by order of the Board of Ordnance.

23.*--"Died, lately, aged 101, Mr. Robert Holmes, of St. Augustine's,
Norwich."

27.--Died at Ramsgate, Lieut.-General Beevor.  He was the last surviving
son of Mr. James Beevor, of Norwich.  He served in Flanders in the
campaigns of 1793-4-5; in 1801-2 he was actively employed in Egypt, and
he took part in the protracted operations in the Peninsula and Portugal.


OCTOBER.


2.--Mrs. Fitzwilliam, of Covent Garden Theatre, commenced a six nights'
engagement at the Theatre Royal, Norwich.  She was described as the first
comic actress of the day and a most accomplished vocalist.  On the 7th
Mrs. Fitzwilliam was joined by Mr. Buckstone, of the Haymarket Theatre,
with whom she appeared in "My Tender Charge" and "Foreign Airs and Native
Graces."

14.--In a case before the county justices at the Shirehall, Norwich, in
which the keeper of Hellesdon toll-bar was summoned for unlawfully taking
toll in respect of a vehicle called a "wheel machine," interesting
particulars were given of the contrivance, which belonged to a Norwich
mechanic named Matthew Fish.  It was described as "only a barrow worked
by the feet, and not propelled by machinery."  The carriage was shown
outside the Court, and "appeared to be a very ingenious machine, which
could be worked at the rate of ten miles an hour on a level road."  It
had three wheels and two levers.  Mr. Repton, the clerk to the turnpike
trustees, urged that the narrow wheels cut up the road more than those of
heavy carriages, and that _such contrivances for evading toll and the
keeping of horses were increasing_.  These carriages were considered a
nuisance on the roads, no horses liked to pass them, and the Act laid a
heavy toll upon them to prevent them running on any turnpike at all.  The
matter was ultimately settled without a conviction.

16.--Carter, the "Lion King," appeared at Norwich Theatre with his
trained lions, &c., in a drama founded on the adventures of Mungo Park.
"The submissive bearing with which they crouched to the lash and the
utter want of animation and spirit which they exhibited, divested the
exhibition of all sense of danger."

17.--A severe gale occurred on the Norfolk coast, several vessels were
driven ashore, and five lives were lost off Bacton.

23.--The Norfolk Yeomanry Cavalry paraded at East Dereham and received
from the Lord Lieutenant of the county a standard, in commemoration of
the honour conferred upon it by Prince Albert, in allowing the corps to
be called after his name.  "The helmets, which formerly were fronted with
the Maltese Cross, now exhibit the Royal Arms."


NOVEMBER.


9.--Mr. Freeman was elected Mayor, and Mr. George Lovick Coleman
appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

25.--Mr. Murray announced the publication of "The Correspondence of
William Taylor of Norwich (author of 'English Synonyms') with Robert
Southey, Esq., from 1791 to 1830, with a memoir of his life and works,"
by J. W. Robberds.


DECEMBER.


2.--A meeting of landowners, agriculturists, and merchants of the county,
presided over by the High Sheriff (Mr. Tyssen), approved the scheme of
the Norwich and Brandon Railway, expounded by Mr. G. P. Bidder.  The
estimated cost was 380,000 pounds, to be raised in 19,000 shares of 20
pounds each.  (_See_ July 29th, 1845.)

9.--The first person in Norwich to advertise "patent photographic
portraits" was Mr. Beard, of the Royal Bazaar.  These likenesses were
stated to be "surprisingly correct," and severe chemical tests proved
that they would "last to infinity."  The prices ranged from one to two
guineas.

--Mr. George Pinson, Governor of Gressenhall Workhouse, was selected by
the visiting justices Governor of the County Gaol at Norwich Castle, in
succession to Mr. Johnson, resigned.

15.--Died in St. Peter Southgate, Norwich, John Smith, gardener, aged
102.

16.--The improvement of Briggs' Street, Norwich, was completed, and the
Paving Commissioners were paid 700 pounds by the trustees of the D'Oyley
fund.

19.--Died, Mrs. Elizabeth Barbara Bulwer Lytton, widow of General Bulwer,
of Heydon Hall, and daughter and sole heiress of Richard Warburton
Lytton, of Knebworth Park, Herts.  "She was mother of the Ambassador at
Madrid, of Sir Edward, who succeeds to the estates, and of Mr. W. L.
Bulwer, of Heydon Hall.  The literary tastes and accomplishments of Mrs.
Bulwer Lytton may have had an influence in early life upon her son's
mind.  Many poems of hers circulated amongst her immediate friends are
full of feeling and grace."

26.--The report on the Christmas trade at Norwich stated that the stage
coaches conveyed 3,036 hampers of game and poultry to London.  Sykes'
waggons in five days conveyed to the Metropolitan market 68 tons of meat,
game, and poultry, from Norfolk and Suffolk.

--For the first time for many years, Norwich Theatre opened on Boxing
Day.  The programme included "The Stranger," "Cherry Bounce," and the
pantomime "Harlequin Baron Munchausen."  The other Christmas attractions
were Batty's Equestrian Company at the Pantheon, Victoria Gardens, and
Wombwell's Menagerie on the Castle Meadow.



1844.


JANUARY.


9.--A meeting was held at Norwich, under the presidency of Mr. T.
Brightwell, at which it was resolved to raise a subscription to pay the
legal expenses of Mr. John Francis and of four other recusants, proceeded
against in the Court of Arches for failing to make a rate for repairing
the parish church of St. George Colegate.  When the case was heard in the
Arches Court, counsel for Mr. Francis protested that upon the face of the
citation it did not appear that he had been guilty of any ecclesiastical
offence cognisable by the Court, neither did it appear that the parish
church was in need of repair.  These arguments were overruled by the
Court, whereupon Mr. Francis took the case to the Court of Queen's Bench,
and on May 9th Mr. Justice Denman delivered judgment in favour of the
appellant, on the ground that the citation was bad, because of there
being no adequate allegation of any spiritual offence.

13.--Mr. H. J. Wallack, of Drury Lane Theatre, formerly a member of the
Norwich circuit, and Mrs. Wallack, commenced an operatic engagement at
Norwich Theatre, in the "Barber of Seville."


FEBRUARY.


3.--In the Court of Exchequer, before Lord Abinger and a special jury, an
information was heard against three persons named Phillips, of Swanton
Abbot, for the recovery of penalties for a violation of the Excise laws
by means of illicit distillation.  The jury returned a verdict of guilty.
It was stated that defendants had rendered themselves liable to penalties
amounting to 12,000 pounds, but the Crown would be satisfied with a
verdict for one penalty of 200 pounds, which, trebled, amounted to 600
pounds.  Judgment was then entered for the last-named sum.

--Permission was given by the authorities of the Norfolk and Norwich
Hospital for the formation of a hospital museum, on the understanding
that there should be no alienation of the funds of the institution.  On
October 19th it was reported to the Governors that the museum had been
completed, and an inscription on vellum was voted to Mr. William
Dalrymple, in grateful acknowledgment of his donation of his entire
collection in anatomy and pathology, and to Mr. J. G. Crosse for his
valuable contributions.  (_See_ September 10th, 1845.)

7.--John Franklin, "known by the name of Bill Downey, the celebrated
Southtown pedestrian," for a wager of 10 pounds walked from the Duke's
Head Inn, the Quay, Yarmouth, to the Shirehall, Norwich, and back, in
eleven and a half hours.

8.--A meeting was held at North Walsham, for the purpose of forming a
Protection Association against the attacks of the Anti-Corn Law League.
Similar associations were formed in other parts of the county, and about
fifty petitions were sent to Parliament, praying that no alteration be
made in the state of the law.

10.*--"A society for insurance against damages by hail has been
established in Norwich, an influential body of gentlemen having accepted
the office of directors, and numerous parties have intimated their
intention to take advantage of this institution."

13.--A new historical play, entitled, "Zopyrus, the Hero of Persia," by
Mr. William Cooper, barrister, of Norwich, was produced for the first
time at Norwich, Theatre.

15.--A singular person, named Jemima Cock, died at Long Stratton.  "She
was 78 years of age, and was known for many years as a letter-carrier of
the Post Office, and although no scholar, was never known to make a
mistake in that department.  She once travelled the country as a seller
of rakes and other implements.  She wore top boots, kindly given to her
by gentlemen of the village, and dressed her head with a hat like Mrs.
Twankey's in the play of the 'Ladies' Club,' and long before, and at the
time of her demise was, by order of the parish, made governess of the
clink.  She leaves no relative or friend to mourn her loss, save one, and
those placed under her kind attention in prison-like confinement, and the
poor weary barefooted traveller who wandered thither for shelter (and
repose) from the fury of the pelting storm."

20.--It was announced in the "London Gazette" that Sir E. L. Bulwer,
Bart., in compliance with a direction contained in the will of his late
mother, Elizabeth Barbara Bulwer Lytton, of Knebworth, would thereafter
use the surname of Lytton in addition to and after that of Bulwer, and
also bear the arms of Lytton quarterly in the first quarter with his own
family arms.

26.--An information was laid before the Docking magistrates by Robert
Bullock, a common informer, against Mr. William Shearman, of Burnham,
under 52 Geo. III., cap. 93, for having, on November 17th, 1843,
"assisted Mr. Charles Edward Overman and 20 other persons in the taking
of a hare by means of two greyhounds, the said act of assisting not being
done in the company or presence and for the use of any person who had
then duly obtained a certificate in his own right and who then and there
used his own dogs for the taking of the said hare," whereby he rendered
himself liable to a penalty of 20 pounds.  Evidence was adduced showing
that the dogs which ran at the West Burnham Coursing Meeting, where the
alleged offence took place, belonged to qualified persons.  The Bench
recorded a conviction, against which the defendant appealed, at the
Norfolk Quarter Sessions, held at Norwich on March 13th.  The Court
quashed the conviction.  Twenty other cases depended upon the result of
this appeal.

--Died in London, aged 73, Mr. John Wright.  He was a native of Norwich,
and going early in life to the Metropolis, where he had the
superintendence of Hookham's Reading Rooms, in Old Bond Street, he became
acquainted with many of the leading political and literary characters of
the day, by whose support he entered into business as a publisher, in
Piccadilly.  He was the particular friend of Gifford, the poet, and the
_rencontre_ between that individual and Peter Pindar took place at
Wright's house.  He was afterwards connected with Cobbett in the
publication of the "Weekly Register," but this terminated in a lawsuit,
in which the latter gained little credit.  Literary pursuits of various
kinds occupied Mr. Wright's attention for the remainder of his life, and
his assistance was much sought after by publishers and others, in
affording which and in attendance at the House of Commons he generally
spent his time.  He was supposed to have had the superintendence and
correction of "Hansard's Debates."

28.--Died at Ingolville, near Havre, Mr. John Morse, formerly of
Sprowston.  He was a magistrate and deputy lieutenant of the county, and
served the office of High Sheriff in 1807.  His remains were interred at
Sprowston, on March 12th.


MARCH.


5.--The Norwich Court of Guardians passed a series of resolutions on the
new Poor Law Amendment Bill, expressing regret that the measure contained
a clause extending the powers of the Poor Law Commissioners to places
hitherto governed by local Acts of Parliament, and thereby to a
considerable extent repealed those Acts.

9.*--"A very fine specimen of the osprey or sea eagle, in full plumage,
measuring 7 ft. 5 in. from tip to tip of the wings, was lately shot at
Westwick by one of the gamekeepers of Mr. J. Petre."

16.*--"Ministers connected with the party which seceded last May from the
Scotch Church have visited Norwich this week, for the purpose of
detailing their version of the differences between them and the
Presbyterian Establishment and of raising 'siller' to enable them to
carry on their system."

25.--Lord Chief Baron Abinger and Mr. Justice Patteson, Judges of Assize,
arrived at Norwich.  Lord Abinger, on the 30th, received a deputation of
the principal merchants of the city, who represented to him the
unfairness and expense attending the mode of conducting bankruptcy
proceedings.  On April 1st his lordship was taken suddenly ill at Bury
St. Edmund's, the next town on the Assize circuit, and on April 7th he
died.  His lordship's political connection with Norwich commenced in
1832.  As Sir James Scarlett he was returned with Lord Stormont in 1833 a
member for the city, and on December 15th received the honorary freedom.
When Sir Robert Peel was unexpectedly called upon to form a Conservative
ministry, the office of Chief Baron was conferred upon Sir James
Scarlett, who was called to the House of Lords by the title of Baron
Abinger, of Abinger, in the county of Surrey, and of the city of Norwich.

30.--Died, aged 81, at Wymondham, Mr. John Cullyer.  "He was an excellent
arithmetician, and the author of a scientific work entitled, 'The
Gentleman's and Farmer's Assistant,' containing tables for the
measurement of land, &c."


APRIL.


4.--Hales, the Norfolk giant, was exhibited at Tombland Fair.  He was 8
ft. in height, and weighed 33 stones.

8.--Mrs. Yates and Mr. O. Smith appeared at Norwich Theatre in the
"Christmas Carol," produced under the superintendence of its adaptor, Mr.
Edward Stirling, stage manager of the Adelphi Theatre.  Mrs. Yates was a
granddaughter of Mr. Brunton, many years manager of the Norwich circuit.

11.--The Norwich Town Council completed the arrangements respecting the
purchase by the Corporation of the Foundry Bridge tolls, and empowered
the City Committee to negotiate for the borrowing of 8,000 pounds for the
purpose.  The new iron bridge which replaced the old wooden structure was
opened for traffic on June 29th.  It was erected by Messrs. Bradley and
Co., of Wakefield, from designs by Mr. C. D. Atkinson, of the same town,
at the cost of 800 pounds.

12.--Major-General Pasley, Government Inspector, accompanied by the Lord
Bishop of Norwich, and several of the directors, proceeded in "a train of
carriages" from the Norwich terminus to Yarmouth by the new Yarmouth and
Norwich Railway.  This was the first train that ran out of the city, and
its departure was witnessed by thousands of the inhabitants.  (_See_
April 30.)

20.--The Scots Greys, during the week ending this date, marched from the
Cavalry Barracks, Norwich, _en route_ to Edinburgh.

20.*--"The parish clerk of St. Peter's, Terrington, has caused his coffin
and gravestone to be prepared, although in excellent health.  The former
he keeps in his sleeping room, and uses as a wardrobe, and the latter
stands in the church, ready to be put down when required.  The stone
contains the following:--

    "This aged clerk, long ere he died,
    His coffin had and placed by his bedside;
    His neighbours all well know the truth is spoke--
    'Twas made of Mr. John Perry's best oak;
    His old friend Death just touch'd him with his spear
    And in pure kindness laid him quietly here.

"The upper part of the stone contains the name, with blanks for cutting
age, &c., when the time of his dissolution shall take place."

24.--Died at Boyland Hall, aged 66, the Hon. Frederick Paul Irby, C.B.,
Rear-Admiral of the White.  He was born April 18th, 1779, and was second
son of the second Baron Boston.  He entered the Navy in 1791, was present
in Lord Howe's action on June 1st, 1793, at Camperdown under Lord Duncan,
and afterwards saw much active service.  He was severely wounded in an
action fought with a French frigate off the Isle of Los, on the coast of
Guinea.

--Died in Julian Place, Norwich, aged 38, Mr. Thomas Wiggins.  "He had
been proprietor of and a celebrated whip on the Phenomena coach from
Norwich to London for several years, and was much respected by all for
his skill as a coachman."

30.--The Yarmouth and Norwich Railway was formally opened on this date.
The county was indebted to Mr. R. Stephenson, the celebrated engineer and
"father of railways," for the introduction of the line.  He and his
friends, supported to a limited extent only by residents in Norwich and
Yarmouth, contemplated it as the commencement of a grand line from the
east to the west of England, in connection with other systems extending
north and south.  The prospectus was issued on January 15th, 1842; the
Act of Parliament obtained June 18th, 1842; and the first meeting of
proprietors held at the Victoria Hotel, Yarmouth, on August 5th, 1842.
The total cost of the undertaking was estimated at 200,000 pounds.  The
first half-yearly meeting of shareholders was held at the Royal Hotel,
Norwich, on February 26th, 1843.  Messrs. Grissell and Peto constructed
the line, at the cost of 10,000 pounds per mile.  The rolling stock of
the company consisted of five locomotives and a number of passenger
carriages, supplied by Mr. Wright, of London.  "The third class are
six-wheeled carriages, open, and at present without seats.  We trust they
will not long continue so; the inconvenience of standing, especially to
females, during a journey in cold weather, will be very great."
Thousands of persons assembled at Thorpe Station to witness the departure
of the first train at 10.30, hundreds thronged the line at various
points, and a great crowd gathered at Yarmouth to see the arrival.
Howlett's brass band occupied a third-class carriage next the engine, and
the other carriages were reserved for 200 guests, specially invited by
the directors.  The train started amid loud cheers, and accomplished the
journey in 50.5 minutes; the return trip was done in 44 minutes.  At four
o'clock a dinner was held at the Assembly Rooms, Norwich, under the
presidency of Mr. S. M. Peto, supported right and left by the Mayors of
Norwich and Yarmouth.  The railway was opened for public traffic on May
1st, when 1,015 passengers were booked.


MAY.


4.*--"Last week 100 stand of arms were received at our barracks for the
Norwich Enrolled Pensioners.  The dress consists of a peaked, glazed cap,
with scarlet band and star in front, a blue frock coat, similar to those
worn by the French infantry, with scarlet epaulettes edged with brass,
and dark mixture trousers with broad red stripes.  Sergeants will be each
armed with a light carbine and cutlass.  The whole will be called out
occasionally for exercise and drill."

6.--A troop of the 4th Light Dragoons arrived at Norwich.

--The Bishop of Norwich confirmed 1,277 persons at the Cathedral.

18.--The Norfolk Yeomanry Cavalry commenced eight days' permanent duty at
Holt.

20.--Mr. Govett, formerly assistant minister at St. Stephen's church,
Norwich, "whose eccentricities were often the cause of great pain to many
members of the congregation," was baptised at Mr. Brock's chapel, "with
six young ladies whom he had persuaded unhappily to follow his errors."


JUNE.


1.--The season terminated at Norwich Theatre.  The manager (Mr. G. Smith)
said, in the course of his customary address: "Having been for nearly 30
years a member of the company, I am most reluctantly compelled to
chronicle the one now closing as the very worst season within my
recollection."

19.--Died at Knapton, aged 59, Mr. Jeffreson Mills, Commander R.N.  He
served from 1799 until the Peace in 1815.  "During his career he assisted
at the capture of 26 line of battleships, 18 frigates, and 21 sloops of
war and privateers.  He was the author of a masterly vindication of Lord
Nelson's proceedings in the Bay of Naples."

22.*--"The fatal ball by which Nelson received his death wound, and which
was in the possession of the late Sir W. Beatty, M.D., R.N., at his death
came into possession of Col. Beatty, R.M., and his brother, Mr. Vincent
Beatty, _ci-devant_ captain of the late 24th Light Dragoons, by whom it
has been presented to her Majesty, and most graciously received.  The
ball, with the particles of the coat and epaulette which were forced into
the body, is neatly and elegantly set within a crystal case, which is
appropriately mounted with a double cable coiled around its
circumference.  It opens like a watch."

24.--Madame Vestris and Mr. Charles Mathews commenced a short engagement
at Norwich Theatre, in "Patter _versus_ Clatter," "Loan of a Lover,"
"Grist to the Mill," and "Follies of a Night."


JULY.


13.--At Marsham, near Aylsham, were rung 10,080 changes of Oxford treble
bob major, "the longest peal on eight bells ever completed in this
county."  It was composed by Eversfield, of London, and rung in 5 hours
44 minutes.

22.--Died at Longford Hall, Derbyshire, whither she had retired for her
accouchement, Anne Amelia Dowager Countess of Leicester, wife of the
Right Hon. Ed. Ellice, M.P. for Coventry.  The third daughter of the Earl
and Countess of Albemarle, and born on June 16th, 1803, she married, on
February 26th, 1822, Mr. Thomas William Coke, of Holkham, who was created
Earl of Leicester in 1837, and died in 1842.  Her ladyship married Mr.
Ellice on October 25th, 1843.

25.--A cricket match, Marylebone Club and Ground against Norfolk with
Fuller Pilch, commenced at Lord's.  Norfolk, 60-111; Marylebone, 79-71.
The return match commenced at Swaffham on Sept. 5th.  Marylebone, 19-32;
Norfolk, 45-6.

29.--The celebrated dwarf, Tom Thumb (Charles Stratton), made his first
appearance in Norwich at the Theatre Royal, where he was introduced by
Mr. Barnum, the equally famous showman.

30.--Mr. Justice Williams, in charging the Grand Jury at the Norfolk
Assizes, dwelt upon the alarming increase of incendiarism.


AUGUST.


1.--Madame Celeste and Mr. Webster commenced an engagement at Norwich
Theatre.  One of the features of the entertainment was the dancing of "le
Polka."  This dance, which was introduced for the first time in Norwich,
was described as "a mixture of the waltz and the cracovienne, and
extremely pretty when danced well."  All the local dancing masters
advertised it, and it gave fresh life and animation to the ball rooms.
"Nothing was more wearisome," it was said, "than the eternal first set of
quadrilles, and comparatively few joined in the waltz; in the polka we
have a dance full of life, elegant in its figures, and with the
additional charm of being accompanied by music of the most attractive
character."  At the Norwich Sessions Ball, on Sept. 16th, it was a great
attraction; Mr. Frank Noverre gave a "polka ball" at the Assembly Rooms
on December 2nd; and at Miss Bidwell's ball, at the same place, on
December 5th, "these ladies danced the polka in character, giving a good
delineation of Madame Celeste and Mr. Webster."

--A sculling match took place between Messrs. Corby and Wigham, from the
New Cut, Whitlingham, to Mutford Lock and back, a distance of 60 miles,
for 25 pounds a side.  Corby, the winner, rowed the distance in 10 hrs.
21 mins., the whole of the return journey being against a strong wind and
tide.  Wigham gave up at Buckenham.

2.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Mr. Justice Williams, William Frost,
aged 35, was indicted for having, on April 8th, at Whitwell, murdered his
four children, whose ages ranged from five years to ten weeks, by
striking them on the head with a hammer.  Mr. W. P. Nichols, Mr. G. W. W.
Firth, and Mr. Crosse testified to the insanity of the prisoner, against
whom a verdict of not guilty was returned, and he was ordered to be
confined in the Criminal Lunatic Asylum, St. George's Fields, London.

3.*--"About 60 cwt. of tea and coffee have been brought to Norwich by the
Yarmouth and Norwich Railway Company, for Messrs. Wolton and Co., of
London Street.  We should not be surprised if that practice become more
general in busy weeks, particularly when the wind is contrary for the
favourable transit of the wherries."

--At the Norfolk and Norwich Assizes, before Mr. Justice Alderson, the
action, Cory _v._ the Yarmouth and Norwich Railway Company, was heard.
It was an action sent down from the Vice-Chancellor's Court, in which the
plaintiff sought to restrain the defendants from carrying passengers from
their railway terminus across the Bure or Yare to Great Yarmouth, on the
ground that the right of the plaintiff as proprietor of the ancient ferry
and of the suspension bridge which supplied its place, was thereby
infringed.  At the suggestion of the Judge, an agreement was arrived at
between the parties.  (_See_ May 2nd, 1845.)

7.--Intelligence was received at Norwich of the birth of a Prince (Prince
Alfred Ernest Albert, Duke of Edinburgh).  The bells of St. Peter
Mancroft were rung, and the Town Council in due course sent to the Queen
a congratulatory address.

9.--Great festivities took place at Ellingham, near Bungay, in
celebration of the return of Col. Smith from active service in India.

12.--The opera of "The Bohemian Girl" was performed at Norwich Theatre
for the first time.  The principals included Miss Rainforth, Mr.
Harrison, and Mr. Stretton, of Drury Lane Theatre; Mr. Gilbeigh, Mr.
Duval, &c.  The numerical strength of the orchestra was more than trebled
by the services rendered by professional and amateur instrumentalists of
the city.  The conductor was Mr. C. F. Hall, one of the leaders of the
Drury Lane orchestra "Norma" was also produced.  The week's performances
received very inadequate support.

19.--Killed at Sekerran, Borneo, aged 39, George Steward, youngest son of
Mr. Timothy Steward, of Great Yarmouth.  He was in the East India
Company's service, and volunteered to accompany Capt. Keppel, R.N., in
his expedition against the pirates of Borneo.  While ascending a river in
a native boat he was surrounded by the enemy and slain.

--Died at Bracondale, Norwich, aged 78, Mr. Roger Kitson, a schoolmaster,
who sixty years previously succeeded Mr. Massingham at the then
well-known academy in St. Andrew's Broad Street.  He had a talent for
poetical composition, and belonged to the Confraternity of United Friars
and other literary societies.

21.--The Norwich Mechanics' Institute was dissolved.  On October 27th its
surplus funds, amounting to 120 pounds, were handed over to a new
society, known as the Athenaeum, in which the Rev. A. Bath Power, Mr. J.
J. Gurney, and other gentlemen were interested.  The society met at rooms
in the Market Place.

24.*--"The operation of Lord Brougham's Act, for the abolition of
imprisonment for debt, has had the effect of clearing the Norwich Gaol of
all the debtors except one.  Its operation will be very disadvantageous
to the prisoners sentenced by the Court of Conscience or Requests, as
they had laid a part of their time, and a very few days more would have
exempted them from future liability, whereas now they go out subject to
other proceedings and executions against their goods."

28.--A shocking accident occurred at Dereham Theatre, to Mr. Dillon, one
of the performers.  He had just dressed for his part, and approaching too
near to a lighted candle, the inflammable material which he wore
immediately caught fire, and he was enveloped in flames.  He ran about
the stage in terror, and some of the audience, rushing forward,
endeavoured to extinguish the fire, but they did not succeed until he had
been seriously injured.

31.--Among Norwich improvements completed during the preceding twelve
months were mentioned at this date the building of Victoria Street, the
erection of new houses in place of old and unsightly ones near St. Giles'
Gates, and the widening of the street in that locality; the
reconstruction of the Wensum Street and Tombland Corner; and the
construction of the embankment between Foundry Bridge and Carrow Bridge.


SEPTEMBER.


9.--Mr. and Mrs. Charles Kean appeared in "Hamlet" at Norwich Theatre,
and on succeeding evenings played in "The Gamester," "Macbeth," "The Lady
of Lyons," "Richard the Third," and "The Stranger."

--The Royal squadron escorting the Queen on her voyage to Scotland was
off the Norfolk coast from 7 a.m. to 12 noon.  The coastguard fired
rockets at various points, which were answered from the Royal yacht.

11.--Died at Cheltenham, the Ven. Henry Bathurst, Archdeacon of Norwich
and rector of North Creake.

12.--The organ at St. Nicholas' church, Great Yarmouth, was reopened
after renovation.  The instrument was built in the 18th century, by
Abraham Jordan, and repaired in 1812 by G. P. England.  It was finally
repaired by Messrs. Grey and Davison, of Gray's Inn Road, London.

19.--At a meeting of the members of the medical profession in Norwich,
held at the Guildhall, under the presidency of Mr. J. G. Crosse, approval
was expressed of the registration clauses in Sir James Graham's Bill for
the better regulation of medical practice in the United Kingdom.

26.--The new chapel, dedicated to St. Edmund, at Walpole St. Peter, was
consecrated by the Bishop of Norwich.

--A meeting was held at the King's Arms Hotel, East Dereham, in
furtherance of a scheme for constructing a railway from Wymondham to that
town, with extensions to Lynn and Downham.  Lord Sondes, on October 7th,
presided over a meeting at the Guildhall, Norwich, at which the
undertaking was approved.  It was estimated to cost 10,000 pounds per
mile.  (_See_ December 7th, 1846.)


OCTOBER.


10.--Died at Norwich, Mr. Thomas Turner, "a well-known amateur on the
river."  "Agreeable to the wishes expressed by the deceased, he was
conveyed from Carrow to Thorpe on board a sailing-boat, from which he was
carried on the shoulders of six boating men in blue jackets and white
trousers to his last resting-place in Thorpe churchyard."

16.--Van Amburgh's Circus and Menagerie were exhibited in a large marquee
erected in Chapel Field, Norwich.

17.--Dereham and Swaffham Theatres were advertised to be sold by auction,
"under the will of the late Mr. David Fisher."  After this date there are
no further records of the Norfolk and Suffolk Company of Comedians, so
long under the management of the Fisher family.

--Mr. Rush, "a respectable farmer," of Hevingham, was accidentally killed
by the discharge of a gun "left in the kitchen of his house by his son,
James Blomfield Rush, auctioneer and farmer, of Wymondham."

18.--M. Jullien gave the first of three concerts at St. Andrew's Hall,
Norwich.

26.--In the Arches Court, the Rev. William Henry Henslowe, perpetual
curate of Wormegay, was suspended from the ministry for three months, for
refusing on two occasions to bury the corpse of Sarah Bowden, a
parishioner who had been baptised by a minister of the Primitive
Methodist persuasion.  The case was brought before the Court by letters
of request from the Bishop of Norwich.


NOVEMBER.


9.--Sir William Foster, Bart., was elected Mayor, and Mr. John Betts
appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

24.--Died at his residence, St. Catherine's Cottage, St. John de
Sepulchre, Norwich, aged 73, Mr. Jonathan Matchett, senior proprietor of
the NORFOLK CHRONICLE.  He had been connected with the journal for 51
years, and became its head on the decease of his father-in-law, Mr.
Stevenson, in 1821.

27.--Died at his house at Costessey, aged 69, Mr. Richard Mackenzie
Bacon, principal proprietor and editor of the "Norwich Mercury."  Mr.
Bacon was the editor also of "The Quarterly Musical Magazine and Review."

28.--Mr. Tom Cross, the celebrated "gentleman whip," driver of the Lynn
and London coach, delivered at the Assembly Rooms, Lynn, a lecture on
Shakespeare.


DECEMBER.


3.--Died at Swaffham Vicarage, aged 92, the Rev. William Yonge, vicar of
the parish and Chancellor of the Diocese.

5.--Mr. Edward Stracey, of St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich, the respondent in
a suit respecting the tenancy of a pew in the parish church, was taken
into custody and lodged in the City Gaol by a process of the Norwich
Ecclesiastical Court, because of his refusal to pay the costs imposed by
the Court.

14.*--"The winter has set in most severely, with an intense ground frost
and the wind in the east.  The navigation of the river between Norwich
and Yarmouth and from that port to Beccles, Bungay, and Aylsham, has been
stopped by ice, but not a particle of snow has fallen."



1845.


JANUARY.


5.--The Rev. Charles Chapman, who was elected vicar of the parish on
November 5th, 1832, preached his farewell sermon at St. Peter Mancroft
church, Norwich.  The Rev. Thomas Wilson, M.A., was elected to the vacant
living.

7.--At Norwich Quarter Sessions, before the Recorder (Mr. Isaac Jermy),
John Dover, the notorious Chartist leader, was found guilty of receiving
stolen silk, &c., the property of William Martin and others, and
sentenced to fourteen years' transportation.

13.--Cooke's Royal Circus was opened at the Amphitheatre, Victoria
Gardens, Norwich.  During the season various "horse spectacles,"
pantomimes, farces, and burlettas were produced.

18.--Died at his house near St. Giles' Gates, Norwich, Mr. James Bennett,
a man of great scientific attainments.  By trade a watchmaker, "he
invented an instrument for performing the operation of the trepan, which
was mentioned with much praise by Sir Astley Cooper in his lectures, and
ever afterwards used by that distinguished surgeon.  He was the first man
who made an electrical machine in Norwich.  To different societies he
sent original contributions, and presented articles of value,
particularly the splendid anatomical preparations of the late Mr.
Stevenson, veterinary surgeon, Castle Meadow, which were given to a
museum in London.  He took great interest in witnessing surgical
operations, and could dissect an eye very beautifully.  He was an adept
at music and drawing, and was one of the original members of the Hall
Concert."  Mr. Bennett served the office of Sheriff in 1826, and by
virtue of seniority was "Father of the Common Council."  He was the
oldest surviving "brother" of the intellectual and benevolent
confraternity, the College of United Friars, and was for many years a
member of the Castle Corporation.

25.--The NORFOLK CHRONICLE published the results of an inquiry into the
state of the manufactures of Norwich, and in its comments stated:
"Norwich has lost its former prominence as a manufacturing city, partly
in consequence of the high price of coals compared with the North and
West, and partly from improvements in machinery being tardily introduced.
We regret that while 8,000 persons are employed in or connected with our
factories and mills, a large number are constantly without work, and this
is likely to be the state of things for some time to come."

26.--On this date occurred the highest tide ever recorded at Yarmouth.
The depth of water on the bar was 19 ft. 6 in.  A severe gale prevailed,
and several vessels were in distress.  The Phoenix yawl, which went out
to the assistance of a brig stranded on the north end of the Scroby Sand,
was lost, and seven of her crew drowned.


FEBRUARY.


19.--Died at his residence, Northrepps Hall, Cromer, Sir T. Fowell
Buxton, Bart.  He was in his 59th year.

23.--Died at St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich, Mr. Thomas Stannard, engraver,
aged 55.

24.--The Hon. W. B. Baring, M.P., who had accepted the office of
Paymaster to the Forces, was re-elected without opposition member for the
borough of Thetford.

28.--Mr. Samuel Lover, author of "Rory O'More" and other Irish tales,
gave, at the Assembly Rooms, Norwich, his "Irish Evening, illustrative of
the national characteristics, legends, superstitions, mirth, and melody
of his country, entitled, 'Paddy by Land and Sea.'"  The entertainment
was repeated on the 29th.

--At an inquest held at Costessey, by Mr. Pilgrim, one of the County
Coroners, upon the exhumed body of a woman named Jane Mary Lovett, who
was alleged to have died in childbirth, in consequence of improper
treatment by a medical man named Gaches, a verdict of manslaughter was
returned.  Mr. Gaches contrived to escape from the custody of Inspector
Barrett, concealed himself in the park, and ultimately absconded from the
neighbourhood.  He was re-arrested on March 29th, in a railway carriage
at Shoreditch, and at his trial at the Norfolk Assizes on April 8th the
jury, by direction of Mr. Justice Patteson, returned a verdict of not
guilty.


MARCH.


5.--Died at his residence in the Upper Close, Norwich, Dr. Warner Wright,
aged 70.  He was founder of the Norwich Dispensary, and in 1804 was
chosen a physician of the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital, a position which
he resigned in 1840.  For many years he was visiting physician to the
Norfolk County Lunatic Asylum, and to the Norwich Bethel, and was placed
upon the commission of the peace for the city in 1836.

12.--John Tawell, indicted at Aylesbury Assizes for the murder of Sarah
Hart, at Salt Hill, by poisoning her, came of a respectable Norfolk
family.  "Augustus Metcalfe, who served the office of Mayor of Norwich in
1716, was the maternal grandfather of Tawell's father.  Thomas Tawell,
uncle of John Tawell's father, served the office of Sheriff of Norwich in
1723, and died during his shrievalty.  Tawell's father was a shopkeeper,
and had resided in several places in the neighbourhood of Norwich."  The
convict, who was a Quaker, was executed on March 28th.

15.*--"The frost has now continued, with few intermissions, for eighteen
weeks, a longer period than has been remembered for the last thirty
years."

19.--A meeting of the principal inhabitants was held at the Guildhall,
Norwich, under the presidency of the Mayor (Sir William Foster), "to
determine on the steps to be taken for arresting the progress of the
epidemic diseases so extensively prevailing, and for mitigating the
sufferings of the afflicted poor."  It was stated that between 1,500 and
1,600 persons had been attacked by small-pox, measles, scarlet fever, and
typhus.  The attention of the authorities was directed to the insanitary
condition of the city, and a fund was started for cleansing and
disinfecting the houses of the poor.

26.--Sir James Graham's Bill for the amendment of the Law of Settlement
was considered at a public meeting held at the Guildhall, Norwich.
Disapproval of the measure was expressed.  The Court of Guardians and
other public bodies passed resolutions in opposition to the Bill, which
was received unfavourably in other parts of the county.

29.*--"A salmon trout, measuring 23 inches in length and weighing 5 lbs.,
has been taken while fishing for pike in the river Wensum, near
Hellesdon."


APRIL.


1.--Died at Winfarthing, aged 80, Mr. Philip G. Browne.  "He was author
of 'The History of Norwich,' &c., &c., and was parish clerk of
Winfarthing for upwards of fifty years."

7.--At Norwich Assizes, before Mr. Baron Parke, George William Wilson,
formerly cashier of the Norwich Court of Guardians, was charged with
embezzling various sums, amounting to 1,245 pounds, the property of that
body.  The jury returned a verdict of not guilty.  A further charge of
stealing a book belonging to the Guardians was deferred to the Summer
Assizes, on which occasion no evidence was offered, and the prisoner was
discharged.

--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Mr. Justice Patteson, Robert Richard
Royal, James Barnard Hall, and James Mapes were indicted for the murder
of Harriet Candler, at Yarmouth, on November 18th, 1844.  The principal
witness was a man named Samuel Yarham, who had turned Queen's evidence.
The jury acquitted the prisoners.  (_See_ March 27th, 1846.)

8.--Bawdeswell church was consecrated by the Bishop of Norwich.  The
church became dilapidated in 1740, but a portion of the ruined building
was fitted with pews and used until 1843, when it was found necessary to
rebuild the church, at the cost of 1,400 pounds.  Mr. J. Brown, of
Norwich, was the architect, Mr. William Gillham, of Rainham, contractor,
and Mr. Francis Cushing, of North Walsham, sub-contractor.

14.--The east wall of the chancel of St. Julian's church, Norwich, fell
with a tremendous crash, which greatly alarmed the neighbourhood.  The
church was re-opened on January 18th, 1846.

19.--The foundation-stone of the new church of St. John, King's Lynn, was
laid by the Bishop of Norwich.  The building was consecrated by his
lordship on September 24th, 1846.

21.--Died at his official residence, Woolwich, Colonel Sir George C.
Hoste, C.B.  He was the third son of the Rev. Dixon Hoste, rector of
Tittleshall, and was gazetted lieutenant in the Royal Engineers on
December 20th, 1802.  He was attached to the expedition to the
Mediterranean commanded by General Sir J. Craig, and was present at the
battle of Maida, and distinguished himself on other occasions in Sicily,
Egypt, and Calabria.  He was employed in the two attacks on Antwerp in
1813, and gained the rank of brevet-major for the skill and gallantry
which he displayed in leading the Guards at the storming of
Bergen-op-Zoom.  At the battle of Waterloo he was attached to the corps
led by the Prince of Orange, and was subsequently upon the personal staff
of the Duke of Wellington.  For his services during this campaign he
received the distinction of C.B.

26.--At a meeting of the Norfolk and Norwich Shipwrecked Mariners'
Society, held at the Shirehall, Norwich, Mr. J. J. Gurney called
attention to a new form of life-preserver made and presented to the
society by a reporter of the NORFOLK CHRONICLE.  "It consists of a linen
jacket covered with oblong pieces of cork.  The head is put through a
circle, and the jacket falls down at the back and the front of the person
wearing it, leaving the arms perfectly free, being suspended from the
shoulders and strapped round the body.  There is a semi-circular thick
cork collar in front and coming under the chin, so that the jacket is not
only calculated to keep any person afloat in the water, but also to keep
his head at a sufficient elevation.  It was agreed that the jacket should
become the property of the society."


MAY.


2.--An appalling loss of life was occasioned at Yarmouth by the fall of
the Suspension Bridge, which had been the subject of so much litigation
between Mr. Cory and the Yarmouth and Norwich Railway Company.  A clown
named Nelson, belonging to Cooke's Equestrian Circus, had announced that
he would perform the feat of sailing in a tub drawn by four geese from
the old Draw Bridge to the Suspension Bridge.  Thousands of persons
assembled to witness the spectacle, and upon the bridge itself there were
between 400 and 500.  The bridge, which was the chief means of transit
from the railway terminus to the town, and had been widened to admit of
increased traffic by a footpath constructed on either side, was suspended
from two piers.  Just as the clown was entering the Bure, at ten minutes
to six o'clock, there was a rush to the south side of the bridge, the
suspension rods snapped, the chains gave way, and "the bridge fell on
that side like the leaf of a table let down," pouring the crowd upon it
into the water.  A terrible scene ensued.  As many as possible were
rescued and conveyed to the Vauxhall Gardens, but notwithstanding the
efforts made by watermen in boats and upon the river banks, there was
fearful loss of life.  An inquest was opened at the Church Hall on the
3rd, when Mr. Cooke, the proprietor of the circus, intimated that he
would at once withdraw his company from the town.  The inquiry was
adjourned from time to time, and at the last sitting Mr. James Walker,
C.E., who had been sent down to examine into the cause of the disaster,
reported: (1) the immediate cause of the accident was a defect in the
welding of the bar which first gave way; (2) that the quality of the iron
and the workmanship were defective, and the accident would not have
happened had the work been properly examined at the time of construction;
(3) the widening of the bridge appeared to have been made without
sufficient reference to its original strength and the weight which it had
to support; and (4) that in the original construction of the bridge the
casualty of a great load all on one side did not appear to have been
contemplated.  The jury returned a verdict in accordance with Mr.
Walker's conclusions.  The number of dead bodies recovered was 77; some,
however, were supposed to have been carried away by the current.  Nearly
all the sufferers were children or very young persons, but it was related
as "a very extraordinary circumstance" that "Mr. Thomas Bowles, aged 84,
who was on board the Royal George when she sank, and who is probably the
only living survivor, should have been on the Suspension Bridge during
the late accident.  He was precipitated into the water, but was once more
miraculously saved."

3.--The Norfolk Yeomanry Cavalry assembled at East Dereham in stronger
force than on any previous occasion, for eight days' permanent duty.

--The last troop of the 4th Dragoons marched from Norwich Barracks, and
were, on the same day, replaced by the 7th Hussars.

5.--Died at West Somerton, aged 74, "Mr. William Hales, father of nine
children, whose united heights amount to 57 ft. 6 in., including the
Norfolk giant and giantess."

7.--The experiment was made at Norwich Theatre of still further reducing
the prices of admission to 2s. 6d. for dress boxes, and to 1s. 6d. for
the upper circle.

8.--Mr. Walter Morgan, aged 23, of the firm of Messrs. Morgan, of the
King Street Brewery, Norwich, met with his death by falling into a vat of
beer.

10.*--"A handbill has been published in Norwich showing that out of 1,664
persons who have had small-pox, 1,536 had not been vaccinated, and only
128 were vaccinated.  Out of 506 who had escaped the disease altogether,
only 84 had not been vaccinated, and 422 vaccinated.  Of 141 who had died
from small-pox, only four had been vaccinated, one a man 93 years old;
the other three were suffering from teething or were otherwise ill when
vaccinated."

24.*--"The Hanworth Hall estate, comprising a mansion, cottages, and
1,465 acres of land, has been disposed of by private contract to Mr.
William Howe Windham, of Felbrigg Park, for 65,000 pounds."

26.--A series of lectures on phonography was commenced at the Assembly
Rooms, Norwich, by Mr. Joseph Pitman and Mr. Reid.  "Mr. Reid appears to
have mastered the system so far as to be able to follow a speaker, but no
reporter has yet adopted it."


JUNE.


2.--Mr. Macready, accompanied by Mr. Ryder, "a highly respectable actor,"
commenced a three nights' engagement at Norwich Theatre.  He appeared in
the characters of Hamlet, Richelieu, and Macbeth.


JULY.


21.--Miss Fitzwilliam appeared at Norwich Theatre in the Assize week
performances.  She took the leading parts in "The Belle of the Hotel,"
"My Little Adopted," "Foreign Airs and Native Graces," &c.  At the
conclusion of the season, on the 26th, Mr. George Smith announced to the
audience that he had resigned the management of the circuit.  "He had
been," he said, "thirty-one years a member of the Norwich Company.  He
had witnessed the drama in its high and palmy state; he had seen its
gradual decline.  Many had been the causes assigned for this decay--the
increase of Dissent and fanaticism on the one hand, errors of management
on the other, and the reduction of prices."

29.--A prize-fight took place on Mousehold Heath, Norwich, between Jim
Woods and Ben Clarke, "the Norfolk Slasher," for 5 pounds a side.  Woods
was the favourite, at 5 to 2, and obtained "first blood," but in the
second round Clarke struck him a severe blow on the temple and felled
him.  In the third round Clarke put in another blow, and as his opponent
was falling, struck him behind the ear and laid him senseless.  Clarke
was declared the winner, after a contest which lasted only five minutes.

--The Norfolk Railway was opened.  The directors ran a special train from
Trowse to Cambridge, by which about 200 guests, including the Dean and
Mayor of Norwich, were conveyed.  A special train from London brought a
like contingent to Cambridge, where luncheon was served, under the
presidency of the chairman of the Eastern Counties Railway, Mr. Henry
Bosanquet.  One of the first projects for a long line was the proposal to
construct a railway between London and Norwich, _via_ Thetford, with a
continuation to Yarmouth.  A prospectus was printed and partially
circulated in 1825, but the scheme was abandoned.  In 1835 the prospectus
of the Eastern Counties (or Grand Eastern Counties) Railway appeared.
The requisite notices were published in November of that year,
application was made in the ensuing session of Parliament for a Bill, and
the first Act for the construction of the works received the Royal assent
on July 4th, 1836.  Up to 1840 this line was opened only as far as Warley
Lane, between Brentwood and Warley Common.  In 1843 it was completed as
far as Colchester, but as the original capital was more than expended in
carrying the line that distance, all hope of proceeding to Norwich was
abandoned.  In 1839 two Acts connected with the Northern and Western
Company were passed, and received the Royal assent on July 19th.  The
first was for the purpose of extending the time for the purchase of land
as far as Bishop's Stortford, and the second was chiefly to confirm an
agreement with the Eastern Counties Company as to the terms, &c., for
passing over their line.  In 1840 another Act was passed, receiving the
Royal assent on June 4th, for reducing the joint stock capital to 700,000
pounds, giving the company power to raise 240,000 pounds on debentures so
soon as one moiety of the capital should be paid off, and abandoning that
portion of the line between Bishop's Stortford and Cambridge.  In 1840
the idea of railway communication between Norwich and the Metropolis was
revived, and it was resolved to form a company, to be styled the Norfolk,
Suffolk, and Cambridge Railway Company.  It was afterwards known as the
East Anglian Railway Company.  It received the support of the landowners'
committee in Norfolk, and the expense was estimated as follows: From
Bishop's Stortford to Cambridge, 22 miles, 572,000 pounds; from Cambridge
to Norwich, 63 miles, 1,126,695 pounds; from Norwich to Yarmouth, 18
miles, 291,512 pounds.  After the opening of the Yarmouth and Norwich
line according to the plan of Mr. Stephenson, the project for the East
Anglian Railway was dropped for a time, and was revived by the promoters
of the Norwich and Brandon Railway, the prospectus of which was published
in 1843.  The capital to be raised was stated to be 380,000 pounds, in
19,000 shares of 20 pounds each.  In the Session of 1844 an Act was
applied for and received the Royal assent in the month of June.  The line
in connection with that from Yarmouth and with that from Ely to Brandon
resulted, and it was known as the Norfolk Railway.  Messrs. Grissell and
Peto were the contractors, and Messrs. Stephenson and Bidder the
engineers in chief.  The works were commenced at Wymondham on May 17th,
1844, and finished on July 1st, 1845.  The first through train to London
started from Trowse on the morning of July 30th.  At that date the swing
bridge at Trowse had not been completed.  Of the travelling it was said
it "cannot be rendered more comfortable than it is upon the Norfolk
Railway."


AUGUST.


12.--The foundation-stone of the Leicester monument was laid in Holkham
Park by Lord Coborne, in the presence of a large gathering of the
nobility and gentry and of the tenant-farmers of Norfolk.

15.--Died at his residence in Golden Ball Street, Norwich, aged 78, Mr.
John Angell, who served the office of Sheriff in 1825 and of Mayor in
1830.

16.*--"Within the last few days no less than 500 coach horses have been
sent for sale at Aldridge's Repository, owing to the further opening of
the Northern and Eastern Railway from Bishop's Stortford by way of Ely
and Thetford to Norwich, and the consequent discontinuation of coaches."


SEPTEMBER.


6.--The Brundall estate, consisting of a mansion and 143 acres of land,
the property of the Rev. L. B. Foster, was sold by Mr. Spelman, of
Norwich, for 12,500 pounds, to Mr. T. G. Tuck.

--The Newmarket mail coach was overturned at Cringleford Gate, and of the
six outside passengers, all of whom were more or less cut and bruised, a
lady had her arm broken and a gentleman sustained a fractured collar-bone
and dislocated arm.

10.--The museum at the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital was opened, under the
presidency of the Lord Bishop of Norwich.

11.--A cricket match commenced at Swaffham, between the Marylebone Club
and the Norfolk Club, and concluded on the 12th.  "Fuller Pilch, the hope
of Norfolk, was beautifully caught for seven runs.  A great damper was
thrown on their spirits by this untoward event, and the rest of the side
did little to retrieve the misfortune."  Marylebone, 162; Norfolk, 42-83.

16.--Died at Yarmouth, aged 69, Mr. Richard Sutton.  "He was very
eccentric, and had such a love for mathematics that though extremely poor
he had often been known to sell his dinner in order to procure some old
book on mathematics."

16.--The Norfolk and Norwich Triennial Musical Festival commenced.  The
principal vocalists were Madame Grisi, Madame Caradori Allan, Miss Dolby,
Miss Poole, Sig. Mario, Sig.  F. Lablache, Mr. Hobbs, Mr. Hawkins, Mr.
Machin, Mr. Bradbury, and Herr Standigl.  Mr. T. Cooke was leader of the
band, Mr. Benedict conductor, and Mr. Turle organist.  The programme
included selections from the "Stabat Mater," "The Seasons," "Il Don
Giovanni," Purcell's "Jubilate," Mozart's "Requiem," "Calvary,"
"Midsummer Night's Dream," and "The Messiah."  On the 19th a ball took
place at St. Andrew's Hall.  The gross receipts amounted to 5,432 pounds
9s. 6d., and expenses to 4,180 pounds 10s. 9d.  The Sheriffs of London
(Mr. Hunter and Mr. Sidney) attended the Festival, and were, on the 19th,
entertained at dinner at the Royal Hotel.

27.*--"The Yarmouth and Norwich Railway Company has reduced the charge
for the use of the telegraph and dispatching a messenger to any part of
Norwich from 4s. 6d. to 2s. 6d."


OCTOBER.


7.--A meeting of the Wesleyan Methodists of the Norwich circuit was held
at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, for the purpose of raising a consolidated
fund to redeem the chapel debts, amounting to 6,900 pounds.  It was
proposed to create a capital to be raised in 6,900 shares of 1 pound
each, the payments to be made at intervals of three months during the
ensuing five years.

13.--Died "that excellent and philanthropic lady," Mrs. Fry, who for many
years "devoted her time and her purse to ameliorate the miseries of the
inmates of our various prisons."

14.--Lord Suffield was installed Grand-Master of Freemasons in the
province of Norfolk.


NOVEMBER.


1.*--"Mr. Charles Fisher, who for the last two or three seasons has been
a general favourite on the Norwich circuit, has accepted an engagement at
the Prince's Theatre, London."

--*"The North Walsham Theatre, which eighteen years ago cost Mr. D.
Fisher 1,800 pounds, has lately been sold for about 400 pounds, and is to
be converted into a school, to be conducted on the National system."  The
school was opened on May 25th, 1846.

4.--A prize-fight took place near Harford Bridges, between Ben Clarke and
Smith.  After a contest lasting twenty minutes, the former was declared
the winner.

6.--Large numbers of birds were attracted by Happisburgh light during
stormy weather on this date.  Forty-five dozen larks, eight and a half
dozen starlings, and many other birds, were taken.

7.--Trowse Swing Bridge, erected from a design by Mr. Bidder, was swung
across the river for the first time.  It underwent Government inspection
on December 9th, and the first trains ran over it on December 15th.

7.--Sir Lawrence Jones, Bart., of Cranmer Hall, was murdered by robbers
at Macri, in Turkey.  He was in his 29th year.  On July 8th, 1846, his
remains were interred in the family vault at Sculthorpe.

10.--Mr. John Betts was elected Mayor of Norwich, and Mr. Jeremiah Colman
appointed Sheriff.

16.--Died, aged 72, Gregory Robinson, of the Bull's Head Inn, Ber Street,
Norwich.  "The deceased in early life entered the Navy, and was with Lord
Howe on June 1st, 1794, and in several other engagements.  He was one of
the crew of the St. George when that vessel was wrecked on the coast of
Jutland, on December 24th, 1811."


DECEMBER.


3.--A public meeting was held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, to consider
the propriety of memorialising the Government to open the ports of Great
Britain and Ireland for the admission of foreign grain free of duty, in
consequence of the apprehended scarcity of food.  The Mayor presided, and
Mr. Tillett moved that a petition be presented to Parliament for the
immediate repeal of the Corn Laws.  A similar petition was adopted by the
Norwich Town Council on the 9th.

12.--In the Arches Court, Sir H. Jenner Fust gave judgment in the suit
Kitson _v._ the Rev. Arthur Loftus, vicar of Fincham St. Martin and
rector of Fincham St. Michael.  The case came before the Court by letters
of request from the Bishop of Norwich, and the articles, in substance,
charged Mr. Loftus with gross immorality.  Sentence of deprivation was
passed.

--A "remarkable and unprecedented" occurrence took place at the meet, on
Mulbarton Common, of the Norfolk Subscription Pack of Staghounds.  A
bailiff, on behalf of the Rev. J. H. Steward, of Carlton House, served
notices upon all who were suspected of being about to commit a trespass.
"The eccentricity of such a proceeding created much amusement, and the
consequence was a change of position was ordered."

22.--The van of a menagerie travelling through Potter Heigham overturned
into a ditch, and the bars of the tiger's cage giving way, "the animal
escaped, after biting off the head of an eagle."  The neighbouring
farmers, armed with guns, and the labourers with pitchforks, went in
pursuit of the beast.  An unsuccessful endeavour was made to entangle him
in a sheep-net.  "A large hamper containing a piece of flesh was then
placed in his way.  Upon his jumping in to seize the food the lid was
drawn down and soon secured, the animal uttering the most hideous yells."

24.--A serious accident occurred on the Norfolk Railway near Thetford.
The up-train from Norwich was proceeding at a rapid rate when the engine
left the line and fell down the embankment.  The engine-driver, named
Pickering, was killed instantly, and the stoker, Richard Eager, had both
legs broken, and died shortly after his removal from the scene of the
accident.  None of the passengers were seriously hurt.  The accident was
supposed to be due to the excessive speed at which the train was
travelling--fifty-five miles an hour.

26.--Norwich Theatre was opened, under the management of Mr. Abington,
M.A., lessee of Southampton Theatre.  The circuit also included the
Cambridge, Bury St. Edmund's, Ipswich, Colchester, and Yarmouth Theatres.
The old company had been dispersed, and regret was expressed that the new
company was not likely to maintain the reputation of the Norwich stage.

31.--The customary peals were rung at St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich.  "In
the centre of the circle stood the celebrated pitcher, capable of holding
seventeen quarts, which was moulded by John Dearsley in the year 1749.
This the churchwardens (Mr. W. Butcher and Mr. Robert Fitch) liberally
filled with punch."



1846.


JANUARY.


6.--The West Norfolk Agricultural Protective Association held a meeting
at the Town Hall, King's Lynn, under the presidency of Lord Hastings, "to
preserve the Corn Laws from further violation."  A similar meeting was
held at North Walsham on the 8th.  On January 20th a great meeting took
place at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, at which addresses were delivered by
Mr. Cobden and Col. Thompson in favour of the repeal of the Corn Laws,
and a resolution, moved by Mr. Geary, and seconded by Col. Angerstein,
"that the Corn Laws and all other laws designed to restrict trade under
pretence of protecting particular classes are unjust in principle and
injurious in operation, and ought to be forthwith abolished," was carried
by a large majority, in face of an amendment proposed by Mr. Wodehouse,
M.P., and supported by Lord Hastings, Mr. Hamond of Westacre, and other
prominent Protectionists.  "Reporters from all the London daily papers
attended the meeting, and the proprietors engaged special trains to carry
back the report of the proceedings.  The first special left Norwich
Station at 8.45 p.m., and reached Shoreditch at 12.40 a.m.; the second
left at 10.29 p.m. and reached London at 2.38 a.m.  At half-past two p.m.
on Wednesday (the 21st) we received the 'Times' containing the speeches
to the extent of rather more than four columns."

7.--Died at Malta, aged 77, the Right Hon. John Hookham Frere, of Roydon
Hall, eldest son of Mr. John Frere, formerly member for Norwich.  Mr.
Hookham Frere was educated at Eton, where he had Canning as a school
companion.  When very young he evinced a love for verse, and made, when
only an Eton school boy, his clever translation of the Anglo-Saxon War
Song on the victory of Athelstan, written when the Rowley controversy was
at its height.  George Ellis gave it a place in his historical essay
before his "Specimens of the Poets," and Scott invariably spoke of it as
something more than a mere curiosity.  Another of Mr. Frere's works was a
"prospectus and specimen" of his "Intended National Work by William and
Robert Whistlecraft of Stowmarket in Suffolk, Hemp and Collar Makers,
intended to comprise the most interesting particulars relating to King
Arthur and his Round Table"--the precursor and original of Byron's
"Beppo" and "Don Juan."  "I have written," says Byron, "a poem of 84
octave stanzas, in or after the excellent manner of Mr. Whistlecraft,
whom I take to be Mr. Frere."

17.*--"All the coaches between Norwich and London have ceased to run, the
last being the mail through Bury St. Edmund's, which was discontinued on
the 6th inst.  Six or seven coaches direct to London from Norfolk have
been discontinued, and about 700 horses thrown off the road.  There are,
however, about 30 coaches constantly running from various towns to the
principal stations between Yarmouth and London.  There are many
omnibuses, cabs, and flys.  The railway has very much increased the
number of horse conveyances to and from all the towns along the line.  In
fact, horses are dearer than ever they were and more in demand, and the
consumption of oats is not likely to be diminished, but rather
increased."  The adverse effects of the railway were shown in the
following paragraph, published on April 25th: "During the droving season
last year 9,300 beasts were housed at the Bird-in-Hand public-house,
Tasburgh, and the landlord purchased for their consumption, and for
horses, &c., 50 tons of hay; but so great is the diminution of the
traffic occasioned by the Norfolk Railway, that during the present season
only twelve beasts have been taken in, and the landlord has had occasion
for only eight and a half hundredweight of hay."

21.--The Norwich School of Design was opened by Sir J. P. Boileau, Bart.

31.*--"By order of the Mayor and magistrates of Norwich, the shop-keepers
have had notice that no goods are to be exposed or sold after ten o'clock
on Sunday morning, and bakers are not to sell or bake goods after
half-past one o'clock in the afternoon."  Several tradesmen were
afterwards charged before the magistrates for contravention of the order.


FEBRUARY.


2.--A large sea-borne vessel, heavily laden with coal, and between 60 and
70 tons burden, was brought up to the head of the navigation at Norwich,
the first vessel of the kind that had ever got beyond Foundry Bridge.  It
was a Dutch-built craft, drawing only two feet of water, and was the
property of Messrs. Bullard and Watts, St. Michael-at-Coslany Bridge.

6.--Mr. D. N. Fisher gave the first of three subscription concerts at the
Assembly Rooms, Norwich.  The _artistes_ included Mdlle. Schloss, Madame
and Signor F. Lablache, Mr. W. L. Phillips (principal violoncello), Mr.
D. N. Fisher (leader), Mr. William Sterndale Bennett (director), and Mr.
James Harcourt (director of rehearsals).  "The musical world of Norwich
owe a debt of gratitude to Mr. Fisher for introducing to them Mr. William
Sterndale Bennett.  As a pianist, Mr. Bennett, without the extravagance
and with less fire and brilliance than Liszt, has all the expression and
musical enthusiasm of that performer."


MARCH.


27.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Mr. Justice Maule, Samuel Yarham was
indicted for the murder of Harriet Candler, at Yarmouth, on November
18th, 1844.  The prisoner, who at the Spring Assizes in 1845 turned
Queen's evidence against three other men (Hall, Mapes, and Royal) charged
with the murder, had made certain admissions which led to his
apprehension at Gloucester, where he had gone to work.  The jury found
him guilty, and he was sentenced to death.  The execution took place on
the Castle Hill, Norwich, on April 11th (Tombland Fair-day), in the
presence of 30,000 spectators.  "Eight hundred persons came from
Wymondham in one train; it was found necessary to use bullock-trucks to
convey the people, there not being a sufficient number of regular
carriages."  The fancy fair (the Sick Poor Repository) and all business
in the city was suspended during the morning.  "After the execution,
gongs, drums, and other instruments commenced their uproar, mountebanks
and clowns their antics, the vendors of wares and exhibitors of prodigies
their cries, while the whirligigs and ups-and-downs were soon in full
swing.  The public-houses round the Hill were crowded, and hundreds
finished the day in riot and intoxication.  Royal and Hall were on the
Hill during the execution, and got jostled by the crowd.  They were
turned out of the Golden Ball public-house and other houses where they
presented themselves."  Owing to the scandalous character of the
proceedings, a public meeting was held at St. Andrew's Hall on April
17th, under the presidency of the Mayor, when it was decided to petition
Parliament for the abolition of capital punishment.


APRIL.


1.--The first general meeting of the Norfolk and Norwich Archaeological
Society was held at the Norfolk and Norwich Museum, under the presidency
of the Lord Bishop of Norwich.

8.--Died at his residence at Lakenham, aged 81, Mr. Thomas Thurtell,
formerly an Alderman of Norwich, who served the office of Sheriff in
1815, and of Mayor in 1828.  "He was universally esteemed as an honest
and upright man."  (_See_ April 30th.)

11.--George Clarke, a Norwich pedestrian, commenced a walk of 1,500 miles
in 1,000 successive hours, "a mile and a half at the beginning of each
hour," at the West End Retreat Gardens, Norwich.  (The result was not
recorded.)

16.--The Rev. R. F. Elwin, of Norwich, was presented with a silver coffee
service, in recognition of "his promotion of the objects of the Norfolk
and Norwich Musical Festival from its institution, in 1824."

18.--The 7th Hussars left Norwich for Ipswich, where they joined
headquarters and marched for Hounslow.  They were succeeded by the 6th
Dragoon Guards (Carabineers), with headquarters and staff.  "This
regiment received its _nom de guerre_ from being the first corps which
carried the modern carbine."

20.--The Norwich Board of Health was established as a permanent
institution at a meeting held at the Guildhall.  Among its objects was
the encouragement of vaccination amongst the poor.  The Bishop of Norwich
was elected president, and the Mayor vice-president.

21.--Many hundreds of persons attended a steeplechase meeting at East
Dereham.  "The course from the Common was marked out by flags describing
a circle round the country, over Mr. Greenacre's piece, across Mr.
Neale's land, and round to the Common again, making a distance of three
and a half miles in two rounds."

--The first stone of the Cromer sea-wall was laid by the vicar, the Rev.
W. Sharp, in the presence of the Earl and Countess of Carnarvon and Lord
Porchester.  The contractors were Messrs. Wright and Cattermole, of
Norwich, and the engineer Mr. J. Wright, of Westminster.  On the same day
the first pile of the new jetty was driven.  The works were opened amid
much festivity on August 7th.

23.--The North Cove Hall estates were sold at the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich,
by Mr. Simpson, for 36,960 pounds.

29.--At a meeting of "The Friends of Permanent and Universal Peace," held
at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, under the presidency of Mr. J. J. Gurney,
it was resolved: "That in consideration of the points now at issue
between this country and the United States of America, involving, as they
do, the question of war or peace, an address be presented to the
magistrates and to the ministers of the several denominations of the city
of Norwich in Connecticut, and generally to the people of the United
States, asking them to use their endeavours to avert war."

30.--At the Norwich Police Court, Mr. George Thurtell, horticulturist,
was charged with assaulting a Mr. Riches, of St. George Colegate.  Mr.
Riches was the Norwich correspondent of the "Daily News," and he had sent
to that journal a notice of Mr. Thomas Thurtell's death "and a private
communication respecting one of Mr. Thurtell's sons."  Mr. George
Thurtell was greatly incensed on seeing the paragraph, more particularly
as his father was not dead at the time, although he had been ill for some
weeks, and meeting the complainant in the Market Place, he severely
chastised him with a whip.  The Bench, who considered the paragraph
highly improper, imposed upon the defendant the nominal fine of one
shilling.  (_See_ January 5th, 1848.)


MAY.


8.--The Norfolk Yeomanry Cavalry commenced eight days' permanent duty at
Cromer.

9.*--"During the last week as many as 18 seaborne vessels, _via_
Lowestoft, many of them of considerable burden, have been lying at
Foundry Bridge, Norwich, laden with coke, coals, and other materials, for
delivery at the railway station.  This proves how excellent and how
practical was the plan of our late fellow-citizen, Mr. Crisp Brown, and
must cause universal regret that it then failed."

18.--An inquest was opened at Happisburgh by Mr. Pilgrim, one of the
County Coroners, upon the bodies of Jonathan Balls, his wife, and four
grandchildren, who were believed to have been poisoned.  The bodies had
been exhumed, and were placed in a tent erected in the churchyard; peace
officers were sworn to prevent the incensed villagers from rushing into
the tent.  Several other bodies were disinterred, and in nearly every
instance traces of arsenic were found.  At the adjourned inquiry some
curious facts were elicited.  Suspicion pointed to Balls as having
destroyed his wife and grandchildren, and then poisoned himself.  His
conduct years previously had been suspicious, children having died
suddenly while at his house.  What number of persons had been thus
destroyed it was impossible to ascertain.  The jury found that, in the
majority of the cases, death resulted from the effects of poison, but how
it was administered there was no evidence to show.

26.--The bells of St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich, were rung on the reception
of the news of the birth, on the previous day, of a Princess (Princess
Helena Augusta Victoria).

31.--Died at Kimberley Hall, in his 76th year, the Right Hon. John Baron
Wodehouse.  He was born January 11th, 1771, and married November 18th,
1796, Charlotte Laura, only child and heiress of Mr. John Norris, of
Witton Park.  He succeeded to the peerage on the death of his father in
1834.  He was made Lord Lieutenant of the county and Vice-Admiral of the
coast in the room of Lord Suffield in 1821, and he had also served as
Colonel of the East Norfolk Militia, and was Steward of Norwich
Cathedral.  His lordship was succeeded in his title and estates by his
grandson, John Gurdon Wodehouse, son of Henry Wodehouse and of Anne, only
daughter of Mr. T. T. Gurdon.  The deceased nobleman was a staunch
Conservative.  "He was of commanding appearance, both in personal figure
and dignity of deportment.  During the contest for the representation of
Norfolk in 1806 it was remarked with perfect truth that three finer men
or more perfect gentlemen than Mr. Windham, Mr. Coke, and Col. Wodehouse
never presented themselves together as candidates for the electoral
suffrages of a great county."


JUNE.


5.--A fire occurred at St. James's Factory, Norwich.  Upwards of one
thousand persons were, in consequence, thrown out of employment.

25.--The first meeting of a new archery society, known as the West
Norfolk Bowmen, of which Sir William B. ffolkes was "Prime Warden," and
Lady ffolkes "Lady Patroness," was held at Reffley Wood, near King's
Lynn.

27.--The first excursion train from London arrived at Norwich.  It
conveyed 800 passengers, who left Shoreditch at one p.m., and reached
Norwich at eight p.m.  The first excursion train from Yarmouth to London
was run on June 29th.  "There were 1,500 persons when it left Trowse
Station at a quarter to nine, in 37 carriages.  The passengers had
increased to 2,000, and the carriages to 52, before it reached London, at
5.15 p.m."  The return fare was 7s. 6d.  On June 30th 6,000 passengers
were conveyed by two special cheap trains to Yarmouth and back.  Hundreds
of Nonconformist Sunday School children were taken at threepence a head,
and the return fare for ordinary passengers was one shilling.  Ten
thousand persons assembled at Thorpe Station to witness the return of the
excursionists.


JULY.


3.--A cricket match was played on the Norwich Ground, between eleven
resident members of the Norwich Club and the Messrs. Colman (eleven
brothers).  In the first innings the club headed their opponents by five
runs only, and in the second innings had 50 runs to get.  At eight
o'clock, when the wickets were drawn, they had obtained 22 runs for four
wickets.  Scores: The Messrs. Colman, 87-54; the Club, 92-22.  Game
unfinished.  The following were the Colmans:--Samuel, Joseph, William,
Barnard, Thomas, Jeremiah, Henry, Edward, James, Robert, and John.

4.--The great heat on this day so affected the iron Swing Bridge at
Trowse as to prevent its being opened for the accommodation of the river
traffic.  At the magisterial proceedings which followed, it was urged in
defence that the heat caused the ironwork to expand.

9.--The first direct communication from Norwich to London was made
through the medium of the electric telegraph.

--An experimental trip from London to Rotterdam was made by the railway
company, _via_ Norwich and Yarmouth.  The railway journey was performed
in 3 hrs. 35 mins. 15 secs., and was more successful than the trip by the
steamer known as the Norfolk.  On the return voyage the crew were under
the influence of drink, bad weather was experienced, and the vessel got
out of her course.  The boiler of the engine of the return train to
London burst when a mile and a half from Ely, and the excursionists
alighted from the carriages and walked to that city.  The Norfolk
afterwards plied regularly between Yarmouth and Rotterdam.

12.--Died, Charlotte Elizabeth, wife of Mr. Lewis Tonna and only daughter
of the Rev. Michael Browne, Minor Canon of Norwich Cathedral.  She edited
"The Christian Ladies' Magazine," and was the author of "Letters from
Ireland," and of many religious works.

20.--Norwich Theatre was opened, under the management of Mr. Davenport,
who had become lessee of the circuit, in place of Mr. Abington.  He
announced that "he would be able to avail himself of the occasional
services of his daughter, the eminent actress."  The company included Mr.
L. Melville, Mr. Henry Loraine, Mr. Cooper, Mr. Cranfield, and Mr. J.
Clarence.  It was said to be better than Mr. Abington's company, but
inferior to that of Mr. George Smith.

27.--A match between the Norfolk Cricket Club and Marylebone commenced at
Lord's, and finished on the 28th.  Marylebone, 117-122; Norfolk, 119-32.
The return match was played at Swaffham on August 10th, 11th, and 12th.
Marylebone, 52-149; Norfolk, 86-82.

28.--Died, aged 49, Mr. John Hill, nearly 20 years chorus-master of the
Norfolk and Norwich Musical Festival.

--Died at Bath, aged 58, Lieut.-Col. Richard Brunton, youngest son of Mr.
John Brunton, manager of Norwich Theatre, and brother of the Dowager
Countess Craven.  He entered the Army young, and went through the
Peninsula War.  He was several times wounded, and had his lip shot away.
"He was in the same battle in which several Norwich men were wounded in
the leg, one of whom was Mr. R. Blake.  He was also wounded at Waterloo,
in defending the baggage from an attack by the enemy.  He joined his
regiment (the 13th Light Dragoons) in India in 1819, and brought it home,
having the command of it, about five or six years since.  Whilst lying in
Norwich with the regiment, in 1841 and 1842, he was universally beloved
by both officers and men."  Col. Brunton married the widow of Col.
Wallace, but left no family.


AUGUST.


1.--The first consignment of foreign beasts were sold on Norwich Hill by
Mr. Stephen Fromow.  Dutch bullocks made 13 pounds 10s. each, and Dutch
lambs from 9s. to 20s. each.  "No doubt a regular trade will be
ultimately established here in foreign stock, but whether to the
advantage of any party except the foreign importer time must show."

4.--Lord George Bentinck, M.P., was entertained at dinner at Lynn by "the
friends of agricultural protection, as a testimony of their esteem for
the public integrity and perseverance displayed by him in the House of
Commons during the recent discussion on the Corn Law Importation Bill."
The Earl of Orford, High Steward of Lynn, presided, and one of the
principal speakers was Mr. Disraeli, M.P., who had a most enthusiastic
reception.

19.--The Provincial Medical and Surgical Association held its anniversary
meeting at Norwich.  Mr. J. G. Crosse was President for the year.

--Died at Ormesby, Capt. Richard Glasspoole.  He was President of the
Norfolk and Norwich Museum in 1844-45, and a large contributor to the
zoological department of that institution.

26.--Died at Norwich Castle, in his 90th year, Mr. William Cole, formerly
an attorney at Loddon.  "He was committed to prison for debt in January,
1830, and remained there till the time of his death, never having been
out of the walls of the prison 16 years and 8 months."


SEPTEMBER.


2.--Burgh Castle, the ancient _Garianonum_, was offered for sale by
auction at the Bear Hotel, Yarmouth, by Mr. Pettingill, and was purchased
for 1,500 pounds by Sir John P. Boileau, Bart., President of the Norfolk
and Norwich Archaeological Society.


OCTOBER.


17.--A meeting of tenant-farmers was held at the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich,
presided over by Mr. Leamon, of Whitwell.  After addresses by a
deputation from the "Total Repeal Malt Tax Association," a committee was
appointed to form a district branch of the society in Norfolk.

26.--The railways from Lynn to Downham and from Lynn to Narborough were
opened on this date.


NOVEMBER.


9.--Mr. Jeremiah Colman was elected Mayor, and Mr. Charles Winter
appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

13.--The London markets were, for the first time, "expressed by electric
telegraph" in the NORFOLK CHRONICLE.  Discussing the possibilities of
"this wonderful medium of communication," that journal observed: "A
division in the House of Commons after any important debate may be
communicated at all stations from London to Yarmouth in a few minutes."

16.--The first recorded canary show in Norwich was held on this date, at
the Greyhound Inn, Ber Street, when 300 specimens belonging to a canary
club were exhibited.

24.--A trout, weighing 9.5 lbs., was captured in a net near the New
Mills, Norwich.

27.--The Norwich Corporation delegated their powers to the Watch
Committee "to appoint a fire brigade of six men, whose business it will
be to attend all fires in Norwich with the Corporation engine, which is
to be managed by the brigade exclusively.  The men in the daytime are to
act as common policemen, and to sleep near the station house, where the
engine is kept, each night, that they may be ready in case of alarm."


DECEMBER.


5.*--"The directors of the Norfolk and Eastern Counties Railway, with the
view of giving the poorer classes greater facilities, have started a
fourth class.  The return fare to London is 7s. 6d."

7.--The Wymondham and Dereham Railway was opened for goods traffic.  The
Bill for the construction of this railway, which was applied for by the
Norfolk Company, was strenuously opposed by Norwich traders, who
considered that a direct line to Dereham would be to their greater
advantage.  The Act authorised the Company to make an extension of 22.5
miles from Dereham to Wells, with a branch line of 6.5 miles to Blakeney,
making the total from Wymondham 40.5 miles.  Messrs. Grissel and Peto
were the general contractors, and the electric telegraph was established
under the superintendence of the Rev. A. Bath Power.  (_See_ February
15th, 1847.)

18.--Winter set in with great severity.  The Dereham, Swaffham, and Lynn
coach was unable to leave Norwich, owing to the great depth of the snow.

20.--A fine specimen of the black grouse was shot at Swanton.

--A riot occurred at Pulham St. Mary Workhouse.  The paupers made a
preconcerted attack upon the bread store, and were with difficulty driven
back by the officials.  Thirteen of the ringleaders were committed to
Norwich Castle for terms ranging from seven days to two months'
imprisonment.  (_See_ January 5th, 1847.)

26.--Norwich Theatre opened for the Christmas season with the play of
"George Barnwell" and the pantomime "Fortunio."  Mr. Davenport, "in
compliance with public feeling," reduced the prices of admission, which
had been raised on his taking over the management.

--Many of the roads in the country were stated to be "half a yard deep in
mud," and almost impassable.  "Heavy goods in large quantities have
lately been sent from Norwich to London and from thence to Ipswich by
rail, 196 miles, instead of the direct route of 40 miles by road, the
rail conveyance being cheaper and quicker.  It would be a great advantage
in this and other counties if a general Act were passed for widening and
levelling the turnpike roads and for laying down tramways on which
carriages could be drawn by horses or by engines of small power to the
principal railway.  Unless some measure of this sort be carried out, the
common roads will soon be of little use, and not worth keeping in
repair."



1847.


JANUARY.


1.--A new form of entertainment was introduced at this date--"Ethiopian
minstrelsy," the precursor of the Christy minstrels.  The troupe appeared
at Norwich Theatre.  "The band consists of five harmonists, with black
faces and white eyes, black coats and white cuffs, black trousers and
white waistcoats, black stocks and white collars.  The instruments are a
violin, two 'banjoes' (instruments that look like guitars run to seed), a
tambourine, and 'bones' (a species of castanet)."

4.--Died at Earlham, in his 59th year, Mr. Joseph John Gurney.  He was a
son of John Gurney, of Earlham, and a grandson of John Gurney who died in
1770, and had been "the connecting link by which the hand-spun yarn of
the South of Ireland was brought to add its stores to the wants of our
artizans."  Mr. J. J. Gurney received his early education under the Rev.
M. Browne, of Hingham; he then went to the Academical Institution at
Oxford.  He was a great traveller.  Several times he visited the West
Indies, travelled twice on the Continent, made a tour in Scotland, in
company with Mr. Hoare, for the purpose of inspecting the prisons, and,
accompanied by Mrs. Fry, he visited Ireland in the spring of 1827, in
order to personally investigate the condition of the prisons and the
charitable institutions of that country.  On July 8th, 1837, he embarked
at Liverpool for Philadelphia on a Gospel mission to parts of North
America and the West Indies.  Of this tour he gave an interesting account
in "Familiar Letters to Amelia Opie"; his "Winter in the West Indies" is
described in "Familiar Letters to Henry Clay of Kentucky."  He was three
times married; his first wife was a daughter of Mr. J. Birkbeck, of Lynn,
his second a Wiltshire lady, and his third an American lady.  Mr. Gurney
was the author of several works in addition to those above-mentioned, and
was one of the greatest philanthropists of his day.  Memorial services
were held at many places of worship in Norwich on the Sunday following
his death, and on the day of the funeral (January 12th) business in the
city was suspended.  The interment took place at the Gildencroft, when
the rites peculiar to the Society of Friends were performed.

5.--Serious acts of insubordination were committed by the inmates of
Swainsthorpe Workhouse, "on the ground that they wanted more victuals."
Damage was done to the windows to the amount of 30 pounds.

14.--The use of anaesthetics--"ethereal fumes "--was introduced at the
Norfolk and Norwich Hospital by Dr. Hull, in the extraction of teeth.
(_See_ December 30th, 1847.)

23.--At a meeting held at the Swan Inn, Norwich, the East Norfolk and
West Norfolk Agricultural Societies were amalgamated under the title of
the Norfolk Agricultural Society.  The first general meeting of the
newly-formed society was held on the same day, when Lord Hastings was
elected President.  The first show took place on the Cricket Ground,
Norwich, on June 18th, and for several years the exhibitions were held
alternately in the city and at Swaffham.

27.--Died, aged 67, Mr. George Fisher, formerly of the Norfolk and
Suffolk Company of Comedians.

31.--Died, in his 93rd year, the Rev. John Oldershaw, Archdeacon of
Norfolk.  He was born at Leicester, where his father practised as a
surgeon, and was educated at Oakham Grammar School and at Emanuel
College, Cambridge, where he proceeded B.A. in 1776, and obtained the
distinguished honour of senior wrangler of his year.  About this time he
became private tutor to Charles Manners Sutton, who was afterwards Bishop
of Norwich and Archbishop of Canterbury.  He was elected a Fellow and
public tutor of his College; when Sutton became Bishop of Norwich he
appointed him his examining chaplain.  Mr. Oldershaw married Anne,
daughter of Sir John Hynde Cotton, Bart., of Maddingley, Cambridgeshire,
and took up his residence at Harpley, as curate.  He was presented in
1797 to the Archdeaconry of Norfolk, and was soon after nominated to the
rectory of Redenhall-with-Harleston.  Archdeacon Oldershaw was for many
years one of the most active magistrates in the county.


FEBRUARY.


5.--At a meeting held at the Guildhall, Norwich, presided over by the
Mayor, it was decided to open a public subscription for the relief of the
distress among the Irish peasantry, consequent upon the failure of the
potato crop.  For the same object collections were made in the places of
worship in city and county.

6.--The warehouse in Rose Lane, Norwich, belonging to Mr. Kitten was
burnt down, and its contents, consisting of barrels of grease, resin, and
other inflammable materials, destroyed.  Another serious fire occurred on
the same premises on May 20th.

15.--The opening of the Wymondham and Dereham Railway for passenger
traffic was celebrated with great festivities.  Mr. Gidney, of Dereham,
one of the principal promoters of the line, entertained a large company
at luncheon at the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, and in the evening a dinner
took place at the King's Arms Hotel, Dereham, in which town the day was
observed as a general holiday.  "Along the road from the station," it was
stated, "many new and handsome-looking houses have been built, far
superior to any modern houses in Norwich."

17.--Died at his residence in the Cathedral Precincts, Norwich, the Rev.
Canon Edward South Thurlow, rector of Houghton le Spring, Durham.  He was
appointed Prebendary of Norwich in 1788.

25.--The Mayor of Norwich (Mr. Jeremiah Colman) turned the first sod on
the Norwich extension of the Ipswich and Bury Railway.  The ceremony took
place on Mr. Cyrus Gillett's farm in the parish of Markshall.  Several
gentlemen filled barrows with earth, which other gentlemen, including the
Sheriff (Mr. Charles Winter) wheeled away--a proceeding which elicited
from Mr. Willett the remark that "if they went on at that rate they would
leave little work for the navvies to do."  The company then assembled for
luncheon, under the presidency of Mr. A. Ogilvie, and many congratulatory
speeches were made.  (_See_ November 7th, 1849.)

28.--The shop of Mr. Cooper, silversmith and jeweller, London Street,
Norwich, was broken into and goods of the total value of 2,000 pounds
stolen.


MARCH.


4.--Died at his residence, in St. Giles', Norwich, Dr. Edward Lubbock,
aged 43.  He was the younger son of Dr. Richard Lubbock, and was educated
at the Free Grammar School, under Valpy.  He commenced his medical
studies under Dr. Skrimshire at Peterborough, became a student at Guy's
Hospital, and afterwards proceeded to Edinburgh University, where he took
his degree as M.D.  His devotion to the study of anatomy and physiology
led him, conjointly with Mr. Nichols, to establish in Norwich, about
1830, a school for dissection.  He was one of the physicians of the
Norfolk and Norwich Hospital and of the Bethel.

10.--A public meeting, presided over by the Mayor, was held at St.
Andrew's Hall, Norwich, "to oppose the oppressive operation of the
present Law of Settlement upon the industrious poor."  Petitions were
presented to Parliament praying for the abolition of the system, and
demanding that the poor should be relieved out of a national fund.

15.--Died, in his 92nd year, the Rev. Stephen Allen, for 56 years
minister of St Margaret's, Lynn.  "In early life Mr. Allen was a pupil of
Archdeacon Paley, and by his mother's marriage with the celebrated Dr.
Burney he enjoyed frequent opportunities of mixing in that brilliant
circle of which Madame D'Arblay was at once the life and the ornament."

24.--A public fast and humiliation were observed in Norwich.

30.--An inquest was held at Tibenham, by Mr. Pilgrim, one of the County
Coroners, on the bodies of Mrs. Pearson and Mrs. Everett, the wives of
farmers living in that parish.  Several deaths had occurred under
mysterious circumstances, and in these two cases _post-mortem_
examinations revealed the fact that death was due to arsenical poisoning.
The inquiry was several times adjourned, and on May 13th the jury
returned a verdict to the effect that the women died from poison wilfully
administered by some person or persons unknown.


APRIL.


3.--The new road from the bottom of Long John's Hill to Lakenham Mills,
with the bridges and viaduct beyond the mills, was completed by the
contractors, Messrs. Watson, Wright, and Cattermoul, from plans prepared
by Mr. J. Brown.

17.--A brig of 150 tons, named the Countess of Leicester, and intended
for the southern trade, was launched from Mr. Tyrell's shipyard, at
Wells-next-the-Sea.  She was classed A 1 for twelve years, and was the
finest ship ever launched at Wells.

22.--The new County Court, for the recovery of small debts, was held for
the first time, at the Guildhall, Norwich, before Mr. T. J. Birch, the
Judge.  In consequence of the jurisdiction of this Court, the old Court
of Conscience was abolished.

30.--St. Mark's Schools, Lakenham, erected from designs by Mr. J. Brown,
were opened.


MAY.


1.--The remains of the Hon. Isabella Stafford Jerningham, who died at
Genoa on January 1st, were interred in the family vault beneath the altar
in the chapel at Costessey Hall.  At the same time was interred the body
of the Hon. Frances Stafford Jerningham, who died at Paris in May, 1838.
It was placed by the side of the remains of her twin sister, the Hon.
Georgiana Stafford Jerningham, who died at Leamington in 1841.

3.--Mr. Davenport, lessee of the Norwich Theatre, was fined by the
magistrates in a nominal sum for assaulting a man who was selling tickets
outside the Theatre under the regular prices of admission.  The sale took
place upon what was known as a "ticket night."  Mr. Davenport alleged
that by this system, which was allowed in no other town, the former
manager, Mr. Smith, had lost in twenty years 6,000 pounds from the
treasury of the circuit.

15.--The Norfolk Yeomanry Cavalry commenced its annual training at
Wells-next-the-Sea.  The drills took place in Holkham Park, where the
regiment was hospitably entertained by the Earl of Leicester.


JUNE.


11.--The Norwich Small Tenements Bill was referred to a Committee of the
House of Commons.  On the 12th the Committee settled the clauses
determining that the owners of cottages of the annual value of 6 pounds
and under should be rated at one-third of the yearly value or rent.

28.--Mr. Henry Russell, "from America," gave his entertainment at the
Concert Room, Swan Inn, Norwich.  The programme included most of the
favourite songs of the popular composer.  The performance was repeated on
the 29th.  Mr. Russell made a return visit to Norwich, and appeared at
the Theatre on September 6th and 8th.


JULY.


1.--The railway from Reedham to Lowestoft was opened.

3.--The Norwich Chamber of Commerce was announced to be "in full
activity."  It was formed for the purpose of associating bankers,
merchants, and other persons interested in the trade and commerce of the
city, "so as to enable them to promote such objects as may be best
calculated to benefit and protect commercial interests, and to further
the carrying out or attainment of such measures as the exertions of
individuals may be less adequate to accomplish."

5.--Feargus O'Connor, the leader of the Chartists, addressed a large
meeting held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich.

19.--Mr. and Mrs. Keeley commenced a week's engagement at Norwich
Theatre.

26.--Madame Celeste appeared at Norwich Theatre as Madeline ("St. Mary's
Eve") and Julien ("The Cabin Boy").

28.--The Marquis of Douro, Mr. Samuel Morton Peto, and Mr. John Humphries
Parry were nominated candidates for the representation of Norwich.  A
poll was demanded, and the election took place on the 29th.  The poll was
declared on the 30th, as follows:--Peto, 2,448; Douro, 1,727; Parry,
1,572.  The chairing of the successful candidates took place on August
2nd.

--Thetford Election: The Right Hon. W. B. Baring and the Earl of Euston
were returned unopposed.

29.--Yarmouth Election: Lord Arthur Lennox, 834; Mr. Octavius Edward
Coope, 813; Mr. Charles Edmund Rumbold, 729; Mr. Francis Henry Goldsmid,
698.  The two first-named were returned.  (_See_ February 7th, 1848.)

--The Archaeological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland commenced its
annual meeting at Norwich.  The proceedings concluded on August 5th.

30.--Lynn Election: Lord George Bentinck and Lord Jocelyn were returned
unopposed.


AUGUST.


3.--East Norfolk Election: Mr. Edmond Wodehouse and Mr. Henry Negus
Burroughes were returned unopposed.

6.--Mary Ann Havers, of Norwich, a girl in humble life, who possessed
remarkable musical ability, died on this date.  She was educated at a
school supported by private subscription, where singing according to the
Norwich Sol-fa system was taught, and she became one of the best
organizers of village choirs ever sent out of the city.  Before she was
fifteen years old she went to Southampton to give instruction; thence she
was invited to Salisbury, and met with successive engagements in
Dorsetshire, the Isle of Wight, Staffordshire, Kent, and Warwickshire.

9.--The "London Gazette" announced that the Queen had granted to Robert
Blake, of Swafield, her Royal license and authority, in compliance with a
wish expressed in the will of the Rev. John Humfrey, of Wroxham, to take
the surname of Humfrey immediately after that of Blake, and to quarter
the arms of Humfrey with those of Blake.

10.--The railway extension from Narborough to Swaffham was opened.

10.--The nomination of candidates for the representation of West Norfolk
took place at Swaffham.  The Conservative procession started from Friars'
Thorns, headed by the candidates, Mr. William Bagge and Mr. H. L. S. le
Strange.  It extended two miles in length, and included 1,000 yeomen on
horseback.  The Whig procession, with the candidates, Mr. A. Hamond and
the Hon. Ed. Keppel Coke at its head, started from Swaffham Splashes, and
was in all respects as imposing as the other.  At the nomination the show
of hands was in favour of the Conservatives, and Sir William ffolkes
demanded a poll for Messrs. Hamond and Coke.  The polling took place on
the 13th and 14th.  The contest, one of the severest that had ever taken
place in the county, resulted as follows:--Bagge, 3,113; Coke, 3,052;
Hamond, 2,935; le Strange, 2,676.

17.--Mr. J. B. Wigham and Mr. J. L. Barber, members of the Norwich
Amateur Rowing Club, launched their pair-oared boat at Villequier, on the
Seine, at 2.30 p.m., and rowed to Paris, where they arrived at 9 a.m. on
August 24th.  The distance was upwards of 300 miles, and the actual time
occupied in rowing was 57 hours 25 minutes.  For more than 200 miles the
men rowed against a current which flowed at four miles an hour.
"Galignani's Messenger" described it as an "unparalleled feat."

28.--The New Adelphi Theatre, Victoria Gardens, Norwich, was opened,
after extensive alterations and improvements, under the management of Mr.
R. Gordon.  "As You Like It" was produced, with Mr. Fred. Phillips in the
part of Jacques.  Mr. Phillips, who came from the Royal Pavilion Theatre,
London, was subsequently editor of the "Norwich Argus."

30.--Mr. Farren and his son, Mr. H. Farren, appeared, the former as Sir
Anthony Absolute, and the latter as Captain Absolute, at the Theatre
Royal, Norwich.


SEPTEMBER.


11*.--"At Deopham, near Hingham, a skeleton has been found, underneath
the floor of an old barn, which was being pulled down, and it is supposed
to be the remains of Thomas Jolly, aged 20, the heir of the estate, who
was missing 52 years since, and is supposed to have been murdered.  A
piece of his dress and a small portion of his handkerchief were also
found."

22.--Mdlle. Jenny Lind, engaged by Mr. George Smith, late manager of the
Theatre, and Mr. C. F. Hall, made her first appearance at St. Andrew's
Hall, Norwich.  Mr. Gedge was responsible for the payment of her fee of
1,000 pounds, of which amount she gave 200 pounds to the charities of the
city.  Mdlle. Lind was accompanied by Madame F. Lablache, Signor Gardoni,
and Signor F. Lablache, and Mr. W. Balfe was director of the concert.
She appeared again on the 23rd and 25th.  Mdlle. Lind stayed at the
Palace as the guest of the Bishop of Norwich.

30.--Died at Bath, aged 65, Mr. Benjamin Plim Bellamy, for many years
lessee of the Assembly Rooms there.  Mr. Bellamy, some 30 years previous
to his death, was a favourite actor on the Norwich circuit.  On vacating
the stage in 1819 he took the editorship of the "Bury Herald," but in
1823 went to Bath and resumed his original profession.  He became manager
of the Theatre there in 1827, which he soon after resigned on becoming
lessee of the Assembly Rooms, and Master of the Ceremonies.


OCTOBER.


12.--Mr. George Dawson, of Birmingham, lectured at the Assembly Rooms,
Norwich, on "The Characteristics of the Age."

16.--The Catfield estates, formerly the property of Col. Cubitt,
deceased, were sold by auction at the Norfolk Hotel, Norwich, by Messrs.
Spelman and Sons, for 27,930 pounds.

--A report was presented to the Governors of the Norfolk and Norwich
Hospital, upon the result of inquiries made into certain serious
allegations by the Messrs. Dalrymple, who had asserted that, compared
with other hospitals of the same size, the utility of the Norfolk and
Norwich Hospital was in an inverse ratio to its cost of maintenance.  The
meeting was adjourned for a week, but discussion upon the statement and
report was avoided, on the understanding "that such regulations would be
framed from the two documents as would improve the management of that
noble institution."

20.--Elihu Burritt, "the learned blacksmith," of Massachusetts, U.S.,
delivered a lecture at St. Mary's chapel, Norwich, on "The Organic
Sinfulness of all War."

23.--A high tide overflowed the salt marshes at Wells-next-the-Sea and
drowned 240 ewes, the property of Mr. Hudson, of Warham.

25.--The East Anglian Railway, from Lynn to Ely, was opened.


NOVEMBER.


9.--Mr. G. L. Coleman was elected Mayor, and Mr. James Watson appointed
Sheriff of Norwich.

23.--The Queen's Speech was, for the first time, transmitted to Norwich
by electric telegraph.  "Through the politeness of the Rev. A. B. Power,
the superintendent of the electric telegraph along the Norfolk line, the
Queen's Speech was transmitted to us before 4 h. p.m.  The transmission
commenced at 2 h. 15 m. p.m., and our reporter took it down till the
transmission was finished at 3 h. 45 m."


DECEMBER.


3.--Rajah Brooke of Sarawak was entertained by his old schoolfellows of
the Free Grammar School, at a dinner held at the Royal Hotel, Norwich.
During his stay in Norfolk he visited the Earl of Leicester at Holkham,
the Earl of Albemarle at Quidenham, and Mr. H. S. Partridge at Hockham.

7.--Died in London, aged 76, Mr. William Dalrymple, "one of the most
eminent of general practitioners in chirurgery and medicine in Norwich."

24.--Died at Yarmouth, in his 81st year, Sir George Parker, K.C.B.,
Admiral of the Red.  He entered the Navy at a very early age, and served
under his uncle, Sir Peter Parker.  He took part in the capture of the
Cannanon on the Malabar coast, and was senior lieutenant of the Phoenix
at the capture of La Resolve, French frigate, and of the Crescent in her
gallant action and capture of the Rennon in 1793, previous to which he
brought to England the despatches of Admiral Cornwallis.  In 1805, when
commanding the Stately, he, in company with the Nassau, destroyed, after
a running fight of two hours, a line of battle ship of 74 guns.  He was
appointed, in 1808, to the command of the squadron in the Baltic, and on
his return to England he was appointed to the Aboukir (74), which he
commanded in the Walcheren Expedition.  In 1841 he attained the rank of
Admiral of the Red.

29.--Died at the residence of his son (the Rev. W. R. Crotch), at
Taunton, "that eminent musician," Dr. Crotch.  He was born in Norwich in
1772, and in his twenty-second year was appointed professor of music in
the University of Oxford.  In 1822 he became principal of the Royal
Academy of Music.

30.--Chloroform was, for the first time, used in a surgical operation at
the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital.  "A young woman had her leg amputated
after having inhaled the fumes from a convenient apparatus.  She became
perfectly insensible to pain, and continued so throughout the operation.
Her sensations were apparently of a very happy description, as she partly
amused herself by singing psalms in a very clear and distinct voice, and
partly by holding lively conversations with imaginary persons during the
performance of this painful operation.  The state of unconsciousness
appeared to be more rapidly induced by the use of chloroform than is
usually effected by spirits of ether.  Its exhalation also was more easy
and agreeable, and the duration of its influence longer."



1848.


JANUARY.


1.--Methwold church was re-opened after restoration.  "The centre of the
nave has been given to the poor, and the outside aisles appropriated to
the rich."

3.--Mr. Aldridge, "the African Roscius," appeared at Norwich Theatre in
the character of Othello, and afterwards as Zanga ("The Revenge"), Fabian
("The Black Doctor"), and Bertram.  He was a native of Africa, and was
described as a very intelligent actor.

5.--At the Norfolk Quarter Sessions, at Norwich, George Thurtell (47),
horticulturist, "who appeared like a dying man," pleaded guilty to
stealing various articles from the house of Mr. Farrer, of Sporle, where
he had been entertained as a guest while engaged as a landscape gardener
in laying out the grounds.  The prisoner, who was a son of Mr. Alderman
Thurtell, of Norwich, and brother of the notorious John Thurtell, the
murderer of Mr. Wear, was sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment.  He
died before the completion of his sentence (July 26th).

13.--The elephant belonging to Wombwell's Menagerie died whilst being
exhibited at Norwich.  The animal was said to be 85 years old.

19.--Mrs. Butler, "once so celebrated as Fanny Kemble," commenced an
engagement at Norwich Theatre, in the character of Mrs. Beverley.  She
appeared also as Julia ("The Hunchback") and Pauline.

28.--The Yarmouth Haven and Pier Commissioners determined to oppose at
every stage the Norwich and Yarmouth Navigation Bill, by which it was
sought to obtain powers for improving the navigation of the river Yare by
straightening, widening, and deepening the channel, so as to admit of the
passage of seaborne ships from Yarmouth to Norwich.  Application was made
in the Court of Chancery for an injunction to restrain the Corporation of
Norwich from raising funds by means of the borough rate to forward the
Bill, which went before a Committee of the House of Commons on May 2nd.
Counsel for the promoters intimated on May 5th that they did not intend
to offer further evidence in its support, whereupon the Bill was
withdrawn.


FEBRUARY.


4.--The driver of the Brandon, Fakenham, and Wells coach, benumbed with
cold, fell from the box seat unknown to the passengers, and was severely
injured.  The accident occurred at Toftrees.  "The horses proceeded at
their usual pace, turning all corners, crossing Hempton Common, up the
narrow street into Fakenham, and passing several carts and other vehicles
on the way.  They pulled up at the Crown Inn, as usual, and waited for
the porters and ostlers.  The coach stops on alternate nights at the
Crown and Lion Inns, and this was the proper night for it to stop at the
Crown."

7.--The Yarmouth election petition against the return of Lord Arthur
Lennox and Mr. Octavius E. Coope, on the ground of corrupt practices,
came before the Committee of the House of Commons.  On the 14th the
Committee found that "gross, systematic, and extensive bribery prevailed
amongst the freemen at the last and previous elections, and considered it
their duty to express to the House their unanimous opinion that the
freemen should be disfranchised, and that no writ should be issued for
the borough until legislative measures had been taken for the purpose of
such disfranchisement."  The members were unseated.  The Disfranchisement
Bill received the Royal assent on June 30th, and the names of 1,106
voters were struck off the list, leaving the constituency at 876.  On the
same day the writ was issued for the election.  Mr. C. E. Rumbold, Mr.
Joseph Sandars, and Mr. Bagshaw were nominated candidates on July 7th; a
poll was demanded, and the result was declared on the 8th, as
follows:--Sandars, 416; Rumbold, 386; Bagshaw, 300.

27.--Died at Hill's Farm, Attleborough, Mr. Theophilus Smith, aged 68.
"He was a man of considerable talent and mechanical skill.  In 1841 he
had, through the kindness of the Earl of Albemarle, an introduction to
Prince Albert at Windsor Castle, when a variety of ingenious models
invented by Mr. Smith for improving the construction of the plough were
submitted to and obtained the approbation of his Royal Highness, and a
patent was subsequently taken out for what has become well known to
agriculturists as 'Smith's Patent Albert Plough.'  Mr. Smith presented
two poems to Prince Albert, addressed, 'To the Queen' and 'To the Prince
of Wales,' and shortly after a beautiful family Bible, elegantly bound
and emblazoned with the Royal Arms, was transmitted from Windsor Castle
to Mr. Smith, with an inscription intimating that it was presented 'by
command of her Majesty.'  The Royal autograph and that of Prince Albert
were, at Mr. Smith's request, inserted."


MARCH.


4.*--"Freehold building land is now freely selling on what is called Diss
Common, for building purposes, at the rate of 700 pounds per acre, which
before the railway was barely worth the tillage."

13.--The 16th Lancers arrived at Norwich, from Brighton.  Men and horses
came by special trains, and were under the command of Lieut.-Col. Smyth,
C.B.  The regiment had just returned from India, "where it had shared in
the glorious battles of Aliwal and Sobraon."

18.--Intelligence was received at Norwich that the Queen had given birth
to a Princess (Princess Louise Caroline Alberta).  The Corporation sent a
congratulatory address.

22.--Died at Thetford, aged 107, Mrs. Catherine Brand.  "She was a pious
Roman Catholic, and her first marriage was on the day of the Coronation
of George III., to Mr. Main, by whose name, in her second widowhood, she
preferred to be called."

23.--Died at his residence in Surrey Street, Norwich, Mr. Edward Temple
Booth, aged 84.  In 1820 he was appointed Sheriff, in 1821 Alderman, and
in 1826 Mayor.  He was president of the Norwich Union Fire and Life
Insurance Societies.

30.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Mr. Baron Pollock and a special jury
was tried the action Jermy _v._ Rush.  The plaintiff, who was Recorder of
Norwich, sought to recover damages from the defendant for a breach of
covenants in respect of the lease of a farm at Ketteringham.  The jury
returned a verdict for the plaintiff on all issues--damages 420 pounds.


APRIL.


11.--Madame Anna Thillon made her appearance at Norwich Theatre as La
Catarina in Auber's opera, "Crown Diamonds."  She also took the part of
Roxalana ("The Sultana").

13.--Died at Cromer Hall, aged 73, Mr. Henry Baring.

14.--Mr. Sims Reeves made his first appearance in Norwich at a concert
given by Jullien at St. Andrew's Hall, under the management of Mr.
William Howlett.


MAY.


10.--Mr. G. V. Brooke, after an absence of several years, appeared at
Norwich Theatre for one night, in the character of Othello.

15.--Mr. Webster, of the Haymarket Theatre, commenced a three nights'
engagement at Norwich Theatre as Stanislaus ("The Roused Lion") and
Michael Bradshaw ("Old Honesty").

22.--Mr. Henry Russell, the favourite vocalist, gave his entertainment at
Norwich Theatre.

23.--The enforcement of the regulation of the Poor Law Commissioners for
the separation of married men from their wives in workhouses, gave rise
to a serious disturbance among the inmates of Norwich Workhouse.  The
rioting was resumed on June 16th.  A policeman named William Callow,
while engaged in removing the refractory paupers from the Workhouse to
the Police-station, was struck by a stone and received fatal injuries.  A
verdict of wilful murder against some person unknown was returned by the
Coroner's jury.

27.--The Norfolk Yeomanry Cavalry assembled at Fakenham for their annual
training--the last in the history of the regiment.  (_See_ May 19th,
1849.)

28.--Died at Castleacre, Ann Stanford, widow, in her 104th year.

30.--A military race-meeting was held by the 16th Lancers, on land near
the Heart's Ease Inn, Plumstead Road, Norwich.  The "Citizens' Races"
took place over the same course on the 31st.


JUNE.


26.--A masquerade and fancy dress ball took place at Norwich Theatre.
The pit was converted into a ball-room.  "The attendance was moderate and
not very select."

--The foundation-stone of the Jewish synagogue in St. Faith's Lane,
Norwich, was laid by Mr. Joel Fox.  The building was consecrated by the
Rev. Dr. N. M. Adler, Chief Rabbi, on Sept. 6th, 1849.


JULY.


13.--The Rev. C. Turner was elected perpetual curate of St. Peter
Mancroft, Norwich.

28.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Mr. Baron Parke, a libel action,
Quarles _v._ Bacon and another, was tried.  The plaintiff, a solicitor at
Fakenham, claimed damages against the defendants, proprietors of the
"Norwich Mercury," for stating in that journal he was guilty of such
conduct as to warrant his being struck off the rolls.  The jury returned
a verdict for the plaintiff--damages 40s.


AUGUST.


4.--A sculling match for 50 pounds a side took place between Mr. J. L.
Barber, of Norwich, and Mr. Knight, of Wymondham.  The distance was
fifty-five miles, namely, from Thorpe Gardens to Reedham, thence through
the New Cut and Lake Lothing to Mutford Bridge, and back to the
starting-point.  Mr. Knight started at 6.56 a.m., and Mr. Barber at 7.1
a.m.  On the return journey Mr. Barber's boat was upset during a severe
thunderstorm and squall.  Resuming, he rowed to Cantley, where he was
taken from his boat almost insensible and conveyed to the inn.  Mr.
Knight reached Thorpe Gardens at 3.39 p.m., having rowed the distance in
8 hrs. 43 mins.--1 hr. 34 mins. less than it had ever been covered
before.

9.--Died at his house at Langham, Capt. Marryat, C.B.  He was well-known
as the author of several works of fiction, founded principally on the
naval service.  He was a Fellow of the Royal Society, a magistrate and
deputy-lieutenant of the county of Norfolk, and was in his 56th year.

11.--A singular accident occurred at Mattishall.  A boy named Thomas
Ireson, ten years of age, tied himself to the tail of a cow, and the
infuriated animal kicked him to death.

24.--St. Nicholas' church, Great Yarmouth, was re-opened after
restoration.  The sermon was preached by the Bishop of Oxford.  Luncheon
was served at the Town Hall, and was attended by the Bishops of Norwich
and Oxford, Mr. Baron Alderson, M. Guizot, a former Prime Minister of
France, and by many other distinguished guests.


SEPTEMBER.


6.--The Royal Victoria and Albert steam yacht, with the Queen and Prince
Consort on board, passed off Cromer at 6.30 a.m., on her voyage to
Aberdeen.  The coastguard discharged rockets and fired from the mortars a
salute of seven rounds.

--Died, aged 73, Mr. John Palmer, of St. Mary's, Thetford.  "He had been
twenty years afflicted with rheumatic gout, and for the past sixteen
years had never left his bed but once, on which occasion he was carried
to the poll at the borough election in the summer of 1842, in the contest
between the Earl of Euston and Sir James Flower, when his vote on the
Conservative side carried the election."

7.--A two-days' cricket match, between the Marylebone Club and Ground and
the County of Norfolk (with Wisden) commenced at Swaffham.  The principal
scores for the former were made by the Hon. E. Grimstone and the Hon. F.
Ponsonby, and for the latter by Mr. Charles Wright, the Rev. F. French,
and Wisden.  Marylebone, 84-76; Norfolk, 106-56.

11.--The East Anglian Railway from Lynn and Swaffham was opened for
passenger traffic to Dereham.

--Miss Helen Faucit commenced an engagement at Norwich Theatre.  She was
supported by Mr. W. Shelley, from the Park Theatre, New York, and by Mr.
H. Farren.

--H.R.H. the Duke of Cambridge, who visited Norwich for the purpose of
attending the Triennial Musical Festival, arrived at Trowse Station,
where he was received by the Mayor (Mr. G. L. Coleman) and the Sheriff
(Mr. J. Watson), who were attended by the principal officers of the
Corporation, mounted.  "The four whifflers, in proper dress, created much
merriment by brandishing their weapons to keep a passage, but they had
not the agile grace of the old retainers of our ancient Corporation, and
the procession, though the best we have seen in Norwich since the
Municipal Reform Act passed, fell short of that imposing dignity which
graced our ancient displays of civic pomp."  His Royal Highness, who was
the guest of the Bishop of Norwich, left the city on the 15th.

12.--The Norfolk and Norwich Triennial Musical Festival commenced at St.
Andrew's Hall, with a grand evening concert, at which selections from "Il
Matrimonio Segreto" and from "Le Nozzi di Figaro" were given.  The
following were the principal items in the week's programme:--Sept. 13th,
"The Christian's Prayer" and selections from "The Creation"; evening,
"The First Walpurgis Night" and selections from "La Clemenza di Tito";
Sept. 14th, "Elijah"; evening, selection from "Fidelio," &c.; Sept. 15th,
"Davidde Penitente" and "Israel in Egypt."  In the evening a dress ball
was given, at which Jullien's band performed.  The principal vocalists at
the Festival were Madame Viardot Garcia, Madame Castellan, Mdlle. Alboni,
Miss Anne Williams, Miss Martha Williams, Mr. Sims Reeves, Mr. Lockey,
Mr. H. Phillips, Mr. H. Whitmore, and Signor Lablache.  Mr. H. Blagrove
was leader of the band, Mr. Benedict conductor, and Mr. Harcourt
organist.  The gross receipts were 5,266 pounds 4s. 2d.; the gross
expenses 4,598 pounds 10s. 7d., and the net surplus 667 pounds 13s. 9d.

21.--Lord George Bentinck, M.P., was discovered dead on a footpath at
Thoresby, about six miles from his seat at Welbeck.  The Coroner's jury
found that death was due to heart disease.  The deceased nobleman was
first elected for King's Lynn in 1828, in succession to his uncle, Lord
William Bentinck.  He had previously acted as private secretary to Mr.
Canning, a near relative by marriage.  His lordship was the recognised
leader of the Protectionist party, and as a firm supporter of the Turf
did much to reform the abuses which existed upon it in his time.  The
vacancy created by his death in the representation of Lynn was filled by
the election of the Hon. E. H. Stanley, who was returned without
opposition on December 22nd.

23.--Under the provisions of the new Tavern Act, the public-houses in
Norwich were closed at 12 p.m.  "The streets in the lower parts of the
city and all round the Market Place were crowded with persons returning
home with pots of malt liquor."  On the 25th informations were preferred
against many publicans for failing to close their houses at the
prescribed time.

28.--Died at Pulham, aged 43, Mr. R. B. Harvey, a well-known
flock-master, who did much to improve the breed of sheep in Norfolk.  He
was a frequent exhibitor at the shows of the Royal Agricultural Society
and of the local agricultural associations.


OCTOBER.


17.--The first conviction under the new Act for preventing the extension
of diseases in sheep was recorded at Norwich, when Mr. Betts, cattle
dealer, of Old Buckenham, was fined for exposing on the Castle Meadow
sheep that were suffering from sheep-pox or variola ovina.

23.--The Adelphi Theatre, Norwich, was opened under the management of Mr.
George Smith, formerly lessee of the Theatre Royal.  The company included
Mr. and Mrs. Sidney (Miss J. Trafford).

31.--St. Matthew's church, Thorpe Hamlet, Norwich, at which building
operations commenced in the second week in August, was "founded" by the
chairman and members of the committee.


NOVEMBER.


9.--Mr. Samuel Bignold was elected Mayor, and Mr. Robert Chamberlin
appointed Sheriff of Norwich.

13.--A salmon weighing 9 lbs. was captured in the river near Trowse
Bridge, Norwich.

21.--Died at Richmond, Mr. William James Achilles Abington, M.A.,
barrister-at-law, of the Middle Temple, aged 41, the only surviving son
of Mr. William Abington, of the East India House.  The deceased gentleman
was in 1845 lessee of Norwich Theatre.

28.--Madame Dulcken, pianist to the Queen, gave a grand concert at the
Assembly Rooms, Norwich.

--Mr. Isaac Jermy, Recorder of Norwich, and Mr. Jermy Jermy, his son,
were murdered at Stanfield Hall, Wymondham, by James Blomfield Rush.
Mrs. Jermy Jermy and her maid, Elizabeth Chastney, alarmed by the report
of the firearm, proceeded to the assistance of the victims, and were
severely wounded, the former in the arm and the latter in the hip, by
another shot fired by the murderer.  Rush was apprehended the same night
at his house, Potash Farm, by Police-constable Mortar, of the Norwich
city police, and conveyed to Wymondham Bridewell.  The first examination
of the prisoner took place on the 29th, before the Hon. and Rev. R.
Wilson, Mr. Cann, and Mr. Parker.  He was afterwards taken to Stanfield
Hall, where Mrs. Jermy Jermy identified him as her assailant.  Rush was
further examined at Wymondham Bridewell on the 30th.  At the adjourned
hearing on December 2nd, Emily Sandford, his housekeeper, gave evidence,
and the prisoner was committed to Norwich Castle, where the third hearing
was conducted in private on December 5th.  The final examinations took
place at the Castle on the 13th and 14th; on the latter date the
depositions were publicly read, and the prisoner was formally committed
to take his trial on the charge of wilful murder.  On the 19th he was
taken, under writ of _habeas corpus_, to Stanfield Hall, where Chastney
gave evidence in his presence.  The inquest on Mr. Jermy and Mr. Jermy
Jermy was opened by Mr. Press at the King's Head Inn, Wymondham, on
November 30th, and adjourned sittings were held on December 1st, 2nd, and
5th.  On the last-named day the Coroner issued a warrant for the
detention of Emily Sandford in Wymondham Bridewell.  The final sitting of
the Coroner's Court was held on December 19th, when the jury returned a
verdict of wilful murder against Rush.  The funeral of Mr. Jermy and his
son took place at Wymondham church, on December 5th.  (_See_ March 29th,
1849.)


DECEMBER.


22.--Mr. Prendergast, of the Norfolk Circuit, qualified as Recorder of
Norwich, in the room of Mr. Isaac Jenny, deceased.

26.--Pablo Fanque's Circus opened for the Christmas holidays at the
Victoria Gardens, Norwich.  (On September 15th, 1849, this circus
proprietor was referred to as "our fellow-citizen, Mr. Darby, _alias_
Pablo Fanque.")

--Norwich Theatre was opened for the season, under the management of Mr.
Charles Dillon.  The pieces produced were "Virginius," and the pantomime
"The Naughty Boys, Smith, Brown, Jones, and Robinson, or Harlequin and
the Great Sea Serpent."

30.--St. Mary's church, Norwich, was described as being in a most
disgraceful and dilapidated condition.  "It was re-pewed in 1827 by the
Rev. Mr. Wodehouse, and was then one of the neatest parish churches in
Norwich."



1849.


JANUARY.


22.--Mdlle. Jenny Lind, assisted by Miss Dolby, Signor Belletti, and
Signor Marras, gave an evening concert at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, in
aid of the charities of the city.  On the 23rd she sang at a morning
concert in furtherance of the same object.  The total receipts amounted
to 1,859 pounds 11s., and 1,250 pounds remained after the payment of
expenses.  The services of the famous singer were rendered quite
gratuitously.  The Mayor (Mr. Bignold) and members of the Corporation
waited upon her at the Palace, where she was staying as the guest of
Bishop Stanley, and presented to her an address expressive of the thanks
of the citizens.


FEBRUARY.


2.--Mr. Michael Beverley, of Forncett St. Mary, a popular sportsman in
South Norfolk, was killed whilst hunting with Mr. Fellowes' hounds at
Moulton.  He was in his 60th year.

4.--Many hundred persons assembled at Bacton Wood Mill, North Walsham, to
witness the baptism by immersion in the mill stream of several men and
women "who had embraced the faith of Mormonites, or Latter-day Saints."

13.--A public meeting was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, under the
presidency of the Mayor, at which resolutions were adopted in favour of a
national rate, and condemnatory of the laws of settlement and removal,
"which drove the poor to reside in large towns and unjustly limited their
field of labour."  Another resolution condemned the gross inequality in
the assessments of the various parishes in England and Wales to the
relief of the poor.  A petition was ordered to be presented to Parliament
in accordance with the terms of the resolutions.

17.--A severe outbreak of cholera was recorded at Rudham, where
twenty-four deaths had occurred up to this date.  "Extreme poverty and
dirt had much to do with this awful visitation."

27.--The agitation for the repeal of the Malt Tax was re-opened at a
meeting of the farmers of West Norfolk, held at the Market Hall, Lynn.
It was decided to petition Parliament in favour of the repeal.  Many
meetings were held with the same object in other parts of the county.

28.--Died at Leyton, aged 54, Mr. Charles Fox, engraver.  He was a son of
Robert Fox, a steward on the Costessey estate, received lessons in
drawing from Charles Hodgson, at Norwich, and was apprenticed to Mr.
Edwards, engraver, of Bungay.  "His exquisite line engravings are well
known by those who value the highest specimens of skill in that
department and by the lovers of fine English prints."


MARCH.


13.--Elihu Burritt addressed a public meeting at St. Andrew's Hall,
Norwich, in favour of the settlement of national disputes by arbitration
instead of by force of arms.

20.--The railway from Dereham to Fakenham was opened for passenger and
goods traffic.

25.--Died at the Grove, Holt, in his 64th year, Major T. A. Girling,
formerly of the 5th Fusiliers, with whom he served in the Peninsula War.
He was for some years adjutant of the Norfolk Yeomanry Cavalry.

29.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Mr. Baron Rolfe, the trial commenced
of James Blomfield Rush for the Stanfield Hall murders.  Mr. Serjeant
Byles, Mr. Prendergast, and Mr. Evans were counsel for the prosecution,
and the prisoner conducted his own defence.  The case was opened at nine
a.m., and the Court adjourned at seven p.m.  On the 30th Emily Sandford
gave evidence, and was in the witness-box nine and a half hours.  Her
examination in chief lasted two hours, and the prisoner subjected her to
seven and a half hours' cross-examination, mostly on irrelevant matters.
On the 31st the Court sat from nine a.m. to 7.30 p.m.; and the case for
the Crown was completed on Monday, April 2nd.  The prisoner commenced his
address to the jury shortly after nine o'clock on the morning of the 3rd,
and had not concluded when the Court rose at ten minutes to eight
o'clock.  "It was full of repetitions, and everything material might have
been said in a tithe of the time."  The address was resumed at nine a.m.
on April 4th, and concluded at twelve o'clock, the prisoner in the two
days having spoken nearly fourteen hours.  Mr. Serjeant Byles then
replied for the Crown.  The Judge summed up, the jury, after a few
minutes' consultation, returned a verdict of guilty, and sentence of
death was passed.  Throughout the trial the Court was densely crowded.
The jury were conveyed each night to the Maid's Head Hotel, where the
assembly-room was specially fitted up for their accommodation as a
sleeping apartment; and on Sunday, April 1st, they attended morning and
afternoon service at the Cathedral, under the escort of the county
officials.  (_See_ April 21st.)


APRIL.


2.--The garrison steeplechases of the 16th Lancers took place at
Stanninghall, near Spixworth.

21.--The execution of James Blomfield Rush, for the Stanfield Hall
murders, took place on the Castle Hill, Norwich, in the presence of an
enormous gathering of spectators.  Thousands of persons entered the city
by road--"one woman who had been confined only three weeks travelled from
the country on foot fourteen miles during the previous night, in order to
be present"--and many thousands more were brought in by the trains.
Cheap return tickets were issued from London to Norwich, and the persons
who availed themselves of the facilities were principally members of the
"swell mob."  At Attleborough station the London detectives who travelled
by the train transferred the gang to an up-train; several who evaded the
police were apprehended immediately on their arrival at Norwich and
conveyed to the Police Station, where they remained in custody until
after the execution.  The culprit was hanged at noon, by Calcraft.  "The
greatest silence prevailed, the solemn stillness being only broken by the
solitary shriek of a woman who had fainted in the crowd."


MAY.


19.--Major Loftus, commanding Prince Albert's Own Norfolk Yeomanry
Cavalry, announced to the officers, non-commissioned officers, and
privates, that the Earl of Leicester, as Lord Lieutenant, had advised the
authorities that, in consequence of local circumstances, it was expedient
to disband the regiment.  Major Loftus complained that the Lord
Lieutenant would assign "no cause for this unceremonious dismissal."  He
added: "My duty is now to give you my last word of command, which is to
obey the orders of her Majesty's Secretary of State and to desire that
you deliver up all your arms, clothing, and accoutrements to the
respective captains of troops, who are hereby directed to forward the
arms and sword belts to Cornet William Freeman, at my store-room at
Billingford.  And I have to request that your clothing, saddlery, &c., be
conveyed to Holkham Hall, when his lordship will have the opportunity of
disposing of them as he and Sir George Grey may think proper, for I shall
give myself no further trouble in the matter after the ungracious manner
in which I have been treated."

20.--A telegram was received at Norwich, announcing that the Queen had
been fired at on the previous (Saturday) evening, by an Irishman named
John Hamilton.  The National Anthem was played at the Cathedral and at
most of the parish churches.

24.--The Queen's birthday was celebrated with much rejoicing in Norwich.
The Sheriff gave a dinner at St. Andrew's Hall to the inmates of the
Workhouse and Infirmary.  The 16th Lancers paraded in the Market Place,
and the Corps of Pensioners, under Capt. Cockburn, fired a _feu de joie_.
The Mayor entertained a large party at luncheon at the Guildhall, and in
the evening gave a dinner at the Assembly Rooms.

26.--Died at Montreal, Sir Benjamin D'Urban, Commander of her Majesty's
forces in British North America.  He saw much active service during the
Peninsula War, and in 1829 became Colonel of the 51st Foot.  He was a
native of Norfolk, and related to the D'Urban Blythes of Massingham.

26.*--"One day last week a fine sturgeon, weighing 3 st. 11 lbs., and
measuring 5 ft. 9 in. in length, was caught in the river at Northwold,
twenty-eight miles from the sea."


JUNE.


5.--The Rev. R. S. Bayley, of Sheffield, the originator and promoter,
gave the first of a series of addresses on the aims and work of a new
institution in Norwich known as the People's College.  Commodious
premises were taken in St. George Colegate, where students were
instructed under competent masters.

11.--Mountjoy the pedestrian commenced the task of walking from Norwich
to Yarmouth and back twice daily for six successive days, and completed
it on the 16th.

20.--Mr. G. L. Coleman, of Norwich, was presented with a valuable piece
of plate, in recognition of his efficient discharge of the duties of the
Mayoralty in 1847-8.  The presentation was made at a dinner given at the
Norfolk Hotel, under the presidency of the Mayor (Mr. Bignold).

--The demolition of the old Guildhall (or Church Hall) at Yarmouth
commenced.  The building had been used as a National School.


JULY.


18.--The annual show of the Royal Agricultural Society of England was
opened at Norwich.  The show ground, which comprised about fifteen acres,
was on the old Heath, near Ipswich Road; the trials of implements took
place on Mr. Parker's land at Bixley.  H.R.H. the Duke of Cambridge
attended the show, and during his one night's stay in the city was the
guest of the Mayor.  The society's dinner, attended by 900 noblemen and
gentlemen, was held at St Andrew's Hall on the 19th, under the presidency
of the Earl of Chichester.  The show, which lasted two days, was visited
by 22,000 persons.

20.--"A gentleman well known as Champion of the Yare" undertook to row
100 miles in twenty-four hours.  He started at 12.35 a.m., and rowed to
Beccles Bridge, a distance of 40 miles, and returned to Carrow Bridge; he
then pulled down the river to Rockland Dyke, and back, a distance of 20
miles, finishing at 8.28 p.m., and completing the whole distance in 19
hrs. 53 mins.  He rowed the last 20 miles under three hours.

23.--Mr. Martin William ffolkes, eldest son of Sir William ffolkes,
Bart., of Hillington Hall, whilst fishing at Castle Rising, was killed by
lightning.  "His hands were not closed, and part of a cigar he had been
smoking was in his mouth."

24.--A lecture was given at St. Andrew's Hall, by Professor Isham Baggs,
of the Polytechnic Institution, London, on "The Economy and Philosophy of
the Electric Light, and its present and prospective bearing on the vested
interests of Gas Companies."  The electric light was shown by the aid of
a powerful voltaic battery.  It was described as "a light of dazzling
lustre and surpassing brilliancy, on which no eye can steadily gaze.  The
figures on the various paintings in the Hall appeared to start from the
canvas, and every living face displayed an almost supernatural brilliancy
and expression.  The gas seemed extinguished amid the new blaze of
light."

27.--Lieut. Gale, R.N., "of Cremorne celebrity," made a balloon ascent
from the Cellar Gardens, Pockthorpe, Norwich, accompanied by Mr. A. W.
Pashley, of Harleston, and Mr. Nevey.  "There was a second car or fake
bottom attached by a rope to the balloon, and when at the altitude of
about a mile this was lowered thirty or forty feet.  A rope ladder was
fixed to it from a trap door in the car, and by that the gallant aeronaut
descended into the lower car, from which he discharged shells and other
pyrotechnics."  The descent was made in a field near Coldham Hall.


AUGUST.


23.--A grand cricket match, between an eleven of All England and twenty
of Norfolk commenced on the Norwich Ground.  All England, 63-63; Norfolk,
118-11.

25.*--"Several of those new coins, the florin, have found their way to
Norwich.  It is a handsome piece of money, but we dislike the un-English
name.  We also protest against the omission of the words of the old
legend intimating that our beloved Queen reigns by 'the Grace of God,'
and that she is the defender of the faith."

--Particulars were given on this date of the marriage of the notorious
Lola Montez, "the ex-Countess of Lansfeldt," with Mr. George Trafford
Heald, a lieutenant in the Life Guards, and an owner of considerable
landed property at Freebridge Marshland and Walpole St. Peter.

28.--The Rev. John Woolley, D.C.L., was elected head master of Norwich
Free Grammar School, and on the same day the Rev. Henry Banfather, B.D.,
the former master, was, on his retirement, presented with a valuable
piece of silver plate, subscribed for by the boys and his personal
friends.


SEPTEMBER.


4.--A curious incident occurred at the Assembly Rooms, Norwich, at a
lecture given by a Mrs. Hamilton, on "A phrenological analysis of the
heads and speeches of three of the speakers at the soiree given on the
16th ult. to celebrate the opening of the People's College."  The persons
referred to were Mr. J. H. Tillett, Mr. Wheeler, and Mr. J. W. Dowson.
The lecturer, amid much disturbance, stated that Mr. Tillett had "a large
love of approbation, too little veneration, and a large portion of
self-esteem"; Mr. Wheeler had "little veneration or
philo-progenitiveness"; and Mr. Dowson's head "showed beautiful Christian
development."  Mr. Tillett rose from his seat and described the lecture
as "a mass of rhodomontade, as an imposition, as non-conclusive, and as
most of it foreign to the subject.  He denounced this lecturing on heads,
and asked what would be thought if he brought down a phrenologist to
lecture on the heads of his opponents?"

4.--A balloon ascent was made from the Cavalry Barracks, Norwich, by Mr.
Green, accompanied by Mr. Rush, of Elsenham Hall, Essex, "who was
desirous of trying some experiments with a new instrument called an
aneroid barometer invented by himself, and the first ever made on the new
principle."  The balloon descended in a field at West Newton.

6.--The death of the Right Rev. Dr. Edward Stanley, Bishop of Norwich,
occurred at Brahan Castle, near Dingwall, Ross-shire.  The body was
conveyed from Invergordon by sea by the steamer Duke of Sutherland, and
landed at Yarmouth on the 19th.  It arrived at Norwich on the same day,
and was deposited in the Palace Chapel, where it lay in state on the
20th, and was interred in the centre of the Cathedral nave on the 21st.
"Anthony Sparrow (50th Bishop), ob. 1685, was the last prelate buried in
the Cathedral."  Bishop Stanley was the second son of Sir J. T. Stanley,
of Alderley, Cheshire, and was born January 1st, 1779.  He was elected to
the vacant see of Norwich on the death of Bishop Bathurst in 1837.  "His
lordship was a Liberal in politics, but more of the Whig than the
Radical, and although too conciliatory to Dissenters, he, of late years
in particular, showed himself devoutedly attached to the Church."  He was
Clerk of the Closet to the Queen, President of the Linnean Society, and
one of the Commissioners appointed in 1848 to enquire into the state of
the British Museum.

8.--A meeting of medical practitioners was held at the Guildhall,
Norwich, to consider the best means of preventing the spread of cholera.
Rooms were hired in different parts of the city for dispensing medicines,
and special forms of prayer were used in all the churches and chapels.
November 15th, the day appointed for thanksgiving "for deliverance from
the scourge which has lately visited this land," was observed in Norwich
by the entire suspension of business.  All classes of citizens attended
the services held at the Cathedral and the parish churches.


OCTOBER.


2.--Victoria Gardens, Norwich, for so many generations the popular resort
of the citizens, were dismantled on this date, when Mr. William Wilde,
auctioneer, sold "the ranges of drinking boxes, seats and tables, the
scenery, fittings, and machinery in the theatre, the fittings, benches,
&c., in the circus and saloon, the materials of the firework house, the
porter bar, cake-room, &c."  The sale was held by order of the directors
of the Eastern Union Railway Company, who had acquired the property as
the site for their Norwich terminus.

3.--Mr. Joseph Hume, M.P., Sir Joshua Walmisley, M.P., Mr. George
Thompson, M.P., Mr. J. H. Parry, Mr. Feargus O'Connor, M.P., and other
members of the National Reform Association, addressed a large meeting
held at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, under the auspices of the local
branch of the association.  Mr. J. H. Tillett presided.

22.--Madame Sontag, Signor Calzobari, Signor Bolletti, Signor F.
Lablache, and M. Thalberg appeared at a grand concert given at St.
Andrew's Hall, Norwich.  A second performance took place on the 23rd.

--A public meeting was held at the Independent chapel, Diss, for the
purpose of hearing statements from Mr. James Everett respecting the
expulsion of himself and Messrs. Dunn and Griffith from the Wesleyan
Conference.  On the 24th a similar meeting was held at St. Andrew's Hall,
Norwich, when resolutions were passed condemnatory of the action of the
Conference and expressive of sympathy with the expelled ministers.  The
agitation was continued until June 22nd, 1850, on the 19th of which month
another meeting took place at St. Andrew's Hall, at which the Wesleyan
Reformers uttered "violent tirades against the Conference, the Missionary
Committee, and other ruling bodies of Wesleyanism."  In December, 1850, a
series of disturbances occurred at Lenwade, where the services of the
chapel were stopped and the preacher, the Rev. C. Povah, assaulted with
stones and burnt in effigy.  Magisterial proceedings at Reepham were
followed by an application in the Court of Chancery for an injunction to
restrain certain persons from interrupting Mr. Povah and other ministers
in the performance of religious worship at the Wesleyan chapel, Cawston.
The affidavits read disclosed a number of gross outrages upon the
ministers, extending over the period of six months.  Issue of the
injunction was stayed upon the defendants entering into an undertaking
not to disturb or molest the plaintiffs in the exercise of their duties.

26.--Immense quantities of fish were caught off Yarmouth.  The herring
boats had from 100,000 to 200,000 fish on board.  Cartloads of fish were
taken to Norwich and sold at the following rates:--Fresh herring, 10 for
one penny; boaters, 25 for sixpence; cod, one penny per pound; soles,
from three halfpence to twopence per pair.

30.--Died at Quidenham Hall, the Earl of Albemarle.  Born on May 14th,
1772, he married, on April 9th, 1792, the Hon. Elizabeth Southwell, four
years his junior, who became the mother of sixteen children.  Mr. T. W.
Coke, though old enough to be Lord Albemarle's father, became his
son-in-law in 1822, when he espoused Lady Anne Keppel.  His lordship
married secondly, on February 11th, 1822, Charlotte Susannah, daughter of
Sir Henry Hunloke, Bart.


NOVEMBER.


5.--Downham Market was lighted with gas for the first time.  The event
was celebrated by a dinner at the Queen's Head and by other rejoicings.

6.--The Oddfellows of the Norwich District, to the number of 700, dined
at St. Andrew's Hall, under the presidency of Mr. W. M. Kitton.

7.--The Norwich extension railway of the Eastern Union line, completing
the communication with London _via_ Ipswich, Colchester, and Chelmsford,
was opened on this date.  It was part of the plan of the Eastern Union
Company, whose Act for making the railway from Ipswich to Colchester was
obtained in 1844.  The line was commenced in 1845, and opened on June
11th, 1846.  In 1845 another Act was passed for making a railway from
Ipswich to Bury St. Edmund's, and in 1846 an Act was obtained for making
the Ipswich and Norwich extension.  In the latter year an Act was also
passed for the amalgamation of the Eastern Union and the Ipswich and Bury
Railway Companies, and by the two united the Norwich line was
constructed.  Mr. Locke was the engineer-in-chief, Mr. Bruff the resident
engineer, and Messrs. Mackenzie and Brassey the contractors.  The first
train, conveying 550 ladies and gentlemen, the guests of the directors,
started from the station ("constructed in part out of the old Pantheon"),
and proceeded to Stowmarket, where refreshments were served.  Trains from
Bury, Colchester, and Ipswich brought 600 more passengers, and the three
trains uniting ran to Norwich, where they arrived at 4.30, the band of
the 16th Lancers playing the travellers into the city.  A dinner took
place at St. Andrew's Hall, under the presidency of the Mayor (Mr.
Bignold), and the Sheriff (Mr. Chamberlin) gave a ball in the evening, at
the Assembly Rooms.  The line was opened for the conveyance of cattle and
goods on December 3rd, and of passengers on December 12th.

9.--Mr. Henry Woodcock was elected Mayor, and Mr. James Colman appointed
Sheriff of Norwich.  Mr. Bignold reminded the Council that when he took
the office of Mayor a distinct assurance was given that there was to be a
retention of the system of alternate Whig and Tory Mayors and Sheriffs.
He would not have accepted office but for that assurance.


DECEMBER.


2.--The consecration of the Rev. Dr. S. Hinds, Bishop-elect of Norwich,
took place at Lambeth Palace.  His lordship was installed at Norwich
Cathedral on January 24th, 1850.

--Intelligence was received of the death of the Queen Dowager.  The day
of the funeral, December 13th, was observed in Norwich by the partial
closing of the shops.

20.--Died at Hampstead, the Ven. Philip Jennings, Archdeacon of Norfolk,
aged 66.  He was presented to his office in 1847 by Bishop Stanley.

27.--A severe gale from the N.N.W., a heavy fall of snow, and a high tide
prevented railway communication with Yarmouth.  The line was under water
for a considerable distance.  The trains on the lines to London were
delayed by deep snowdrifts.  An omnibus was run between Norwich and
Yarmouth for the conveyance of passengers.  "The people on the road
stared with wonderment on seeing the six-in-hand drawing the ponderous
vehicle through the snow."



1850.


JANUARY.


3.--Mr. Sims Reeves took part in a performance of "the Messiah" at St.
Andrew's Hall, Norwich.  The other vocalists included Miss Poole, Miss
Kenneth, Herr Formes, and Master Mann.

10.--A sculling match from Bramerton to Whitlingham, for 10 pounds a
side, between R. Buttle, of Norwich, and Aldred, one of the crew of the
"Young Company," Yarmouth, was won easily by the former.

16.--Aylsham was for the first time lighted with gas, an event celebrated
by the ringing of the church bells, by the distribution of beer, and by a
dinner and ball at the Black Boys Hotel.  A display of fireworks ended
the festivities.

18.--Acts of disorder were committed by the female factory hands in
Norwich, owing to an alteration being made in the working hours.  They
broke with snowballs the windows in the house of Mr. Douglas, one of the
manufacturers, and waylaid him on St. Martin-at-Palace Plain.  To save
himself from being stripped naked, he took refuge in a neighbouring
office.

20.--Died at Ranworth, the Rev. T. B. Greaves, for forty years vicar of
South Lynn, and thirty-six years vicar of Wiggenhall St. Giles.  He was
the author of a volume of poems entitled, "Greaves' Wilderness."

28.--A meeting, convened by the High Sheriff (Col. Mason), on the
requisition of 3,000 signatories, was held at Swaffham, "for the purpose
of adopting means to secure the return of a Protective policy."  The
railway companies ran special trains for the convenience of persons
desirous of attending the meeting.  The High Sheriff was supported by
Lord Orford, Lord Sondes, and the members for the division.  A resolution
was adopted to the effect that the depression under which the
agricultural, commercial, and industrial classes laboured was owing
principally to legislative enactments, and nothing but a return to a
protective policy could restore the permanent prosperity of agriculture,
trade, and commerce.  It was decided to present to the Queen and to
Parliament a petition embodying these views.


FEBRUARY.


11.--A public meeting was held at the Guildhall, Norwich, to give the
citizens the opportunity of expressing their opinion upon the new Water
Works Bill.  A resolution was adopted in its favour.  On the 12th the
Town Council agreed to petition the House of Commons in opposition to the
Bill, on the ground principally that no provision was made for such a
supply of water as the inhabitants required, and that the scale of rates
was too high.  On the 19th the Corporation authorised the expenditure of
250 pounds "to defray the expense of defending the rights of the present
Water Works Company and of opposing the new Water Works Bill in
Parliament."  On March 27th Mr. David Stevenson, C.E., Edinburgh, held a
public inquiry at the Guildhall respecting the application for the new
Bill, and subsequently made a tour of inspection.  He stated that Norwich
was as badly supplied with water as any place he was ever in.  The Bill
went before the Committee of the House of Commons on May 2nd, and on the
16th was reported to the House of Lords.  It passed its third reading in
the House of Commons on June 3rd.  The Town Council, on June 12th,
appointed a committee to confer with the promoters of the Bill as to
certain clauses; and on June 15th it was announced that the promoters had
adopted a course that was satisfactory to the representatives of the
Council.  Opposition was then withdrawn.  The first general meeting of
the shareholders of the Norwich Water Works Company was held on October
15th, under the presidency of Mr. Bignold, chairman of the company.


MARCH.


13.--Festivities commenced at Shadwell Court, and were continued three
days, in celebration of the coming of age of Sir Robert Jacob Buxton, who
was presented by the tenantry with a massive silver salver.  The band of
the 2nd Life Guards was in attendance.

24.--Snow fell to the depth of 12 inches.  A drift occurred in the chalk
cutting between Narborough and Swaffham, and delayed railway traffic.

26.--Died at Lambeth, aged 66, Mr. William Bath, President of the Money
Order Office, St. Martin's le Grand.  He was Mayor of Yarmouth in 1824
and 1826, and was the first Mayor of that borough after the passing of
the Municipal Reform Act, when he occupied the civic chair during two
successive terms.


APRIL.


5.--At the Norfolk Assizes, before Lord Chief Baron Pollock, Blofield
John Rix and Henry Senior were charged with stealing, embezzling, and
misappropriating various sums of money, to the amount of 10,589 pounds
18s., the property of their employers.  Both prisoners were employed at
the Diss Bank.  The proprietor, Mr. Dyson, was taken seriously ill in the
month of December, 1848, and an arrangement was made that Mr. Thomas
Lombe Taylor, son of Mr. Meadows Taylor, a former partner with Mr. Dyson,
should be taken into partnership, and the partnership commenced in 1849.
On January 19th Mr. Dyson died, and Mr. Taylor intended to dispose of the
business to the firm of Messrs. Harveys and Hudson.  It became necessary
to go through the accounts, and then the frauds were discovered.  The
prisoners were tried on a charge of simple larceny, whereupon they
pleaded guilty, and were sentenced, Rix to 18 months' and Senior to 12
months' imprisonment.

--The action, Berney _v._ Delane and Co., was tried at the Norfolk
Assizes, before Lord Chief Baron Pollock.  The question at issue was the
right to the use of the stream which worked Taverham Mills.  The
defendants manufactured the paper for "The Times" newspaper, "and their
broadsheets were every day scattered round the terrestrial globe, and
were to be found in every corner of the earth."  In order to carry on
their business, the defendants had the right to raise the stream behind
their mills; they had not only raised it to the height they were entitled
to enjoy, but very much higher; so high that they had flooded the lands
of Mr. Thomas Trench Berney, and had rendered them useless for sheep
grazing.  The case was ultimately referred to Mr. Russell Gurney, and a
verdict for the plaintiff was taken on account of the damage laid in the
declaration, subject to such reference.

17.--The Mayor of Norwich (Mr. Woodcock) having offered to provide an
illuminated clock and clock turret at the Guildhall, on condition that
the Corporation removed the false ceiling in the Council Chamber and laid
open the old roof, it was unanimously resolved to accept the clock.  It
was made by Messrs. Moore, of Clerkenwell, London, and fixed in a turret
designed by Mr. Kerr, in the month of October.

30.--The headquarters of the 16th Lancers marched from Norwich for
Hounslow.


MAY.


1.--Sultzer's public baths were opened in St. Augustine's, Norwich.  In
the course of six months they were used by 10,943 persons.

4.--Attention was directed to the system then becoming more prevalent
than ever, of driving dogs in trucks or small carts along the public
roads.  "To say nothing of the cruelty to the dogs, few horses will pass
them without risk of accident."

6.--The season terminated at Norwich Theatre.  The house was under the
management of Mr. Clarence (afterwards known as Mr. Clarence Holt).

14.--The Norwich Town Council adopted an address of congratulation to the
Queen and Prince Albert upon the birth, on May 1st, of a Prince (Prince
Arthur, Duke of Connaught).

16.--Mr. W. Lee, C.E., one of the Inspectors of the Board of Health,
opened, at the Guildhall, Norwich, a public inquiry into the sanitary
state of the city.  It lasted eight days.

--A sturgeon, measuring 6 ft. 2 in. in length and 3 ft. 6 in. in girth,
and weighing 15 st. 3 lbs., was shot in the river Wissey, near Hilgay
Bridge.  "It is surprising how a fish of this size could get up the river
so far, as it had to pass through several sluices."

17.--Died at Mill Hill, Hendon, aged 57, Sir James Flower, Bart.  He was
a son of the first baronet, by the eldest daughter and co-heiress of Mr.
James Squire, of Portsmouth.  In 1816 he married the daughter of Sir
Walter Stirling, Bart.  He succeeded his father in 1834.  In 1838 he
filled the office of High Sheriff of Norfolk, and in 1843 was appointed a
deputy-lieutenant for Herefordshire.  A Conservative in politics, he
contested the representation of Thetford with the Earl of Euston, when a
"double return" resulted.  On petition, Sir James was declared the
sitting member.  The first baronet was an alderman of the City of London,
who filled the office of Lord Mayor in the year of the Jubilee.

19.--Lieut. John Allen, commander of the Prince of Wales Revenue cutter,
boarded off Happisburgh a vessel named the Sea Flower, of Hull, and found
her laden with 122 bales of contraband tobacco of 50 lbs. each, the duty
upon which amounted to 900 pounds.  The vessel and cargo were
confiscated.

24.--The headquarters of the 11th Hussars arrived at Norwich, under
command of Col. the Earl of Cardigan.  "This regiment has a fine
appearance.  The uniform is blue jacket, braided, scarlet trousers, and
bearskin cap."

--The Queen's birthday was celebrated at Norwich by the Pockthorpe
"Corporation" parading in the Market Place, "the 'Mayor' and 'Aldermen'
wearing their scarlet gowns and bearing themselves with all the conscious
dignity of office."  The Sheriff of Norwich (Mr. James Colman)
entertained the inmates of the Workhouse, the Infirmary, and the Boys'
Home to dinner at St. Andrew's Hall, and the Mayor (Mr. Woodcock) gave a
dinner at the Assembly Rooms.

29.--A new organ, the gift of Col. Mason, was opened at Necton church.


JUNE.


5.--An extraordinary will was left by Miss Margaret Creake, of St.
Andrew's, Norwich, whose death occurred on this date.  She was the last
of three sisters, very eccentric in their manners and parsimonious in
their way of living.  She directed that her relatives who chose to prove
their identity should receive one shilling each; a legacy of 20 pounds
was left to one neighbour, and of 10 pounds to another.  She directed
that 50 pounds be given to each homeless person above 68 years of age in
London, Ireland, and Scotland, and that all her real estate be employed
in founding a hospital for aged persons, the hospital to be built and the
inmates habited according to her directions.  The property, valued at
20,000 pounds, being insufficient, the wishes of the testatrix could not
be carried out.  Upwards of 1,000 persons visited the late residence of
the deceased, "the filthiness of which was beyond description."  Shortly
after the death of Miss Creake, a chemist named Woolner, with whom she
had been intimate, committed suicide by poisoning himself.  It was then
rumoured that the woman had met with her death by foul means.  The
Coroner (Mr. Wilde) ordered the exhumation of the body from St. Clement's
churchyard.  An examination of the remains was made by Mr. T. W. Crosse,
who attributed death to natural causes.

9.--Died at Norwich, aged 60, Mr. John Green Crosse, senior surgeon of
the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital.  Mr. Crosse was a native of Suffolk,
and received his early professional education under Mr. Bailey, at
Stowmarket.  After a distinguished career as a medical student in London,
he became demonstrator of anatomy in Dublin.  He visited Paris, where he
made himself sufficiently acquainted with the French schools of medicine
to enable him on his return to publish "Sketches of the Medical Schools
of Paris."  He settled in Norwich in 1815, and in the following year
married a daughter of his former master and friend.  In 1825 he was
elected assistant-surgeon of the Hospital, and on the death of Mr. Bond
succeeded to the surgeoncy on August 25th, 1826.  There he gained for
himself a surgical reputation which was described as "not local, not
provincial, not British, not European, but universal."  Mr. Crosse was
one of the founders of the Pathological Society; he was a Fellow of the
Royal Society, a Fellow of the College of Surgeons of England, a Doctor
of Medicine in the Universities of Heidelberg and St. Andrew's, a member
of several scientific bodies, and the author of many valuable
professional works and papers.  His remains were interred on June 14th,
in the burial ground of Norwich Cathedral.


JULY.


9.--Intelligence was received in Norwich of the death of H.R.H. the Duke
of Cambridge.  The bells of the city churches were tolled.

29.--Mrs. Charles Gill (Miss Vining) appeared at Norwich Theatre, after
an absence of five years, and was enthusiastically received by a crowded
house.


AUGUST.


3.--Comment was made upon the altered circumstances of the Norwich Assize
week:--"Alterations in our system of jurisprudence have caused some
change in the character of our Assizes, and diminished the number
attending them; whilst changes of our social system have led the higher
classes to join less in the popular amusements of the people."

10.--Potash Farm, formerly occupied by James Blomfield Rush, was sold by
auction by Mr. Butcher, for 3,100 pounds.  The purchaser was Sir J. P.
Boileau, Bart.

17.*--"Messrs. E. and R. W. Blake, of Norwich, have purchased the Yarn
Factory, with its machinery, for 14,000 pounds, under direction of the
Master in Chancery, under the Winding-Up Act.  The stock is valued at
7,219 pounds, making, with the purchase, the sum total of 21,219 pounds."

--Died, Hannah Sarah Hancock, daughter of the Rev. Thomas Wigg Hancock,
of St. Helen's parsonage, Norwich.  She was born on November 8th, 1781.
At eight years of age she compiled a dictionary for children, and
throughout her life took great interest in music and painting.  She
received the silver medal of the Society of Arts in 1805, and in 1807 was
granted a second silver medal by the same society for an oil painting
after the design by Rubens in the altarpiece at Antwerp.

--Considerable inconvenience was caused at Norwich by a strike of the
firemen and engine-drivers on the Eastern Counties Railway.

24.--Died at Birkenhead, Lieut.-Col. Edwin Cruttenden.  Of an old Norfolk
family, he was born in 1784.  He received a commission in the Royal
Artillery in 1804, was stationed ten years in the Mauritius, and in 1814
was engaged in the capture of Oswego, North America.  He was appointed
lieutenant-colonel in 1841.


SEPTEMBER.


20.--At a special meeting of the Norwich Town Council, an address was
ordered to be presented to the Bishop of Norwich on his appointment to
the diocese.  The presentation took place at the Palace, on October 4th.

28.--Died at his residence, James Street, Buckingham Gate, London, Mr.
Thomas Amyot, F.R.S., F.S.A., in his 76th year.  He was the eldest son of
Mr. Peter Amyot, of St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich, and was articled to
Messrs. Foster and Unthank, solicitors, of that city.  On the accession
to power, in 1806, of the Fox and Granville parties, the Right Hon.
William Windham, Secretary for the Department of War and the Colonies,
appointed Mr. Amyot his private secretary.  On the dissolution of that
short-lived Administration, he received a lucrative Colonial appointment
as Registrar of Slaves in the British West India possessions, a position
which he continued to hold until his functions gradually ceased on the
passing of the Slavery Abolition Act.  Mr. Amyot was interested in
literary pursuits and archaeological research.  He married Jane, only
daughter of Mr. Edward Colman, surgeon, of Norwich, by whom he had two
sons and six daughters.


OCTOBER.


23.--A fine schooner was launched from Mr. T. Tyrrell's shipyard at
Wells-next-the-Sea.

24.--"The Times" was shamefully hoaxed on this date.  A letter had been
sent to the editor, with the intimation that a Protectionist meeting was
to be held at Lynn, to be addressed by the Hon. E. H. Stanley, M.P., Mr.
D'Israeli, and other gentlemen.  "The Times" sent its representatives,
who found that no such meeting had been announced or even contemplated.

27.--Died at Blickling Hall, the Dowager Lady Suffield.  "She was born in
the year 1767, her early life being passed during one of the most
eventful periods, both socially and politically, which have marked our
history."  Her father was John Hobart, second Earl of Buckinghamshire,
who had been Ambassador at St. Petersburg, and was afterwards Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland.  In 1792 she married William Assheton, second Lord
Suffield, and in 1744 her youngest sister, Amelia Ann, was married to
Lord Castlereagh.  "In consequence of this union her connection with the
political world was maintained even more intimately than before.
Throughout her life she continued to take a lively interest in the
politics of the county, and the influence of the united houses of Gunton
and Blickling in the days of contested elections was not lightly esteemed
by conflicting parties."  In 1821 she became a widow, and thenceforth
devoted herself to charitable works.  The family estates descended to the
Marquis of Lothian, her grand-nephew.


NOVEMBER.


2.--The announcement was made of the engagement of Mr. and Mrs. F.
Phillips as members of the Norwich Company, under the management of Mr.
Joseph Clarence.  Mrs. Phillips, who was professionally known as Miss
Ellen Daly, had acquired Metropolitan celebrity, and "was equally at home
in serious work, in domestic comedy, and in fashionable life."

8.--The ceremony of turning the first sod of the great undertaking known
as the Norfolk Estuary Works was performed at Lynn by Sir William
ffolkes.  The Earl of Hardwick, the Earl of Leicester, Mr. R. G. Tounley,
M.P., and Miss Wodehouse each deposited a spadeful of earth upon a
barrow, which was wheeled away by the Mayor.  It was estimated that
150,000 acres of land would be reclaimed from the sea by the completion
of the work.

9.--Mr. Henry Woodcock was re-elected Mayor of Norwich.  Mr. Edward
Blakely was appointed Sheriff.

11.--The Norwich Protestant Association held a meeting at St. Andrew's
Hall, and adopted an address to the Queen "on the recent invasion of her
Majesty's prerogative by the Pope."  On December 7th the clergy of the
diocese presented to the Bishop an address upon the same subject; and on
December 14th the High Sheriff (Mr. E. R. Pratt) presided over a county
meeting at the Shirehall, when resolutions condemnatory of the action of
the Pope were adopted, and an address voted to the Queen.  Many meetings
were held in all parts of the county, and for some weeks "Papal
aggression" was made a popular cry.


DECEMBER.


21.*--"Baron Rolfe has been raised to the peerage, by the dignity of
Baron Cranworth, of Cranworth, in the county of Norfolk."

26.--Mr. J. Clarence produced a pantomime at Norwich Theatre (title not
given).  Of the scenery and dresses it was said, "We never saw anything,
even in the Metropolis, more superb and more beautiful."

                                * * * * *

                             END OF VOL.  I.




INDEX.


A


Abduction of a child, 210.

Abinger, Baron.  _See_ Scarlett, Sir James.

Abington, Mr., actor, 417; manager of Norwich Theatre, 452, 457; death,
473.

Accession of George IV., 179; of William IV., 297; of Victoria, 362.

Accidents: At a launch, 22; to Volunteers, 41, 66; at an Oddfellows'
meeting, 94; with guns, 329, 442; at Taverham Mills, 385; at firework
display, 395; to the Countess of Leicester, 405; at Swaffham Brewery,
420; to an acrobat, 420; on the stage, 329, 441; Yarmouth bridge, 446; at
King Street Brewery, Norwich, 447; railway, 451; singular, at Mattishall,
471; whilst hunting, 474.

Acle and Yarmouth New Road, 305.

Action against a coach proprietor, 100.

. . ., singular, at Norwich, 218.

Action at Assizes: The King _v._ Beevor, 3; Stracey _v._ Davey, 7; Astley
_v._ Harwood, 18; Palmer _v._ Blomfield, 33; the King _v._ Larke,
Mileham, and others, 74; Leathes _v._ Baker, 74; Leathes _v._ Maddison,
75; Baker _v._ Leathes, 75; Leathes _v._ Long, 75; Royle _v._ Parsley,
90; Mann _v._ Carroll, 114; the King _v._ Garratt, 125; for coach
accident, 191; Crawcour _v._ Smith, 198; Lock, D.D., _v._ Bishop of
Norwich, 206; Howard _v._ Howes, 237; Reader _v._ Bloom, 273; Fellowes
_v._ Steward, 247; Woodewis _v._ Patteson, 247; Maitland _v._ Kinnebrook,
279; Howes _v._ Wood, 307; Hunter _v._ Platten, 312; Rex _v._ Brightwell,
356; Palmer _v._ Alliance Insurance Co., 410; Lynes _v._ Beck, 422; Rex
_v._ Painter, 426; Cory _v._ Yarmouth and Norwich Railway Co., 440; Jermy
_v._ Rush, 469; Quarles _v._ Bacon, 470; Berney _v._ Delane and Co., 483.

Activity in old age, 138, 140.

Actor on a donkey's back, 296; turned Dissenting minister, 80, 106, 291.

Actors, accidents to, 329, 441.

. . . , amateur, 167, 266.

. . . learn military drill, 22.

Actors of colour, 284, 467.

. . . stranded on Breydon, 139.

"Adam Slow," 265.

Additional Force Act, 44.

Addresses to the Queen, 363, 385, 393, 412, 440.

Adelphi Theatre, Norwich, 465, 473.

"Admiral Clark," of Norwich, 266.

"African Roscius," 284.

Africans baptised, 106.

Agricultural associations, 92, 261, 386, 331, 354, 414, 461.

. . . defence association, 171.

. . . distress, 191, 192, 196, 204, 217, 246, 263, 346.

. . . horse tax, 134.

. . . implements, 6, 15, 31, 41, 57, 65, 72, 73, 84, 96, 127, 138, 160,
183, 469.

. . . sale, 224.

Aickin, Miss (actress), 39, 46, 80.

Aldermen, alleged illegal election of, 363.

. . . elections of, 201, 269, 274, 290, 317, 341.

Alderson, Edward Hall, receives freedom of Norwich, 285; appointed Judge,
299; attends Norwich Assizes, 395, 400, 440.

Alderson, Robert, his duel with Mr. Grigby, 16; elected Governor of
Norwich Court of Guardians, 65; resigns Recordership, 301.

Aldridge, Mr., "the African Roscius," 467.

Alexandria, surrender of, 8.

Algiers, bombardment of, 140.

Aliens, 24.

Allotments, 203, 353.

Altar-piece at Braconash church, 76; at St. Peter's, Yarmouth, 328.

Amateur Hamlet on Norwich stage, 167.

Amburgh, Van, 411, 442.

Amelia, Princess, funeral of, 87.

Ammunition for Orange patriots, 111.

Anacreontic Society, 2.

Anaesthetics, use of, 461, 467.

Anatomical studies, 283.

Angel Inn, Norwich, re-named the Royal Hotel, 400.

Angerstein, Mr., 94.

Angling, 92, 162, 214.

Animals' Friend Society, 403.

Anti-Corn Law League, 427, 434.

Apartment at St. Lawrence's church, Norwich, 144.

Aquatic funeral, 441.

Archaeological discoveries at Castle Rising, 226.

. . . Institute, 464.

. . . Society, Norfolk and Norwich, 454.

Archbishop Manners Sutton, 37.

Archery, 278, 456.

Aran for German levies, 104.

Army of Reserve Act, 20, 30; ballot, 23.

Arson, remarkable trial for, 306.

Art exhibitions, 384, 416.

. . . Union, East of England, 416.

Artillery corps at Norwich, 46.

Artists, 86, 92, 97, 119, 131, 139, 150, 168, 175, 194, 214, 230, 253,
276, 282, 300, 377, 394, 396, 416, 420, 422, 423, 486.

. . . , Norfolk and Norwich Society of, 50, 67, 74, 119, 139, 150, 175,
194, 214, 242, 279, 396.

. . . , Norfolk and Suffolk Society of, 285.

Ass following a corpse, 84.

Assault in Fakenham Market Place, 190.

. . . on a Dissenting preacher at Aylsham, 74.

Assessments, 42, 125, 183, 226, 273, 463, 475.

Assize of bread, 82.

Assize week, decline of the, 486.

Assizes, 3, 7, 12, 18, 33, 37, 47, 58, 60, 74, 75, 81, 89, 90, 92, 108,
114, 124, 125, 126, 134, 136, 145, 151, 155, 156, 174, 175, 180, 191,
198, 206, 209, 211, 214, 237, 247, 261, 262, 267, 271, 272, 279, 288,
291, 295, 302, 303, 304, 307, 312, 320, 322, 338, 340, 343, 348, 356,
359, 364, 372, 376, 378, 384, 395, 400, 401, 406, 410, 416, 422, 426,
436, 439, 440, 444, 445, 454, 469, 470, 475, 483.

Association against felonies, Norwich, 96.

Astrology, 61.

Asylum at Thorpe, 89, 116, 444.

Athenaeum, Norwich, 440.

Attornies' privileges, 98.

Auctioneer, conviction of, 426.

Auctioneer's evasion of plate licence, 390.



B


Baggage waggons, 120.

Bagshaw's menagerie, 80.

Baldwin, the weather prophet, 19.

Ball, Edward, dramatist, 181, 192, 218.

Balloon ascents, 124, 128, 248, 257, 306, 343, 388, 389, 402, 411, 478,
479.

. . . , General Money's adventure in a 129.

Ballot-box abolished by Norwich Corporation, 306.

Band of music at a wedding, 156.

Bank, East of England, 345, 362.

. . . notes stolen, 168.

. . . robbery at Lynn, 428.

. . . suspends payment, 252.

Bankes, Prebendary, 187.

Bankruptcy of Kerrison and Son, 66, 73, 79.

Banners presented to members of Parliament, 324.

Bannister, Mr. (actor), 57, 72.

Baptist chapel, St. Mary's, Norwich, 389.

Baptisms to avoid registration fees, 358.

Barnum at Norwich, 439.

Barony of Berners, 314, 372.

. . . of Stafford, 235.

Barracks sold at Norwich, 145.

Bartley, Mrs. (actress), 134, 135, 145, 192.

Barton, Mr. (actor), 255.

Bathing machine, 147.

Baths, public, 484.

Bathurst, Benjamin, 40.

Bathurst, Bishop, installation of, 38; death of, 359; monument in Norwich
Cathedral, 362, 413; bust of, 366.

Bathurst, Miss, tragic death of, 232.

Bats found in vaults, 45, 134.

Bawdeswell church rebuilt, 445.

Bayonne, Battle of: Norfolk officers wounded, 111, 112.

Beacham, Mr. (actor), 341, 392.

Beacons, 23, 34.

Bear-baiting, 13.

Beating the bounds, 20, 91, 105, 116, 195, 267, 286.

Beaton, Mrs., "the Freemason," 14.

Bedford, Mr. Paul (actor), 401.

Beer Bill, 299, 401.

Bell, fall of, at St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich, 417.

. . . , killed by a falling, 46.

. . . foundry at Downham, 71, 120, 152, 158, 242, 317.

. . . ringers' pitcher at St. Peter Mancroft, 452.

Bellamy, Mr. (actor), 129, 226.

Bellman's gratitude, 61.

Bells and bellringers, 46, 65, 67, 71, 97, 120, 122, 143, 146, 151, 152,
158, 166, 177, 187, 193, 195, 229, 242, 246, 289, 317, 346, 384, 391,
402, 405, 408, 417, 438, 452.

. . . rung for race meetings, 408.

. . . stolen, 384, 391.

Belsoni, Signor, at Norwich, 36, 199.

Benefactions, 18, 37, 93, 102, 103, 166, 370.

Benefit of clergy, 73.

Benefit receipts at Norwich Theatre, 64, 90, 222, 235, 245, 278.

Benevolent Society, Norwich, 48.

. . . stranger, 102.

Bengalese baptised at Burnham Market, 141.

Bennett, Mr. (actor), 225.

Bennett, Mr. George (actor), 401.

Bennett, Mr. James, Norwich scientist, 443.

Bentinck, Lord George, elected for Lynn, 273, 306, 320, 464; entertained
at dinner by Protectionists, 458; death, 472.

Bentinck, Lord William, resigns his seat for Lynn, 273.

Benwell, loss of the, 370.

Berners, Barony of, 314, 372.

Berney's patent cartridges, 423.

Berry, Capt. Sir Ed., R.N., 52; death of, 303.

Betty, Master, "the Young Roscius," 133, 147.

Bible Societies, 93, 250.

Bidder, George, the boy calculator, 171.

Bidwell, Elizabeth, her escape from the French, 52.

Biffin, Miss, 90, 197.

Bignold, Mr. Samuel, elected Mayor of Norwich, 323, 473; presentation to,
335; summoned before the House of Commons, 340; appeals to the House of
Lords, 358; attacked by "Norwich Mercury," 390; chairman of Waterworks
Company, 483.

"Billy Boots," 123.

Bird fancying, 130.

Birds attracted by Happisburgh light, 450.

Bishop Blaize celebrations, 188, 329, 354, 415.

Bishop of Norwich assailed by mob, 413.

Bishops of Norwich, 37, 38, 359, 362, 413, 479, 481.

Birth, of Princess Royal, 403; Prince of Wales, 412; Prince Alfred, 440;
Princess Helena, 456; Princess Louise, 469; Prince Arthur, 484.

Birthday dinners, 19, 28, 30, 47, 56, 83, 147, 158, 159, 166, 172, 178,
182, 205, 245.

Birthdays, celebration of Royal, 6, 30, 41, 57, 83, 105, 127, 148, 157,
159, 172, 181, 295, 298, 331, 362, 476, 485.

Blackman, the privateer, 36.

Blanchard, Mr. (actor), 145, 161, 206.

Blasphemy, charge of, 145.

Blickling Hall, fire at, 65.

Blind persons married, 75.

. . . postman, 336.

. . . School at Norwich, 37, 131, 182, 199.

Blucher's victory, 114.

Boat-phaeton, 375.

Body of Dean Croft discovered, 89.

Body-snatching, 232, 241, 261, 272, 273, 281, 283, 289, 300, 319.

Body-stealing, remarkable case of, 376.

Bombardment of Flushing, 76.

Bonfires prohibited, 24.

Bonaparte in effigy, 110, 115, 116.

Bonaparte's military coach in Norwich, 162.

Bone manure, 106.

Booth, Miss (actress), 168, 293.

Booth, Mr. (actor), 183.

Borrow family, 316, 327, 374, 396; Capt. Borrow, 125, 177; George Borrow
gives derivation of word "Tory," 316; imprisoned in Spain, 374; marriage,
396; Lieut. John Thomas Borrow, 327.

Botanical garden proposed, 237.

Boundary of Norwich: Singular case, 166.

Bourbon, Mdlle. de, 41.

Bowles, H. R. (actor), 46, 80, 106, 283, 286, 291.

Bowls, 59.

Boxing exhibitions, 61, 70, 160, 170, 184.

Boy charged with murder, 416.

Braconash church restored, 67.

Braham, Mr., at Norwich, 299, 316, 428.

Bray's waggons, 334, 371.

Bread, sale of on Sunday, 129, 149.

Bread substitutes, 2.

Breweries, 401, 411.

Bribery, 156, 201, 237, 255, 257, 258, 266, 269, 274, 275, 288, 290, 294,
302, 334, 341, 372, 373, 468.

. . . , alleged extortion arising from, 334.

. . . , indictments for, 302, 342.

Bride, curious reception of a, 281.

Bridewell at Norwich, 88, 259.

. . . , sale of, 286.

Bridges, 28, 67, 68, 72, 159, 161, 176, 196, 212, 276, 285, 386, 428,
440, 446, 449.

Brig launched at Thorpe, 22.

Briggs' Lane (or Street) improvement, 119, 388, 390, 412, 433.

British Army in Spain, 75.

Brooke, Mr. G. V. (actor), 359, 360, 361, 383, 392, 393, 397, 407, 470.

Brooke, Rajah, of Sarawak, 466.

Brown, Hannah, murdered by Greenacre, 360.

Browne, Philip G., author of "History of Norwich," 446.

Browne, Sir Thomas, finding of his remains, 402.

Browne, W. J. Utten, elected Sheriff, 324; declines to attend Municipal
Commission, 327; candidate for Ashburton, 363.

Brunswick Constitutional Club, 282.

Brunton family, 17, 61, 90, 158, 168, 180, 193, 216, 218, 227, 247, 256,
268, 411, 419, 436, 457.  Miss Louisa Brunton, married to the Earl of
Craven, 61.  Mr. and Miss Brunton at Norwich Theatre, 158, 180, 193.
_Debut_ of Miss Fanny Brunton at Lynn Theatre, 168.  Lieut. (afterwards
Lieut.-Col.) Brunton, 90, 411, 457.

Bull-baiting, 55, 123, 159.

"Bull-fight" at Norwich circus, 327.

Bull in an upstairs room, 262.

Bull Ole B. (violinist), 352.

Bullock's Museum, 94.

Bulwer, Brigadier-General, 33.

Bulwer, Mr. W. E. L., and the Heydon estate, 181, 183.

Burgh Castle, sale of, 458.

Burglar shot at Lynn, 203.

Burglaries, 14, 92, 104, 198, 203.

Burial in a suit of clothes, 192; in regimentals, 195; at cross-ways,
199; refused by a clergyman, 442.

Burnt alive at Lynn, 194.

Burritt, Elihu, 466, 475.

Bustard (little) killed, 379.

Butler, Mr. (actor), 340.

Butler, Mrs.  _See_ Kemble, Miss Fanny.

Byrne, Miss (actress), 159.



C


Cadet corps at Norwich, 27.

Caistor Camp, discovery of skeletons at, 191; of pottery, 208.

Cambridge, Duke of, 14, 20, 471, 486.

Camping (or Camp-ball), 50, 127, 159, 208, 210, 213, 308.

Canal, North Walsham and Dilham, 93, 239, 244, 256, 258.

Canals proposed between Bungay and Diss, 154; Dereham and Norwich, 171.

Canary show, 459.

Canning, Sir Stratford, appointed Ambassador at Constantinople, 415.

Cannon, bursting of, 23.

. . . , mounted on waggons, 38, 62.

Cannonading heard at Horsford, 8.

Capital punishment, efforts to abolish, 168, 296, 454.

Carlile, Richard, at Norwich, 364.

Carriages for conveyance of troops, 23, 42, 44.

Carrow bridge, 67, 68, 155, 386.

Carter, the "Lion King," 407, 432.

Castle Corporation, 83, 121, 122, 133, 179, 241.

Castle Hill, Norwich, enclosed, 67.

Castlereagh, Lord, 132, 154; assailed by Norwich mob, 178.

Castle Rising, archaeological discoveries at, 226.

. . . Corporation, 327.

. . . prison: singular action, 108.

Cathcart, Lord, at Norwich, 60, 97.

Cathedral, 4, 7, 46, 211, 255, 420; restoration of, 46, 309; repair of
tower criticised, 420.

. . . doors, ceremony of knocking at, 332, 333.

. . . rushes strewn in, 296, 332.

Cattle-driving on Sunday, 36.

Cattle, foreign, on Norwich Hill, 458.

. . . Market at Norwich, 76, 81.

. . . , shooting of, 389.

Caul advertised, 13.

Cavalry pioneers, 34.

Celebrations, 6, 30, 41, 57, 83, 87, 110, 115, 116, 127, 191, 194, 197,
264.

Celeste, Madame, 323, 430, 439, 464.

Census returns, 5, 7, 91, 195, 306, 413.

Centenarians.  _See_ Died.

Ceremonial objected to by a Sheriff, 86.

Chairing of members of Parliament, 256, 319.

Chalmers, Mr. (actor), 85.

Chamber of Commerce, 464.

Chancel screen at Yarmouth, 144.

Chancellors of the Diocese, 72, 220, 296, 442.

Changes of surnames, 44, 91, 115, 119, 147, 187, 189, 190, 200, 233, 364,
387, 421, 422, 435, 464.

Chantrey, the sculptor, 413.

Chapel Field, Norwich, circus and menagerie in, 442.

Chapels, Nonconformist, 91, 98, 101, 169, 200, 225, 228, 256, 345, 389.

Chapman, Rev. C, vicar of St. Peter Mancroft, Norwich, 443.

Charities litigation, 351, 356, 358, 382.

Charlotte, Princess, marriage of, 137; encourages Norwich manufactures,
140; death, 152, 154.

Chartist movement, 378, 380, 382, 398, 403, 408, 409, 412, 413, 427, 443,
464.

Chatham, Earl of, 132.

Chedworth will case, 35, 141.

Chief Constable of the county, 390.

Chimney sweeps, 140.

Ching Lan Lauro, 275.

Chloroform first used at Norwich, 467.

Cholera, 309, 313, 475, 479.

Cholmondeley, Lord, elected for Castle Rising, 205.

Choral concerts, 329.

Christchurch, Catton, 399, 412.

Christmas custom at Thetford, 100.

Christmas-day church illumination, 203.

. . . observed by Norwich Corporation, 88.

Church briefs, 281.

Church building, 245, 399, 412, 427, 441, 445, 473.

Church, proposed new, at Yarmouth, 245; protest against, 294.

Church Missionary Society, 109.

. . . rates, 294, 390, 433.

. . . restoration, 67, 68, 103, 374, 467, 471.

. . . societies, 232.

Circus building blown down, 354.

. . . performances at Norwich Theatre, 422.

. . . tent first used, 425.

Circuses, 78, 94, 100, 109, 130, 132, 152, 163, 188, 203, 215, 226, 272,
282, 326, 327, 355, 379, 390, 392, 394, 422, 425, 433, 442, 443, 474.

City Chamberlin of Norwich, 263, 336.

. . . Gaol, sale of, 286.

. . . Treasurer, 287.

. . . wall, fall of, 266.

Clarence, Duke of, 60, 249.

Clarence, Mr. (Clarence Holt), manager of Norwich Theatre, 484, 488.

"Cleansing week" at Norwich, 64, 180, 266.

Clergy incomes, 38.

Clergyman charged with assault, 106.

Clifford, Mr. (actor), 361.

Clock at Norwich Guildhall, 484.

Close Jail, Norwich, 133.

Clothing for Portuguese troops, 280.

Coach accidents, 191, 233, 250, 322, 323, 335, 387, 415, 425, 449, 468;
competition, 194; conveyance of contraband spirits, 351, of convicts,
290, of corpses, 219; fares, reduction of, 136, 163, 429; informers, 233,
402; lighted inside, 357; of novel construction, 142, 164; running with
a, 171; narrow escape of, 233; furious driving of, 217; robberies, 99.

Coaches, 3, 7, 8, 10, 11, 27, 34, 36, 38, 51, 54, 63, 69, 71, 82, 88, 97,
99, 104, 106, 112, 115, 117, 127, 129, 131, 134, 136, 139, 142, 153, 156,
157, 161, 163, 164, 171, 172, 175, 177, 191, 193, 194, 195, 201, 208,
212, 215, 217, 218, 219, 227, 229, 232, 233, 246, 248, 249, 250, 253,
259, 263, 290, 293, 308, 309, 314, 322, 342, 355, 357, 368, 377, 383,
400, 402, 405, 413, 415, 424, 425, 426, 429, 437, 442, 449, 453, 459,
468.

Coaches and wains: a comparison, 229.

Coachguard's stage performance, 311.

Coaching system, effect of railways upon, 449, 453.

Coachman fined for possession of game, 259.

Coachman's funeral: Singular incident at, 112.

. . . lecture on Shakespeare, 442.

Coal duty, 170, 227, 299.

. . . hawking, important decision as to, 54.

Coates, the pedestrian, feats by, 407.

Cobbett, Mr., at Norwich, 217, 254, 292.

Cobden, Mr., at Norwich, 427, 452.

Cockey Lane, Norwich, 77, 283.

"Cockfighter," a famous hunter, 358.

Cocking, 15, 29, 39, 42, 46, 47, 64, 69, 81, 82, 86, 90, 95, 101, 113,
123, 124, 135, 137, 144, 146, 149, 153, 157, 159, 171, 184, 194, 207,
211, 220, 233, 246, 271, 282, 285, 297, 304, 310, 312.

Coffin, two bodies in one, 134.

Coffins provided before death, 130, 386, 387, 437.

. . . , condemned felons seated on, 211.

Coin, circulation of base, 376.

Coinage, exchange of defective, 137; Irish and French taken at Norwich
Theatre, 144; new silver, 143.

Coins, discoveries of ancient, 39, 270, 405.

. . . , copper, carried for a wager, 259.

Coke-Kennedy shooting match, 225; Coke-Ross, 249.

Coke, Mr. T. W., attacked by Norwich mob, 124; insulted at Norwich, 148;
his political bias, 213; son and heir, 213, 216; "chaired" at Norwich,
256; retirement from Parliamentary life, 320; complimentary dinner to,
323; portrait, 321; elevation to peerage, 363; death, 419; monument to,
420, 424, 449.

Cold weather in June, 41, 391, 408.

Colman cricket team, 457.

Colours at elections prohibited, 273.

. . . , presentations of, 26, 27, 28.

Coltishall Brewery, sale of, 411.

Comedians, Norfolk and Suffolk Company of, 32, 210, 211, 213, 216, 316,
400, 442, 461.

Comet, 93.

Coming of age celebrations, 181, 217, 257, 483.

Common Council elections, 266, 304.

Concerts, 46, 187, 239, 249, 272, 322, 377, 402, 406, 413, 428, 442, 453,
469, 480.

Condemned felons seated on coffins, 211.

Confidence trick, 128.

Confirmations, 7, 49, 73, 105, 182, 246, 267, 268, 324, 330, 366, 406,
438.

Conjugal rights, actions for restitution of, 113, 412.

Conjurers, 214, 240.

Consecrations, 441, 445.

"Conservative": when first used in a political sense, 303.

Consistory Court, imprisonment by, 292, 442.

Conspiracy, 131; remarkable case of, 416.

Constabulary Act, adoption of, 390.

Contractors, allegations against, 260.

Convict's restitution of stolen money, 423.

Convicts, attempted escapes of, 37, 290, 293.

. . . sent from Norwich by water, 330.

Cooke, Mr. T. P. (actor), 312.

Cooke, the Pentonville miser, 93.

Cooper, Mr. W., plays by, 418, 427, 434.

Cooper, Sir Astley, 198.

Cooping of electors, 64, 169, 269, 270, 274.

Copenhagen, Battle of, 4.

Coppin, Mrs., 65.

Corn Exchange, Norwich, 236, 242, 280.

. . . importation, 260, 394, 451, 458.

. . . Laws, 116, 117, 124, 244, 262, 380, 394, 427, 434, 451, 452, 458.

. . . Law riots, 124, 136.

. . . market at Ranelagh Gardens, Norwich, 236.

. . . at Wells, 251.

. . . merchants and corn growers' dispute, 68, 79.

. . . Regulation Bill, 32.

Cornwallis, Marquis, 132.

Coronation of George IV., 197; of William IV., 308; of Victoria, 374.

Coroner's election, 274.

Corporation grant for church building, 289.

Corpses sent by coach, 219; by wains, 272, 281.

Corri, Miss Rosalie (actress), 194.

"Cossey gang," 204, 211.

Costessey Guild, 195.

. . . rejoicings, 235.

Cotman, J. S. (artist), 54.

Counterfeit money, 59.

County business, mode of conducting, 260, 262, 278.

. . . Court, 463.

. . . Gaol at Norwich, 201, 229.

. . . Lunatic Asylum, 89, 116, 444.

. . . Surveyor, election of, 349.

Coursing, 9, 17, 36, 69, 261.

. . . , alleged illegal, 435.

Courts martial, 81, 293, 316.

Cowper monument at Dereham, 24.

Crape ball at Norwich, 252.

Credit for corn, 68, 79.

Cribb and Gully at Norwich, 61.

Cricket, 42, 49, 57, 65, 66, 67, 83, 84, 85, 86, 91, 92, 93, 107, 120,
129, 140, 144, 151, 161, 162, 174, 175, 197, 212, 221, 245, 278, 287,
297, 306, 308, 324, 332, 351, 416, 439, 449, 457, 471, 478.

. . . on Sunday, 152.

Cricket Club, Norfolk, 262, 269, 275, 449; grounds established by, 262,
275; uniform of, 262.

. . . , Norwich, 266, 278.

. . . ground at Norwich, 266, 278, 323, 332.

. . . match by females in trousers, 221.

. . . for cherries and cider, 91.

. . . on the ice, 265, 404.

_Crim. Con._, actions for: Brograve _v._ Elwin, 57; Laton _v._ Beauchamp,
145; Muskett _v._ Gurney, 156, 291; Astley _v._ Garth, 265; Trafford _v._
Ellis, 394.

Crime in Norfolk, 203; in Norwich, 189, 198.

Criminal offenders, prosecution of, 251.

Cromer Hall, fire at, 290.

. . . jetties, 193, 455.

. . . races, 119.

. . . sea wall, 377, 455.

. . . Theatre, 140.

Cross Keys Wash, 252; bridge opened, 309.

Cross roads burial, 104.

Cross, Tom, literary coachman, 442.

Cruelty to a child, 190.

Cuckoo, late arrival of, 372.

. . . shot in September, 388.

Culprit drawn to execution on a hurdle, 58.

Culprit's body exhibited, 305.

Cumberland, Duke of, 104.

Curtis, John, naturalist, 423.



D


Dance, Miss (actress), 199.

Davenport, Mr., manager of Norwich Theatre, 457; remarkable statement by,
463.

Davison, Mrs.  (actress), 133, 192.

Davison, Miss (actress), 145, 155.

Dawson, Mr. George, lecturer, 466.

Deaf and dumb by visitation of God, 33.

Death in the Council Chamber, Norwich, 179; in the hunting field, 266,
348, 474; in the jury box, 210; in the pulpit, 135; whilst singing, 344.

. . . sentence for striking an officer, 81.

De Bardelin, Chevalier, 115, 255.

Defective silver, exchange of, 137.

Defence of the county, 7, 8, 21, 22, 24, 28, 31, 33, 44, 48.

Dennett's rocket apparatus, 411.

Denny, Mr., of Egmere, 243.

Denver murder, 355, 359.

Deprivation of living, 451.

Dereham Theatre, 137, 161; singular accident at, 441; advertised for
sale, 442.

"Desideratum of Norfolk gentlemen," 294.

Despard's conspiracy, 18, 19.

Dibden, Mr., at Norwich, 15.

Died (_c_ indicates reputed centenarian): Abinger, Baron, 436; Adkin,
Rev. Dr., 55; Albemarle, Countess of, 152; Albemarle, Earl of, 480;
Aldborough, Mrs. (_c_), 209; Alderson, Dr. James, 249; Aldis, John, 170;
Alexander, Charles, 277; Allcock, Christopher, 195; Allen Rev. Stephen,
462; Allen Tom, 379; Alpe, Hamond, 225; Amyot, Thomas, 487; Andrews, John
(_c_), 137; Andrews, William, 90; Angell, John, 449; Ansell, John, 259;
Anson, Viscount, 161; Archer, Charles, 188; Armstrong, Thomas (_c_), 100;
Astley, Miss, 64; Astley, Sir Edward, 12; Astley, Sir Jacob Henry, 147;
Atkinson, Ann (_c_), 327; Atkinson, J. F. G., 237; Aufrere, Anthony, 120.

. . . Back, Thomas, 179; Bacon, Mrs. (_c_), 284; Bacon, Richard
Mackenzie, 442; Bacon, Sir Edmund, 186; Baldry, Susanna (_c_), 372;
Baldwin, Edward, 19; Banks, John, 243; Barber, Thomas, 81; Barham, Sarah
(_c_), 265; Barker, Edmund Henry, 383; Baring, Henry, 469; Barnard, Rev.
V. L., 135; Barrow, Edward, 106; Bath, William, 483; Bathurst,
Archdeacon, 441; Bathurst, Bishop, 359; Bathurst, Mrs., 220; Bayning,
Lord, 83; Bayning, Lord, 224; Beacham, J. P., 392; Beatniffe, Richard,
160; Beaton, Mrs., 14; Beauchamp, Capt. R., 105; Beaumont, Rev. Ed., 185;
Beckwith, Dr., 72; Beckwith, J. C, 177; Beechey, Sir William, 381;
Beevor, Dr. John, 125; Beevor, Lieut.-General, 431; Beevor, Rev.
Augustus, 157; Beevor, Sir Thomas, 113; Beevor, Sir Thomas, 189; Bell,
Lieut. H. F., 257; Bellamy, B. P., 465; Bennett, James, 443; Bennett,
John, 133; Bentinck, Lord George, 472; Bentley, Elizabeth, 385; Berners,
Lord, 372; Bernes, Henry, 366; Berney, Elizabeth, 380; Berry, Sir Edward,
303; Betts, William, 303; Beverley, Michael, 474; Bidwell, S., 222;
Biggs, Martha (_c_), 109; Billingsley, Edward, 110; Blackwell, Sir
Lambert, 5; Blanc, Sir Simon le, 135; Blanchard, William, 339; Bland,
Major John, 102; Blencowe, John Prescott, 403; Blofeld, Thomas, 149;
Blomfield, Francis, 144; Bolton, 267; Bolton, Capt., 301; Bolton,
Susanna, 107; Bonsell, John, 5; Booth, Edward Temple, 469; Borrow, Capt.,
230; Borrow, Lieut. John Thomas, 327; Bowles, Henry (the elder), 51;
Bowles, Major-General, 98; Bowles, Rev. H. R., 291; Boxall, Major, 420;
Boyles, Charles, 64; Boyles, Vice-Admiral, 142; Bradfield, James, 60;
Bramwell, 94; Brand, Catherine (_c_), 469; Brand, Hannah, 192; Bray,
Mrs., 334; Bray, Thomas, 371; Brett, William, 350; Brown, Crisp, 298;
Brown, John (_c_), 95; Brown, William, 134; Browne, Capt. J. M., 277;
Browne, Dr. Charles, 267; Browne, Mary, 383; Browne, Mrs., 218; Browne,
Philip G., 445; Browne, William (_c_), 134; Bruckner, Rev. J., 30;
Brunton, Lieut.-Col. Richard, 457; Brunton, John, 216; Brunton, Mrs.,
256; Buckingham, Dowager Countess of, 143; Buckingham, Earl of, 35;
Buckingham, Earl of, 133; Buckle, John, 155; Bullard, James, 104; Bulwer,
Brigadier-General, 57; Bunn, James, 86; Burks, 252; Burrell, Adam, 265;
Burroughes, J. B., 25; Burrows, William, 202; Burt, William, 318; Burton,
Thomas, 193; Bury, Viscount, 29; Buxton, Sir John Jacob, 423; Buxton, Sir
Robert John, 386; Buxton, Sir T. Fowell, 444.

. . . Caldwell, Ralph, 301; Calthorpe, William, 182; Campling, Elizabeth
(_c_), 244; Carter, Henry, 298; Carter, Mrs. (_c_), 405; Case, P. M.,
332; Castleton, Edward, 87; Catchpole, James (_c_), 243; Chad, Sir
George, 131; Chalmers, 85; Chambers, William, 348; Chapman Ann, 311;
Chapman, Rev. C. J., 254; Chedworth, Lord, 35; Chesney, Thomas, 128;
Chesnut, Robert, 195; Chesnutt, Mrs., 111; Cholmondeley, Marquis of, 266;
Church, James, 121; Clabburn, James, 133; Clark, Daniel, 266; Clark,
Zachary, 129; Clayton, Elizabeth, 38; Clifford, 361; Clifford, Lieut.,
113; Clifford, Mrs., 248; Cobb, George (_c_), 170; Cock, Jemima, 434;
Cockle, Mrs., 347; Cocksedge, J. P., 349; Codenham, Sarah (_c_), 124;
Codling, Henry, 406; Coe, John, 386; Coke, Edward, 351; Coke, Mrs., 88;
Coldwell, Thomas, 221; Cole, J. H., 282; Cole, William, 338; Cole,
William, 458; Colman, Edward, 100; Columbine, Rev. P., 202; Columbine,
Francis, 63; Cook Mary (_c_), 244; Cooke, Thomas, 93; Cooke, William,
419; Cooper, Henry, 238; Cooper, Mrs., 57; Cooper, Sir Astley Paston,
405; Coppin, Daniel, 214; Coppin, Mrs., 97; Cotman, John Sell, 420;
Coward, William, 210; Craven, Earl of, 247; Crawforth, Ann, (_c_), 158;
Crew, Phoebe, 147; Cricknell Richard, 415; Crisp, John, 84; Crisp, Mrs.
(_c_), 51; Crome, Emily, 396; Crome, J. B., 422; Crome, John, 194; Cross,
Mrs. (_c_), 137; Crosse, John Green, 485; Crotch, Dr., 467; Crowe, James,
54; Cruttenden, Lieut.-Col., 486; Cullyer, John, 436; Curtis, C. M., 389;
Cushing, R. H., 114; Cutting, William, 115.

. . . Dacheux, Peter Lewis, 428; Dale, John, 163; Dalrymple, John, 78;
Dalrymple, William, 467; Daniel, T., 47; Davey, Jonathan, 121; Davey,
Robert, 188; Day, Starling, 180; Day, Thomas, 134; Death, Mrs., 237; De
Bardelin, Madame, 255; Deeker, Rev. Thomas, 240; Deeker, Thomas, 95; De
Hague, Elisha, 260; Delaval, E. H., 119; De Mirepoix, Madame, 47; Dent,
Margaret (_c_), 117; De Rouillon, 410; D'Eterville, Rev. T., 425; Dewing,
Edward, 266; Diboll Hannah, 332; Dickens, Mrs., 236; Dickson, Sir
Archibold, 20; Dillon Archbishop, 49; Dixon, Col J., 232; Dixon, Robert,
131; Downes, J. D., 285; D'Oyly, Rev. William, 119; Drummee, Martin, 130;
Dunn, John, 99; D'Urban, Sir Benjamin, 477; Dyball, Mrs., 290; Dye Mary
(_c_), 132.

. . . Eastaugh, Nathaniel, 81; Edge, Mary Ann (_c_), 241; Edwards, C.,
395; Ellis, John, 105; Elton, 430; Elwin, Marsham, 306; Everitt, Mrs.
(_c_), 28.

. . . Fair, Jane (_c_), 97; Fellowes, Robert, 285; Fellowes, W. H., 364;
Fenn, Dame Eleanor, 110; Fenn, Nathan (_c_), 265; Fenn, Robert, 76;
ffolkes, Sir M. B., 203; ffolkes, William Martin, 478; Filby, T., 210;
Finch, Peter, 58; Fisher, David (the elder), 316; Fisher, George, 461;
Fisher, H., 126; Fisher, Miss, 69; Fisher, Mary, 178; Fisher, Mrs., 113;
Fisher, Mrs. David, 165; Fisk, H., 286; Fitch, Joseph, 236; FitzRoy, Hon.
William, 361; FitzRoy, Lord James Henry, 332; FitzRoy, Lieut., 270;
Flower, Sir James, 484; Folker, John, 373; Forby, Rev. R., 252; Forby,
Richard, 308; Forster, Rev. Dr., 430; Foster, W., 192; Foster, William,
80; Fountain, Martin, 273; Fox, Charles, 475; Foyson, Thomas, 311;
Framingham, Major-General Sir H., 182; Fransham, John, 80; Frere,
Barbara, 150; Frere, John, 58; Frere, John Hockham, 452; Frere, Lieut.
R.E., 423; Fry, Mrs., 450; Fuller, Ann, 14; Fuller, James, 90.

. . . Galey, Mrs. (_c_), 53; Gardner, Thos., 318; Garland T., 63; Gibson,
Joseph, 296; Gibbs, Mary (_c_), 110; Gill, Thomas, 99; Gill, T. W., 397;
Gilpin, Rev. William, 415; Girling, Major, 475; Glasspoole, Capt.
Richard, 458; Goddard, Sophia, 3; Gooch, Dr. R., 293; Goodings, Thomas
(_c_), 168; Goodyer, Ashton (_c_), 154; Gordon, Sir William, 27; Goulty,
Mrs., 193; Grafton, Duke of, 89; Greaves, Rev. T. B., 482; Green, John
(_c_), 242; Greenfield, Thomas (_c_), 265; Gresham, Sir John, 8; Grimmer,
Charles (_c_), 170; Grounds, Thomas and Jane, 134; Gudgeon, John, 349;
Gurney, Bartlett, 17; Gurney, John, 77; Gurney, Joseph, 301; Gurney
Joseph John, 460; Gurney, Richard, 92; Gurney, Richard (innkeeper), 288;
Guyton, Benjamin, 230.

. . . Hague, Dr. Charles, 196; Hales, William, 447; Hall, William, 241;
Hamond, Anthony, 214; Hamond, Sir A. S., 279; Hampp, Christopher, 243;
Hancock, Hannah Sarah, 486; Hankin, Col. Sir T. P., 250; Hansard, L. G.,
406; Hansard, Luke, 281; Hansell, Rev. Peter, 405; Hardy, James, 152;
Harrison, B., 400; Harrison, John, 88; Harwin, William, 90; Harvey,
Charles (_see_ Onley, Charles Savill); Harvey, Lieut.-Col., 415; Harvey,
Robert, 178; Harvey, Jeremiah Ives, 112; Harvey, R. B., 472; Harvey,
Robert, 133; Havers, Mary Ann, 464; Hawes, Elizabeth (_nee_ Porson), 416;
Hawkes, Robert, 348; Haylett, Nehemiah (_c_), 134; Hays, Roger, 255;
Helsdon, Mary (_c_), 17; Herring, Alderman, 269; Herring, John, 86;
Herring, Robert, 117; Hethersett, Lieut.-General, 96; Hicks, J., 287;
Hill, John, 457; Hill, W. M., 101; Hindes, J. C., 231; Holl, Thomas, 172;
Holland, Mrs., 131; Holland, Mrs., 183; Holmes, Robert (_c_), 431; Holt,
Thomas (_c_), 105; Home, Dowager Countess, 113; Hope, F. F., 271; Horne,
Mrs., 231; Horth, James, 303; Hoseason, Thomas, 339; Hoste, Capt. Sir
William, 282; Hoste, Capt. T. E., 333; Hoste, Rev. Dixon, 252; Hoste, Sir
George C., 445; Houghton, Rev. P., 231; Howes, Rev. T., 120; Howlett,
Williams, 199; Hoy, John, 143; Hudson, James, 56; Hull, Thomas H., 276;
Hunt J., 235; Hunt, John, 192; Hunt, John, 419.

. . . Irby, Hon. F. P., 437; Ives, Jeremiah, 38.

. . . Jackson, Elizabeth, 372; Jarvis, Christopher, 143; Jean, Roger,
282; Jennings, Archdeacon, 481; Jerningham, C. W., 187; Jerningham,
Edward, 100; Jerningham, Edward, 208; Jerningham, General, 121;
Jerningham, Lady, 243; Jerningham, Sir William, 75; Jessup, Sarah (_c_),
321; Jodrell, Henry, 113; Jodrell, Richard Paul, 303; Johnson, 96;
Johnson, Lewis, 110; Johnson, Rev. Dr., 325; Jones, Mrs., 234; Jones, Sir
John Thomas, 425; Jones, Sir Lawrence, 451; Jones, William, 261; Joy,
John, 253; Joy, Matthew, 223.

. . . Kemp, Sir W., 34; Kent, Nathaniel, 87; Keppel, Hon. C. J., 150;
Keppel, Hon. Mrs., 107; Kerrison, Sir Roger, 65; Kerrison, Thomas A.,
163; Keymer, Henry, 55; Keymer, James, 291; Kingaby, Charles, (_c_), 289;
Kinghorn, Rev. Joseph, 317; Kinnebrook, David, 81; Kitson, Charles, 210;
Kitson, Roger, 440; Knights, P. J., 323.

. . . Lacon, Sir Edmund, 187; Ladbrooke, Robert, 423; Lambe, James, 379;
Lane, Rev. James, 193; Laney, Mrs. (_c_), 182; Langton, Richard, 346;
Lany, Elizabeth, 377; Larner, Ann (_c_), 380; Larwood, Rev. Joshua, 63;
Layton, Mrs. E. (_c_), 147; Leake, Elizabeth, 316; Leake, Sir J. O., 133;
Leeds, Dowager Duchess of, 366; Leech, Thomas, 415; Lee Warner, H., 32;
Leicester, Countess of, 11; Leicester, Dowager Countess of, 439;
Leicester, Earl of, 419; Leman, Barnabas, 340; Lemon, G. W., 369;
Lennard, Rev. D. Barrett, 381; Lens, Serjeant, 248; Ling (_c_), 103;
Lindley, George, 340; Linley, 339; Linley, Mrs., 178; Linley, Rev. O. T.,
304; Lloyd, Mrs., 4; Lock, John (_c_), 223; Loftus, Col. Henry, 223;
Loftus, General, 307; Loftus, Lady Elizabeth, 90; Lombe, Sir John, 147;
Longe, Sir J. T., 43; Lorkin, Jeremiah, 296; Lorkin, William, 357;
Lothian, Marquis of, 412; Love, H. B., 377; Love, William, 63; Lovick,
John, 180; Lubbock, Dr., 462; Lubbock, Dr. Richard, 67; Lukin, Rev. Dr.,
100; Lytton, Elizabeth Barbara Bulwer, 433.

. . . Mack, Mary, 62; Manby, Rear-Admiral, 331; Mann, Catherine (_c_),
266; Manning, Dr. J., 47; Manning, Edmund, 370; Manning, Thomas, 396;
Manning, William, 246; Marryat, Capt., 471; Marsham, Thomas, 336;
Marsters, Thomas, 430; Martin, Sir Mordaunt, 130; Martin, Stephen, 18;
Martineau, Dr. T., 234; Martineau, Mrs., 80; Martineau, P. M., 282;
Maskeleyne, Rev. Neville, 89; Mason, William, 343; Matchett, Jonathan,
442; Mellish, Very Rev. E., 301; Middleton, Mrs., 86; Middleton, Right
Rev. Dr., 210; Mildenhall, Robert, 224; Miller, Ann (_c_), 57; Miller,
Dean Combe, 113; Miller, Thomas, 34; Milles, Richard, 187; Mills,
Jeffreson, 438; Mingay, James, 97; Mingay, Richard, 336; Minns, John,
130; Mitchell, John, 79; Mog, Samuel (_c_), 96; Money, General, 145;
Money, Major, 202; Moneyment, Mary (_c_), 67; Montrath, Earl of, 12;
Moore, William, 391; Morell, Rev., S., 239; Morgan, Walter, 447; Morphew,
Rev. J. C., 232; Morse, John, 365; Morse, John, 435; Morris, Samuel, 223;
Morton, J., 90; Mountain, Mary, 199; Munnings, Rev. T. C., 325; Munsen,
William, 123; Murray, Captain James, 161; Murray, Dr. T. A., 12; Murray,
James V., 282; Murray, John B., 280; Murray, Lady, 313; Murray, Mary,
168; Murray, Robert, 60; Myhill, John (_c_), 65.

. . . Nash, John, 178; Neale, Francis (_c_), 232; Neale, Henry, 107;
Nelson, Earl, 63; Nelson, Earl, 344; Nelson, Rev. Earl, 338; Nelson,
Viscountess, 306; Neville, Dr., 407; Ninham, John, 150; Noble, William,
103; Norfolk, Duke of, 132; Norgate, Elias, 24; Norgate, Elias, 326;
Norman, William, 418; Norris, Lieutenant George, 109; Norton, Eliza
(_c_), 62.

. . . Odell, Rev. Richards, 243; Oldershaw, Archdeacon, 461; Oldershaw,
Mrs. (_c_), 245; Onley, Charles Savill, 431; Opie, John, 56; Orford, Earl
of, 71; Orford, Earl of, 209; Osborn, T., 53.

. . . Palgrave, William, 215; Palmer, John, 471; Parfrey, Mrs., 18;
Parker, Sir George, 467; Parnell, Robert, 253; Parr, Rev. Dr., 243;
Parsons, James, 99; Partridge, Robert, 144; Paston, James, 213; Patteson,
Capt., 120; Patteson, J. S., 317; Pattle, Richard (c), 394; Paul, Robert,
266; Pearson, Samuel, 272; Peele, Rev. John, 35; Penrice, Thomas, 141;
Perowne, Isabella (_c_), 278; Perowne, William, 227; Pettet, Alfred, 358;
Philo, James, 291; Pickwood, Sarah, 53; Pidgeon, Mrs., 215; Plestow, Sir
T. B., 168; Porson, Richard, 68; Potter, Rev. Robert, 33; Poultney, Sir
James, 90; Powell, 107; Praed, 387; Pratt, Edward Roger, 370; Preston,
Jacob, 268; Priest, Rev. St. John, 163; Priest, Robert, 238.

. . . Quin, Edward, 224.

. . . Rayson, John, 406; Read, William, 351; Reed, William (_c_), 391;
Reeve, Dr. Henry, 120; Reeve, Edmund, 334; Rennie, John, 200; Repton,
Humphrey, 156; Revell, Rev. M., 223; Reynolds, John, 259; Reynolds,
Thomas, 312; Riches, Thomas, 276; Rigby, Dr., 200; Rising, John, 72;
Robberds, J. W., 366; Robinson, Gregory, 451; Robinson, James, 366;
Roope, Mrs. (_c_), 46; Roope, Thomas, 85; Rosebery, Earl of, 114; Row,
Thomas, 372; Rumble, Mrs. (_c_), 239.

. . . Saint, William, 173; Sanctuary, Thomas, 103; Sandby, Rev. Dr., 55;
Sayers, Dr. F., 149; Scott, Hannah (_c_), 171; Scrape, Thomas (_c_), 275;
Sculley, Lieut., 4; Seaman, Mary (_c_), 254; Service, David, 274;
Seymour, E. H., 166; Sharpe, Edward, 103; Shaw, Richard, 366;
Sheepshanks, Rev. W., 84; Sillett, James, 396; Simpson, Samuel (_c_),
370; Simpson, William, 336; Skipper, Henry, 12; Smith, Benjamin, 291;
Smith, Henry, 254; Smith, James, 345; Smith, John, 197; Smith, John
(_c_), 433; Smith, Miss, 187; Smith, Richard (_c_), 324; Smith, Sir J.
E., 274; Smith, Theophilus, 468; Smith, Thomas, 178; Smith, William
(ex-M.P. for Norwich), 340; Smyth, Ann, 87; Smyth, Capt., 48; Snell J.
C., 61; Sneyd, W., 287; Snow, William, 387; Spraggs, Mary (_c_), 266;
Stafford, John, 400; Stanford, Ann (_c_), 470; Stanley, Bishop, 479;
Stannard, G., 394; Stannard, Joseph, 300; Stark, Michael, 304; Starling,
Tabitha (_c_), 141; Stephens, Sir Philip, 78; Stevens, Mrs., 109;
Stevenson, William, 173; Stevenson, William, 195; Steward, George, 440;
Stockings, Mrs. (_c_), 131; Stokes, W. H., 164; Stone, Capt. Charles,
304; Stone, Francis, 343; Storey, Hannah (_c_), 271; Strongitharm, Rev.
L., 265; Stubings, J., 51; Suffield, Dowager Lady, 487; Suffield, Lord,
80; Suffield, Lord, 197; Suffield, Lord, 342; Sutton, Col. Manners, 243;
Sutton, Richard, 449; Sutton, Thomas, 172; Swan, John, 215; Symonds,
John, 195.

. . . Tawell, Thomas, 182; Taylor, Meadows, 371; Taylor, Rev. Philip,
309; Taylor, William, 347; Thompson, Henry, 136; Thompson, John, 35;
Thompson, John, 89; Thurlow, Canon, 461; Thurlow, Lord Chancellor, 51;
Thurston, Samuel, 405; Thurtell, George, 468; Thurtell, Henry, 274;
Thurtell, Thomas, 454; Tinkler, Capt., 185; Titchfield, Marquis of, 230;
Tonna, Charlotte Elizabeth, 457; Townshend, Lord, 420; Townshend,
Marquis, 59; Townshend, Marquis, 92; Travers, Major-General Sir R., 336;
Troughton, T., 46; Troughton, Thomas, 264; Tucker, G. C., 418; Turner,
Mrs., 194; Turner, Thomas, 441; Turner, Very Rev. Dean, 278; Twiddy,
James, 308; Twiddy, Mrs. (_c_), 310; Twiddy, Thomas, 18.

. . . Unthank, Lieut., 96; Uttten, William, 155; Utting, Elizabeth (_c_),
198; Utting, Robert, 335.

. . . Valpy, Rev. Edward, 313; Vaughan, 425; Vere, Mrs. (_c_), 270;
Vince, Rev. Samuel, 203.

. . . Waddy, John, 115; Wade, John, 171; Wade, Robin (_c_), 394;
Wagstaffe, John, 71; Walden, John (_c_), 189; Walker, Ezekiel, 329;
Walker, Rev. J., 61; Waller, Luke (_c_), 227; Walpole, Hon. George, 343;
Walsingham, Lord, 154; Walton, Rev. L., 405; Want, Hannah (_c_), 249;
Ward, Robert, 351; Ware, William Henry, 281; Warmington, Robert, 98;
Warrant, William (_c_), 159; Warren, Capt. J. E., 76; Waters, Joseph,
352; Watling, Simon, 97; Watson, J., 308; Watson, John, 282; Watson,
Thomas, 72; West, Edward, 2; Webb, T. S., 399; Websdale, William (_c_),
11; Wheeler, James, 91; Whetstone, Edward, 109; White, Mrs., 321; Whiter,
Rev. Walter, 316; Widdows, Francis, 349; Wiggins, Thomas, 437; Wignell,
17; Wilkins, W., 388; Wilkins, William, 125; Willement, William, 316;
Windham, Joseph, 86; Windham, Mrs., 233; Windham, William, 83; Withers,
Captain, 429; Witton Sarah (_c_), 410; Wodehouse, Baron, 456; Wodehouse,
Lady, 244; Wodehouse, Lord, 331; Wodehouse, Rev. Prebendary, 89;
Wodehouse, Thos., 37; Woodward, Samuel, 370; Wratham, Mary (_c_), 333;
Wright, John, 435; Wright, Warner, 444.

. . . Yallop, Sir J. H., 341; Yates, F., 419; Yonge, Rev. Chancellor,
442; Youngs, J., 105.

Dilapidation of St. Mary's church, Norwich, 474.

Dillon, Mr. Charles, manager of Norwich Theatre, 474.

Diseased sheep, conviction for exposing, 472.

Disfranchisement of Yarmouth voters, 468.

Disraeli, Mr., at Lynn, 458.

Disruption in the Scottish Church, 436.

Diss church belle re-cast, 317.

. . . Brewery, sale of, 401.

. . . hosiery, 415.

. . . Hospital, 386.

. . . , public improvements at, 77.

Dissection of criminals, 151, 174, 288.

Dissenters' Benevolent Society, 48.

Dissolving views, 332.

Distillation from grain, 64, 80.

Distin family, 413.

District Provident Society, Norwich, 360.

. . . Schools, Norwich, 369.

Disturbances at Norwich Theatre, 126.

Diving operations at Yarmouth, 316.

Divorce, 87, 113, 395.

Dixon, the scene painter, 131.

Dogs as animals of draught, 288, 387, 420, 484.

Douro, Marquis of, adopted candidate for Norwich, 357, 408, 464; elected,
363, 409, 464; introduces Norwich Improvement Bill, 382; receives
deputation of freemen, 395; secures cavalry headquarters for Norwich,
427.

Dover, the Chartist, 398, 403, 408, 409, 443; "sells" the city, 409;
sentenced to transportation, 443.

Downham riots, 136.

. . . Theatre, 283.

Dowton, Mr. (actor), 133, 190, 311.

Drama, decline of, in Norwich, 331, 438, 448.

Dress, paucity of, in ball-room, 130.

Dresser to actresses, 183.

Drill system of husbandry, 173, 419.

Driving up a flight of steps, 221.

. . . a coach and six, 413.

Dropsy, remarkable case at Norwich, 53.

Drought, 161.

Drover, long distance ridden by a, 81.

Drowned, at Wroxham Water Frolic, 66; in a bath, 252; in a beer vat, 447;
in a vinegar vat, 311.

Duels, 16, 74, 268, 324, 325.

. . . , inciting to fight, 85, 380, 422.

Duke of York, charges against the, 71.

Duke's Palace Bridge, 176, 386, 428.

. . . estate, sale of, 50.

Dulcken, Madame, 473.

Du Pain, the "Fire-King," 123.

Dutch church, 38, 39.

. . . regiment formed at Yarmouth, 114.

Duty on port wine at Lynn, 7.



E


Eagles killed in Norfolk, 11, 18, 43, 123, 263, 296, 299, 345, 358, 383,
436.

Early closing of public-houses, 472.

. . . of shops, 378.

Early rising, 332.

East Norfolk Conservative Association, 339.

Eau Brink Cut opened, 197.

. . . Drainage Bill, 156.

Eccentric personages, 12, 19, 32, 38, 45, 61, 62, 63, 68, 76, 79, 80, 81,
84, 93, 102, 123, 130, 188, 192, 197, 223, 235, 241, 253, 265, 276, 291,
350, 370, 386, 409, 434, 437, 449, 485.

Education, national system of, 373.

Eel, large, 384.

Eldon Club, Norwich, first anniversary of, 318.

Election compromises, 409; of Common Council, Norwich, 266, 274, 294,
304; conducted upon "correct principles," 304; dinners, 109, 299, 320,
324, 337, 363; dinner bill disputed at Thetford, 114; fracas at Swaffham,
337; by juveniles, 365; nominations at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, 98;
petitions, 53, 341, 368, 372, 409, 468; against Lord Stormont and Sir
James Scarlett, 321, 334; against Mr. Edmond Wodehouse and Mr. H. N.
Burroughes, 372; against Mr. C. E. Rumbold and Mr. W. Wilshere, 372;
against the Hon. R. C. Campbell and the Marquis of Douro, 373; against
the Earl of Euston, 409; scrutinies, 15, 317.

Elections on Sunday, 116, 306.

. . . (Parliamentary), 15, 52, 56, 99, 147, 159, 160, 165, 180, 209, 230,
256, 297, 298, 300, 305, 306, 319, 320, 333, 336, 337, 363, 364, 408,
409, 410, 415, 444, 464, 465.

Electric light, 478.

Elephant, death of, 468.

Elliston, Mr. (actor), 133.

Elopement of an actor and actress, 429.

Enlistment of a woman, 83.

Ensign of the Genereux, 6.

Embargo on Yarmouth shipping, 19.

Embezzlement, 81, 338, 428, 445, 483.

. . . alleged fictitious charge of, 340, 348.

Emery, Mr. (actor), 155.

Emigrants, 193, 294, 338, 349, 360, 427.

Episcopal chapel, Yarmouth, 298.

Equestrian feat, 6.

. . . performances at Norwich Theatre, 123.

Equipage of High Sheriff, 108, 174.

Escapes from prisons, 69, 157, 182, 192, 293, 361, 371.

Estate owner sentenced to transportation, 135.

Estates, sales of, 54, 73, 76, 78, 79, 80, 199, 203, 271, 283, 351, 352,
388, 394, 401, 411, 415, 447, 449, 455, 466.

Evening services at Norwich churches, 101, 143.

Exchange Street, Norwich, opened, 279.

Excommunication, 292.

Excursion of Yarmouth Headborough Inquest, 98.

Excursions to Rotterdam, 246, 457.

Execution at Lynn, 9; at Yarmouth, 109; disgraceful scene at, 454.

Executions, 4, 8, 9, 13, 16, 19, 39, 56, 58, 61, 64, 104, 135, 137, 140,
151, 170, 174, 175, 206, 207, 211, 220, 232, 285, 288, 295, 305, 330,
338, 343, 348, 359, 384, 401, 410, 454, 476.

. . . , at Thetford, 232.

Exhumations, 172, 485.

Expeditions to the Baltic, 65, 82; to Copenhagen, 58, 60.

Explosion on Wright's steam packet, 145.

Eye Infirmary, Norwich, 204.



F


Factories, employment of children in, 321.

Falconry.  _See_ Hawking.

Fall of city wall, Norwich, 54.

. . . east end of St. Julian's church, Norwich, 445.

. . . floors, 94, 219, 385; at Taverham Mills, 385.

. . . Yarmouth Suspension Bridge, 446.

. . . , singular death from a, 423.

Farmers' funerals, 111, 351.

Farms, extent of Norfolk, 78.

Farren, Mr. (actor), 376, 398, 465.

Farren, Mr. H., 465, 471.

Farrier's funeral, 99.

Fasting man at Buckenham, 45.

Fasts, 2, 24, 30, 38, 80, 89, 95, 103, 311, 462.

Fatal accident during a gale, 70.

Faucit (or Faucett), Mrs. (actress), 109, 169.

Faucit, Miss Helen (actress), 471.

_Felo de se_, 104.

Female letter-carriers, 316, 321.

. . . pedestrian, 289.

. . . quack doctor, 18.

Fight in a magistrates' room, 422.

Fillover work, copying of patterns, 377.

"Finest barley and worst ale," 108.

Fire alarm regarded as an April hoax, 266.

. . . at Cathedral, Norwich, 7; at Cavalry Barracks, Norwich, 431.

. . . brigade organized at Norwich, 459.

. . . engine kept in a church, 53.

. . . engines, 53, 132, 183, 386.

. . . escape, 352.

. . . Insurance Society (Norwich Union), 198.

. . . , killed at a, 218.

Fire-balls, 324.

Fires, 7, 9, 14, 30, 31, 39, 53, 65, 89, 129, 164, 187, 191, 199, 214,
218, 238, 266, 283, 290, 314, 320, 324, 331, 345, 359, 386, 394, 417,
431, 456.

First day of the century, 1.

Fish, immense captures of, 480.

Fisher, Mr. Charles, at the Prince's Theatre, 450.

Fisher, Mr. David, at Drury Lane Theatre, 155.

Fisher family, 32, 69, 95, 113, 126, 130, 137, 155, 161, 178, 213, 218,
239, 243, 276, 316, 322, 400, 442, 450, 453.

Fisheries preservation, 383.

Fishermen drowned at Sheringham, 61.

Fishing rights at Thetford, 315.

Fitzgerald, Mr. (actor), 116, 169.

Fitzwilliam, Mrs. (actress), 432, 447.

Flaw in an indictment, 268.

Flax, cultivation of, 424.

Fleets at Yarmouth, 2, 48, 58, 60, 65, 82.

Floods, 70, 133, 178, 180, 202, 277, 355, 405, 413.

Florin, introduction of the, 478.

Flower, Sir James, as High Sheriff, 371, 376; elected member for
Thetford, 409; death, 484.

"Flying Actaeons," 172.

Foot-steeplechase, 376.

Foote, Miss, 285.

Forehoe tontine, 271.

Foreign barley bought by Norwich maltsters, 170.

Forged bank notes discovered, 134.

Forgery of a will, 114.

Forncett centenarian, 133.

Fortune-telling, 131.

Foundation-stones laid, 98, 106, 149, 169, 176, 200, 234, 269, 276, 296,
298, 388, 399, 406, 427, 431, 445, 470, 473.

Foundry Bridge, 68, 72, 386, 436.

Four at a birth, 149, 168.

Fox, Charles James, 51.

Fox chased by greyhounds, 202.

. . . on cottage roof, 216.

Freedom of Norwich, 31, 38, 63, 120, 168, 189, 192, 224, 257, 285, 302,
304, 310, 324, 339.

Freemasonry, 11, 132, 175, 406, 450.

Friars' Society, 100.

Friends' Meeting House, Norwich, 260.

Frightened to death by a fortune-teller, 131.

. . . at a theatre, 352.

Frosts, 11, 112, 178, 262, 301, 355, 369, 404, 405, 443, 444.

Funeral at night, 89.

Fye Bridge, 276.



G


Gales, 45, 55, 60, 63, 70, 87, 148, 155, 180, 202, 203, 214, 226, 263,
277, 290, 347, 354, 357, 378, 380, 404, 432, 443, 481.

Gamecock, child attacked by a, 222.

Gaols (Norwich), 171, 234, 258, 260, 339.

Gas lighting, 122, 163, 167, 168, 231, 237, 243, 295, 301, 332, 341, 347,
368, 379, 403, 480, 482.

. . . , price of, at Norwich, 347.

Gates of Norwich, 69.

George III., Jubilee of, 76, 77; death, 179; funeral, 179; address of
condolence by Norwich Corporation, 180; by the county, 181.

George IV., accession of, 179; coronation, 197; receives loyal addresses,
189; death, 296; funeral, 297.

German Legion at Norwich, 46, 129.

Ghost, Orford Hill, 259; at Syderstone Parsonage, 324.

Giants, 262, 436, 447.

Gibbets, 6, 29.

Gibbs, Capt., feat by, 140.

Gill, Mr., his first appearance at Norwich Theatre, 316; elopement with
Miss Vining, 429.

Gin shops, 101.

Girl widow, 337.

Gladstone, Mr., on Norwich railway petition, 347.

Glee Club, 369.

Glory, East Indiaman, loss of, 78.

Gloucester, Prince Frederick William of, 9, 122, 132.

. . . Duke of, 173, 189; his toast at Holkham, 142.

Glover, Miss Phillis (actress), 243.

Gored by a bull, 308.

Govett, Rev. Romaine, turns Nonconformist, 438.

Gower, Lord L., at Norwich, 62.

Grossmith, W. R. (juvenile performer), 282.

Grain in distilleries, 64, 60, 88, 94.

Grammar School, Norwich, 289, 290, 326, 430, 478.

Grant, Mr. Robert, M.P., resignation of, 315.

Grave-digger in Hamlet, traditionary waistcoats of, 255.

Greenacre, James, 360.

Greenfield, Miss (actress), 90.

Gretna Green marriage, 105.

Greyhounds belonging to Lord Rivers, 251.

Grouse, black, shot at Swanton, 459.

Guardians, Norwich Court of, Amendment Bills, 264, 305; mode of election,
259; right of Corporation to elect, 296, abolition of the right, 305.

Guild Day at Norwich, 15, 49, 57, 66, 73, 84, 91, 118, 138, 148, 160,
183, 196, 209, 222, 235, 246, 257, 268, 277, 286, 296, 306, 315, 324,
332, 341.

. . . , party favours on, 160.

Guildhall, Norwich, improvements at, 347, 484.

Gully and Cribb at Norwich, 61.

Gun accidents, 213, 318, 442.

. . . , bursting of a, at Yarmouth, 213.

Gurney, Richard Hanbury, defendant in _Crim. Con._ action, 156, 291;
marriage, 291; elected for Norwich, 305; attends Norwich Reform
celebration, 314; defeated at Norwich, 319; presentation to, 332;
candidate for East Norfolk, 337, 364.

Gustavus Adolphus at Yarmouth, 87.



H


Haddock's exhibition of automata, 148.

Hailstorm Insurance Society established, 434.

Hailstorms, 148, 173, 365, 376, 430.

Hairdresser to George III., 418.

Hales, the Norfolk giant, 436, 447.

Halos round the sun, 429.

Hall Concert Society, 141, 335, 406.

Hall, Mr. C. F. (composer), 422, 440.

Hamond, Mr. Anthony, 202, 214.

Happisburgh light, birds attracted by, 450.

. . . church tower damaged by lightning, 209.

. . . , horses drowned off, 322.

. . . , poisoning cases at, 455.

Harley, Mr. (actor), 179.

Harvest ruined by heavy rains, 139.

. . . , late, 141.

Harvey, Lieut.-Col. Robert John, at Vittoria, 106; at St. Boes, 114;
marriage of, 127; knighted, 144.

Hastings, Barony of, 407.

Hawking, 126, 223, 285, 338, 372.

Hayes, Capt., his long service, 218.

Health, Board of, Norwich, 454.

Heat, excessive, 34, 49, 66, 72, 377.

. . . , affects Trowse Swing Bridge, 457.

Heavy rains, 139, 173, 202, 277.

Heber, Mr., the bibliomaniac, 212.

Heigham Episcopal chapel, 381.  _See also_ Rahobeth chapel.

. . . Hall Asylum, 284.

Herring, large captures of, 192, 480.

Herring's Antidote, 55.

Hickathrift, the Marshland giant, 349.

High Sheriff's balloon ascent, 248.

. . . claim of exemption, 241.

. . . equipage, 108, 174, 247.

High Sheriffs, 108, 110, 241, 247, 371, 376.

Highway robberies, 65, 382.

. . . surveyors, 260.

Hillington Hall, fire at, 417.

Hinds, Bishop, installation of, 481; presented with address by Norwich
Corporation, 487.

Hoaxing the public, 258, 342; the "Times," 487.

Hobby horses, 170.

Holkham, huntsman at, 261.

. . . , irrigation at, 46.

. . . , race meeting at, 324.

. . . , ram letting at, 17.

. . . Sheep Shearing, 6, 15, 31, 41, 49, 57, 65, 72, 84, 91, 96, 106,
118, 127, 138, 148, 160, 173, 183, 196.

Holly and evergreen in churches, 88.

Hone's trial, 153.

Hooker, Dr. W. J., 349.

Hops, cultivation of, 353, 367.

Horse packet on the Yare, 146.

. . . patrol, 110.

. . . poisoning, 270.

Horses drowned off Happisburgh, 322.

Horticultural Society, Norfolk and Norwich, 290, 326.

Hospital, Norfolk and Norwich, 15, 43, 51, 59, 67, 191, 202, 223, 241,
282, 298, 299, 314, 381, 434, 444, 449, 461, 462, 466, 467, 485.

. . . , . . . , its utility questioned, 466.

. . . , . . . , museum, 434, 449.

. . . , Diss, 386.

. . . , West Norfolk and Lynn, 339.

. . . , Yarmouth, 388.

Hoste, Captain William, his defeat of French and Italian Squadrons, 91;
created baronet, 119; death, 282.

Houghton Hall, opera at, 61.

. . . purchase of, 141.

Hounds, remarkable runs of, 1, 71, 77, 112, 202, 205, 244, 284, 354, 358,
371.

Householders as special constables, 25.

Houses of Correction abolished at Aylsham and Wymondham, 240.

Howes, the bell performer, 67.

Humane jailor, 102.

Hunt dinner at East Harling, 360.

Hunting, 1, 71, 77, 112, 244, 294, 451.

. . . party threatened with legal proceedings, 451.

Hutchinson, Lord, at Norwich, 62.



I


Illegitimate children, 64.

Illuminated clock, 285.

Improvement Bills, 382, 390, 392.

Improvements at Norwich, 229, 240, 388, 390, 441.

Imprisoned by Consistory Court, 292, 442.

Imprisonment for debt, abolition of, 440.

Incendiaries, detection of, 309.

Incendiarism, increase of, 439.

Incledon, Mr. (singer), 43, 49, 74, 134, 146.

Income assessment, 13.

. . . tax, 420, 426.

Indian jugglers, 150.

Infant school system, 348.

Influenza, 357.

Informers, 233, 402, 435.

Inquest in a church porch, 298.

Insolvent Acts, 208.

. . . Debtors Act, 135, 169.

Instinct, remarkable, of coach horses, 468.

Intimidation of a clergyman, 307.

Invincible, loss of H.M.S., 3.

Irby, Captain, R.N., his services, 103; death, 437.

Irish distress, relief of, 208, 306, 461.

. . . tontine, 87.

Iron coffins, 191.

. . . tomb, 385.



J


Jermy.  _See_ Preston, Isaac.

"Jerry," 409.

Jews baptised, 148, 270, 366.

Jews' Society established, 150.

"Jim Crow," 372.

Jocelyn, Lord, elected for King's Lynn, 415.

Joint Stock Banking Company, 265.

Jones, Sir Lawrence, murdered in Turkey, 451.

Joy, Matthew, "the Walking Baker," 223.

Jubilee of George III., 76, 77.

Judges' lodgings, 323, 348, 395.

Judges of Assize at Attleborough church, 140.

. . . , meeting the, 247.

Jullien's concerts, 442, 469.

Jury, long detention of, 312.

. . . of matrons, 322.

. . . of solicitors, 294.



K


Kean, Mr. (actor), 150, 172, 181.

Kean, Mr. (the younger), 277, 298.

Kean, Mr. and Mrs. Charles, 441.

Keeley, Mr. and Mrs., 401, 464.

Kelly, Mr. Fitzroy, appointed Steward of Norwich, 301.

Kelly, the Misses (actresses), 134, 143, 330.

Kemble, Miss Fanny, 468.

Kemble, Mr. and Mrs., 139, 144, 342.

Kent, Duke of, 178, 180.

Kerrison Bankruptcy, 66, 73, 79.

Kerrison, Lieut.-Col., his defeat of French Infantry, 114; recognition of
his gallantry, 119; at Waterloo, 128; knighted, 122; created baronet,
198.

Kicked to death by a cow, 471.

Kidd, Rev. T., elected master of Norwich Grammar School, 290; resigns,
326.

Kidnapping, 165.

Killed by lightning, 478.

"Killing not sporting," 381.

King Charles's martyrdom, 63.

King and Constitution Club, 174.

Knowles, Mr. Sheridan (actor and dramatist), 346.



L


Labourers, illegal combination of, 89.

Ladybirds, swarm of, 258.

Lady Lane chapel, Norwich, 228.

Lakenham schools, 463.

Lambert, the Fat Man, 70.

Lamplighter's funeral, 89.

Lancastrian Schools, 63, 81, 90, 95, 129.

Land Tax in Norfolk, 157.

Law Library, 239, 251.

Lay clerks' salaries, 69.

Layton, the Wrestler, 97, 111, 116.

Leicester, Earl of, marriage, 427; lays foundation-stone of Wells Quay,
431; presents standard to Norfolk Yeomanry Cavalry, 432.

Leicester monument, 420, 424, 449.

Leipsic, Battle of, 110.

Lent Assizes, removal from Thetford, 254, 304.

. . . first held at Norwich, 304, 322.

Libel, 118, 279, 307, 369, 391, 470.

. . . by a clergyman, 307.

Life-saving, 35, 57, 62, 85, 193, 200, 222, 224, 227, 329, 411, 446.

Light Horse, Norwich, 6, 22, 25, 71, 127, 148, 181, 194, 197, 206, 220,
267, 415.

. . . railways first suggested, 460.

Lighting (oil) at Loddon, 36; at Norwich, 59; at Thetford, 96.

Lind, Jenny, 465, 474.

Lion tamers, 320, 407, 411, 414, 432, 442.

Liszt, M., at Norwich, 402.

Literary Institution, Norfolk and Norwich, 214, 226, 385.

Livings, purchase of, 385, 398.

Lobster in the Waveney, 306.

Longevity at Pulham Market, 87.

Long imprisonment, 151, 200, 458.

Long residence in one house, 215, 371.

Lords Lieutenant, 63, 198.

Lord's Prayer as a charm, 427, 428.

Lotteries, 6, 35, 54, 84, 132.

Louis XVIII. at Yarmouth, 60.

Low prices, 27.

Love, Midshipman, fires first shot at bombardment of Flushing, 76.

Lover, Mr. Samuel, at Norwich, 444.

Loyal Society, 245.

Lucifer matches, 378.

Lugger race at Yarmouth, 278.

Lynn Corporation custom, 289.

. . . , election riot at, 209.

. . . Market cross, 305.

. . . Market house, 296.

. . . , May-Day at, 330, 349.

. . . Theatre, foundation-stone laid, 106; opened, 123; managed by Mr.
Marsters, 205.

. . . yacht at Brussels, 16.



M


Macauley, Miss (actress), 187, 191.

Machine-breaking, 138, 205, 299, 300, 301.

. . . for removing insects, 58.

Macready, Mr. (actor), 274, 339, 447.

Mad dogs, 63, 219.

Madrigal Society, 369.

Magdalen Fair, Norwich, discontinuance of, 257.

Magistrate sentencing his servant, 94.

Mails, 38, 69, 133, 201, 338.

Malibran at Norwich Theatre, 299.

Malt Tax, 192, 217, 292, 299, 330, 458, 475.

Manby's life-saving apparatus, 57, 62, 85, 87, 222, 224, 329, 411.

Manufactures, Norwich, 65, 66, 70, 95, 106, 107, 133, 140, 152, 177, 190,
205, 209, 213, 218, 230, 249, 252, 263, 304, 311, 375, 377, 443, 460.

Mardyn, Mrs. (actress), 137.

Market Cross sold by auction, 305.

. . . at Yarmouth removed, 350.

. . . House at Lynn, 296.

. . . tolls, 221.

Marriage by a ward in Chancery, 22; by proxy, 150; band of music at a,
156; delayed by a bride, 93; extraordinary, at Yarmouth, 284, at
Fakenham, 288; military escort at a, 127; singular incident at a, 317.

Marriages: Boileau--Elliott, 251; Borrow--Clarke, 396; Brundall--Mason,
238; Coke--Keppel, 205; De Crespigny--Bathurst, 185; Craven, Earl
of--Brunton, 61; Fisher--Howard, 239; Fisher--Richardson, 400;
Fraser--Jerningham, 224; Jarvis--Boyles, 163; Leicester, Earl
of--Whitbread, 427; Macdonald--Keppel, 174; Manby--Gooch, 156;
Murray--Browne, 240; Murray--Douglas, 350; Preston--Jephson, 313;
Rosebery, Earl of--Anson, 175; Thurtell--Morgan, 362; Yates--Brunton,
227.

. . . , singular, 19, 93, 284, 288, 289, 311, 397.

Marryat, Captain, sale of his libraries, &c., 344; death, 471.

Mary, Princess, at Holkham, 173.

Marshland free bridge opened, 196; causeway opened, 212.

Marshland Shales, 265.

Martin, William (artist), 279.

Masonic Hall at Yarmouth, 240.

Massacre of ship's crew, 406.

Matches against time, 3, 17, 107, 200, 205, 361, 395, 399.

Mathematicians in humble life, 272, 303, 406, 449.

Mathew, Father, at Norwich, 431.

Mathews, Mr. (actor), 143, 148, 167, 190, 271.

Mathews, Mr. C., 387, 438.

May-day at Lynn, 330, 349.

Mayor of Norwich censured, 296.

. . . , expenses of, 31.

. . . , grave of, 304.

. . . knighted, 311.

. . . Yarmouth, mode of election, 130, 186, 212.

Mayor's elections at Norwich, 5, 96, 104, 116, 147, 158, 181, 194, 207,
221, 245, 267, 276, 295, 306, 313, 323, 330, 339.  After the passing of
the Municipal Reform Act: 346, 353, 367, 378, 390, 403, 412, 423, 432,
442, 451, 458, 466, 473, 481, 488.

Mechanics' institutes, 240, 440.

Medical and Surgical Association, 458.

. . . library, 235.

. . . registration, 441.

Menageries, 26, 80, 92, 142, 153, 232, 244, 252, 272, 273, 320, 355, 390,
412, 414, 433, 442, 451, 468.

Mendicity, Society for the Suppression of, 174.

Mengdon, Countess, 43.

Merry, Mrs. (actress), 17.

Methodist Missionary Society, 126.

Michaelmas goose dinner at the Great Hospital, 138.

Mild weather at Christmas, 165, 282, 368, 404.

Military baggage, refusing to convey, 31.

. . . bands in the Upper Close, Norwich, 82.

. . . escort at a wedding, 127.

Military funerals, 25, 41, 84, 226, 250.

. . . offences, 20, 27, 41, 293, 318.

Militia ballot, 55, 60, 305.

. . . camp at Coxheath, 33.

. . . , East Norfolk, 13, 33, 91, 271, 305.

. . . , local, 67, 70, 72, 82, 103, 104, 136.

. . . permanent staff, discharge of, 136.

. . . Regiments: Durham, 1; East Essex, 1; Rutland, 3; Shropshire, 24,
27, 29, 31, 40; Fifeshire, 36; Wiltshire, 82, 83, 84, 86.

. . . , supplementary, 8, 20.

. . . trainings, 18, 72, 82, 183.

. . . , West Norfolk, 2, 13, 20, 27, 33, 75, 87, 103, 118, 125, 129, 134,
136, 177, 183, 196, 206, 209, 230, 238, 303, 327, 383.

Militiamen's right to vote, 70.

Miller halfpenny, 34.

Mineral spring at Mundesley, 225.

Mingay, Richard (violinist), 170, 336.

Ministers, appointment of, addresses to the King, 46.

Mock corporations, 195, 374, 485.

Montague, Miss (actress), 430.

Montes, Lola, 478.

Mori, Mr. and Mrs., 187.

Mormonites, 474.

Morris, Sam, the "Scarlet Runner," 223.

Mounted Volunteers at a staghunt, 71.

Mountjoy (pedestrian), remarkable feats by, 399, 477.

Mousehold Heath enclosed, 4.

. . . , right of pasturage on, 7.

Mueller, leader of orchestra at Norwich Theatre, 224, 322.

Mummies discovered at Wymondham, 328.

"Mumpers," 168.

Municipal boundaries, Norwich, 344.

. . . litigation, 352, 356.

. . . Reform Bill, 327; Commissioners' inquiries at Norwich and Castle
Rising, 327; at Yarmouth, 329; protest by Norwich Corporation, 328, 329;
petitions against, 341, 342; evidence against, 342; passing of, 343;
first revision of voters' lists, 345; first elections, 345, 352; first
meeting of the new Town Council, 346; corporate address to the King, 346;
opposed by freemen, 395, 408.

Murder and mutilation, 271.

. . . at Norwich election, 298.

. . . , extraordinary charge of, 55.

. . . sentence reversed, 348.

. . . trial at Lynn, 113.

Murdered by lunatics, 104, 271, 314, 364, 439.

Murders, 58, 104, 109, 113, 151, 174, 206, 215, 271, 285, 288, 298, 314,
364, 401, 406, 410, 439, 445, 454, 473.

Murray family, 94, 142, 163, 168, 207, 240, 277, 280, 282, 313, 350, 383,
457.

Museum, Norfolk and Norwich, 239, 245, 251, 322, 335, 345, 358, 370, 393,
458.

Musical Festival (Triennial), 238, 241, 248, 269, 296, 325, 329, 352,
388, 422, 450, 472.

. . . , Sheriffs of London attend, 450.

. . . Festivals, 16, 77, 93, 109, 118, 151, 214, 269.

. . . performances in churches, 86, 93, 109, 118, 131, 145, 151, 156,
158, 353.

Mutiny by the 7th Hussars, 318.

. . . on H.M.S. Bounty, 185.

Mutton, low price of, 215.



N


National rate, 474.

. . . Reform Association, 480.

. . . Schools, 397, 450.

Naval abuses, 40.

. . . engagements, 28, 29, 50, 78, 91, 103.

Navigation Bill, Norwich and Yarmouth, 468.

Necton Guild, 195.

Neeche's Gardens, Norwich, 6, 14.

"Negro Jubilee" at Sheringham, 333.

. . . minstrels, 460.

Neild, Mr., the philanthropist, 43.

Nelson annuities, 53.

. . . , Lord, at Yarmouth, 2, 7; death of, 44, 45.

. . . monument at Norwich proposed: abortive scheme, 47.

. . . at Yarmouth, 119; first stone laid, 149; singular death of the
surveyor of the works, 172; work completed, 173.

. . . relic, 438.

Nemesis, H.M.S., on Happisburgh Sand, 79.

Neville, Lord, and Mr. Cobbett, 281.

New Concert Room, Norwich, 141, 335.

News of victories, 97, 98, 100, 106, 108, 110, 111, 114, 115, 127, 140.

Newsreaders, 35, 76, 195, 389, 391.

Nobleman charged with assault, 89.

Nonconformist claims, 335.

Norfolk and Norwich Bazaar, 313.

. . . and Suffolk Institution, 279.

. . . "Chronicle" burnt by Norwich mob, 188.

. . . Declaration, 146.

. . . Duke of, at Norwich, 44.

. . . Estuary works, 488.

. . . loyalty, 5.

. . . men and scientific societies, 184.

. . . Petition, 217.

. . . Rangers, 21, 25, 223.

. . . Society (or Club), 44, 185; revival of, 56.

. . . in London, 221.

Norman's School, 395.

North Walsham church steeple, 346.

. . . Theatre opened, 276; converted into a school, 450.

"Norwich a Port," 162, 164, 200, 213, 216, 218, 242, 253, 263, 276, 291,
325, 455.

. . . and Lowestoft Navigation Co., 310, 326, 330.

. . . Assize Bill, 310.

. . . Castle, 49, 67, 180, 259, 283, 328, 420; as a prison, 180;
discovery of rooms and passages in the keep, 259; Hill enclosed, 67;
restoration of, 283, 328, 420.

. . . (Connecticut), 455.

. . . Equitable Insurance Office, 291.

. . . improvements, 108.

. . . oarsmen on the Seine, 465.

. . . Poor Bill, 305.

. . . Public Library, 339, 346.

. . . recruits in the French War, 5.

. . . Union Independent Society, 257.

. . . Union Life Insurance Society, 367, 390.

Nuns of Montargis, 41, 47.



O


Oakes, Lieut.-Col. R. M., appointed Chief Constable, 390.

Oath, declining the, 412.

Observatory on Norwich Cathedral, 431.

O'Connell at Norwich, 367.

O'Connor, Feargus, at Norwich, 464, 480.

Oddfellows, 400, 480.

Oliver _v._ Painter, prize-fight, 184.

Ominous titles of plays, 135.

Omnibuses, 357.

O'Neil, Miss (actress), 162.

Opah, or King-fish, 82, 387.

Opera at Houghton Hall, 61.

. . . at Norwich Theatre (Italian), 346, 430, 440, 469.

Opium eating, 350.

Opulent Norfolk farmers, 321, 336.

Orange fair at Yarmouth, 426.

. . . , Prince of, at Yarmouth, 9.

. . . Societies, 236.

Orford Hill ghost, 259.

Orford, Horatio, Earl of, elected High Steward of Yarmouth, 322;
dismissed from office, 346; presides at Protectionist dinner, 458.

Organists, 63, 69, 72, 115, 121, 177, 232, 358.

Organs, 13, 16, 69, 109, 110, 115, 156, 198, 232, 258, 271, 312, 329,
441, 485.

Osbaldiston, Mr. (actor), 255, 268.

Oury, Mr. and Mrs., 387.

Outrage at Fakenham, 43; at Norwich Theatre, 195; by female factory
hands, 482; on a clergyman, 9.

Oyster bed at Happisburgh, 196; at Cley, 361.



P


Paganini at Norwich, 307.

Pageant at Yarmouth, 115, 153.

Painter Ned, 178, 181, 184, 203, 219, 232, 277, 293, 426; his fight with
Oliver, 184; action at Assizes, 426.

Pains and Penalties, Bill of, 185, 188.

Panic at St. Margaret's church, Lynn, 334.

Panoramas, 54, 81, 199, 215, 216, 219, 337, 362.

Panoramic view of Norwich, 74.

Pantomimes, 37, 81, 291, 433, 459, 474, 488.

Papal aggression, 488.

Paper duty, 284.

. . . mills, 76; accident at Taverham, 385.

Parachute descents, 388, 389.

Parish clerks, 90, 96, 99, 100, 109, 110, 178, 210, 308, 310, 437, 445.

. . . , funerals of, 90, 210.

Parliamentary Reform, 204, 208, 302, 313, 314, 315; re-division of the
county, 315.

Parry, Captain (afterwards Sir Edward), presented with freedom of
Norwich, 192, of Lynn, 254; appointed Poor-law Commissioner, 340;
official visits to Boards of Guardians, 341.

Paton, Miss (Mrs. Wood), 286, 288, 313, 323, 411, 418.

Patteson, Alderman, resignation of, 306; death, 317.

Patteson, John, appointed Judge, 299; on circuit at Norwich, 400, 401,
436, 444.

"Paul Pry," a slanderous publication, 389.

Pauper, cost of maintaining a, 368.

Pavements defective at Norwich, 131.

Paving and improvement of King's Lynn, 53.

. . . Bills, 17, 43, 45, 234, 241, 390, 392.

Payne, the pirate, 29.

Peace of Amiens, 12, 13, 14.

. . . preliminaries, 8.

. . . rejoicings, 8, 9, 12, 13, 112, 117, 118, 124.

. . . Society, 455.

. . . with America, 124.

Pedestrianism, 31, 35, 40, 48, 138, 149, 150, 162, 171, 185, 195, 200,
205, 234, 259, 289, 350, 397, 399, 407, 418, 430, 434, 454, 477.

Peel, Major, candidate for Norwich, 255; election of, 256; receives hon.
freedom, 257.

Penance in church, 274.

Penny Library, 231.

. . . post to Stalham, 128.

. . . postage, 370, 391, 428.

Pensioners, Corps of, 438, 477.

People's College, Norwich, 477.

Peregrine falcon killed in Norwich, 378.

Perpetual motion, 223.

Peterloo incident, 176, 177.

Petty sessions, disturbance at, 422.

Pew disputes 237, 292, 442.

Pews, appropriation of, 467.

Phenomenon during thunderstorm, 236.

Philharmonic Society, 406.

"Philip Augustus," 409.

Philipsthal's Phantasmagoria, 59.

Phillips, Mr. and Mrs., first appearance at Norwich, 465; engaged at
Norwich Theatre, 488.

Phoenix yawl, wreck of, 444.

Phonography, 447.

Phosphorus, winner of the Derby, 372.

Photography, 433.

Phrenology, 394, 478.

Picture of North Walsham steeplechase, 360.

Pigeon shooting, 141.

Pike, large, 47, 295, 330; voracity of, 214.

Pikes for special constables, 28.

Pilch, Fuller, 323, 332, 449; his single wicket match with Marsdon, 324.

Pilgrim case, 340, 348.

Pillory, 21, 98, 121.

Pinson, Mr. G., appointed Governor of County Gaol, 433.

Pirates tried at Yarmouth, 225.

Ploughing matches, 65, 311; aged competitor at, 311.

Ploughs, 419, 469.

Poaching, 37, 58, 261, 348.

Pocket-picking at an execution, 206.

Pockthorpe Guild, 374, 485.

Poisoning at Burnham Westgate, 343, 348; Happisburgh, 455; Hempnall, 384;
Tibenham, 462; Wighton, 322; Yarmouth, 245.

Police, 189, 300, 347, 390.

Polito's menagerie, 26, 92, 101.

Polka, introduction of, 439.

Poll-book, attempted mutilation of a, 320.

Polytechnic exhibition at Norwich, 403.

Poor-law relief, 56, 195, 252, 253, 259, 305, 342, 359, 365, 435, 462.

Porpoise captured at West Somerton, 377.

Porson, Richard, 68, 416.

Portrait of Mr. T. W. Coke, 112.

Portraits at St. Andrew's Hall, Norwich, 8, 19, 29, 50, 92, 120, 168,
203, 227, 252, 256, 270, 281, 345, 381.

Postal deliveries on Sunday, 397.

Posting charges, 12, 72, 89, 331.

Postman, a crippled, 406.

Postmaster of Norwich, 132.

Postmasters, 221, 222, 331.

Potash Farm, sale of, 486.

Poulteney, Sir James, tragic death of, 90.

Power, Mr. (actor), 295, 310.

Power, Rev. A. Bath, and the electric telegraph, 459, 466.

Prendergast, Mr., qualifies as Recorder of Norwich, 474.

Presentations, 32, 42, 64, 88, 95, 101, 108, 117, 122, 124, 133, 149,
172, 173, 187, 199, 203, 213, 215, 220, 241, 240, 243, 246, 248, 249,
253, 256, 286, 290, 296, 327, 332, 335, 345, 348, 366, 377, 381, 398,
400, 413, 454, 477.

Press gangs, 19, 40, 126.

Preston, Isaac, appointed Steward of Norwich, 262; appointed Recorder,
301; marriage, 313; claimant to the Stanfield property, 378; action
against James Blomfield Rush, 469; murdered by Rush, 473.

Preston, Sir Thomas, 122.

Prices of provisions, &c., 2, 3, 5, 7, 10, 68, 72, 94, 136.

Priest, Rev. St. John, 135, 163.

Prince of Wales, birth of, 412; christening, 415.

Prince's Street chapel, Norwich, 169.

Printer's name omitted from a publication, 113, 118.

Prisoners' alms boxes, 83.

Prisoners of war, 13, 29, 36, 55, 75, 111, 113, 115, 118.

. . . drowned, 55.

Private stills, 323, 434.

Privateers, 36, 50, 61.

Prize-fights, 31, 66, 79, 84, 92, 123, 127, 129, 137, 142, 153, 158, 170,
174, 176, 180, 181, 184, 186, 187, 203, 210, 214, 222, 225, 233, 234,
239, 244, 259, 268, 277, 284, 292, 366, 370, 379, 381, 386, 387, 391,
448, 450.

. . . , fatal, 214, 225.

. . . on Sunday, 187, 381, 386.

Proclamation of George IV., 179; of William IV., 297; of Victoria, 363.

Property, re-valuation of, 43, 147, 153.

. . . tax, 122, 133.

Protection, 407, 434, 452, 458, 482.

Protestant movement, 289.

Public breakfasting, 59.

. . . discussions, 364.

. . . Dispensary, Norwich, 19.

. . . meetings in parish churches, 377, 418.

Publicans' licences refused, 59.

Publication of local works, 192, 386, 397, 416, 417, 421, 432.

Pugilists at Norwich, 70, 93, 160, 184, 426.

Pump in St. Lawrence, Norwich, 196.

Pump-room and baths at Thetford, 176.

Pye's almshouses, 259, 260.



Q


Quakers, 9, 129, 249, 260, 444.

Quarter Sessions, Norfolk, 9, 24, 73, 82, 106, 120, 138, 163, 166, 190,
201, 210, 220, 229, 240, 278, 292, 295, 300, 301, 310, 319, 389, 423,
435, 467.

. . . , Chairmen of, 201, 293, 305, 306, 320, 395.

. . . , Norwich, 54, 66, 73, 85, 101, 118, 126, 128, 135, 190, 216, 219,
226, 259, 260, 302, 391, 412, 413, 443.

Queen Caroline, 185, 188, 198.

. . . Dowager, death of, 481.

. . . , death of, 164, 165.

Victoria, accession, 362; proclamation, 363; addresses from Norwich
Corporation, 363, 385, 398, 412; coronation, 374; marriage, 393;
attempted assassinations of, 398, 476, and Norfolk farmer, 469; voyages
to Scotland, 421, 441, 471; birthday celebrations, 476, 485.

Queen's Speech first telegraphed to Norwich, 466.



R


Raby Castle s.s., wreck of, 357.

Race meetings, 16, 20, 35, 43, 52, 60, 69, 73, 75, 93, 98, 119, 124, 161,
238, 294, 324, 375, 388, 401, 408, 420, 470.

Rahobeth chapel, Norwich, 225, 381.

Railway first suggested, 154.

Railways: Norfolk and Suffolk Company projected, 240; Eastern Counties
line, 334, 360, 384, 400; proposed line _via_ Cambridge, 334, 344, 347,
404; Yarmouth and Norwich line, 344, 347, 413, 427, 436, 437, 440, 450;
Norfolk line, 404, 448; Norwich and Brandon line, 432, 449; Wymondham and
Dereham line, 441, 459, 461; line from Lynn to Downham, 458; Lynn to
Narborough, 458; Narborough to Swaffham, 464; Lynn to Ely, 466; Swaffham
to Dereham, 471; Dereham to Fakenham, 475; Reedham to Lowestoft, 463;
Norwich extension of the Ipswich and Bury line, 462; opening of, 481;
light railway first suggested, 460; third-class carriages, 437; goods
conveyed, 440, 459; action against Yarmouth and Norwich Company, 440;
steamboat excursion in connection with railway, 457; accident, 451;
excursion trains, 456, 476; fourth-class tickets, 459; running of an
excursion train to an execution, 476; trains delayed by snow, 481, 483;
strike of firemen and engine-drivers, 486.

. . . , effect of: Sale of coach horses, 449; discontinuance of coaches,
453; diminution of road traffic, 453; public-houses, 453; coal trade,
456; neglect of roads, 459; price of land, 469.

Rainham Hall, festivities at, 67.

Rams' horns at a wedding, 289.

Ranelagh Gardens, Norwich, 59, 78, 199, 215, 236, 241, 354, 355, 368,
379, 390, 401, 412, 414; amphitheatre and saloon at, 401; corn market
held at, 236; theatre at, 368, 401.  (_See also_ Victoria Gardens.)

Ranger cutter, loss of, 214.

Rates raised in Norfolk, 125.

Rat Society at Swaffham, 233.

Read, Miss, Norwich actress, 350.

Reading-desk at Norwich Cathedral, 400.

Re-burials at Costessey Hall, 463.

Recorders of Norwich, 2, 29, 215, 261, 301, 474.

Recruiting by beat of drum, 125.

Reeves, Mr. Sims, 469, 472, 482.

Reffley _fete_, 14.

Reform of the House of Commons, 141; demonstration at Norwich, 314.

Regattas, 32, 50, 66, 85, 92, 212, 225.

Regent, Prince, at Norwich, 100; attack on, 143, 146.

Regiments--Cavalry: 1st Dragoon Guards, 28, 254, 255, 319; 2nd Dragoon
Guards (Queen's Bays), 236, 245, 331, 339; 3rd Dragoon Guards, 10, 363;
4th Dragoon Guards, 198, 202, 374, 378, 380, 383; 5th Dragoon Guards, 82,
121, 150, 161; 6th Dragoon Guards (Carabiniers), 454; 7th Dragoon Guards,
206, 209, 210, 285, 287, 292, 293, 295, 406, 409, 410; 1st Royal
Dragoons, 135, 136, 138, 150, 223, 295, 297, 300, 301, 308, 312; 2nd
Dragoons (Royal Scots Greys), 246, 250, 251, 253, 254, 427, 436; 3rd
Light Dragoons (3rd Hussars), 322, 330, 331; 4th Light Dragoons (4th
Hussars), 438, 447; 6th Inniskilling Dragoons, 274, 280, 339, 342, 349;
7th Light Dragoons (7th Hussars), 49, 311, 318, 319, 322, 447, 454; 8th
Royal Irish Hussars, 226, 234, 235, 397, 406; 9th Lancers, 174, 176, 185,
194, 197, 198, 383, 393, 394, 397; 10th Light Dragoons (10th Hussars),
182; 11th Light Dragoons (11th Hussars), 256, 485; 12th Lancers, 265,
267, 274, 280, 283; 13th Light Dragoons (13th Hussars), 1, 4, 6, 410,
416, 418, 427, 458; 14th Light Dragoons (14th Hussars), 176, 181, 182;
15th Light Dragoons (15th Hussars), 161, 163, 174, 223; 16th Lancers,
469, 470, 476, 481, 484; 17th Lancers, 349, 363; 24th Light Dragoons
(disbanded), 171; Royal Artillery, 28; Brunswick Hussars, 121, 122, 124,
125, 127; German Legion, 46, 129.

. . . Infantry: 4th Foot, 46; 12th Foot, 319; 23rd Foot, 46; 24th Foot,
29, 83; 28th Foot, 46; 40th Foot, 255, 262; 47th Foot, 22, 28; 54th Foot,
83; Rifle Brigade, 46.

Registration Act, 358, 363.

Rejoicings at Thetford, 116.

Relief of the Poor, subscriptions for, 1, 142, 252, 355; relief works,
144, 252.

. . . of Germans, 113; Irish, 208, 306, 461; Russians, 103; Scilly
islanders, 169; Spaniards, 223.

Religious instruction, 331, 373.

. . . mania, 235.

Remarkable woman, 311, 316, 321.

Rents, reduction of, 136.

Reporters at Norwich Corporation meetings, 267.

. . . Norfolk magistrates' meeting, 278.

Reporter's life-saving invention, 446.

Restoration of Charles II., 126, 222.

Resurrection men, 232, 241, 261, 272, 273, 283, 289, 300, 319.

. . . , precautions against, 191, 283.

Rigby, Dr., 200.

Rioters dispersed by the Norfolk Hunt, 300.

Riots, 3, 9, 122, 124, 136, 138, 205, 209, 210, 253, 267, 287, 292, 299,
300, 301, 319, 342, 378, 408, 409, 416, 459.

River robberies, 79.

Road improvement at Lakenham, 462.

Roads, neglect of, 459.

Robberies on the Yare, 182.

Robbery at a jeweller's shop, 462.

Rolfe, Baron, and the Rush trial, 475; elevated to the Peerage as Baron
Cranworth, 488.

Roman Catholic claims, 102, 182, 244, 265, 284.

. . . chapel, Norwich, 269, 289.

Romney, loss of H.M.S., 36.

Rook shooting, 233.

"Roope's Weekly Letters," 85.

Rosary Burial Ground, Norwich, 231.

Rotterdam, excursions to, 246, 457.

Rough Hussars, 91.

Rough-legged falcons, 141.

Rowing feats, 234, 235, 465, 477.

. . . matches, 19, 48, 56, 68, 105, 106, 108, 140, 159, 161, 411, 421,
439, 470, 482.

Royal Agricultural Society at Norwich, 477.

. . . progresses, 212, 343.

. . . visits to Norfolk, 76, 94, 100, 110, 122, 131, 188, 343.

Runaway coach-horses, 36, 323, 426.

Rural police, 390, 391, 414.

Rush James Blomfield: Tragic death of his father, 442; sued by Mr. Jermy,
469; murders Mr. Jermy and Mr. Jermy Jermy, 473; trial, 475; execution,
476.

Rushes in Norwich Cathedral, 296, 332.

Russell, Henry (entertainer), 463, 470.

Ryder, Mr. (actor), 447.



S


Sailing matches, 163.

St. Andrew's Day celebration, 251.

. . . Hall, Norwich, 196; used as a corn exchange, 50.

St. Crispin, Festival of, 110.

St. Crowche church, Norwich, 333.

St. Domingo Bay, battle in, 47.

St. Faith's Fair, regular attendant at, 99.

St. George's Day celebration, 194.

St. Mark's church, Lakenham, 427.

St. Michael-at-Coslany Bridge, 28.

St. Stephen's pit, Norwich, 127.

Salmon taken at Norwich, 168, 473; at Hellesdon, 445.

Sandford, Emily, 473.

Sanitary measures at Norwich, 445, 454, 484.

Savings Bank, Norwich, 135.

Saxon font at Great Hautbois, 43.

. . . remains at Norwich, 35.

Scarcity of provisions, 1.

Scarlett, Hon. Robert Campbell, adopted candidate for Norwich, 336;
attacked at Norwich Corn Exchange, 336; returned for Norwich, 337, 363;
receives freedom of the city, 338; unseated on petition, 373.

Scarlett, Sir James, returned for Norwich, 319; receives honorary
freedom, 324; presented with a banner, 324; appointed Chief Baron of the
Exchequer, 336; adopts supporters of the Norwich Arms, 337; on circuit at
Norwich, 338, 436; presented with congratulatory address, 338; receives
deputation of Norwich merchants, 436; death, 436.

Scarning Free School, 166.

School of Design, 367, 373, 453.

Scilly Islands relief fund, 169.

_Sciaena aquila_, 412.

"Scissor artist," 217.

Scragg's Company of Comedians, 95, 97.

Seaborne vessels at Norwich, 276, 325, 453, 455.

Sea fencibles, 26, 28, 30.

Seaman's funeral, 374.

Seaman's museum of natural history, 160.

"Searcher," a scurrilous publication, 391.

Searchers and sealers of leather, 17.

Sea serpent, 227.

. . . walls, 21.

Sedan chair for conveyance of voter, 105.

Sedgwick, Rev. A., installed prebendary of Norwich Cathedral, 335;
lectures at Norfolk and Norwich Museum, 345.

Sedition, 82.

Seed, vitality of, 350.

Sentry sleeping at his post, 293.

Settlement, Law of, 445, 462, 474.

Sexton's funeral, 90.

Sham fights, 24, 30, 34.

Shark captured off Yarmouth, 51.

Sharpshooters, 34.

Shawls, 57, 65, 106, 323.

Sheep drowned at Wells, 148.

Shelley, Mr. W. (actor), 471.

Sheriff, disturbance at swearing in of, 279.

. . . , litigation arising from election of, 280.

Sheriffs' elections at Norwich, 120, 131, 150, 186, 199, 237, 248, 258,
269, 279, 288, 298, 308, 317, 324, 325, 334, 343; appointments under the
Reform Act, 346, 353, 367, 378, 390, 403, 412, 423, 432, 442, 451, 458,
466, 473, 481, 488.

Shipbuilding in Norfolk, 22, 30, 34, 39, 48, 51, 52, 64, 100, 147, 215,
229, 234, 258, 275, 283, 285, 290, 299, 306, 313, 321, 348, 392, 463,
487.

Shipdham cattle fair, 286.

Ships in Yarmouth Roads, 378.

. . . launched at Norwich, 283, 306, 313.

Shipwrecked Mariners' Society, 446.

Shipwrecks.  _See_ Wrecks.

Shirehall, Norwich, 56, 201, 229.

Shocking occurrence at Catton, 365, 372.

Shoemaker's funeral, 178.

Shoes burnt in Norwich, 17.

Shooting, 10, 34, 60, 69, 109, 164, 225, 233, 249, 250, 334, 381, 403,
417.

. . . , remarkable feats of, 41, 165, 186, 334, 417.

Shore's menagerie, 153, 244.

Shows and exhibitions, 4, 50, 67, 70, 79, 90, 94, 123, 148, 150, 153,
160, 164, 166, 171, 197, 205, 227, 241, 246, 262.

Shrievalty declined at Norwich, 32.

Sick Poor Repository, 156.

Sidney, Mr., engaged at Adelphi Theatre, Norwich, 473.

Signal flags, 23, 28.

Silk duties, 230, 249.

Silver tickets, 45.

Simony, 206.

Sinclair, Mr. (actor), 154, 373.

Skating, 253, 404.

. . . on wheels, 414.

Skeletons found, 191, 199, 423, 465.

Skipper (Norwich pugilist), 12.

Skipper (pedestrian), 149, 150, 162, 200, 205, 418.

Slavery, 118, 174, 220, 229, 250, 251, 276, 333, 368, 376, 403, 487.

Sledges, 369.

Sloman, Mrs. (actress), 239.

Small holdings, 10.

Small-pox, 41, 97, 102, 167, 172, 173, 194, 382, 445, 447.

. . . , Lord Montrath's dread of, 12.

Small Tenements Bill (Norwich), 463.

Smith, Colonel, of Ellingham, 440.

Smith, Mr. William, M.P., resignation of, 297.

Smith, Sir James E., 119, 177, 184.

Smith, Sir Sidney, at Yarmouth, 29.

Smithson, Miss, at Norwich Theatre, 305.

Smuggling, 10, 37, 47, 60, 101, 125, 145, 194, 205, 229, 288, 290, 319,
321, 351, 379, 485.

"Snap," 246, 341.

Snipe, H.M.S., wreck of, 55.

Snow, heavy falls of, 54, 63, 69, 112, 263, 293, 355, 369, 383, 424, 459,
481, 483.

. . . in May, 14.

Snow, Mr., "the Ude of Norwich," 345, 387.

Socialism, 375.

Society for the Education of the Poor, 97.

Somnolence, remarkable case of, 393.

Soult, defeat of, 111.

Spain and Portugal aided, 66.

Spanish relief, 223.

Speaker of the Common Council, 6, 182, 263, 270, 336.

Speech boys (or orators) on Norwich Guild Day, 91, 106, 209, 222, 332,
341.

. . . day at Norwich Grammar School, 106.

S.P.G., special collections for, 170.

Spinning, 2, 86, 325.

Spire of St. Gregory, Norwich, 45.

Spohr at Norwich, 388.

Springfield, T. O., elected Mayor, 285, 346; sworn in, 286; censured by
Corporation, 296; municipal litigation, 353.

Spring guns, 130, 239.

Stack firing, 60, 154.

Stafford, Barony of, 235.

Stage spectacle, "The Coronation," 205.

Stage waggons, 83, 152, 173, 191, 210, 233, 334, 371.

Stagorians, 99, 103, 146, 232.

. . . attacked by mob, 147.

Stained glass window at Hingham church, 108.

Stallage charges in Norwich Market, 333; letting of, 358.

Stallion, alleged unlawful exhibition of a, 125.

Stanfield Hall murders, 473, 475, 476.

. . . riot, 378.

Stanley, Bishop, 360; enthronement of, 361; supports temperance movement,
366; entertains Jenny Lind, 465, 474; death, 479.

Starlings' nest in a dead body, 6.

Steamboats, 108, 139, 141, 145, 236, 239, 246.

Steam carriages, 323, 415, 428.

Steam Mill Company, Norwich, 2, 66, 141.

Steeplechases, 294, 312, 359, 383, 392, 404, 455, 476.

Stewards of Norwich, 2, 19, 55, 84, 98, 215, 262, 301, 336.

Stoke Mills mustard manufactory, 116.

Storm, remarkable, at Norwich, 430.

Stormont, Lord, returned for Norwich, 319, 337; receives honorary
freedom, 324; presented with a banner, 324; attacked at Norwich Corn
Exchange, 336; secures acceleration of the mails, 338; resignation, 357.

Stratford, the poisoner, trial of, 288.

Stream, right to the use of a, 483.

Streets, new, at Norwich, 40.

Strolling players, 275.

Strong men, 283.

Strikes, 42, 122, 253, 375, 416, 486.

Sturgeon, 477, 484.

Subsidence of a cottage, 227.

Sugar bounties and duties, 276.

Suicide after an election, 373.

. . . , remarkable, at Norwich, 92; at Yarmouth, 49.

Sunday, desecration of, 39, 152, 187, 190, 381, 386, 453.

. . . postal delivery, 397.

. . . prize-fights on, 187, 381, 386.

. . . schools, 157.

. . . trading, 453.

Superstitious ceremony at Norwich, 396.

Surgeon, remarkable charge against a, 444.

Surrey Gardens, Norwich, 268.

Surveyor of Bridges, election of, 349.

Suspension Bridge at Yarmouth, 285.

. . . for neglect of ministerial duties, 158.

Sussex, Duke of, 213, 250, 323, 428.

Sutherland, Mrs. Sinclair, her remarkable case, 73.

Sutton, Archbishop Manners, 37.

Swaffham Quarter Sessions, 371.

. . . Races, 289; curious wagers at, 289.

. . . Shirehall, 375.

. . . Theatre, 213; advertised for sale, 442.

Swan for the Royal table, 309.

Swans at civic feast, 405.

Swimming, remarkable feat of, 344.

Syderstone ghost, 324.

Sydney, Lord, High Steward of Yarmouth, 132.

Synagogue, 470.



T


Tavistock Canal tunnel, 140.

Tawell, John, Salt Hill murderer, 444.

Taxation, 346.

Telegraph electric, 450, 457, 459, 466.

Telegraphs, 23, 39, 62.

Temperance movement, 366, 388, 431.

Tenant's legacy to his landlord's daughter, 103.

Test Act, 4.

Testerton Park prize-fight, 203.

Thalberg (pianist), 366.

Thanksgiving celebrations, 44, 112, 132.

Theatre, New, at Norwich: circus at, 422; disturbances at, 268;
equestrian spectacles, 380; free performances, 393; masquerade and fancy
dress ball, 470; Mayor and Sheriff decline their patronage, 349; opening
of, 254; performance stopped by thunderstorm, 430; performances with wild
beasts, 407, 432; reduction of prices, 424, 447, 459; restoration, 351;
Tom Thumb at, 439; underselling of tickets, 463; used as a
banquetting-room, 374; _versus_ circus, 392.

. . ., Old: Fall of roof, 296.

Theatres, Norwich, 1, 3, 5, 15, 30, 35, 37, 39, 43, 45, 46, 49, 51, 57,
61, 63, 64, 70, 72, 74, 80, 81, 90, 94, 105, 123, 125, 131, 133, 134,
139, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 150, 154, 158, 159, 161, 162, 167, 168,
169, 170, 179, 180, 181, 183, 187, 190, 192, 193, 195, 199, 205, 210,
211, 214, 216, 219, 222, 224, 226, 231, 232, 233, 234, 235, 237, 239,
241, 243, 245, 265, 268, 271, 273, 274, 275, 277, 278, 283, 284, 285,
287, 288, 291, 293, 295, 296, 298, 299, 305, 307, 308, 310, 311, 312,
316, 323, 329, 331, 332, 339, 340, 341, 342, 346, 349, 350, 351, 361,
369, 372, 373, 376, 386, 387, 392, 393, 397, 398, 401, 405, 406, 407,
413, 417, 418, 424, 427, 428, 430, 432, 433, 436, 438, 439, 441, 447,
448, 452, 457, 459, 460, 463, 464, 465, 467, 468, 469, 470, 471, 474,
484, 486, 488.

. . . managers of, 144, 187, 216, 226, 231, 233, 243, 271, 273, 331, 386,
387, 411, 438, 448, 452, 457, 463, 473, 474, 484.

. . . new plays at, 35, 70, 105, 125, 146, 169, 181, 192, 211, 218, 222,
258, 286, 331, 341, 361, 406, 427, 434.

Theatrical Fund, Norwich, 5, 81, 192.

Thetford Assizes, removal to Norwich, 75, 167, 220, 228, 242, 295, 303,
304, 310, 312.

. . . Corporation dinner, 68.

. . . Court of Pleas, 315.

. . . Sheep Fair, 48.

"The Tour," a poem, 386.

Thillon, Madame Anna, 469.

Thiodon's automata, 164.

Thorogood, the coachman, 193; remarkable driving feats by, 212, 246, 250.

Thorpe Asylum, 89, 116, 444.

Threatening a reporter, 404.

Threshing machines, 34, 41.

Thunderstorms, 33, 67, 91, 134, 138, 173, 209, 236, 324, 332, 377, 419,
430.

Thurlow (pedestrian), 418.

Thurtell family, 202, 217, 218, 229, 245, 274, 276, 283, 286, 287, 362,
454, 467, 468.

Thurtell, George, charged with assault, 455; with theft, 467; death in
prison, 468.

Thurtell, John, his story of a robbery in Chapel Field, 190; execution
of, 229; reference to, 455, 468.

Thurtell, Thomas, sworn in as Sheriff of Norwich, 131; ominous titles of
plays at his theatrical bespeak, 135; elected Mayor, 276; allegations on
retiring from office, 286; dinner to, 287; death, 454.

Tibenham poisonings, 462.

Tide low at Yarmouth, 369.

Tides high at Yarmouth, 133, 241, 347, 443.

. . . at Wells, 148, 466.

Tiger, escape of a, 451.

Tight rope performer at Norwich Theatre, 30.

Tillett, Jacob Henry, phrenologically described, 479.

"Times" hoaxed, 487.

Tithe cases, 74, 75, 90, 247, 257, 307.

Tithes, commutation of, 137, 359.

Titchfield, Marquis of, elected for Lynn, 204.

Tobacco in bond, 367.

"Tobacco, snuff, and red herrings," 80.

Toll demanded of soldiers, 163.

Tolls (market), 358.

"Tom and Jerry" (burletta), 227.

Tombland Fair, Norwich, 82, 90, 155, 275, 358.

. . . , removed to Castle Meadow, 155.

Tom Thumb at Norwich, 439.

Tonnage Bill, 386.

"Tory," derivation of, 316.

Tounshend (pedestrian), 234.

Tower half-pence, 121.

Tower of St. John Madder-market, 199.

. . . St. Nicholas, Yarmouth, 53.

Town Clerks of Norwich, 260, 336.

. . . Council, first meeting of the reformed, 346; proposal to admit the
public, 350.

Trade with Yorkshire, 161.

Trafalgar, Battle of, 44.

Tragic death of a clergyman, 261.

Training Act, 55.

Tread-wheel, 219, 220, 226.

. . . , fatal accident on, 226.

Tree, Miss Ellen (actress), 401, 405.

Trees planted at Norwich, 123.

Trial of speed between the Westacre and Melton Constable hounds, 273.

Triplets, 31.

Troops embarked at Yarmouth, 73.

. . . landed at Yarmouth, 46.

Trotting matches, 1, 52, 85, 103, 107, 219, 235, 323, 361, 381, 395.

Trout taken at Norwich, 132, 141, 151, 403, 459.

Trowse Swing Bridge, 449, 450, 457.

Trumpet herald to Norwich comedians, 18.

Turkeys, 79, 89, 153, 309, 368, 380, 424, 433.

Turner, Rev. C., elected perpetual curate of St. Peter Mancroft, 470.

Turnips, preservation of, 115.

Turnpikes, 229.

Turtle at civic dinner, 187.

Tussaud's exhibition at Norwich, 166, 246.

Twelfth Day in Norwich, 153.

Twenty-fourth Light Dragoons disbanded, 171.

Twin steamer built at Wells, 299.



U


Uniform of Norwich Rifle Corps, 26.

. . . Norfolk Cricket Club, 262.

. . . Norfolk Yeomanry Cavalry, 309, 397, 432.

. . . Norwich police, 347.

. . . Norwich Enrolled Pensioners, 438.

. . . 11th Hussars, 485.

Union of Great Britain and Ireland, 1.

Unitarian Society, 107, 381.

Universal Goodwill, Society of, 25, 36, 53, 61.

Urns found at Caister, 125.

"Utter barrister," 261.



V


Vaccination, 41, 97, 101, 102, 167, 173, 194, 447, 466.

Valpy, Rev. Edward, elected headmaster of Norwich Grammar School, 87;
resigns, 289; death, 313.

Vaults discovered at Norwich, 228.

Venison feast at Fakenham, 8.

Ventriloquists, 212, 224.

Vestris, Madame, 287, 387, 438.

Victoria Gardens, Norwich, 433, 443, 465, 474, 479; Adelphi Theatre at,
465, 473; circus, 474; dismantled, 479.

Victoria Hotel, Yarmouth, 406.

Victoria, Princess, at Holkham Park, 343; celebration of her birthday,
362; accession and proclamation of, 362.  (_See also_ Queen Victoria.)

Villecrop hoax at Norwich, 258.

Vinegar and mustard works, 143.

Vining (actors and actresses), 109, 199, 222, 250, 329, 398, 424, 428,
428, 486.

Vittoria, battle of, 106, 107; its effect on Norwich manufactures, 107.

Volunteer corps, 6, 8, 12, 13, 18, 19, 20, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28,
29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 40, 41, 42, 43, 47, 48, 50, 59, 65, 66, 67, 68,
70, 72, 74, 103, 104, 108.

. . . disbandment of, 103.

. . . clothing made by Lynn ladies, 28.

Voracious sow, 161.

Voters' register, failing to deliver, 384; revision of, 318.



W


Wagers, 21, 22, 27, 39, 40, 59, 109, 125, 140, 149, 165, 233, 259, 289,
360, 385, 386, 430.

Walcheren expedition, 78.

Wallack, Mr. (actor), 308, 434.

Walloon congregation, 30.

Waltz, introduction of, 269.

Wandering piper, 319.

Wanstead House, purchase of, 221.

Watchmen, 51, 95, 157, 215, 239.

Waterloo, battle of, 127.

. . . , Norfolk officers at, 128.

. . . , sick and wounded from, 128.

. . . , public subscription in respect of, 128.

. . . , anniversary dinner, 138, 196.

Water frolics.  (_See_ Regattas.)

Water surreptitiously obtained, 8.

Water velocipede hoax at Lynn, 208.

Waterworks prosecution, 8.

Waterworks (Norwich), 482; opening of, 483.

Waylett, Mrs. (actress), 323.

Weavers, 76, 95, 209, 213, 224, 252, 253, 263, 267, 287, 292, 375, 377,
416.

Weavers' riots, 253, 267, 287, 292, 375.

Webster, Mr. (actor), 430, 439, 470.

Wellington, Duke of, at Norwich, 177, 178, 189.

Wells harbour improvement, 34.

Wemyss, Earl of, smack, wreck of, 325; case at Norfolk Assizes, 326.

Wesleyan schism, 480.

Wesleyans, 256, 357, 372, 389, 415, 450, 480.

West, Mrs. W., at Norwich Theatre, 295.

Whale, skeleton of, 354.

Whales captured, 207, 300, 421.

Whaler at Lynn, 162.

Wheel machine driven by manual power, 432.

Whifflers, reappearance of, 472.

Whipping in public, 29, 39, 73, 149, 164, 296.

Whirlwinds, remarkable, 43, 275, 429.

White sparrowhawk, 377.

Wife selling, 38, 199, 221, 417, 418.

Wiggens (coachman), 259, 377, 413, 425, 437.

Wilkins, William (architect), 260.

Will extraordinary, 485.

William IV. proclaimed King, 297; coronation of, 308; receives address
from Norwich Corporation, 315; death, 362.

Wilson, the pedestrian, 138.

Windham, William, death of, 83.

Window duty, 97.

Windows in Norwich Cathedral, 255.

Wine, Bishop Bathurst's, 359.

. . . , duty on at Lynn, 7.

. . . , Lord Suffield's, 385.

Winthuysen's sword, 48.

Witchcraft, belief in, 428, 429.

Wodehouse, Rev. C. N., installed prebendary, 148.

Woman with two husbands, 164.

Women at prize-fights, 153, 158.

Wombwell's menagerie, 142, 165, 193, 206, 232, 252, 390, 414, 433, 468.

Wood pavements, 398, 412.

Wooden leg race, 125.

Woolcombers, 372, 415.

Wool, importation and exportation of, 135, 177, 195, 230.

Woolley, Rev. John, elected headmaster of Norwich Grammar School, 478.

Workhouse, fire at Rollesby, 359.

Workhouses, 9, 10, 11, 12, 22, 31, 43, 359, 459, 460, 470.

. . . , insubordination in, 359, 469, 460, 470.

. . . , separation of married couples in, 359, 470.

Wreckers, lawless conduct of, 345, 357.

Wrecks, 55, 63, 87, 139, 202, 203, 214, 226, 227, 263, 290, 322, 325,
345, 355, 357, 370, 380, 404, 432, 444.

Wrestling, 49, 60, 97, 111, 116, 127, 137, 148, 149.

Wroxham Regatta, 7.



Y


Yacht built at Woodton, 281.

Yarham, the murderer, 445, 454.

Yarmouth Bridge accident, 446.

. . . churches, 307, 328.

. . . Court of Gaol delivery, 225.

. . . Disfranchisement Bill, 468.

. . . Guildhall, 477.

. . . Hospital, 388.

. . . Improvement Act, 88.

. . . parish church, mutilation of, 398.

. . . Port and Haven Bill, 330, 340.

Yarn Company and Factory, 325, 329, 349, 350, 354, 374, 379, 486.

Yates, Mr. and Mrs., 268, 323, 351, 401, 419, 436.

Yaxley Barracks, 13.

Yelloly, Dr., 202.

Yeomanry Cavalry, 8, 10, 13, 20, 21, 25, 26, 27, 28, 30, 34, 42, 69, 80,
84, 136, 145, 148, 161, 181, 206, 223, 225, 234, 256, 266, 271, 308, 386,
371, 378, 385, 397, 400, 407, 415, 418, 428, 432, 438, 447, 455, 463,
470, 476.

. . . , disbandment of, 371, 476.

. . . , escort prisoners, 266.

York, Duke of, 110, 188, 189, 215, 262; receives honorary freedom of
Norwich, 189; death, 262.

Young, Mr. (actor), 175, 179.




Footnotes


{0}  In this Project Gutenberg eText the corrigenda has been applied to
the eText.--DP.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NORFOLK ANNALS***


******* This file should be named 34439.txt or 34439.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/4/4/3/34439



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

