The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Chief Engineer, by Henry Abbott

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Chief Engineer

Author: Henry Abbott

Release Date: December 16, 2010 [EBook #34673]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHIEF ENGINEER ***




Produced by Linda M. Everhart, Blairstown, Missouri




The
Chief Engineer

By
HENRY ABBOTT

NEW YORK
1920

Copyright 1920
By
HENRY ABBOTT



The Chief Engineer
by
Henry Abbott

It was a dark night in July--very dark. There was no moon and clouds
hid the stars. We were sitting by the camp fire. Bige had just kicked
the burning logs together so that a shower of sparks shot straight up
toward the tree-tops, indicating that there was no wind, when he
said, "If you want to make that picture of deer this is just the kind
of a night to go for it. You must have it dark so you can get close
enough to get a good photograph. Also, this is just the kind of
weather when we are likely to find deer feeding near the mouth of the
river."

So with camera and flash-light apparatus I climbed into the bow end
of our light-weight cedar boat, while Bige with paddle sat in the
stern. We aimed toward the mouth of the river about half of a mile
from camp and across the pond. No land-marks were visible, so we
steered by "dead reckoning." Bige was feathering his paddle, Indian
fashion without lifting it out of the water, so we silently
proceeded, making no ripple on the surface and yet, at first, rather
swiftly.

  [Illustration: The Chief Engineer]

A few minutes later, the bow of the boat struck some yielding
obstacle. My first thought was that we had hit a mossy, overhanging
bank on the opposite shore of the pond. In times of stress, thoughts
follow each other in rapid succession. My second thought was that the
opposite shore was not mossy and overhanging, but rocky; third, that
we had not been out long enough to get across; and fourth that we
must have hit some animal who was swimming. But things were happening
now, more rapidly than thoughts, and very much quicker than the time
required to tell about them; and this latter thought was confirmed
long before it was completely formulated.

Instantly, after we struck, a violent commotion occurred under the
bow of the boat, water splashed in my face, there was the sound of
scratching, gnawing and splintering wood, then a paw appeared on the
gunwale beside me, the boat rocked and I yelled to Bige, "He is
climbing aboard!!" while I lifted the camera intending to brain this
indistinct shape as soon as I could see its head. This was
immediately followed by the release of the weight on the side of the
boat, its rocking in the opposite direction, a resounding slap on the
water which threw a shower of spray over my head, in my eyes and
ears. Then silence.

"Must have hit a muskrat," said Bige.

"More like a collie dog or a young bear," said I. "He surely would
have swamped the boat if you had not slapped the water with the
paddle, and I would have smashed my camera over his head."

  [Illustration: A Beaver Fountain]

"I didn't slap anything with the paddle. I wouldn't spoil your fun
that way. Your friend in the water made all the noise. Wonder what he
was," said Bige.

"Well, it was no measly muskrat, I'll stake my reputation and
experience on that," said I.

There ended our photographing operations for that occasion, since
after such a racket no deer could be expected to show himself at the
pond, so we turned back to camp. On the way we discussed the possible
identity of the animal with whom we had just been in collision, and
who had upset our plans for the evening.

Most wild animals swim; some for pleasure, others only when it cannot
be avoided. In the darkness we failed to get a clear idea of the size
or shape of this fellow, we could only judge by the jolt our boat
got, and the commotion he made in the water. We canvassed the
possibility of its being a coon, a fox, an otter, a porcupine, a
marten, a lynx or a wolf; but there was something about the habits of
each that would not fit the incident and we went to bed with the
problem still unsolved.

After breakfast the following morning, we went down to the shore and
examined our boat. The thin part of the prow above the water line had
been bitten through and a splinter a half-inch thick and eight inches
long had been torn out. The marks of very sharp clean cutting teeth
plainly showed at the upper end of the break. Short brown hairs were
sticking to the rough edges of the bow, and on the keel for a space
of eighteen inches back of the bow.

"That fellow must have thought a tree fell on him," said Bige. The
boat, we found did not leak, so we went fishing. Passing a small
island about a mile up the pond, we noticed a young green poplar tree
had fallen into the water. There had been no wind storm for months
and we did not know of any other campers on the pond so we wondered
who could have cut down that poplar, and why? We went ashore to
investigate. The tree we found was about four inches in diameter at
the butt and it had not been chopped, but had been gnawed off. The
ground about the stump was strewn with chips and one branch had been
gnawed off and carried away. The tooth marks on the stump were like
those on the bow of our boat, and looked as if made by a curved
chisel about a quarter inch wide. The chips were from two to four
inches long and were clean cut on each end and split out as if they
had come from a wood chopper's axe.

Bige said, "Gosh! that looks like the work of beaver, but there are
no beaver in these woods, haven't been any here for sixty years."

A few minutes later we found the branch which had been cut from the
fallen poplar floating on the water near shore opposite the island.
The bark had been stripped from it down to the smallest twig and it
appeared white and conspicuous when seen from a distance of fifty
yards.

Proceeding on our way toward the fishing ground, we presently saw the
head of some animal above the surface. It was swimming toward us and
waves were spreading out fan wise in its wake, on the smooth surface
of the pond. Instantly we became motionless and watched its approach.
When within fifteen or twenty yards of our boat it stopped, eyeing us
curiously, then swung to the right and again to the left, apparently
for the purpose of viewing us from different angles. Its back
appearing above the surface was covered with a reddish brown fur with
long grey hairs showing at intervals. There was a large white spot on
the top of his head (this we later learned was not a characteristic
marking, a white spot being quite unusual on animals of this family,
and it enabled us to recognize our first acquaintance from among the
many members of his tribe whom we subsequently met.) Two large,
projecting and curving cutting teeth on the upper and two on the
lower jaw appeared when he opened his mouth. There were also eight
molars on each jaw. His eyes were inconspicuous and his ears were
small but he had a broad, flat tail, shaped somewhat like the blade
of a paddle.

Having, apparently, decided that it would be unwise to cultivate a
closer acquaintance with two men in a boat, our swimmer humped his
back, lifted high his broad tail and with it struck the water a
powerful slap, the noise of which reverberated from "Mud Pond
Mountain to East Inlet Holler" and it threw a shower of water and
spray eight or ten feet into the air, looking like some of the war
pictures of exploding mines.

The animal disappeared under water but a long line of air bubbles
coming to the surface marked his progress under water. These we
followed about two hundred yards to where they ended at the opposite
shore. A closer examination disclosed the entrance, about two feet
under the surface, of a burrow which seemed to rise under the high
bank.

"Well," said Bige, "that's the fellow who met up with our boat last
night. He's a beaver all right, but where in tunket did he come
from?"

  [Illustration: Camp Fireplace]

The incidents here related occurred while we were camping at Cherry
Pond, seventeen years ago. We had learned in many conversations with
Mitchell Sabattis (an Indian who died at a very advanced age a few
years ago, and who was the oldest inhabitant of this region), about
the Indians trapping beaver here, and how they sold hundreds of skins
to John Jacob Astor, who became rich dealing in furs which he
purchased throughout the northern forests and in Canada.

Sabattis explained that it was the practice of the Indians to take
only a few animals from each colony, when they would move their traps
to another dam. Thus there were always enough beaver left for
breeding and they increased rapidly. But the white trappers, when
they came, caught every beaver and took every skin, big and little,
with the result that in a few years' time, beaver had been
exterminated from the Adirondack forests and none ever came in again.

A few days after our encounter with the animal as above related, we
learned, while making inquiries, that during the previous season the
Conservation Commission of the State had "planted" a family of six
beavers on one of the streams emptying into Raquette Lake, and we
concluded that the individual we met was an emigrant from that
colony.

Upon studying the government map, we figured that if he followed a
chain of lakes and ponds through the connecting streams, he must have
traveled thirty-five miles. If he had come over the mountain and
several foothills in a straight line, which seemed unlikely, he might
have shortened his trip to about twenty miles.

We saw the white headed beaver many times during our visits to the
pond that summer, sometimes on shore, or sitting on the trunk of a
poplar or birch tree which he had felled near the water. His body was
about thirty inches long, tail ten inches long and six inches wide,
hind feet webbed, like those of a goose, fore feet resembled the
hands of a child but with long, sharp toe nails. He might have
weighed forty or fifty pounds. He was a slow and clumsy traveler on
land but a very efficient citizen in the water. He could dive and
remain under water from eight to ten minutes without apparent
inconvenience. Swimming, he could tow a log twice his own weight and
against the current when necessary.

Early in September, his wife arrived. Whether the "old man" went
after her, whether he sent a wireless message or a telepathic
command, or whether the date of her coming had been arranged between
them before he left home, we never knew. It seems quite probable that
she just naturally knew that it was high time for her husband to stop
exploring and loafing and to get busy building a house and storing a
supply of food for the winter, so she arrived.

She would have no difficulty in following his trail, which after the
habit of his kind, he doubtless marked at more or less frequent
intervals by scooping up from the bottom of the pond or stream a
double handful of soft mud, which he would place on the shore, shape
it up into a nice round mudpie and deposit in its center a few drops
of "Castoreum." This material has a peculiar, pungent and individual
odor easily recognized by members of a beaver family. The Indians
also highly prized the castoreum of the beaver for its supposed
medicinal properties.

Immediately on the arrival of the female beaver the two began work
building a house. This was placed on a point of land between the
mouth of the river and a shallow bay or slough. The base of the house
was about a foot above the normal level of the pond. Straight sticks
and crooked branches two to four inches in diameter and about five
feet long were placed on the ground for a foundation and were
arranged in a circle like the spokes of a wheel. On these were piled
other sticks, brush, stones, sod and mud, which latter was used as
cement or mortar to bind the other materials together. An open space
was left in the center, which grew smaller in diameter as the walls
were carried up and was finally arched over. The house when finished
was fourteen feet in diameter at the base; it was cone shaped and six
feet high. It had no door or entrance visible on the surface; but as
the side walls were being carried up one of the beavers dug a round
hole twelve inches in diameter, straight down from the center of the
house about eighteen inches, when it was curved toward the river and
opened out in the bottom. Then he dug a second entrance, close to the
first one, but this curved toward the slough. The water there being
shallow, a ditch or canal dug in the bottom carried the outer end of
the burrow down about three feet below the surface and a hundred feet
or more out to deep water. The mud procured in digging the entrance
and exit was used in plastering the walls of the house. No mud was
used on the ventilating flue, which was a space about a foot in
diameter in the center of the cone. This was thoroughly protected
from outside enemies by two feet in thickness of criss-crossed
sticks, but air could freely pass through the interstices.

  [Illustration: Beaver House]

The house building proceeded rapidly, much of the work being done at
night, but we were able to inspect the building daily, and several
times we found the beavers working in the daytime. Always the white
crowned beaver was the leader and seemed to be directing the work of
the other. When the structure was completed it proved to be an
excellent example of reinforced concrete work of a most substantial
character. Nevertheless, six weeks later, just before freezing
weather started, a final coating of mud three inches thick was
plastered over the entire outside surface of the house. When frozen,
this armor plate would furnish complete protection to the furry
inhabitants against their most ferocious enemies during the long and
hungry months of winter.

Some years later, a beaver house, the side of which had been cut
away, afforded an opportunity for us to learn how our white-headed
friend finished the inside of his castle. The rough projecting inner
ends of sticks, branches and brush were gnawed off making a roomy,
smooth-walled, dome ceilinged space divided into two parts. The
first, or ground floor, contained the openings for entrance and exit.
It also was used as a drying room; for no self-respecting beaver
would ever permit himself, his family or guests to go to bed in wet
clothes. Coming in from swimming in the pond or river he must sit in
the vestibule until his wet fur is thoroughly dry before he climbs
into the bunk.

The drying floor also serves the purpose of a dining room in winter,
when the pond is covered with ice, as will later appear.

The sleeping apartment had its floor about six inches higher than the
drying floor. The bed was made of thin shreds or splinters of dry
poplar wood. A quantity of this material had been split out with an
expenditure of much time and patience. A mattress three inches or
more thick, made of this soft, elastic material would make a far
better bed than many campers can boast of.

Mud for use in house building was procured, not only from the tunnel
entrances and from the canal, but excavations were made in the river
bottom near the house. A pocket was there dug out, about twenty feet
in diameter, making the water six feet deep.

Into this hole the two beavers now proceeded to store their food for
the winter. This consisted chiefly of the trunks of poplar saplings,
two to six inches in diameter, cut into lengths of four to six feet,
the sticks of larger diameter being the shorter. In the wood pile
were also placed the branches of the same trees. Mixed in with the
poplar were some alders and a few birch and soft maple sticks. The
birch and alder apparently were used to add spice and tang to the
otherwise sameness of their more staple food.

In the edge of the forest next the slough a few years before, a fire
(doubtless started by some careless hunter), had burned over several
acres, and this was now covered by a "second growth" of poplar. It
was there that the beavers cut most of their lumber. The water in the
slough was shallow and filled with pond lilies, so a canal three feet
wide, two feet deep and two hundred and twenty feet long was dug
across this mudhole. Through this canal the beavers floated their
sticks and brush and placed them on their storage pile under water so
that the bark, which they eat, might be kept soft and fresh for
winter use. Also, so that it might be reached from their house under
the ice, after pond and river were frozen.

Day after day Bige and I watched the progress of this harvest. Saw
the beaver towing the floating logs through the canal into the pond
and up the river to the lumber pile where the beaver would dive with
his stick and presently come to the surface again, leaving the stick
_under the water;_ and we wondered how he did it. Also we discussed
possible ways of making a floating stick sink. From our boat we could
see the pile of wood below the surface of the water and we could see
no stones on the pile.

Bige stoutly argued in support of the theory that the beaver sucked
the air out of the pores in the wood, that the water flowed into the
vacuum thus produced, making the stick heavy enough to sink. In order
to demonstrate his theory, Bige took the axe from camp, cut a poplar
sapling an inch and a half in diameter and the usual beaver length,
put one end in the water and sucked on the other end of the stick.
After repeated trials and failures to make the stick do anything but
float, Bige decided that his "sucker was not powerful enough." The
next day, looking down into the water from our boat, we saw one end
of the axe-cut stick in the wood pile with other sticks cut by beaver
teeth.

  [Illustration: Bige Testing the Power of His Sucker]

After my return to the city, Bige reported from time to time, making
visits to the beaver house, seeing beaver swimming under the ice,
carrying sticks from the wood pile into the tunnel leading to the
house; also later, beaver bringing peeled sticks out of the house and
placing them in a very orderly manner on another pile. Reports also
reached me of beaver under the ice digging pond lily roots and
carrying them into the house.

In the following April after the ice in the pond had broken up, the
beavers came out of their winter home and brought with them six young
beaver puppies. The father beaver with the white head now went away
on his summer exploration trip. We later learned that it was the
habit of all male beavers to wander far from home during the summer
months. The mother remained at the pond and took care of her six
young ones; but with them she moved into the burrow in the bank where
we had first seen the old male beaver go to hide.

Many times during the summer we saw the young beavers sunning
themselves on the bank or playing in the water near the shore. The
mother was always somewhere near, and invariably sounded a warning by
pounding the water with her broad tail, whereupon the youngsters
would scamper for cover and each would precede his dive by slapping
the water with his little ladle-like tail, in feeble imitation of the
mother.

One day in June a hawk swooped down, grabbed one of the young beavers
and carried him away. Later, a pekan, sometimes called a fisher,
killed another one. Apparently the mother scared him off. We found
the dead baby beaver, and tracks in the mud gave us the name of his
murderer.

  [Illustration: The Pekan]

Early in July of that summer, while on a fishing trip to Wolf Pond,
six miles to the east, Bige and I met our white-headed beaver friend.
A slap on the water and a shower of spray informed us that we were
recognized. It also spoiled our fishing for at least half an hour.

Toward the end of the same month we met him at the mouth of West Bay
Brook on Cedar Lake. This was nine miles west of his home and fully
fifteen miles from Wolf Pond, where we last saw him.

In the third week in August we again saw our beaver with a white cap.
This time on Pine Brook where he was assisting two other beavers
(possibly a brother and sister of his,) in building a dam across the
brook. We were fortunate in being able to conceal ourselves, and for
a time watched operations. Apparently, our friend was bossing the job
and directing the operations of the other two. It seemed that his
ability as an engineer was recognized in beaver world, and he
therefore had been called in to supervise a difficult undertaking.
Thereafter we called him the Chief Engineer, and he many times proved
his right to the title.

In September the Chief Engineer returned to his home at Cherry Pond,
and there followed a season of great activity among the beavers. Some
of their work we were privileged to see in progress, all of it we saw
after completion. The young beavers were now about one third the size
of their parents, but they all worked.

First, the entire family visited the outlet of the pond, where the
Chief demonstrated to the others that with the rocky stream bed and
the accumulated drift-wood, a dam would be unnecessary to maintain
water in the pond at its present level. Next the house must be
enlarged to make room for a family of six instead of two, as in the
previous winter. When completed, the house was elliptical in shape,
twenty-two feet across its base in the short diameter and thirty feet
in its longer dimension. It was also increased in height to eight
feet. The peeled sticks piled up under the ice during the previous
winter were now utilized in making additions to the house with other
sticks and brush brought from the woods.

  [Illustration: A One Night Camp]

The interior of the house was enlarged to more than twice its former
size by cutting away and dragging out through the tunnels, surplus
materials. In doing this, several pillars were left standing for
supports to the enlarged ceiling.

Three additional tunnels were dug, making five channels for entrance
and exit. Those terminating in shallow water were continued as
ditches to deeper water.

The storage warehouse also was made larger and deeper, not only to
provide mortar for enlarging the building, but because more food must
be stored for six mouths than was required for two. A very high grade
of what is called "instinct" in animals must be required to calculate
and determine just how much food to store for a winter's supply for a
family of a given size. It has been asserted by those who think they
know, that in this matter a beaver never makes a mistake. That he
also stores an extra amount of food for an unusually long and severe
winter. So far as I have observed, they seem to come through the
winter in good physical condition.

A picture, which I have longed to secure on a film, but which, so
far, I have only been able to fix on the retina of an eye, represents
a young beaver about the size of a kitten, not fully grown, in an
upright position, holding in his two hands and against his breast a
gob of mud, while he laboriously and clumsily struggles up the steep
side of his house, on the roof of which he is about to deposit his
burden. In the water, towing a young log or a bushy branch, he is
much more at home and more graceful in his movements.

The following spring there came out of our beaver house, the Chief
Engineer, his wife, four yearlings and a new family of five babies.
The "old man" now went off on his annual exploring trip, but he took
with him the four older children, while the mother and the babies
remained behind. As usual, the house was deserted during the summer
months. We now noted several burrows under the bank at widely
separate places along shore. Sometimes the beaver would be seen
entering one of these holes and again another.

It is interesting and easy, to study the habits of wild creatures,
and to note how uniform are their methods and practices. It is not so
easy to determine reasons for their peculiar way of doing things. It
is of course permissible to speculate, but one might be expected to
furnish proof, when an assertion is made. For example, it has been
stated by at least two writers, that beaver desert their homes in
summer so that the vermin which infest their huts may die off from
starvation during the absence of their fur coated hosts.

My own guess, if I were to hazard one, would be that since a beaver
house must generally be placed in an exposed position, its owners
find that with the sun beating down on its roof during June, July and
August, the poorly ventilated interior becomes too hot for comfort.
On the other hand, I have noted that the burrows in which they live
in summer, are usually found under some overhanging tree, in a cool
spot where the sun never penetrates.

During our wanderings through the woods that summer, Bige and I came
upon a family of beavers at Mud Pond. These were doubtless also
emigrants from the original Raquette Lake colony. Great improvements
were in progress. An abandoned and broken down lumber dam at the
outlet, which had not been used for lumber operations for many years,
was being rebuilt by the beavers, and the Chief Engineer was on hand
assisting and directing operations.

  [Illustration: Section of Beaver Dam]

On a subsequent visit, we saw the completed dam which raised the
waters of the pond about three feet. An area more than a mile long
and a quarter mile wide was now flooded. A swamp at the upper end was
entirely covered and afforded water transportation from a large grove
of poplar trees, which without the dam could not have been reached.
Five years later, on the shores of this pond, the beavers had
completely cleared of trees more than ten acres of ground. At this
time four beaver houses were observed on the shore and on islands in
Mud Pond.

When three years old, the children of the Chief Engineer left the
parental homestead, mated with relatives in other colonies and set up
house building and house keeping on their own account. Some of them,
doubtless, located many miles away, others we know built dams and
houses on streams emptying into Cherry Pond.

One summer Bige and I were trout fishing on West Bay Brook. We worked
up stream about four miles from its mouth, and encountered seven
beaver dams and as many houses. At one of these dams we found the
white capped Chief working with some younger beavers. Our guess was,
that some of these were his own offspring to whom he was giving
instruction in engineering practice.

  [Illustration: Beaver Posing]

A year later, on Fishing Brook, twenty miles to the north-east, and
fully fifty miles from the original colony on the Raquette tributary,
we found several beaver colonies. They also settled on Minnow Brook.
On Salmon River, from its mouth to Salmon Pond (which it drains), a
distance of six miles, there is now a beaver dam every half mile. At
one of these dams, a few years ago, we found the Chief Engineer at
work. The dam was placed where the current was swift, and a big rock
in mid stream was utilized as a pier, against which the two sections
of the dam were braced. Such an adaptation of available means to
accomplish a difficult engineering feat is surely something more than
merely instinct.

  [Illustration: Stone Pier in Beaver Dam]

On an exploring trip over the foot hills of Dunwood Mountain, Bige
and I came upon a very unusual beaver dam on Little Bear Brook. The
brook at this point flowed through a deep ravine. The dam built
across the valley measured in length at its top two hundred and ten
feet. It was fifteen feet from the bottom of brook to top of dam, and
we estimated the width at its base at forty feet. Water was flowing
over a spillway three feet wide at one end of the dam. The upper and
lower sides of the dam sloped away steeply like the roof of a house,
and along the ridge was a row of stones, each about the size of a
man's head. We walked across the dam on these stones without wetting
our feet, and we wondered how the beavers got them into position. It
did not seem possible that such small animals could lift and carry
these heavy stones to where they were placed. It was impossible for a
human to roll them up over the lower and outer face of the dam, which
was a network of interwoven and criss-crossed saplings, sticks and
brush. The only other method which appeared to us possible was for
the stones to be rolled or pushed up the upper and inner slope of the
dam _under water_ to the top. The inner face of the dam was of course
plastered over with mud and was relatively smooth.

  [Illustration: Beaver Dam Fifteen Feet High]

We cooked our eggs, bacon and tea on the bank at one end of the dam.
After we had eaten and drunken and while I was engaged in taking some
photographs, we were agreeably surprised to see our old friend, the
bald headed Chief Engineer, swimming down the pond toward us. As a
signal that we were recognized, he saluted by humping his back,
lifting his broad tail and striking the water a resounding slap, thus
throwing a fountain of spray high into the air. His presence
signified to us that this marvelous piece of engineering was the
product of his skill in plan and execution.

We were able to go in a boat past the beaver house on our pond, about
a mile up the river. At the head of navigation was a big flat rock,
over which the water flowed, making a fall about one foot high, and
above this fall were rapids. An old and much used trail started at
this flat rock and led up the river; a branch also took one to Wolf
Pond and another branch led to Dunwood Mountain. We often used this
trail, as also did other visitors at the pond. And doubtless, so did
the Indians many years ago.

A pair of young beavers, both of them probably relatives of the Chief
Engineer, built a dam across the river on this flat rock. The dam was
about two feet high, backing the water up the rapids thirty yards and
making a fall of water over the dam three feet high. Above this dam
the beavers started building a house, but before the house was
completed, high water following three days of rain washed away the
dam. The beavers at once rebuilt the dam in the same spot, but within
a month the dam had been the second time washed away. The high water
of the following spring carried the dam, rebuilt in the fall, off of
the flat rock for the third time.

On the smooth flat surface of this rock there was no suitable
anchorage for a dam, and the unusual pressure of high and swift
flowing water pushed it down stream and scattered the materials of
which it was built.

It was a bad dam-site! and this is doubtless what the Chief Engineer
told the youngsters; for it was at this period that the Chief took a
hand in the game.

The house that had been built above the flat rock was abandoned and
was never again occupied.

A pair of beavers which we believed to be the hard luck animals above
mentioned, we now found were beginning operations on a new dam about
a quarter of a mile down the river, and the Chief Engineer worked
with them and seemed to be directing the job. We watched the progress
of this enterprise for many days and found it most interesting.

At the spot selected, the river was about a hundred and twenty feet
wide and five feet deep in the middle. The current was not very swift
and a lot of mud had settled on the gravelly bottom. Saplings and
bushy alders, many of them fifteen to twenty feet long, were used for
a foundation. They were always placed with the butt ends up stream
and stones on the bushy ends held them firmly anchored on the bottom.
All sorts of materials were worked into this dam; much of it was
carried, dragged or floated long distances. The sticks and brush were
interwoven in a very ingenious manner, the chinks were filled with
sod, stones and mud. The entire structure was firmly braced by heavy
sticks resting against the lower slope of the dam with one end of
each stick stuck in the ground at the bottom of the river.

This dam at first was built up to two feet above the normal level of
the river and water flowed over the top of the dam; but the river
banks were low at this place and water also flowed over the banks--on
one side into a slough and on the other side into a swamp.

The second phase of this hydro-engineering feat was now begun. It
consisted of wing dams two feet high on top of the river bank and
parallel to the stream. These were carried up on the north side of
the river a distance of three hundred and fifty feet and on the south
side about two hundred feet. The dam across the river was also made
two feet higher. The dam now, in the middle of the river, was five
feet high under water and four feet above the surface, making it nine
feet in the highest part and with the two wings, six hundred and
seventy feet long.

We had visited the scene of operations at least twice every day
during the building and had casually discussed the probable
difficulty in reaching the old trail up the river, but had not
considered the matter seriously. One day Bige and I dragged our boat
up over the dam and rowed up the river. Above the end of the wing dam
the forest was flooded five hundred or more feet on each side of the
river, and if we wished to follow the old trail we should have to
wade through water at least as far as that; for it was impossible to
push the boat through the woods, between the trees and bushes.

It was all very well and very interesting to watch the operations of
the beaver, but this was carrying a joke too far. The beavers were
now interfering with our business. The beavers are, of course,
protected by law, but here were hundreds of fine spruce, hemlock,
pine and balsam trees being drowned in our presence. The trees would
die; they were valuable; they belonged to the State and we were both
of us tax-payers. This thing must be stopped at once.

We rowed back to the dam and spent three hours tearing a hole three
feet wide through the middle of it. We watched the water run out
through the break and then returned to camp.

The next morning we found the dam had been repaired during the night
and the water was flowing over its top as usual. Two guests arrived
at our camp that morning. They were interested in the story of the
dam and spent all of the afternoon in making another opening to let
the water out; but again the beavers had the dam repaired before the
following morning. The Doctor had by now settled in his camp at the
western end of the pond. He came across with his two husky boys and
they broke a hole through the dam for the third time; and the third
time the beavers repaired the breach during the night.

  [Illustration: Bige Tearing Out the Dam]

Bige's fighting blood was now thoroughly "het up" and he said "I'll
fix them pesky beavers." A lot of men were at work building a "tote
road" for a lumber camp over the other side of the mountain about
three miles from our camp. Bige went over to call on them, and he
came back with four sticks of dynamite and some fuse. These we
connected and placed on top of the dam. We covered the dynamite with
mud, lighted the fuse, jumped into our boat and rowed as fast as
possible down toward the pond. When a hundred yards away, the
explosion occurred. With a terrific roar that beaver dam was shot
toward the sky and toward every point of the compass, and the water
above the dam came rushing through a gap twenty feet wide. A later
examination proved, that the dam had been torn out clear to the
bottom of the river. Our hand-made breaks had extended only to the
surface of the water below the dam.

That night a hurry up wireless call went out, and before morning
twenty-three beavers were at work rebuilding the dam, with the Chief
Engineer in command. We figured that delegations must have come from
a colony two miles up the river, probably some from Mud Pond, others
from Pine Brook and Raquette River. Certainly, there were not, living
on our pond, as many beavers as we saw at work that night. By the
next morning the dam had been rebuilt to the water level, and the
second morning it was completely restored with water flowing over the
top. A curious fact we noted, was, that while both banks of the river
were strewn with fragments of the old dam, not a single piece of this
tainted and dangerous material was used. New trees and bushes were
cut and carried greater distances for the rebuilding.

At this stage of the war, Bige and I surrendered. We were hopelessly
outnumbered and outclassed by the beavers. They worked while we were
asleep. We now got busy and cut out a new trail around the swamp and
the flooded area to connect with the old trail. This makes the walk
fully a half mile longer than before the dam was built.

The Chief Engineer had lived at Cherry Pond ten years. He had brought
out a new family of from four to seven individuals every spring. All
of these had been housed and fed for two or three years, when they
were old enough to emigrate and set up in business and housekeeping
on their own. During these ten years a large quantity of bark had
been consumed and poplar, the favorite food of beaver, had
practically all been cut off. Along the shores and on the islands no
more was to be found. It was, therefore, necessary to seek new
sources of food supply.

Beyond the swamp, to the northeast of the river mouth, there was a
grove of poplar trees, covering several acres. It was nearly a half
mile to this grove, but not too far for the courage of our Chief, who
now set his gang of youngsters at work digging a canal. This canal
had an average width of three feet and it was two and a half feet
deep. It was made quite crooked through the swamp, winding around and
between clumps of alders and larger trees. Smaller trees were dug up
and roots which crossed the path of the canal were cut off as clean
as if chopped with an axe.

Water in the canal through the swamp maintained practically the level
of the pond. There was a gradual rise of ground beyond the swamp and
here a series of dams or locks were built. Each dam raised the level
of water from two to three feet. There were thirteen of these levels
varying in length from fifty, to two hundred and fifty feet. Water
from a spring brook was diverted into the canal and flowed over each
dam. The beavers towed their lumber through this canal and dragged it
over the several dams, each of which seemed to be especially
constructed to facilitate this operation. The length of this canal we
estimated to be twenty-five hundred feet.

  [Illustration: Map of Cherry Pond]

Beavers appear to prefer the bark of smaller trees, but they do not
hesitate to cut down a large one when necessary. In such case they
carry away the branches only. A poplar tree eighteen inches in
diameter was cut on the shore of our pond and felled into the water.
The branches that remained above the surface were cut off and carried
to the storage pile. Those that were under water were left and were
cut off under the ice during the following winter.

Beavers are generally peaceable. They have many admirable traits.
Individuals of one colony will assist those of another in strenuous
operations much as pioneer humans helped each other in building log
cabins, in barn raisings, etc. Many tales are told. One, of a family
whose house had been destroyed, being taken into another's house and
the two families living together all winter. Another story relates
how a mother beaver was killed, when another immediately adopted the
five orphans and brought them up with her own children. We have
recorded above, instances where the Chief Engineer was contributing
his remarkable skill and experience toward solving the problems of
his friends in widely separated parts of the forest. And we believe
he did not insist upon union rules in regard to wage, hours of labor,
or minimum output.

  [Illustration: Tree 18 Inches in Diameter Partly Cut by Beaver]

Our observations justify the belief that at least some beavers have a
sense of humor. We mention two incidents in support of the theory.
One day on the big lake, near the hotel, I saw two girls about twelve
years of age, in a canoe. These girls were chasing a beaver. The
beaver was swimming on the surface and he was more than half a mile
from his house. He could easily have outdistanced the canoe and got
away from it, but he chose to swim slowly and allow the canoe to
approach until the girls might have touched him with a paddle, when
he would hump himself, slap the water with his tail, thus throwing
showers of spray over the girls, while he dived under the canoe and
presently came to the surface in some new and unexpected position.
The girls, of course, with screams and excited shouts frantically
swung the canoe into position and started the chase over again; while
the beaver loafed along until they caught up. This game of tag,
played by the girls and the beaver I watched for twenty minutes or
more and each time the girls came near enough to the animal he
managed to throw water on them. I feel certain that he enjoyed the
game quite as much as the two girls, and while I did not hear the
beaver laugh, I thought I saw a grin on his face.

The cottage where our family live during the summer, stands on a bank
about thirty feet above the water and fifty feet from the shore of
the lake. A number of shade trees have been planted on the grounds
about the house. Among these were two poplar trees which we had
carefully nursed for five years, and they were growing fine. One of
them was directly in front of the cottage and twenty feet from the
steps. It was six inches in diameter. The other tree was four inches
in diameter and about thirty feet from one side of the house.

A mile up the lake was a large beaver house. The shores near this
house on both sides of the lake, were lined with poplar trees and an
island near by was covered with them. One night a beaver from this
colony came down the lake and cut down the poplar tree in front of
our door, cut it into suitable lengths and towed it back up the lake
to his house. In the morning all that was left where my tree stood,
was a stump and some chips. The following night he came again and cut
the other tree. He must have made several trips to tow back to his
storage pile the lumber he cut at my front door.

  [Illustration: The Cottage]

I have devoted some time to speculating as to the motive that might
conceivably actuate a perfectly sane and intelligent beaver to haul
his lumber more than a mile, when in doing so he would have to pass
by hundreds of other equally good trees, many of them within a few
rods of his house. The only reasonable answer I have been able to
secure to this conundrum is that the beaver probably thought it would
be a good joke on me; and I have a mental picture of him laughing in
his sleeve as he dragged the logs down the bank in front of my door
while I slept.

Early in October, a few years ago, Bige and I were entertaining three
guests at our Cherry Pond camp. For two days we had been hunting with
indifferent success. Awakening quite early one morning, I took my
rifle and leaving the other members of the party audibly sleeping on
the balsam, tiptoed out of camp and down the trail. A log-road
paralleled the shore of the pond and I wandered down this road,
hoping to get an early morning shot at a deer. It was still quite
dark and I found that the sights on my gun were still invisible in
the dim light, so I sat on a log and waited for the first yellow
light to appear over East Inlet Mountain. Then, continuing my silent,
stalking way, when opposite the mouth of the river, I heard curious
and unusual sounds. Peering through the bushes across the slough I
saw a black bear. He was on top of the beaver house and with his
claws was tearing out sticks, brush and sod and throwing them in
every direction. The bear was very busy and with great energy and
determination he was proceeding to dig out the Chief Engineer. Of
course I knew that the Chief was in no personal danger, as he had a
perfectly safe way of retreat open, under water. But I could not
stand idly by and see his roof torn off: so I took careful aim and
fired. The bear tumbled down the steep slope of the beaver house and
I had visions of bear steak, etc., etc. But he immediately got on his
feet and wallowed through the slough to the shore. As he crossed the
log-road headed toward the woods I fired again and the second time
the bear fell. It did not take him long to recover his balance and
start at high speed up the steep hillside. About ten rods from where
I stood, the bear came into an opening in the bushes which had once
been a skid-way for logs; here he stopped, put his fore paws up on a
log and looked back at me. "Now," I said, to the trees and bushes,
"he's coming back to argue with me." Before he started, however, the
third shot cut a bunch of hair off of his shoulder and he resumed his
journey up the mountain and I went back to camp.

  [Illustration: Bear Wrecking Beaver House]

The racket made by three shots in the early morning had suddenly
interrupted the camp chorus, and I was greeted with the inquiry,
"Where's the deer?"

"That deer," said I, "is a bear, and he's big as a horse. I left him
up in the woods. We'll go and get him after breakfast."

Bige allowed that "if it really was a bear, he wasn't hurt much. You
couldn't kill a bear with that pop-gun. (I was using a Winchester
30). Why, a bear's hide is thicker than sole-leather and this time of
year he has an armor-plate of fat under it, six inches thick. You
might as well try to shoot a hole through a feather pillow. If you
are going to hunt bear, take an elephant-gun--a 45-90."

After breakfast, we all started out on the trail of the bear. We
found blood spots in the log-road. We also measured a foot print in a
soft place in the path. It was twelve inches in diameter. Broken
bushes, blood spots on fallen trees and on leaves marked his route up
the steep slope. Half way up the mountain on a big ledge of rocks,
covered with moss, the bear had been lying down. A pool of blood
marked the spot. Also, numerous tufts of moss torn from the rock and
saturated with blood were scattered about. Apparently the bear had
pulled up handfuls of the soft moss and used it in the same manner
that a surgeon uses lint.

Bige suggested, "This is a first aid station for bears; but if you
should tell anyone what you have seen here, you will be put in the
class of Nature Fakirs."

We followed the bear's trail from the mossy rock up to the top of the
mountain and had started down the other side when it began to rain.
In a few minutes the rain had washed away the red stains and we lost
the trail and returned to camp. But that bear is going yet. Also, he
is carrying with him three bullets that belong to me. Some day,
somewhere in the woods, I expect to meet him again, when I shall take
those bullets away from him.

It is now seventeen years since we first met the Chief Engineer. He
still retains the monopoly of his trade mark. Within our knowledge,
no other beaver has appeared with a white spot on his head. But the
Chief shows his age. His brown coat of fur looks faded and grey, and
the white spot is less conspicuous. The Chief was a member of the
first colony installed for the purpose of restocking the northern
forests; and he has contributed his share, both to increasing the
inhabitants and to rebuilding beaver industries. Every season a new
family of four to seven beavers have been sent out from his home to
start other families, and so they have multiplied in a sort of
geometrical progression until now they cover many hundreds of square
miles of forest land and water. Early in 1920 the Conservation
Commissioner of the State of New York estimated that there were more
than twenty thousand beavers in the Adirondack region. My guess is
that this estimate is much too low.

One day last summer, Bige and I saw the Chief Engineer dive and enter
a tunnel leading to his house. We silently paddled up close to the
house and listened. Presently we heard a murmur of beaver
conversation inside. "Gosh!" said Bige, "the old Chief is giving
instructions to the kid beavers. He's telling 'em how to handle the
job they have to do tonight."



END OF THE CHIEF ENGINEER





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Chief Engineer, by Henry Abbott

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHIEF ENGINEER ***

***** This file should be named 34673.txt or 34673.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/6/7/34673/

Produced by Linda M. Everhart, Blairstown, Missouri

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
