The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Two Twilights, by Henry A. Beers

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Two Twilights

Author: Henry A. Beers

Release Date: December 24, 2010 [EBook #34741]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TWO TWILIGHTS ***




Produced by Al Haines










THE TWO TWILIGHTS


BY

HENRY A. BEERS




BOSTON: RICHARD G. BADGER

TORONTO: THE COPP CLARK CO., LIMITED




Copyright 1917 by Henry A. Beers

All Rights Reserved



Made in the United States of America

The Gorham Press, Boston, U.S.A.




PREFACE

The contents of this volume include selections from two early books of
verse, long out of print; a few pieces from The Ways of Yale (Henry
Holt & Co); and a handful of poems contributed of late years to the
magazines and not heretofore collected.

For permission to use copyrighted material my thanks are due to Messrs.
Henry Holt & Co., and to the publishers of Harper's Monthly Magazine
and of the Yale Review.

HENRY A. BEERS.




  CONTENTS


  The Thankless Muse
  Blue Roses of Academus
  The Winds of Dawn
  Anacreontic
  Bumble Bee
  Water Lilies at Sunset
  Between the Flowers
  As You Like It
  The Old City
  Amethysts
  Katy Did
  Narcissus
  Nunc Dimittis
  Beaver Pond Meadow
  High Island
  Lotus Eating
  The Mermaid's Glass
  A Holiday Eclogue
  A Memory
  Amours Passageres
  On a Miniature
  Im Schwarzwald
  Waiting for Winter
  [Greek: To Pan]
  The Singer of One Song
  Posthumous
  Hugh Latimer
  Carcamon
  Ecce in Deserto
  To Imogen at the Harp
  The Ideas of the Pure Reason
  On Guard
  Sursum Corda
  Love, Death and Life
  The Dying Pantheist to the Priest
  The Upland
  The Remainder
  The Pasture Bars
  The Rising of the Curtain




  THE TWO TWILIGHTS




  THE THANKLESS MUSE

  The muses ring my bell and run away.
    I spy you, rogues, behind the evergreen:
  You, wild Thalia, romper in the hay;
    And you, Terpsichore, you long-legged quean.
  When I was young you used to come and stay,
    But, now that I grow older, 'tis well seen
  What tricks ye put upon me.  Well-a-day!
    How many a summer evening have ye been
  Sitting about my door-step, fain to sing
     And tell old tales, while through the fragrant dark
    Burned the large planets, throbbed the brooding sound
  Of crickets and the tree-toads' ceaseless ring;
    And in the meads the fire-fly lit her spark
    Where from my threshold sank the vale profound.




  BLUE ROSES OF ACADEMUS

  So late and long the shadows lie
    Under the quadrangle wall:
  From such a narrow strip of sky
    So scant an hour the sunbeams fall,
    They hardly come to touch at all
  This cool, sequestered corner where,
  Beside the chapel belfry tall,
  I cultivate my small parterre.

  Poor, sickly blooms of Academe,
    Recluses of the college close,
  Whose nun-like pallor would beseem
    The violet better than the rose:
    There's not a bud among you blows
  With scent or hue to lure the bee:
    Only the thorn that on you grows--
  Only the thorn grows hardily.

  Pale cloisterers, have you lost so soon
    The way to blush?  Do you forget
  How once, beneath the enamored moon,
    You climbed against the parapet,
    To touch the breast of Juliet
  Warm with a kiss, wet with a tear,
    In gardens of the Capulet,
  Far south, my flowers, not here--not here?




  THE WINDS OF DAWN

  Whither do ye blow?
  For now the moon is low.
  Whence is it that ye come,
  And where is it ye go?
  All night the air was still,
  The crickets' song was shrill;
  But now there runs a hum
  And rustling through the trees.
  A breath of coolness wakes,
  As on Canadian lakes,
  And on Atlantic seas,
  And each high Alpine lawn
  Begin the winds of dawn.




  ANACREONTIC

          I would not be
  A voyager on the windy seas:
          More sweet to me
  This bank where crickets chirp, and bees
  Buzz drowsy sunshine minstrelsies.

          I would not bide
  On lonely heights where shepherds dwell.
          At twilight tide
  The sounds that from the valley swell,
  Soft breathing lute and herdsman's bell,
          Are sweeter far
  Than music of cold mountain rills.
          The evening star
  Wakes love and song below, but chills
  With mist and breeze the gloomy hills.

          I would not woo
  Some storm-browed Juno, queenly fair.
          Soft eyes of blue
  And sudden blushes unaware
  Do net my heart in silken snare.

          I do not love
  The eyrie, but low woodland nest
          Of cushat dove:
  Not wind, but calm; not toil, but rest
  And sleep in grassy meadow's breast.




  BUMBLE BEE

  As I lay yonder in tall grass
  A drunken bumble-bee went past
  Delirious with honey toddy.
  The golden sash about his body
  Could scarce keep in his swollen belly
  Distent with honey-suckle jelly.
  Rose liquor and the sweet pea wine
  Had filled his soul with song divine;
  Deep had he drunk the warm night through:
  His hairy thighs were wet with dew.
  Full many an antic he had played
  While the world went round through sleep and shade.
  Oft had he lit with thirsty lip
  Some flower-cup's nectared sweets to sip,
  When on smooth petals he would slip
  Or over tangled stamens trip,
  And headlong in the pollen rolled,
  Crawl out quite dusted o'er with gold.
  Or else his heavy feet would stumble
  Against some bud and down he'd tumble
  Amongst the grass; there lie and grumble
  In low, soft bass--poor maudlin bumble!
  With tipsy hum on sleepy wing
  He buzzed a glee--a bacchic thing
  Which, wandering strangely in the moon,
  He learned from grigs that sing in June,
  Unknown to sober bees who dwell
  Through the dark hours in waxen cell.
  When south wind floated him away
  The music of the summer day
  Lost something: sure it was a pain
  To miss that dainty star-light strain.




  WATER LILIES AT SUNSET

  Mine eyes have seen when once at sunset hour
  White lily flocks that edged a lonely lake
  All rose and sank upon the lifting swell
  That swayed their long stems lazily, and lapped
  Their floating pads and stirred among the leaves.
  And when the sun from western gates of day
  Poured colored flames, they, kissed to ruddy shame,
  So blushed through snowy petals, that they glowed
  Like roses morning-blown in dewy bowers,
  When garden-walks lie dark with early shade.
  That so their perfumed chalices were brimmed
  With liquid glory till they overflowed
  And spilled rich lights and purple shadows out,
  That splashed the pool with gold, and stained its waves
  In tints of violet and ruby blooms.
  But when the flashing gem that lit the day
  Dropped in its far blue casket of the hills,
  The rainbow paintings faded from the mere,
  The wine-dark shades grew black, the gilding dimmed,
  While, paling slow through tender amber hues,
  The crimsoned lilies blanched to coldest white,
  And wanly shivered in the evening breeze.
  When twilight closed--when earliest dew-drops fell
  All frosty-chill deep down their golden hearts,
  They shrank at that still touch, as maidens shrink,
  When love's first footstep frights with sweet alarms
  The untrod wildness of their virgin breasts;
  Then shut their ivory cups, and dipping low
  Their folded beauties in the gloomy wave,
  They nodded drowsily and heaved in sleep.
  But sweeter far than summer dreams at dawn,
  Their mingled breaths from out the darkness stole,
  Across the silent lake, the winding shores,
  The shadowy hills that rose in lawny slopes,
  The marsh among whose reeds the wild fowl screamed,
  And dusky woodlands where the night came down.




  BETWEEN THE FLOWERS

  An open door and door-steps wide,
  With pillared vines on either side,
  And terraced flowers, stair over stair,
  Standing in pots of earthenware
  Where stiff processions filed around--
  Black on the smooth, sienna ground.
  Tubers and bulbs now blossomed there
  Which, in the moisty hot-house air,
  Lay winter long in patient rows,
  Glassed snugly in from Christmas snows:
  Tuberoses, with white, waxy gems
  In bunches on their reed-like stems;
  Their fragrance forced by art too soon
  To mingle with the sweets of June.
  (So breathes the thin blue smoke, that steals
  From ashes of the gilt pastilles,
  Burnt slowly, as the brazier swings,
  In dim saloons of eastern kings.)
  I saw the calla's arching cup
  With yellow spadix standing up,
  Its liquid scents to stir and mix--
  The goldenest of toddy-sticks;
  Roses and purple fuchsia drops;
  Camellias, which the gardener crops
  To make the sickening wreaths that lie
  On coffins when our loved ones die.
  These all and many more were there;
  Monsters and grandifloras rare,
  With tropical broad leaves, grown rank,
  Drinking the waters of the tank
  Wherein the lotus-lilies bathe;
  All curious forms of spur and spathe,
  Pitcher and sac and cactus-thorn,
  There in the fresh New England morn.
  But where the sun came colored through
  Translucent petals wet with dew,
  The interspace was carpeted
  With oriel lights and nodes of red,
  Orange and blue and violet,
  That wove strange figures, as they met,
  Of airier tissue, brighter blooms
  Than tumble from the Persian looms.
  So at the pontiff's feasts, they tell,
  From the board's edge the goblet fell,
  Spilled from its throat the purple tide
  And stained the pavement far and wide.
  Such steps wise Sheba trod upon
  Up to the throne of Solomon;
  So bright the angel-crowded steep
  Which Israel's vision scaled in sleep.
  What one is she whose feet shall dare
  Tread that illuminated stair?
  Like Sheba, queen; like angels, fair?
  Oh listen!  In the morning air
  The blossoms all are hanging still--
  The queen is standing on the sill.
  No Sheba she; her virgin zone
  Proclaims her royalty alone:
  (Such royalty the lions own.)
  Yet all too cheap the patterned stone
  That paves kings' palaces, to feel
  The pressure of her gaiter's heel.
  The girlish grace that lit her face
  Made sunshine in a dusky place--
  The old silk hood, demure and quaint,
  Wherein she seemed an altar-saint
  Fresh-tinted, though in setting old
  Of dingy carving and tarnished gold;
  Her eyes, the candles in that shrine,
  Making Madonna's face to shine.
  Lingering I passed, but evermore
  Abide with me the open door,
  The doorsteps wide, the flowers that stand
  In brilliant ranks on either hand,
  The two white pillars and the vine
  Of bitter-sweet and lush woodbine,
  And--from my weary paths as far
  As Sheba or the angels are--
  Between, upon the wooden sill,
  Thou, Queen of Hearts, art standing still.




  AS YOU LIKE IT

  Here while I read the light forsakes the pane;
    Metempsychosis of the twilight gray--
  Into green aisles of Epping or Ardenne
    The level lines of print stretch far away.

  The book-leaves whisper like the forest-leaves;
    A smell of ancient woods, a breeze of morn,
  A breath of violets from the mossy paths
    And hark! the voice of hounds--the royal horn,

  Which, muffled in the ferny coverts deep,
    Utters the three sweet notes that sound recall;
  As, riding two by two between the oaks,
    Come on the paladins and ladies all.

  The court will rest from chase in this smooth glade
    That slopes to meet yon little rushy stream,
  Where in the shallows nod the arrow-heads,
    And the blue flower-de-luce's banners gleam.

  The gamekeepers are coupling of the hounds;
    The pages hang bright scarfs upon the boughs;
  The new-slain quarry lies upon the turf
    Whereon but now he with the herd did browse.

  The silk pavilion shines among the trees;
    The mighty pasties and the flagons strong
  Give cheer to the dear heart of many a knight,
    And many a dame whose beauty lives in song.

  Meanwhile a staging improvised and rude
    Rises, whereon the masquers and the mimes
  Play for their sport a pleasant interlude,
    Fantastic, gallant, pointing at the times.

  Their green-room is the wide midsummer wood;
    Down some far-winding gallery the deer--
  The dappled dead-head of that sylvan show--
    Starts as the distant ranting strikes his ear.

  They use no traverses nor painted screen
    To help along their naked, out-door wit:
  (Only the forest lends its leafy scene)
    Yet wonderfully well they please the pit.

  The plaudits echo through the wide parquet
    Where the fair audience upon the grass,
  Each knight beside his lady-love, is set,
    While overhead the merry winds do pass.

  The little river murmurs in its reeds,
    And somewhere in the verdurous solitude
  The wood-thrush drops a cool contralto note,
    An orchestra well-tuned unto their mood.

  As runs the play so runs the afternoon;
    The curtain and the sun fall side by side;
  The epilogue is spoke, the twilight come;
    Then homeward through the darkening glades they ride.




  THE OLD CITY

  Ancient city, down thy street
  Minstrels make their music sweet;
  Sound of bells is on the air,
  Fountains sing in every square,
  Where, from dawn to shut of day,
  Maidens walk and children play;
  And at night, when all are gone,
  The waters in the dark sing on,
  Till the moonrise and the breeze
  Whiten the horse-chestnut trees.
  Cool thou liest, leisured, slow,
  On the plains of long ago,
  All unvexed of fretful trades
  Through thy rich and dim arcades,
  Overlooking lands below
  Terraced to thy green plateau.

  Dear old city, it is long
  Since I heard thy minstrels' song,
  Since I heard thy church-bells deep,
  Since I watched thy fountains leap.
  Yet, whichever way I turn,
  Still I see the sunset burn
  At the ending of the street,
  Where the chestnut branches meet;
  Where, between the gay bazaars,
  Maidens walk with eyes like stars,
  And the slippered merchants go
  On the pavements to and fro.
  Upland winds blow through my sleep,
  Moonrise glimmers, waters leap,
  Till, awaking, thou dost seem
  Like a city of a dream,--
  Like a city of the air,
  Builded high, aloof and fair,--
  Such as childhood used to know
  On the plains of long ago.




  AMETHYSTS

  Not the green eaves of our young woods alone
    Shelter new violets, by the spring rains kissed;
  In the hard quartz, by some old April sown,
    Blossoms Time's flower, the steadfast amethyst.

  "Here's pansies, they're for thoughts"--weak thoughts though fair;
    June sees their opening, June their swift decay.
  But those stone bourgeons stand for thoughts more rare,
    Whose patient crystals colored day by day.

  Might I so cut my flowers within the rock,
    And prison there their sweet escaping breath;
  Their petals then the winter's frost should mock,
    And only Time's slow chisel work their death.

  If out of those embedded purple blooms
    Were quarried cups to hold the purple wine,
  Greek drinkers thought the glorious, maddening fumes
    Were cooled with radiance of that gem divine.

  Might I so wed the crystal and the grape,
    Passion's red heart and plastic Art's endeavor,
  Delirium should take on immortal shape,
    Dancing and blushing in strong rock forever.




  KATY DID

    In a windy tree-top sitting,
      Singing at the fall of dew,
    Katy watched the bats a-flitting,
      While the twilight's curtains drew
    Closer round her; till she only
      Saw the branches and the sky--
    Rocking late and rocking lonely,
      Anchored on the darkness high.
  And the song that she was singing,
  In the windy tree-tops swinging,
  Was _under the tree, under the tree_
  _The fox is digging a pit for me_.

    When the early stars were sparkling
      Overhead, and down below
    Fireflies twinkled, through the darkling
      Thickets she heard footsteps go--
    Voice of her false lover speaking,
      Laughing to his sweetheart new:--
    "Half my heart for thee I'm breaking:
      Did not Katy love me true?"
  Then no longer she was singing,
  But through all the wood kept ringing--
  _Katy did, Katy did, Katy did love thee_
  _And the fox is digging a grave for me_.




  NARCISSUS

  Where the black hemlock slants athwart the stream
  He came to bathe; the sun's pursuing beam
  Laid a warm hand upon him, as he stood
  Naked, while noonday silence filled the wood.
  Holding the boughs o'erhead, with cautious foot
  He felt his way along the mossy root
  That edged the brimming pool; then paused and dreamed.
  Half like a dryad of the tree he seemed,
  Half like the naiad of the stream below,
  Suspended there between the water's flow
  And the green tree-top world; the love-sick air
  Coaxing with softest touch his body fair
  A little longer yet to be content
  Outside of its own crystal element.
  And he, still lingering at the brink, looked down
  And marked the sunshine fleck with gold the brown
  And sandy floor which paved that woodland pool.
  But then, within the shadows deep and cool
  Which the close hemlocks on the surface made,
  Two eyes met his yet darker than that shade
  And, shining through the watery foliage dim,
  Two white and slender arms reached up to him.
  "Comest thou again, now all the woods are still,
  Fair shape, nor even Echo from the hill
  Calls her Narcissus?  Would her voice were thine,
  Dear speechless image, and could answer mine!
  Her I but hear and thee I may but see;
  Yet, Echo, thou art happy unto me;
  For though thyself art but a voice, sad maid,
  Thy love the substance is and my love shade.
  Alas! for never may I kiss those dumb
  Sweet lips, nor ever hope to come
  Into that shadow-world that lies somewhere--
  Somewhere between the water and the air.
  Alas! for never shall I clasp that form
  That mocks me yonder, seeming firm and warm;
  But if I leap to its embrace, the cold
  And yielding flood is all my arms enfold.
  All creatures else, save only me, can share
  My beauties, be it but to stroke my hair,
  Or hold my hand in theirs, or hear me speak.
  The village wives will laugh and clap my cheek;
  The forest nymphs will beg me for a kiss,
  To make me blush, or hide themselves by this
  Clear brook to see me bathe.  But I must pine,
  Loving not me but this dear ghost of mine."
  Then, bending down the boughs, until they dipped
  Their broad green fronds, into the wave he slipped,
  And, floating breast-high, from the branches hung,
  His body with the current idly swung.
  And ever and anon he caught the gleam
  Of a white shoulder swimming in the stream,
  Pressed close to his, and two young eyes of black
  Under the dimpling surface answered back
  His own, just out of kissing distance: then
  The vain and passionate longing came again
  Still baffled, still renewed: he loosed his hold
  Upon the boughs and strove once more to fold
  To his embrace that fine unbodied shape;
  But the quick apparition made escape,
  And once again his empty arms took in
  Only the water and the shadows thin.
  Thus every day, when noon lay bright and hot
  On all the plains, there came to this cool spot,
  Under the hemlocks by the deepening brook,
  Narcissus, Phoebus' darling, there to look
  And pore upon his picture in the flood:
  Till once a peeping dryad of the wood,
  Tracking his steps along the slender path
  Which he between the tree trunks trodden hath,
  Misses the boy on whom her amorous eyes
  Where wont to feed; but where he stood she spies
  A new-made yellow flower, that still doth seem
  To woo his own pale reflex in the stream;
  Whom Phoebus kisses when the woods are still
  And only ceaseless Echo from the hill
  Unprompted cries _Narcissus_!




  NUNC DIMITTIS

  Highlands of Navesink,
  By the blue ocean's brink,
  Let your gray bases drink
      Deep of the sea.
  Tide that comes flooding up,
  Fill me a stirrup cup,
  Pledge me a parting sup,
      Now I go free.

  Wall of the Palisades,
  I know where greener glades,
  Deeper glens, darker shades,
      Hemlock and pine,
  Far toward the morning lie
  Under a bluer sky,
  Lifted by cliffs as high,
      Haunts that are mine.

  Marshes of Hackensack,
  See, I am going back
  Where the Quinnipiac
      Winds to the bay,
  Down its long meadow track,
  Piled with the myriad stack,
  Where in wide bivouac
      Camps the salt hay.

  Spire of old Trinity,
  Never again to be
  Sea-mark and goal to me
      As I walk down;
  Chimes on the upper air,
  Calling in vain to prayer,
  Squandering your music where
      Roars the black town:

  Bless me once ere I ride
  Off to God's countryside,
  Where in the treetops hide
      Belfry and bell;
  Tongue of the steeple towers,
  Telling the slow-paced hours--
  Hail, thou still town of ours--
      Bedlam, farewell!




  BEAVER POND MEADOW

  Thou art my Dismal Swamp, my Everglades:
  Thou my Campagna, where the bison wades
  Through shallow, steaming pools, and the sick air
  Decays.  Thou my Serbonian Bog art, where
  O'er leagues of mud, black vomit of the Nile,
  Crawls in the sun the myriad crocodile.
  Or thou my Cambridge or my Lincoln fen
  Shalt be--a lonely land where stilted men
  Stalking across the surface waters go,
  Casting long shadows, and the creaking, slow
  Canal-barge, laden with its marshy hay,
  Disturbs the stagnant ditches twice a day.
  Thou hast thy crocodiles: on rotten logs
  Afloat, the turtles swarm and bask: the frogs,
  When come the pale, cold twilights of the spring,
  Like distant sleigh-bells through the meadows ring.
  The school-boy comes on holidays to take
  The musk-rat in its hole, or kill the snake,
  Or fish for bull-heads in the pond at night.
  The hog-snout's swollen corpse, with belly white,
  I find upon the footway through the sedge,
  Trodden by tramps along the water's edge.
  Not thine the breath of the salt marsh below
  Where, when the tide is out, the mowers go
  Shearing the oozy plain, that reeks with brine
  More tonic than the incense of the pine.
  Thou art the sink of all uncleanliness,
  A drain for slaughter-pens, a wilderness
  Of trenches, pockets, quagmires, bogs where rank
  The poison sumach grows, and in the tank
  The water standeth ever black and deep
  Greened o'er with scum: foul pottages, that steep
  And brew in that dark broth, at night distil
  Malarious fogs bringing the fever chill.
  Yet grislier horrors thy recesses hold:
  The murdered peddler's body five days old
  Among the yellow lily-pads was found
  In yonder pond: the new-born babe lay drowned
  And throttled on the bottom of this moat,
  Near where the negro hermit keeps his boat;
  Whose wigwam stands beside the swamp; whose meals
  It furnishes, fat pouts and mud-spawned eels.
  Even so thou hast a kind of beauty, wild,
  Unwholesome--thou the suburb's outcast child,
  Behind whose grimy skin and matted hair
  Warm nature works and makes her creature fair.
  Summer has wrought a blue and silver border
  Of iris flags and flowers in triple order
  Of the white arrowhead round Beaver Pond,
  And o'er the milkweeds in the swamp beyond
  Tangled the dodder's amber-colored threads.
  In every fosse the bladderwort's bright heads
  Like orange helmets on the surface show.
  Richer surprises still thou hast: I know
  The ways that to thy penetralia lead,
  Where in black bogs the sundew's sticky bead
  Ensnares young insects, and that rosy lass,
  Sweet Arethusa, blushes in the grass.
  Once on a Sunday when the bells were still,
  Following the path under the sandy hill
  Through the old orchard and across the plank
  That bridges the dead stream, past many a rank
  Of cat-tails, midway in the swamp I found
  A small green mead of dry but spongy ground,
  Entrenched about on every side with sluices
  Full to the brim of thick lethean juices,
  The filterings of the marsh.  With line and hook
  Two little French boys from the trenches took
  Frogs for their Sunday meal and gathered messes
  Of pungent salad from the water-cresses.
  A little isle of foreign soil it seemed,
  And listening to their outland talk, I dreamed
  That yonder spire above the elm-tops calm
  Rose from the village chestnuts of La Balme.
  Yes, many a pretty secret hast thou shown
  To me, O Beaver Pond, walking alone
  On summer afternoons, while yet the swallow
  Skimmed o'er each flaggy plash and gravelly shallow;
  Or when September turned the swamps to gold
  And purple.  But the year is growing old:
  The golden-rod is rusted, and the red
  That streaked October's frosty cheek is dead;
  Only the sumach's garnet pompons make
  Procession through the melancholy brake.
  Lo! even now the autumnal wind blows cool
  Over the rippled waters of thy pool,
  And red autumnal sunset colors brood
  Where I alone and all too late intrude.




  HIGH ISLAND

  Pleasant it was at shut of day,
  When wind and wave had sunk away,
  To hear, as on the rocks we lay,
        The fog bell toll;
  And grimly through the gathering night
  The horn's dull blare from Faulkner's Light,
  Snuffed out by ghostly fingers white
        That round it stole.

  Somewhere behind its curtain, soon
  The mist grew conscious of a moon:
  No more we heard the diving loon
        Scream from the spray;
  But seated round our drift-wood fire
  Watched the red sparks rise high and higher,
  Then, wandering into night, expire
        And pass away.

  Down the dark wood, the pines among,
  A lurid glare the firelight flung;
  So for a while we talked and sung,
        And then to sleep;
  And heard in dreams the light-house bell,
  As all night long in solemn swell
  The tidal waters rose and fell
        With soundings deep.




  LOTUS EATING

  Come up once more before mine eyes,
    Sweet halcyon days, warm summer sea,
  Faint orange of the morning skies
    And dark-lined shores upon the lee!
  Touched with the sunrise, sea and sky
  All still on Memory's canvas lie:
  The scattered isles with India ink
  Dot the wide back-ground's gold and pink:
  Unstirring in the Sunday calm,
    Their profile cedars, sharply drawn,
    Bold black against the flushing dawn,
  Take shape like clumps of tropic palm.
  Night shadows still the distance dim
  (Ultra-marine) where ocean's brim
  Upholdeth the horizon-rim.

  Once more in thought we seem to creep
    By lonely reefs where sea-birds scream,
  Ulysses-like, along the deep
    Borne onward in the ocean-stream.
  The sea-floor spreadeth glassy still;
  No breath the idle sail doth fill;
  Our oar-blades smite the heavy seas;
  Under the world the morning breeze
  Treads with the sun the unknown ways.
    Thus steer we o'er the solemn main
    Eating the Lotus-fruit again,
  Dreaming that time forever stays,
  Singing "Where, Absence, is thy sting?"
  Listening to hear our echoes ring
  Through the far rocks where Sirens sing.




  THE MERMAID'S GLASS

  'T was down among the Thimble Isles
  That strew for many "liquid miles"
  The waters of Long Island Sound:
  Our yacht lay in a cove; around
  The rocky isles with cedars green
  And channels winding in between:
  And here a low, black reef was spread,
  And there a sunken "nigger-head"
  Dimpled the surface of the tide.
  From one tall island's cliffy side
  We heard the shaggy goats that fed:
  The gulls wheeled screaming overhead
  Or settled in a snowy flock
  Far out upon the lonely rock
  Which, like a pillar, seemed to show
  Some drowned acropolis below.
  Meanwhile, in the warm sea about,
  With many a plunge and jolly shout,
  Our crew enjoyed their morning bath.
  The hairy skipper in his wrath
  Lay cursing on the gunwale's rim:
  He loved a dip but could not swim;
  So, now and then with plank afloat
  He'd struggle feebly round the boat
  And o'er the side climb puffing in,
  Scraping wide areas off his skin,
  Then lie and sun each hirsute limb
  Once more upon the gunwale's rim
  And shout, with curses unavailing,
  "Come out!  There's wind: let's do some sailing."

  A palm-leaf hat, that here and there
  Bobbed on the water, showed him where
  Some venturous swimmer outward bound
  Escaped beyond his voice's sound.
  All heedless of their skipper's call,
  One group fought for the upset yawl.
  The conqueror sat astride the keel
  And deftly pounded with his heel
  The hands that clutched his citadel,
  Which showed--at distance--like the shell
  Round which, unseen, the Naiad train
  Sport naked on the middle main.
  Myself had drifted far away,
  Meanwhile, from where the sail-boat lay,
  Till all unbroken I could hear
  The wave's low whisper in my ear,
  And at the level of mine eye
  The blue vibration met the sky.
  Sometimes upon my back I lay
  And watched the clouds, while I and they
  Were wafted effortless along.--
  Sudden I seemed to hear a song:
  Yet not a song, but some weird strain
  As though the inarticulate main
  Had found a voice whose human tone
  Interpreted its own dull moan;
  Its foamy hiss; its surfy roar;
  Its gentle lapping on the shore;
  Its noise of subterranean waves
  That grumble in the sea-cliff caves;
  Its whish among the drifting miles
  Of gulf-weed from the Indian Isles:--
  All--all the harmonies were there
  Which ocean makes with earth or air.
  Turning I saw a sunken ledge
  Bared by the ebb, along whose edge
  The matted sea-weed dripped: thereon,
  Betwixt the dazzle of the sun
  And the blue shimmer of the sea,
  I saw--or else I seemed to see
  A mermaid, crooning a wild song,
  Combing with arm uplifted long
  The hair that shed its meshes black
  Down the slope whiteness of her back.
  She held a mirror in her hand,
  Wherein she viewed sky, sea, and land,
  Her beauty's background and its frame.
  But now, as toward the rock I came,
  All suddenly across the glass
  Some startling image seemed to pass;
  For her song rose into a scream,
  Over her shoulders one swift gleam
  Of eyes unearthly fell on me,
  And, 'twixt the flashing of the sea
  And the blind dazzle of the sun,
  I saw the rock, but thereupon
  She sat no longer 'gainst the blue;
  Only across the reef there flew
  One snow-white tern and vanished too.
  But, coasting that lone island round,
  Among the slippery kelp I found
  A little oval glass that lay
  Upturned and flashing in the ray
  Of the down-looking sun.  Thereto
  With scarce believing eyes I drew
  And took it captive
                      A while there
  I rested in the mermaid's lair,
  And felt the merry breeze that blew,
  And watched the sharpies as they flew,
  And snuffed the sea's breath thick with brine,
  And basked me in the sun's warm shine;
  Then with my prize I made my way
  Once more to where the sail-boat lay.
  I kept the secret--and the glass;
  By day across its surface pass
  The transient shapes of common things
  Which chance within its oval brings.
  But when at night I strive to sound
  The darkness of its face profound,
  Again I seem to hear the breeze
  That curls the waves on summer seas;
  I see the isles with cedars green;
  The channels winding in between;
  The coves with beaches of white sand;
  The reefs where warning spindles stand;
  And, through the multitudinous shimmer
  Of waves and sun, again the glimmer
  Of eyes unearthly falls on me,
  Deep with the mystery of the sea.




  A HOLIDAY ECLOGUE

  ABOVE

  _First Mason:_

  Tink-a-link!  Tink-a-link!  Hear the trowels ring;
  Feel the merry breezes make the scaffold swing;
  See the skimming swallow brush us with her wing:--
  Go it with your hammers, boys; time us while we sing.

  BELOW.

  _First Student:_

  See the yellow sparkle of the Neckar in the glass,
    And through the cedar branches sparkles blue the sea;
  Hear the sweet piano--hear the German lass
    Sing Freut" euch des Lebens--Oh! "I love I love the free!"

  _Second Student:_

      I like the canary better;
        Look, how he swells his throttle!
      He gurgles like musical water
        That dances and sings in a bottle.

  ABOVE.

  _Second Mason:_

  D'ye mind the students down in the grove
    Drinking their wine and beer?
  That's an easy life they lead.

  _First Mason:_

        So do we up here
      When the weathercock points west
        And the look-off's clear.

  _Third Mason:_

      House-top Jim's the boy for work!

  _First Mason:_

        True for you, my dear.
        (_Whistles "The Girl I Left Behind me."_)

  BELOW.

  _First Student:_

  See the Dutchmen on those settees:
    Isn't it like the Rhine?
  And the old church-tower up over the trees--
    Kellner!  Noch ein Stein!

  _Third Student:_

    I'd like to work with those masons there
      Half way up the sky.
    The air is sweet where the pigeons build,
      And the world is all in their eye.

  _Second Student:_

  But "Love is of the valley:" the Gretchen and the Kellner
    Haunt the cheerful levels of the lower story.
  Glory in the garret--comfort in the cellar:
    I will keep the comfort--you may take the glory.

  ABOVE.

  _First Mason:_

  Look up at the pointers: they 're drawing close together;
  'T is here we get the earliest news of sun, and moon, and weather;
  We can hear time's pulse a-ticking, with the whistling weathercock.
  Drop your mortar-boards, my lads, it's coming twelve o'clock.

  _Third Mason:_

  Oh! it's hungry that I am with working in the wind,
  But there's a shawl and bonnet--below there: do you mind?
  It's Molly with the dinner-pail: she's coming in the door.
  Faith, my belly thinks my throat is cut this half an hour and more.

  (_The church clock strikes the noon._)




  A MEMORY

  I came across the marsh to-night,
    And though the wind was cold,
  I stayed a moment on the bridge
    To note the paly gold

  That lingered on the darkening bay;
    The creek which ran below
  Was frozen dumb; the dreary flats
    Were overspread with snow.

  The college bell began to ring,
    And as the north wind blew
  Its distant janglings out to sea,
    I thought, dear Friend, of you;

  And how one warm September day,
    While yet the woods were green,
  We strayed across the happy hills
    And this wide marsh between.

  The hay-stacks dotted here and there
    The water-meadows wide:
  The even lines of sluices black
    Were filling with the tide.

  Then this salt stream, now winter bound,
    Fled softly through the sedge,
  Retreating from the sparkling Sound;
    And there along its edge

  We strolled, and marked the far-off sloops,
    And watched the cattle graze.
  O'erhead the swallows rushed in troops,
    While bright with purple haze,

  West Rock looked down the winding plain--
    Ah! this was long ago;
  The summer's gone, and you are gone,
    As everything must go.




  AMOURS PASSAGERES

  Light loves and soon forgotten hates,
  Heat-lightnings of the brooding summer sky--
  Ye too bred of the summer's heat,
  Ye too, like summer, fleet--
  Ye have gone by.
  Walks in the woods and whispers over gates,
  Gay rivalries of tennis and croquet--
  Gone with the summer sweet,
  Gone with the swallow fleet
  Southward away!

  Breath of the rose, laughter of maids
  Kissed into silence by the setting moon;
  Wind of the morn that wakes and blows,
  And hastening night that goes
  Too soon--too soon!
  Meetings and partings, tokens, serenades,
  Tears--idle tears--and coy denials vain;
  Flower of the summer's rose,
  Say, will your leaves unclose
  Ever again?




  ON A MINIATURE

  Thine old-world eyes--each one a violet
    Big as the baby rose that is thy mouth--
  Set me a dreaming.  Have our eyes not met
    In childhood--in a garden of the South?

  Thy lips are trembling with a song of France,
    My cousin, and thine eyes are dimly sweet;
  'Wildered with reading in an old romance
    All afternoon upon the garden seat.

  The summer wind read with thee, and the bees
    That on the sunny pages loved to crawl:
  A skipping reader was the impatient breeze,
    And turned the leaves, but the slow bees read all.

  And now thy foot descends the terrace stair:
    I hear the rustle of thy silk attire;
  I breathe the musky odors of thy hair
    And airs that from thy painted fan respire.

  Idly thou pausest in the shady walk,
    Thine ear attentive to the fountain's fall:
  Thou mark'st the flower-de-luce sway on her stalk,
    The speckled vergalieus ripening on the wall.

  Thou hast the feature of my mother's race,
    The gilded comb she wore, her smile, her eye:
  The blood that flushes softly in thy face
    Crawls through my veins beneath this northern sky.

  As one disherited, though next of kin,
    Who lingers at the barred ancestral gate,
  And sadly sees the happy heir within
    Stroll careless through his forfeited estate;

  Even so I watch thy southern eyes, Lisette,
    Lady of my lost paradise and heir
  Of summer days there were my birthright.  Yet
    Beauty like thine makes usurpation fair.




  IM SCHWARZWALD

  The winter sunset, red upon the snow,
  Lights up the narrow way that I should go;
  Winding o'er bare white hilltops, whereon lie
  Dark churches and the holy evening sky.
  That path would lead me deep into the west,
  Even to the feet of her I love the best.

  But this scarce broken track in which I stand
  Runs east, up through the tan-wood's midnight land;
  Where now the newly risen moon doth throw
  The shadows of long stems across the snow.
  This path would take me to the Jaeger's Tree
  Where stands the Swabian girl and waits for me.

  Her eyes are blacker than the woods at night
  And witching as the moon's uncertain light;
  And there are tones in that low voice of hers
  Caught from the wind among the Schwarzwald firs,
  And from the Gutach's echoing waters, when
  Still evening listens in the Forsthaus glen.

  I must--I must!  Thou wilt forgive me, sweet;
  My heart flies west but eastward move my feet;
  The mad moon brightens as the sunset dies,
  And yonder hexie draws me with her eyes.
  _Ruck, ruck an meine gruene Seit!_ she sings
  And with her arms the frozen trunk enrings,

  And lays upon its bark her little face.
  How canst thou be so dead in her embrace--
  So cold against her kisses, happy tree?
  Thou hast no love beyond the western sea.
  Methinks that at the lightest touch of her
  Thy wooden trunk should tremble, thy boughs stir:

  But at the pressure of her tender form
  Thy inmost pith should feel her and grow warm:
  The torpid sap should race along the vein;
  The resinous buds should swell, and once again
  Fresh needles shoot, as though the breeze of spring
  Already through the woods came whispering.




  WAITING FOR WINTER

  What honey in the year's last flowers can hide,
    These little yellow butterflies may know:
    With falling leaves they waver to and fro,
  Or on the swinging tops of asters ride.
  But I am weary of the summer's pride
    And sick September's simulated show:
    Why do the colder winds delay to blow
  And bring the pleasant hours that we abide;
  To curtained alcove and sweet household talks,
    Or sweeter silence by our flickering Lars,
  Returning late from autumn evening walks
    Upon the frosty hills, while reddening Mars
  Hangs low between the withered mullein stalks,
    And upward throngs the host of winter stars?




  [Greek: To Pan]

  The little creek which yesterday I saw
    Ooze through the sedges, and each brackish vein
    That sluiced the marsh, now filled and then again
  Sucked dry to glut the sea's unsated maw,
  All ebb and flow by the same rhythmic law
    That times the beat of the Atlantic main--
    They also fastened to the swift moon's train
  By unseen cords that no less strongly draw.
  So, poet, may thy life's small tributary
    Threading some bitter marsh, obscure, alone,
  Feel yet one pulse with the broad estuary
    That bears an emperor's fleets through half a zone:
  May wait upon the same high luminary
    And pitch its voice to the same ocean's tone.




  THE SINGER OF ONE SONG

  He sang one song and died--no more but that:
    A single song and carelessly complete.
    He would not bind and thresh his chance-grown wheat,
  Nor bring his wild fruit to the common vat,
  To store the acid rinsings, thin and flat,
    Squeezed from the press or trodden under feet.
    A few slow beads, blood-red and honey sweet,
  Oozed from the grape, which burst and spilled its fat.
  But Time, who soonest drops the heaviest things
    That weight his pack, will carry diamonds long.
    So through the poet's orchestra, which weaves
  One music from a thousand stops and strings,
    Pierces the note of that immortal song:--
    "High over all the lonely bugle grieves."




  POSTHUMOUS

  Put them in print?
  Make one more dint
  In the ages' furrowed rock?  No, no!
  Let his name and his verses go.
  These idle scraps, they would but wrong
  His memory, whom we honored long;
  And men would ask: "Is this the best--
  Is this the whole his life expressed?"
  Haply he had no care to tell
  To all the thoughts which flung their spell
  Around us when the night grew deep,
  Making it seem a loss to sleep,
  Exalting the low, dingy room
  To some high auditorium.
  And when we parted homeward, still
  They followed us beyond the hill.
  The heaven had brought new stars to sight,
  Opening the map of later night;
  And the wide silence of the snow,
    And the dark whispers of the pines,
  And those keen fires that glittered slow
    Along the zodiac's wintry signs,
  Seemed witnesses and near of kin
  To the high dreams we held within.

  Yet what is left
  To us bereft,
  Save these remains,
  Which now the moth
  Will fret, or swifter fire consume?
  These inky stains
  On his table-cloth;
  These prints that decked his room;
  His throne, this ragged easy-chair;
  This battered pipe, his councillor.
  This is the sum and inventory.
  No son he left to tell his story,
  No gold, no lands, no fame, no book.
  Yet one of us, his heirs, who took
  The impress of his brain and heart
  May gain from Heaven the lucky art
  His untold meanings to impart
  In words that will not soon decay.
  Then gratefully will such one say:
  "This phrase, dear friend, perhaps, is mine;
  The breath that gave it life was thine."




  HUGH LATIMER

  His lips amid the flame outsent
    A music strong and sweet,
  Like some unearthly instrument
    That's played upon by heat.

  As spice-wood tough, laid on the coal,
    Sets all its perfume free,
  The incense of his hardy soul
    Rose up exceedingly.

  To open that great flower, too cold
    Were sun and vernal rain;
  But fire has forced it to unfold,
    Nor will it shut again.




  CARCAMON

  His steed was old, his armor worn,
    And he was old and worn and gray:
  The light that lit his patient eyes
    It shone from very far away.

  Through gay Provence he journeyed on;
    To one high quest his life was true,
  And so they called him _Carcamon_--
    The knight who seeketh the world through.

  A pansy blossomed on his shield;
    "A token 'tis," the people say,
  "That still across the world's wide field
    He seeks _la dame de ses pensees_."

  For somewhere on a painted wall,
    Or in the city's shifting crowd,
  Or looking from a casement tall,
    Or shaped of dream or evening cloud--

  Forgotten when, forgotten where--
    Her face had filled his careless eye
  A moment ere he turned and passed,
    Nor knew it was his destiny.

  But ever in his dreams it came
    Divine and passionless and strong,
  A smile upon the imperial lips
    No lover's kiss had dared to wrong.

  He took his armor from the wall--
    Ah! gone since then was many a day--
  He led his steed from out the stall
    And sought _la dame de ses pensees_.

  The ladies of the Troubadours
    Came riding through the chestnut grove
  "Sir Minstrel, string that lute of yours
    And sing us a gay song of love."

  "O ladies of the Troubadours,
    My lute has but a single string;
  Sirventes fit for paramours,
    My heart is not in tune to sing.

  "The flower that blooms upon my shield
    It has another soil and spring
  Than that wherein the gaudy rose
    Of light Provence is blossoming.

  "The lady of my dreams doth hold
    Such royal state within my mind,
  No thought that comes unclad in gold
    To that high court may entrance find."

  So through the chestnut groves he passed,
    And through the land and far away;
  Nor know I whether in the world
    He found _la dame de ses pensees_.

  Only I know that in the South
    Long to the harp his tale was told;
  Sweet as new wine within the mouth
    The small, choice words and music old.

  To scorn the promise of the real;
    To seek and seek and not to find;
  Yet cherish still the fair ideal--
    It is thy fate, O restless Mind!




  ECCE IN DESERTO

  The wilderness a secret keeps
    Upon whose guess I go:
  Eye hath not seen, ear hath not heard;
    And yet I know, I know,

  Some day the viewless latch will lift,
    The airy door swing wide
  To one lost chamber of the wood
    Where those shy mysteries hide,--

  One yet unfound, receding depth,
    From which the wood-thrush sings,
  Still luring in to darker shades,
    In--in to colder springs.

  There is no wind abroad to-day.
    But hark!--the pine-tops' roar,
  That sleep and in their dreams repeat
    The music of the shore.

  What wisdom in their needles stirs?
    What song is that they sing?
  Those airs that search the forest's heart,
    What rumor do they bring?

  A hushed excitement fills the gloom,
    And, in the stillness, clear
  The vireo's tell-tale warning rings:
    "'Tis near--'tis near--'tis near!"

  As, in the fairy-tale, more loud
    The ghostly music plays
  When, toward the enchanted bower, the prince
    Draws closer through the maze.

  Nay--nay.  I track a fleeter game,
    A wilder than ye know,
  To lairs beyond the inmost haunt
    Of thrush or vireo.

  This way it passed: the scent lies fresh;
    The ferns still lightly shake.
  Ever I follow hard upon,
    But never overtake.

  To other woods the trail leads on,
    To other worlds and new,
  Where they who keep the secret here
    Will keep the promise too.




  TO IMOGEN AT THE HARP

      _Die Geisterwelt ist nicht verschlossen:
      Dein Sinn ist zu--dein Herz ist todt.
      Auf, bade, Schueler, unrerdrossen
      Die ird'sche Brust im Morgenroth!_
            FAUST.

  Hast thou seen ghosts?  Hast thou at midnight heard
  In the wind's talking an articulate word?
  Or art thou in the secret of the sea,
  And have the twilight woods confessed to thee?
  So wild thy song, thy smile so faint, so far
  Thine absent eyes from earthly vision are.
  Thy song is done: why art thou listening?
  Spent is the last vibration of the string
  Along the waves of sound.  Oh, doth thine ear
  Pursue the ebbing chord in some fine sphere,
  Where wraiths of vanished echoes live and roam,
  And where thy thoughts, here strangered, find a home?
  Teach me the path to that uncharted land;
  Discovery's keel hath never notched its strand,
  No passport may unbar its sealed frontier,--
  Too far for utmost sight, for touch too near.
  Subtler than light, yet all opaque, the screen
  Which shuts us from that world, outspread between
  The shows of sense; like as an ether thin
  Fills the vast microscopic space wherein
  The molecules of matter lie enisled.
  A world whose sound our silence is; too wild
  Its elfin music beats, too shrill, too rare,
  To stir the slow pulse of our thicker air.

  A world whose light our darkness is; that lies
  With its sharp edges turned toward mortal eyes,
  Like figures painted on a folded fan--
  The broken colors of some hidden plan.
  The few who but an instant's look have had
  At the spread pattern broadwise have gone mad.
  As in a high-walled oriental street
  A sudden door flies open, and a fleet
  Departing dream the thirsty traveler sees
  Of fountains leaping in the shade of trees,
  So they who once have caught the glimpse divine:
  They have but wet their lips with goblins' wine,
  And, plagued with thirst immortal, must endure
  The visions of the heavenly calenture,--
  Of springs and dewy evening meadows rave,
  While hotly round them shines the tropic wave,
  And the false islands of mirage appear,
  Uplifted from some transcendental sphere
  Far down below the blue horizon line.
  And thirst like theirs is nursed by songs like thine.
  For thou, in some crepscular dim hour,
  When the weak umber moon had hardly power
  To cast a shadow, and a wind, half-spent,
  Creeping among the way-side bushes went,
  Hast seen a cobweb spun across the moon,
  A faint eclipse, penumbral, gone full soon,
  Yet marking on the planet's smoky ring
  A silhouette as of a living thing.
  Or on the beach making thy lonely range,
  Close upon sunset, when the light was strange
  And the low wind had meanings, thou hast known
  A presence nigh, betrayed by shadows thrown
  On the red sand from bodies out of sight;
  Even as, by the shell of curving light
  Pared from the dark moon's edge, the eye can tell
  Where her full circle rounds invisible.

  Teach me the path into that silent land.
  Take once again the haunted wires in hand,
  And pour the strain which, waking, thou hast heard
  Whistled when night was deep by some lone bird
  Hid in the dark and dewy sycamore,--
  When thou hast risen and unbarred the door
  And walked the garden paths till night was flown,
  Listening the message sent to thee alone.
  Ah! once again thy harp, thy voice once more,
  Fling back the refluent tide upon the shore.
  All nature grows unearthly; all things seem
  To break and waver off in shapes of dream,
  And through the chinks of matter steals the dawn
  Of skies beyond the solar road withdrawn.
  Oh, flood my soul with that pure morning-red!
  It is the sense that's shut, the heart that's dead:
  All open still the world of spirits lies
  Would we but bathe us in its red sunrise.




  THE IDEAS OF THE PURE REASON

  I saw in dreams a constellation strange,
  Thwarting the night; its big stars seemed to range
  Northward across the zenith, and to keep
  Calm footing along heaven's ridge-pole high,
  While round the pole the sullen Bear did creep
  And dizzily the wheeling spheres went by.
  They from their watch-towers in the topmost sky
  Looked down upon the rest,
  Nor eastward swerved nor west,
  Though Procyon's candle dipped below the verge,
  And the great twins of Leda 'gan decline
  Toward the horizon line,
  And prone Orion, sprawling headlong, urge
  His flight into the far Pacific surge.

  I heard a voice which said: "Those wonders bright
  Are hung not on the hinges of the night;
  But set to vaster harmonies, they run
  Straight on, and turn not with the turning sphere,
  Nor make an orbit about any sun.
  No glass can track the courses that they steer,
  By what dark paths they vanish and appear.
  The starry flocks that still
  Are climbing heaven's hill
  Will pasture westward down its sloping lawn;
  But yon wild herd of planets,--who can say
  Through what far fields they stray,
  Around what focus their ellipse is drawn,
  Whose shining makes their transcendental dawn?"

  I told my vision to a learned man,
  Who said: "On no celestial globe or plan
  Can those unset, unrisen stars be found.
  How might such uncomputed motions be
  Among the ordered spheres?  Heaven's clock is wound
  To keep one time.  Idle our dreams, and we,
  Blown by the wind, as the light family
  Of leaves."  But still I dream,
  And still those planets seem
  Through heaven their high, unbending course to take;
  And a voice cries: "Freedom and Truth are we,
  And Immortality:
  God is our sun."  And though the morning break,
  Across my soul still plays their shimmering wake.




  ON GUARD

  _O churl! drunk all, and left no friendly drop_
    _To help me after.--Romeo and Juliet._

  He has chosen the death that is easy
    And left me the life that is hard.
  He has emptied the cup to the lees, he
    Has left me alone to keep guard.

  Remains not a drop in the beaker
    Of the bitter-sweet cordial he quaffed:
  The strong has forsaken his weaker
    And stolen his anodyne draught.

  The cause that he taught me to cherish,
    The weapons he trained me to wield,
  He has given it over to perish
    And thrown down the sword and the shield.

  O how shall the coward persever
    When the hero slinks out of the fight;
  Or weakness keep up the endeavor
    Abandoned by desperate might?

  The hour of stern trial has found me:
    The sentinel fires are burnt low,
  And I hear in the shadows around me
    The stealthy approach of the foe.

  Be it so then, my master, my leader:
    These helpless ones, dear to you, these
  Will I fend while I may, though I bleed, or
    Am beaten with blows to my knees.

  Lo here, where your body lies fallen,
    I draw from its scabbard the sword
  And raise it--how feebly!--and call on
    Your spirit, my captain, my lord.

  The watch-fire is sunken to embers,
    With signals the darkness is starred.
  Let them come!  There is one who remembers--
    There is one who will stand upon guard.




  SURSUM CORDA

  Take courage, heart.  Why dost thou faint and falter?
    Why is thy light turned darkness ere the noon?
  The wind blows west, no clouds the heaven alter,
    Night comes not yet; with night, too, comes the moon.

  "Alas, alas! the dewy morwing weather,
    The tender light that on the meadows lay,
  When Youth and Hope and I set out together,--
    Light Youth, false Hope, that left me on the way!"

  Take courage yet; thou are not unattended:
    See Love and Peace keep step on either hand.
  How green the vales!  The sky how blue!  How splendid
    The strong white sunshine sleeps across the land!

  "Alas the thrushes' song hath long had ending
    I heard at dawn among the pine woods cool.
  The brook is still, whose rocky stair descending,
    I drank at sunrise from each rosy pool."

  The noon is still; the songs of dawn are over;
    Yet turn not back to prove thy memories vain.
  The mist upon the hills canst thou recover,
    Or bring to eastern skies the bloom again?

  But courage still!  Without return or swerving,
    Across the globe's huge shadow keep the track,
  Till, unperceived, the slow meridian's curving,
    That leads thee onward, yet shall lead thee back,

  To stand again with daybreak on the mountains,
    And, where the paths of night and morning meet,
  To drink once more of youth's forgotten fountains,
    When thou hast put the world between thy feet.




  LOVE, DEATH AND LIFE

  The warm wind comes in rushes,
  The night is thick and sweet:
  I cannot see the bushes--
  The tall syringa bushes
  Above the gate that meet,
  Whose fallen blooms she crushes
  Under her heedless feet;
  But their heavy, rich perfume
  Is round us in the gloom
  Which lends its friendly cover
  To bashful maid and lover:
  Which cheats me of her blushes
  But makes her kiss complete.
  'Way down the village street
  A lantern swings and dances
  In front of the old church porch,
  And throws its telltale glances
  On the puddles and the plashes,
  And flares in the wind like a torch,
  And scatters sudden flashes
  On the elm leaves overhead.
  But you need have no dread
  Of that harmless, far-off spark;
  For the night is thick and dark,
  O the dark is thick and sweet!
  So, closer: let the beat
  Of your heart encounter mine.
  (How you tremble--like a leaf!)
  O you do not need to fear
  Any shame or any grief
  While my arms around you twine
  And the night wind pours its wine.
  Come nearer, still more near;
  Press closer, closer yet.
  Your cheeks are warm and wet,
  Like this wind from out the south,
  And warm and wet your mouth;
  And yon lantern won't discover
  The maiden and her lover.
  'Tis only the sexton, nothing more--
  There was a funeral to-day--
  The sexton locking the church door,
  Locking it up and going away.
  Why should it fall on a day like this?
  What has death to do in a world of bliss?
  O passionate black night!
  O rush of the southern breeze,
  Laden with blossoms and rain,
  Asserter of life and its right,
  Cherisher, breeder of things,
  Swelling the sap in the trees,
  Swelling the blood in the vein,
  Filling the rivers and springs:
  Whisper the girl at my side,
  Quicken her pulse with thy breath,
  Teach her the way of a bride,
  Teach her to take and to give.
  What hast thou to do with us, Death?
  By God, we live!




  THE DYING PANTHEIST TO THE PRIEST

  Take your ivory Christ away:
    No dying god shall have my knee,
  While live gods breathe in this wild wind
    And shout from yonder dashing sea.

  When March brings back the Adonis flower
    No more the white processions meet,
  With incense to the risen lord,
    About the pillared temple's feet.

  From tusk of boar, from thrust of spear
    The dead rise not.  At Eastertide
  The same sun dances on their graves--
    Love's darling and the Crucified.

  Yet still the year's returning tide
    Flows greenly round each ruined plinth,
  Breaking on fallen shafts in foam
    Of crocus and of hyacinth:

  Tossing a spray of swallows high,
    To flutter lightly on the breeze
  And fleck with tiny spots of shade
    The sunshine on the broken frieze.

  I know the gray-green asphodels
    Still sheet the dim Elysian mead,
  And ever by dark Lethe's wells
    The poppy sheds her ghostly seed.

  And once--O once!--when sunset lay
    Blood red across the winter sea,
  Where on the sands we drained our flasks
    And danced and cried our _Evoe_!

  Among the tossing cakes of ice
    And spouting of the frozen spray,
  We saw their white limbs twist and whirl--
    The ancient sea-gods at their play.

  The gold-brown liquor burned my heart,
    The icy tempest stung my brow:
  The twanging of Apollo's lyre--
    I heard it as I hear it now.

  O no, the old gods are not dead:
    I think that they will never die;
  But, I, who lie upon this bed
    In mortal anguish--what am I?

  A wave that rises with a breath
    Above the infinite watery plain,
  To foam and sparkle in the sun
    A moment ere it sink again.

  The eternal undulation runs:
    A man, I die: perchance to be,
  Next life, a white-throat on the wind,
    A daffodil on Tempe's lea.

  They lied who said that Pan was dead:
    Life was, life is, and life shall be.
  So take away your crucifix--
    The everliving gods for me!




  THE UPLAND

  We often go a-driving across the pleasant land,
  In summer through the pine woods dark, or by the ocean strand;
  But when the orchards blossom, and when the apples fall,
  We seek the high hill country that props the mountain wall.

  Old farms with mossed stone fences, old grassy roads that wind
  Forever on and upward to higher fields behind,
  By ancient bush-grown pastures, bestrewn with boulders gray,
  And lonely meadow slopes that bear thin crops of upland hay.

  As, terrace over terrace, we climb the mountain stair,
  More solitary grow the ways, more wild the farms and rare,
  And slenderer in their rocky beds the singing brooks that go
  Down-slipping to the valley stream a thousand feet below.

  Above us and above us still the grim escarpments rise,
  Till homeward we must turn at last, or ere the daylight dies,
  And leave unscaled the summit height, the even ridge o'erhead,
  Where smolder through the cedar screen the sunset embers red.

  What should we see, if once we won on that top step to stand?
  A wondrous valley world beyond?  A far-stretched tableland?
  Almost it seems as though there lay the threshold of the sky,
  And that the foot which crossed that sill would enter Heaven thereby.

  And when, dear heart, the years have left us once again alone,
  And from our empty nest the broods have scattered forth and flown,
  Shall we not have the old horse round and take the well-known track
  Into the high hill country, and never more come back?




  THE REMAINDER

  Now faith is dead and hope is deadly sick,
    And joy--dear joy--she died so long ago
  I have forgot her face; but these are quick,
    Black care, and stinging shame, and bitter woe.

  Then what is left in my Pandora's chest?
    Courage is left, but mated with despair,
  Who should have wed with hope.  Yet be ye blest--
    Rise up and take your blessing, happy pair!

  I lay in thine, sad bride, this princely hand--
    In all the world there is no nobler name--
  And thou, brave groom--though 'tis not what we planned--
    Take her, she will be true: be thou the same.

  Courage and sorrow: might these two give birth?
    O thought too bold, O dream too sweet, too wild?
  Though joy--dear joy--be dead and cold in earth,
    Her ghost is peace, and love is sorrow's child.




  THE PASTURE BARS

  The hunted stag, now nearly spent,
    Turns homeward to his lair:
  The wounded Bedouin seeks his tent
    And finds safe shelter there.

  So life returns upon its track:
    We toil, we fight, we roam,
  Till the long shadows point us back,
    And evening brings us home.

  To-night beside the pasture bars
    I heard the whippoorwill,
  While, one by one, the early stars
    Came out above the hill.

  I heard the tinkle of the spring,
    I heard the cattle pass
  Slow through the dusk, and lingering
    To crop the wayside grass.

  O weary world of fret and strife,
    O noisy years and vain,
  What have you paid me for my life
    Since last, along this lane,

  A barefoot boy, I drove the cows
    In summer twilights still,
  And paused beneath the orchard boughs
    To list the whippoorwill?

  Come, peace of God, that passeth all
    Our understanding's sight:
  Fall on me with the dews that fall,
    And with the falling night.

  Among these native hills and plains,
    By these baptismal streams,
  Wash off the city's fever stains,
    Bring back my boyhood's dreams.

  Beside the doors where life began
    Here let it find its close;
  And be its brief, remaining span
    All given to repose.




  THE RISING OF THE CURTAIN

  We sit before the curtain, and we heed the pleasant bustle:
  The ushers hastening up the aisles, the fans' and programmes' rustle;
  The boy that cries librettos, and the soft, incessant sound
  Of talking and low laughter that buzzes all around.

  How very old the drop-scene looks!  A thousand times before
  I've seen that blue paint dashing on that red distemper shore;
  The castle and the guazzo sky, the very ilex-tree,--
  They have been there a thousand years,--a thousand more shall be.

  All our lives we have been waiting for that weary daub to rise;
  We have peeped behind its edges, "as if we were God's spies;"
  We have listened for the signal; yet still, as in our youth,
  The colored screen of matter hangs between us and the truth.

  When in my careless childhood I dwelt beside a wood,
  I tired of the clearing where my father's cabin stood;
  And of the wild young forest paths that coaxed me to explore,
  Then dwindled down, or led me back to where I stood before.

  But through the woods before our door a wagon track went by,
  Above whose utmost western edge there hung an open sky;
  And there it seemed to make a plunge, or break off suddenly,
  As though beneath that open sky it met the open sea.

  Oh, often have I fancied, in the sunset's dreamy glow,
  That mine eyes had caught the welter of the ocean waves below;
  And the wind among the pine-tops, with its low and ceaseless roar,
  Was but an echo from the surf on that imagined shore.

  Alas! as I grew older, I found that road led down
  To no more fair horizon than the squalid factory town:
  So all life's purple distances, when nearer them I came,
  Have played me still the same old cheat,--the same, the same, the same!

  And when, O King, the heaven departeth as a scroll,
  Wilt thou once more the promise break thou madest to my soul?
  Shall I see thy feasting presence thronged with baron, knight, and page?
  Or will the curtain rise upon a dark and empty stage?

  For lo, quick undulations across the canvas run;
  The foot-lights brighten suddenly, the orchestra has done;
  And through the expectant silence rings loud the prompter's bell;
  The curtain shakes,--it rises.  Farewell, dull world, farewell!











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Two Twilights, by Henry A. Beers

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TWO TWILIGHTS ***

***** This file should be named 34741.txt or 34741.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/7/4/34741/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
