The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Pagan's Cup, by Fergus Hume

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Pagan's Cup

Author: Fergus Hume

Release Date: January 4, 2011 [EBook #34835]
Last updated: June 28, 2017

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PAGAN'S CUP ***




Produced by eagkw, Suzanne Shell and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)







                      [Illustration: Cover]



                         The Pagan's Cup

                                BY

                           Fergus Hume


                            AUTHOR OF

                  "THE MYSTERY OF A HANSOM CAB,"
                      "THE RAINBOW FEATHER,"
                  "CLAUDE DUVAL OF NINETY-FIVE,"
                               ETC.


                     [Illustration: Vignette]


                             NEW YORK

                     G. W. DILLINGHAM COMPANY

                            PUBLISHERS





                       Copyright, 1902, by

                     G. W. DILLINGHAM COMPANY

                      [All rights reserved]




_The Pagan's Cup_




CONTENTS


   CHAP.                             PAGE
      I.  A Modern Arcadia              1
     II.  The Crusaders' Chapel        14
    III.  The Lady of the Manor        28
     IV.  The Dinner-Party             42
      V.  Love's Young Dream           58
     VI.  Trouble                      71
    VII.  A Nine Days' Wonder          87
   VIII.  Haverleigh's Defence        101
     IX.  A Bad Reputation            113
      X.  The Price of Silence        126
     XI.  The London Detective        140
    XII.  A Surprise                  154
   XIII.  An Interesting Document     168
    XIV.  An Unexpected Meeting       183
     XV.  A New Complication          198
    XVI.  Sybil's Visitor             214
   XVII.  Lord Kilspindie Explains    227
  XVIII.  A Miracle                   242
    XIX.  A Story of the Past         257
     XX.  Mrs Gabriel's Secret        276




THE PAGAN'S CUP




CHAPTER I

A MODERN ARCADIA


Certain portions of England yet remain undiscovered by Americans and
uncivilised by railways. Colester village above King's-meadows, in a
county which need not be named, is one of these unknown spots. No doubt
before long the bicycle and the motor-car will enliven its somnolent
neighbourhood, but at present it is free from the summer jaunts of
tourists. With this neglect the Colester folk profess themselves
satisfied. They have no wish to come into contact with the busy world.
This prejudice against intrusion dates from mediaeval times, when
strangers rarely came to the village with peaceful intentions. Even now
a chance comer is looked upon with suspicion.

Mr Richard Pratt said something of this sort to the vicar during a
morning ramble, some six weeks after he had taken up his residence in
The Nun's House. With the parson and the gentry of the parish Mr Pratt
agreed very well, his respectability having been vouched for by Mrs
Gabriel, the lady of the manor. But the villagers still held aloof,
although the newcomer did his best to overcome their churlish doubts.
They did not credit his story that he had settled in Colester to pass
his remaining years in peace, and even the money he scattered so freely
could not buy their loyalty. Pratt had never met with such people
before. In most countries an open purse invites an open heart; but the
Colester villagers were above Mammon worship. Such an experience was
refreshing to Pratt, and introduced him to a new type of humanity.

"The first place I ever struck in which the dollar is not all-powerful,"
he said, with his Yankee twang and pleasant laugh.

"We are not sufficiently educated in that respect," replied Mr Tempest
in his simple way. "For my part, I am not ill pleased that my
parishioners should refuse to worship the Golden Calf."

"There is no calf about me, I guess," said Pratt, grimly, "and very
little gold. I don't say I haven't a decent income, but as to being a
millionaire--no, sir."

"In the kingdom of the blind the one-eyed is king, Mr Pratt. You are a
millionaire in this poor place. But I fear you find it dull."

"Why, no, vicar. I'm glad to be out of the buzz. The world's made up of
nerves and machinery nowadays. At fifty-two years of age I can't stand
the racket. This Sleepy Hollow's good enough for me to stay in until I
peg out. Guess I'll buy an allotment in that graveyard of yours."

"Hollow!" said the vicar, smiling, "and our earthly dwelling-place is
set upon a hill! Mr Pratt, I suspect you have Irish blood in your
veins."

Pratt laughed, and being to a large extent devoid of humour, explained
earnestly that he had used the word figuratively. "Washington Irving,
Rip Van Winkle," he explained, nodding, whereat the vicar smiled again.

The situation of Colester was striking and strange. A green-clothed
promontory extended abruptly from the high table-land into
King's-meadow. To right and left chalky cliffs of considerable height
flared away for miles, forming a buttress to the moors above and walls
to the plains below. In pre-historic ages the ocean waves had beaten
against these cliffs, but, gradually receding, had left dry the miles
upon miles of fertile lands now called King's-meadows. An appanage of
the Crown, they had been called so from the days of William the
Conqueror.

From where they stood, the vicar and his friend had a bird's-eye view of
this desirable land, unrolled like a map under the bright June sky.
League after league of corn-fields stretched away to the clear, shining
line of ocean; and amidst the ripening grain appeared red-roofed
villages, clumps of trees, the straight lines of dusty white roads and
the winding, glittering serpent of the river. And as a background to
this smiling plenty--if so Irish an expression be permitted--was the
blue expanse of the Channel dotted with the white sails of merchantmen.

A small wood of ancient oaks shut off the purple-clad moor from the spur
upon which Colester was built. On the verge of this, yet encircled by
trees, stood the village church--a crusading chapel, dedicated to St
Gabriel the Messenger. Thence the ground fell away gradually, and spread
out into a broad neck of land, down the centre of which ran a road
leading from chapel to village. On either side of this, amidst oaks and
elms and sycamores, were the houses of the gentry. From where they ended
the promontory rose into two rounded hills, with a slight depression
between. On the one to the left the village was built, its houses
cramped within a tumble-down wall, dating from the days when it was
needed as a defence. The other hill was surmounted by a well-preserved
castle, the keep of which with its flag could be seen above the oak
woods. This was inhabited by Mrs Gabriel, the sole representative of the
feudal lords of Colester. Yet she was only the childless widow of the
last baron, and had none of the fierce Gabriel blood in her veins. The
once powerful and prolific family was extinct.

From castle and village steps led down into the depression between the
two hills. Down this continued the chapel road, sloping gradually with
many windings to the plains below. The whole place had the look of some
Rhenish robber-hold. And if tradition was to be trusted, the Gabriel
lords had dwelt like eagles in their eyrie, swooping down at intervals
to harry and plunder, burn and slay the peaceful folk of the plains. A
turbulent and aggressive race the Gabriels. It had defied king and
priest, and parliament and people. Time alone had ever conquered it.

"A survival of the Middle Ages," said Mr Tempest, pointing out these
things to his companion. "It was needful that the Gabriel barons should
build strong defences. They were fierce and blood-thirsty, defiant of
law and order. For many centuries they were a scourge to the inhabitants
of the plains. These often complained to the king, and several times the
place was besieged, but without result. The Gabriels kept their hold of
it. The only thing they ever lost was their title. A bill of attainder
was passed against them in the time of the second George. After that
they became less lions than foxes."

"Just so," said Mr Pratt. "This place couldn't do much against
artillery, I guess. And even in the bow and arrow days, a strong force
coming over the moor and down the spur--"

"That was often tried," interrupted Tempest, quickly, "but the attempt
always failed. In the days of Henry II. Aylmer Gabriel beat back an
overwhelming force, and then erected the chapel as a thanksgiving. The
Archangel Gabriel was the patron saint of the family, and the chapel is
dedicated to him."

"He couldn't keep the family from dying out, however," said Pratt, as
they moved towards the village.

"No. With the late John Gabriel the family became extinct. But I daresay
Mrs Gabriel will arrange that her adopted son succeeds. He can take the
name and the coat of arms. I should be very pleased to see that," added
the vicar, half to himself. "Leo is a good fellow, and would make an
excellent landlord."

The eyes of the American flashed when the name was mentioned, but he
made only a careless comment. "Leo Haverleigh," he said, after a pause,
"he's a right smart young chap, sure. Who is he?"

"The son of Mrs Gabriel's brother. She was a Miss Haverleigh, you know.
I believe her brother was somewhat dissipated, and died abroad. The boy
arrived here when he was three years of age, and Mrs Gabriel adopted
him. He will be her heir."

"Is there anyone to object?" asked Pratt, eagerly.

The vicar shook his head. "The Gabriels are absolutely extinct. Failing
Leo, the estates would lapse to the Crown. In the old days they would
have been seized by the king in any case, as the sovereigns were always
anxious to hold this point of vantage which dominated their lands below.
But we live in such law-abiding times, that Mrs Gabriel, although not of
the blood of the family, can leave the estates to whomsoever she will. I
understand that she has quite decided Leo shall inherit and take the
name; also the coat of arms."

"She doesn't strike me as over-fond of the boy," said Pratt, as they
climbed the crooked street; "rather a hard woman I should say."

"Mrs Gabriel has a particularly high moral standard," replied the vicar,
evasively, "and she wishes all to attain to it. Leo--" he hesitated.

"He's no worse than a boy ought to be," said the American, cheerily.
"Your young saint makes an old sinner. That's so, vicar!"

Mr Tempest laughed outright. "I fear there is small chance of Leo
becoming a saint either young or old," he said, "though he is a good
lad in many ways. Wild, I admit, but his heart is in the right place."

Pratt smiled to himself. He knew that Leo was in love with Sybil, the
daughter of this prosy old archaeologist. Simple as Mr Tempest was, he
could not be blind to the possibility of his daughter making such an
excellent match. "Oh, yes," laughed Pratt, knowingly, "I'm sure his
heart is in the right place."

But by this time the vicar was on his hobby horse, and did not gauge the
significance of the speech. "Here," he said, waving his hand towards the
four sides of the square in which they stood, "the Romans built a camp.
It crowned this hill, and was garrisoned by the tenth legion to overawe
the turbulent tribes swarming on the plains below. In fact, this town is
built within the camp, as the name shows."

"How does it show that?" asked Pratt, more to keep the vicar talking
than because he cared.

"The name, man, the name. It is properly Colncester, but by usage has
been shortened to Colester. Coln comes from the Latin _colonia_, a
colony, and caster, or cester, is derived from _castra_, a camp.
Colncester therefore means the camp colony, which proves that the
original builders of this town erected their dwellings within the
circumvallation of the original _castra_ of Claudian. If you will come
with me, Mr Pratt, I will show you the remains of this great work."

"I have seen it several times before," replied Pratt, rather bored by
this archaeological disquisition. "I know every inch of this place. It
doesn't take an American centuries to get round, and six weeks of
walking have fixed me up in your local geography. But there's the
chapel, vicar. We might walk up there. I'd like to hear a few remarks on
the subject of the chapel. Interesting. Oh, I guess so!"

"Certainly! certainly!" said Tempest, absently, "let us walk, walk," and
he strolled away with his hands in his tail-coat pockets, looking
something like an elderly jackdaw. Indeed the churchman, with his lean,
oval face, his large spectacles and the fluttering black garments on his
thin figure, very much resembled a bird. He was scholarly, well-bred and
gentle, but wholly unworldly. Since his wife had died seven years
before, Sybil had taken charge of the house. Harold Raston, the
energetic curate, looked after the parish. But for these two, both
clerical and domestic affairs would have been neglected, so immersed was
Mr Tempest in his dry-as-dust explorations. Many people said openly that
the vicar was past his work and should be pensioned off. Mrs Gabriel, a
capable and managing woman, had once hinted as much to him. But the
usually placid parson had flown into such a rage, that she had hastily
withdrawn herself and her suggestion. "There is nothing more terrible
than the rebellion of a sheep." Mrs Gabriel recalled this remark of
Balzac's when Tempest, proving himself worthy of his name, swept her in
wrath from his study.

Pratt was quite another specimen of humanity. A neat, dapper, suave
little man, undersized yet perfectly proportioned. He had black hair,
black eyes, and a clean-shaven face, which constantly wore an
expression of imperturbable good-humour. His dress was too neat for the
country. A blue serge suit, white spats on brown boots, a Panama hat,
gloves and--what he was never without--a smoothly-rolled umbrella.
Spick-and-span, he might have stepped out of a glass case, and this was
his invariable appearance. No one ever saw Pratt unshaven or untidy. He
had been everywhere, had seen everything, and was a most engaging
companion, never out of temper and never bored. But for all his smiling
ways the villagers held aloof from him. Wishing to break down their
barrier of prejudice, the sharp little American had attached himself to
the vicar during the good man's usual morning walk. He thought that such
a sight might dispose the villagers to relent.

"I shall not vary my usual walk," remarked Mr Tempest, positively. "We
will stroll through the village, return to the chapel, and then, Mr
Pratt, I hope you will lunch with me."

"Delighted, if it will not put Miss Sybil out."

"No, no. My wife is always prepared for chance visitors," answered the
vicar, quite oblivious to the fact that the late Mrs Tempest was resting
in the churchyard. "Ha, this is Mrs Jeal. How do you do, Mrs Jeal?"

Mrs Jeal was in excellent health, and said so with a curtsey. A dumpy,
rosy-faced woman was Mrs Jeal, with a pair of extremely wicked black
eyes which snapped fire when she was angered. She had a temper, but
rarely displayed it, for it suited her better to gain her ends by craft
rather than force. Fifteen years ago she had appeared from nowhere, to
settle as a midwife in Colester. Contrary to their usual fashion, the
villagers had taken her to their bosoms. This was owing to the clever
way Mrs Jeal had of managing them, and to her knowledge of herbs. She
had cured many sick people whom the doctor had given up, and
consequently was not looked upon with favour by Dr James, who had
succeeded to the family practice. But even he could not be angry at
rosy, laughing Mrs Jeal. "Though I don't like her," confessed Dr James;
"the devil looks out of her eyes. Dangerous woman, very dangerous."

Pratt had no chance of proving this remark of the doctor's to be true,
for Mrs Jeal never looked at him. She kept her wicked eyes on the kindly
vicar and smiled constantly, punctuating such smiles with an occasional
curtsey. "Pearl is not with you?" said Mr Tempest.

"No, bless her poor heart!" cried Mrs Jeal, "she is up at the chapel.
Her favourite place is the chapel, as your reverence knows."

"She might have a worse place to haunt, Mrs Jeal. Poor soul--poor, mad,
innocent child!"

"Do you call eighteen years of age childish, Mr Tempest?" asked the
woman.

"No, no! I speak of her mind, her poor, weak mind. She is still a child.
I beg of you to look after her, Mrs Jeal. We must make her path as
pleasant as we may."

"Then I beg your reverence will tell that Barker to leave her alone."

"Barker, Barker? Ah, yes, the sexton--of course. Worthy man."

Mrs Jeal sniffed. "He won't let her stay in the chapel," she said.

"Tut! tut! This must be seen to. Poor Pearl is God's child, Mrs Jeal, so
she has a right to rest in His House. Yes, yes, I'll see to it.
Good-day, Mrs Jeal."

The woman dropped a curtsey, and for the first time shot a glance at
Pratt, who was smiling blandly. A nervous expression crossed her face as
she caught his eye. The next moment she drew herself up and passed on,
crossing herself. Pratt looked after her, still smiling, then hurried to
rejoin the vicar, who began to explain in his usual wandering way.

"A good woman, Mrs Jeal, a good woman," he said. "For some years she has
had charge of Pearl Darry, whom she rescued from her cruel father."

"Is that the insane girl?" said Pratt, idly.

"Do not talk of one so afflicted in that way, Mr Pratt. Pearl may not be
quite right in her head, but she is sane enough to conduct herself
properly. If the fact that she is not all herself reached
Portfront"--the principal town of the county--"it is possible that the
authorities might wish to shut her up, and that would be the death of
Pearl. No, no!" said the good vicar, "let her have a fair share of God's
beautiful earth, and live to a happy old age. In this quiet place we can
afford one natural."

"Like the village idiot we read about in Scotch tales," said Pratt.

"Just so, Mr Pratt. In _Waverley_ there is such a one. Pearl Darry is
quite harmless, and really has a very beautiful nature. Mrs Jeal is much
to be commended for her charity."

"She looks a charitable woman," said the American, but whether he meant
this ironically or not it is hard to say.

The women of Colester were mostly lace-workers, and toiled at this
fairylike craft while their husbands worked in the fields below. During
three seasons the mountain men, as they might be called, ploughed the
meadow-land, sowed the corn and helped to reap and harvest it. In the
winter they returned to live on their earnings and take a holiday. But
the women worked all the year through, and Colester lace was famous. As
the vicar and Pratt walked down the street, at the door of every house
sat a woman with her pillow and pins dexterously making the filmy fabric
which was destined to adorn the dress of many a London beauty. They were
mostly serious-looking, and some even grim. But all had a smile for the
vicar, although they pursed up their lips when they saw the good-natured
face of Pratt. Most unaccountable this dislike they had for the
American. He was rather annoyed by his pronounced unpopularity.

"I must really do something to make them like me," he said, much vexed.

"Tut, tut!" replied the vicar, "liking will come in good time, Mr Pratt.
It takes some years for them to fancy a stranger. I was an object of
distrust to them for quite three. Now they are devoted to me."

"And have you been here long?"

"About forty years," said Tempest. "I have buried many and christened
most. We have no Methodists in Colester, Mr Pratt. Everyone comes to
church and worships according to the rites of the Anglican communion, as
is fit and proper."

"I suppose you are a prosperous community on the whole?"

"So, so! Nothing to complain of. The lace made here by those clever
fingers sells well in London and even abroad. Then the men earn a fair
wage in King's-meadows. Mrs Gabriel looks after the few poor we have
amongst us. On the whole, we have much to be thankful for, Mr Pratt."

Thus talking the good vicar led his companion round by the mouldering
walls, where they could look down on to the plains. After a glance they
re-entered the town and walked through the cobbled-stoned streets,
between the quaint, high-roofed houses. Everywhere the vicar was greeted
and Pratt frowned upon. He was quite glad when they descended from the
village through the old gate, and after walking along the neck, which
was the fashionable part of Colester, began to climb up towards the
chapel.

"A most delightful spot," said Pratt, politely; "but I guess the folk
don't cotton to me. I must make them freeze on somehow."




CHAPTER II

THE CRUSADERS' CHAPEL


The church dedicated to St Gabriel the Messenger was enshrined in a
leafy glade. No churlish wall marked the limits of the sacred ground,
and from the ancient building a soft green sward stretched on all sides
to the circle of oaks which sheltered it from the rude winds. In this
circle were two openings counter to each other. The lower one admitted
those who came from Colester into the precincts; the upper gave entrance
to a larger glade, in which the dead had been buried for centuries. This
also was without a wall, and it was strange beyond words to come
suddenly upon an assemblage of tombstones in the heart of a wood. From
this sylvan God's-acre a path climbed upward to the moor, and passed
onward for some little distance until it was obliterated by the purple
heather. Then for leagues stretched the trackless, treeless waste to the
foot of distant hills.

Of no great size, the chapel was an architectural gem. Built in the form
of a cross, a square tower rose where the four arms met, and this
contained a famous peal of bells. The grey stone walls were carved with
strange and holy devices, lettered with sacred texts in mediaeval Latin,
and here and there were draped in darkly-green ivy. The sharp angles of
the building had been rounded by the weather, the stones were mellowed
by time, and, nestling under the great boughs of the oaks, it had a
holy, restful look. "Like a prayer made visible," said Mr Tempest.

With his companion he had paused at the entrance to the glade, so as to
enjoy the beauty of the scene. Round the chapel swept the swallows,
pigeons whirled aloft in the cloudless blue sky; from the leafy trees
came the cooing of doves, and the cawing of rooks could be heard. All
the wild life of the wood haunted the chapel, and the place was musical
with forest minstrelsy. As the beauty of scene and sound crept into
their hearts, the vicar quoted Spenser's lovely lines:--

    "A little lowly hermitage it was,
    Downe in a dale, hard by a forest side."

"Just so," said Pratt, in the hard, unromantic way of the twentieth
century; "it's the kind of church you see in pictures."

"The church in which Sir Percival met Sir Galahad," replied Tempest.

The American felt the influence of the place despite the material faith
which he held. There was a vein of romance in his nature which had been
buried beneath the common-place and selfish. But in this holy solitude,
at the door of the shrine, his spiritual self came uppermost, and when
he stood bare-headed in the nave his talkative tongue was silent. The
influence of the unseen surrounded him, and, like Moses, he was
inclined to put off his shoes, "for this is holy ground," murmured his
heart.

Glancing at his companion, Tempest was surprised to see his usually pale
and calm face working with emotion and covered with blushes.

"You are unwell, Mr Pratt?" he asked in a low tone befitting the place.

The man stammered, "No--that is, I feel that--well, no matter." He
controlled himself by a powerful effort and laughed. Tempest was not
shocked. He was shrewd enough to see that the merriment was artificial
and designed to cloak a deeper feeling. But the laughter was reproved in
a most unexpected fashion.

"The joy of the profane is as the passing smoke," said a high, sweet
voice.

Pratt started in surprise, and looked around. He saw the jewelled
windows shining through the dim twilight of the church, the white cloth
on the altar, and the glimmer of a silver crucifix, in the faint light
of tall candles. But who had spoken he could not guess, as no one was in
sight. Mr Tempest, however, had recognised the voice.

"Is that you, Pearl?" he called out softly.

From behind the altar emerged a girl of eighteen, though in looks and
stature she was a child. She was small and delicately formed, and on her
thin white face there was a vacant look as of one whose wits were
astray. No intelligence shone through her dark eyes, but a mystical
light burned in their depths. Like Kilmeny, she had been to fairyland,
and had seen things which had lifted her above the common lot of
mortals. Therefore upon her face there shone the light that never was on
sea or land. And, curiously enough, she was dressed in a green gown--the
fairy's colour. Round her straw hat was twisted a wreath of oak leaves.
When she appeared her arms were full of flowers.

"You are decorating the altar, Pearl," said the vicar, kindly.

"I am making ready the House for the Master's coming," replied the girl
in her silvery voice, "but He will abide here but a little time." She
pointed to the groined roof of black oak. "That shuts out His Home,"
said Pearl, reverently, "and He loves not to dwell in darkness."

"Darkness and light are the same to Him, Pearl. But go on with your
work, my child. You have beautiful flowers I see."

"I gathered them in the woods before dawn, when the dew was yet on them.
And see, I have got these mosses to put into the pots. The flowers will
be quite fresh to-morrow for morning service. Then they will die," added
the girl, heaving a sigh, "die, as we all must."

"To rise again in the light of Heaven, child."

Pearl shook her black locks and turning back to the altar began
dexterously to arrange the flowers. When passing and re-passing she
never forgot to bend the knee. Pratt observed this. "Is she a Roman
Catholic?" Mr Tempest smiled. "She does only what I have taught her," he
said. "I am what is called High Church, Mr Pratt, and believe in a
beautiful ritual. To the service of God we should bring all lovely
things, and perform all solemn acts of humility and reverence. That,"
said Tempest, pointing to the white-covered altar, "is a symbol of the
Unseen Power, and so those who approach it should acknowledge its solemn
meaning."

Pratt shrugged his shoulders. The vicar was talking of things too high
for his comprehension. He looked at the mad girl decorating the altar.
"I suppose the villagers think a great deal of this church," he said.

"It is the most precious possession we have," replied Tempest,
reverently, "and it is all that remains to us of the beautiful and
sacred things created by the faith of our forefathers. There were many
vessels for the altar, Mr Pratt; but these were melted down by the
Gabriel who fought for the first Charles in order to help his king. I
would we had a communion service as beautiful as this shrine," and Mr
Tempest sighed.

The remark gave Pratt an idea. He wanted to obtain the goodwill of the
villagers seeing he had come amongst them to pass his days in peace. If
they loved their church so much they would approve of anyone who helped
to decorate it. "I am not rich," he said slowly, "and I can't give you a
whole service such as you want. But I should like to present this chapel
with a communion cup. I have in my travels collected many beautiful
things, Mr Tempest. Amongst others a golden cup of Roman workmanship
which I obtained in Italy. It is a splendid example of the jeweller's
art, and would look well on that table."

"On the altar," corrected Tempest, wincing at the sound of the word
which he connected with the Low Church party. "It is more than good of
you, Mr Pratt. We must talk the matter over. I do not accept gifts
lightly, especially for the service of the Church. But come, let us look
at the tombs. Then we can go to luncheon."

Pratt said no more, but fully made up his mind that the cup of which he
spoke should figure on the altar. He had a vague kind of idea that he
could buy repentance if he gave so splendid a present. If the vicar
proved difficult to deal with, he resolved to ask for Mrs Gabriel's
help. As the lady of the manor, she could insist upon the acceptance of
the offering. There was no reason why Tempest should refuse it, but
Pratt knew that the old man was--as he phrased it--queer, and one never
knew what objection he might make. If he thought that the cup was given
only to secure the goodwill of the parish he would certainly refuse it.
A gift made in such a spirit could not be accepted by the Church.

Meanwhile he examined the tombs of the crusading Gabriels, which he had
seen often before. But the vicar made the present visit more acceptable
by recounting the legends connected with each recumbent figure. The
tombs were three in number, and occupied what was called the Ladye's
Chapel. Their sides were richly blazoned with the Gabriel crest and with
decorations of scallop shells to denote that those who rested below had
been to the Holy Land. The figures of the brave knights were
cross-legged, and their hands rested on the pommels of their huge
swords. Considering the lapse of time, they were in a wonderful state of
preservation. Pratt looked upon them with a sigh, and the vicar inquired
the reason of his sadness.

"I was thinking of the glory of having such ancestors," said Pratt, and
Mr Tempest noticed that his Yankee twang and mode of expressing himself
had quite disappeared. "I would give anything to come of such a line--to
have a dwelling that had been in the possession of my race for
centuries, and to have traditions which I could live up to. I am a
lonely man, Mr Tempest," he added, with some pathos, "no one cares for
me. I never had a home, or a family, or a position in the world. All my
life I have had to fight for my own hand, and for years I have been a
rolling stone. Money, yes! I have made money, but I would give it all,"
and he pointed to the crusaders, "if I could call those my ancestors."

Mr Tempest looked surprised. "I did not expect to hear such views from
the mouth of a Republican," he said, "for, as you are an American, I
presume you hold by the political faith of Washington."

"I don't hold by anything in particular," replied Pratt, recovering
himself, as they left the chapel. "I am unfettered by sectarian
prejudices. You can call me a cosmopolitan, Mr Tempest. But we can talk
of these things on some other occasion. You must come to see me. I have
furnished The Nun's House, and have got out my collection of rare and
curious things. Will you and Miss Tempest dine with me next week?"

"I rarely go out," replied the vicar; "however, I will see what Sybil
says. If she is willing, I will come with pleasure."

"Oh, Miss Tempest will be willing," said Pratt, significantly. "Leo
Haverleigh is coming to dine also!"

"They are very good friends," said the vicar, simply. No thought of what
Pratt meant entered his mind.

At the Vicarage they were met by Sybil and the curate, who had been
talking to her about parish affairs for the greater part of the morning.
At once Raston drew aside his ecclesiastical superior, and the two went
into the library, leaving Sybil to entertain the American. She was not
averse to doing this, as she liked Mr Pratt and his merry conversation.
Having recovered from the emotion caused by the atmosphere of the
chapel, the man was more pronouncedly Yankee than ever. He described his
walk with the vicar, and repeated his invitation to dinner. "Mrs Gabriel
and Mr Haverleigh are coming," he said, "and I shall also ask Sir Frank
Hale and his sister."

Sybil smiled on hearing that Leo was to be present, but her brow clouded
over when she heard about the baronet and Miss Hale. She did not like
that young woman, and Pratt knew the cause. It was not unconnected with
Leo. He was the prize for which these young ladies strove. Miss Hale was
very much in love with the young man, and so was Sibyl, but he cared
more for the vicar's daughter than for Miss Hale. The two girls guessed
each other's feelings, and disliked one another accordingly. This might
not have been proper, but it was eminently human. However, Sibyl was too
much a woman of the world to show Pratt what she felt, and she accepted
his invitation calmly enough. "I shall be delighted to come," she said,
"but I can't answer for my father."

"Oh, I have something to lure him," said Pratt, easily, "and I think you
will be pleased also, Miss Tempest." And thereupon he told the girl of
his proposed gift. "The cup is over a thousand years old," he explained.
"It belongs to the time of the Caesars."

"From all I have heard of them," said Sybil, bluntly, "I don't think a
vessel of their manufacture ought to serve for a Christian ceremony."

"On the contrary, the cup will be sanctified by being put to such a good
use," said Pratt, "and you can set your mind at rest, Miss Tempest. I
got the cup from the church of a little Italian town, where it served
for a chalice. It has been used in the service of the Romish Church for
ages."

"In that case I am sure my father will be delighted to accept it. He is
anxious to get some vessels for the chapel altar. It is very good of you
to give the cup, Mr Pratt."

"Not at all. It is better put to such use than in my collection.
However, you will see all my curios when you come. Mr Haverleigh has
already seen them."

"He told me about them yesterday. I only hope Mr Haverleigh will be here
next week. He said something about going away."

"Why is he going away?" Pratt fixed his keen eyes on the girl.

"I think he is in trouble. That is," added Sybil, hastily, "I gathered
as much. But don't say I told you anything, Mr Pratt. Ah," she broke off
suddenly, "here are my father and Mr Raston."

Pratt cast another sharp glance at her. He guessed that something was
wrong with Leo, and that the young man had told her of his trouble. He
wondered if the two were engaged when they were thus confidential. Pratt
took an interest in Leo, as he had known him for some years, and rather
sympathised with his outbursts of youthful folly. He thought that
marriage would steady the lad's somewhat volatile nature, but he could
not make up his mind as to whether Miss Hale or Miss Tempest was the
best wife for him. However, it was useless for Pratt to worry over this,
as he recognised very clearly. In the first place, it was none of his
business; and in the second, Leo would certainly choose for himself.

"I am giving a house-warming, Mr Raston," said Pratt during luncheon,
"and I should like you to come to dinner. Next Thursday. I suppose in
this Arcadian spot it is not necessary to give written invitations."

"I accept with pleasure," replied Raston, quite ignorant that Pratt
wished to enlist him on his side in getting the vicar to accept the cup;
"but as to written invitations--what do you say, Miss Tempest?"

"Oh, those are _most_ necessary," laughed Sybil. "We are very particular
in this part of the world."

"I am an American, you see, Miss Tempest, and I don't know your English
way of doing things. But the invitations shall be written in due form. I
guess it is as well to humour the prejudice of folks."

"If you wish to be popular," said the vicar, "you must do so here."

"As I intend to die in this part of the world, I must get on with the
crowd somehow. I am not accustomed to be shunned, and that is what your
people here are doing."

"Oh, no!" cried Sybil, much distressed, "they are only waiting to know
you better, Mr Pratt. In a year you will be quite friendly with them."

"I'm friendly with them now," said Pratt, dryly, "it is they who hold
off."

"We are slow to make friendships here," said Raston, "but when we do
accept a friend we stick to him always."

"You are a native of these parts, Mr Raston?"

"I was born and bred here."

"It is I who am the stranger," put in Mr Tempest, "and it was a long
time before my parishioners took to me."

"You are adored now, papa," said Sybil, with a bright glance.

"And someone else is adored also," put in Pratt. Sybil flushed at the
compliment. She thought it was in bad taste.

After a time the conversation turned on Pearl Darry, and Raston, who was
deeply interested in her, gave them some insight into the girl's mind.
"She does not care for churches built by hands," he said. "If she had
her way she would take the altar into the middle of the moor and worship
there. I think she feels stifled under a roof."

"Ha!" said Pratt, with a swift glance, remembering Mrs Jeal, "is she of
gipsy blood? She looks like it."

"No. Her dark complexion comes from Highland blood," explained Sybil.
"Her father, Peter Darry, was a stone mason. He is dead now--died
through drink. While working in Perth he married a farmer's daughter.
They came back here and Pearl was born. Then her mother died and her
father treated her badly. Mrs Jeal rescued her, and Peter fell over a
cliff while drunk."

"Mrs Jeal is a good woman," said Tempest, mechanically.

"Do you endorse that statement, Miss Tempest?"

Sybil looked at Pratt who had spoken. "I think Mrs Jeal was very good to
take charge of Pearl," she said evasively, whereat Pratt smiled to
himself. He saw that Sybil did not like the woman, and privately admired
her insight.

Mr Pratt was destined to deliver all his invitations verbally. On his
way home after the vicar's luncheon he met with a rider on a roan horse.
This was a fair, handsome young man with a clear skin, a pair of bright
blue eyes and a sunny look on his face. He had a remarkably good figure,
and rode admirably. Horse and man made a picture as they came up the
road. Pratt waved his hands and the rider pulled up.

"How are you this morning, Haverleigh?"

Leo laughed. He did not wear his heart on his sleeve, and if he was
worried, as Sybil averred, he did not show his vexation. "I am all
right," he replied, with a smile. "Who could help being all right in
this jolly weather? And how are you, Mr Pratt?"

"I am busy," responded the American, gravely. "I have been lunching with
the vicar, and now I am going home to write out invitations for a dinner
at my new house."

"Will you ask me, Mr Pratt?"

"I have asked Miss Tempest and I want you to come."

Leo laughed. Also he flushed a trifle. "It is very good of you," he
said. "And who else will be at your house-warming?"

"Mrs Gabriel, Mr Raston, Miss Hale and her brother."

"Oh!" Leo looked annoyed at the mention of Miss Hale. "I am not sure if
I shall be able to come," he said, after a pause.

"No?" Pratt's tone was quite easy. "Miss Tempest said something about
your going away. But I hope you will put that off. My dear
fellow"--Pratt smiled meaningly--"you can depend upon me. It is not the
first time I have helped you!"

Haverleigh made no direct response, but sat on his saddle in deep
thought. "I'll come," he said at length, and rode off abruptly.

"I thought you would," murmured Pratt, with a bland smile. He knew more
about Leo Haverleigh than most people in Colester.




CHAPTER III

THE LADY OF THE MANOR


Haverleigh's face did not continue to wear its sunny expression after he
left the American. He frowned and bit his moustache, and in the
annoyance of the moment spurred his horse full speed up the castle road.
Only when he was within the avenue and nearing the porch did he slacken
speed, for his mother--so he called her--might be looking out of some
window. If so, she would assuredly accuse him of ill-using his horse.
Mrs Gabriel rarely minced matters in her dealings with Leo. He was never
perfectly sure whether she loved or hated him.

Mindful of this, he rode gently round to the stables, and, after
throwing his reins to a groom, walked into the castle by a side door. As
he had been absent all the morning, he was not very sure of his
reception, and, moreover, he had eaten no luncheon. The butler informed
him that Mrs Gabriel had asked that he should be sent to her the moment
he returned. At once Leo sought her on the south terrace, where she was
walking in the hot June sunshine. He augured ill from her anxiety to see
him. A memory of his debts and other follies--pardonable
enough--burdened his conscience.

"Here I am, mother," he said as he walked on to the terrace, looking a
son of whom any woman would have been proud. Perhaps if he had really
been her son, instead of her nephew, Mrs Gabriel might have been more
lenient towards him. As it was she treated him almost as harshly as
Roger Ascham did Lady Jane Grey of unhappy memory.

"It is about time you were here," she said in her strong, stern voice.
"As you are so much in London, I think you might give me a few hours of
your time when you condescend to stay at the castle."

Leo threw himself wearily into a stone seat and played with his whip.
This was his usual greeting, and he knew that Mrs Gabriel would go on
finding fault and blaming him until she felt inclined to stop. His only
defence was to keep silent. He therefore stared gloomily on the pavement
and listened stolidly to her stormy speech. "No reverence for
women--after all I have done for you--clownish behaviour," etc.

Some wit had once compared Mrs Gabriel to Agnes de Montfort, that
unpleasant heroine of the Middle Ages. The comparison was a happy one,
for Mrs Gabriel was just such another tall, black-haired, iron-faced
Amazon. She could well have played the _role_ of heroine in holding the
castle against foes, and without doubt would have been delighted to
sustain a siege. The present days were too tame for her. She yearned for
the time when ladies were left in charge of the _donjon_ keep, while
their husbands went out to war. More than once she fancied that if she
had lived in those stirring times, she would have armed herself like
Britomart, and have gone a disguised knight-errant for the pleasure and
danger of the thing. As it was, she found a certain relief in the power
she exercised in Colester. Her will was law in the town, and her rule
quite feudal in its demand for absolute obedience.

Report said that the late John Gabriel had not been altogether sorry
when he departed this life. Undoubtedly he was more at rest in the quiet
graveyard near the chapel than he had ever been before. Mrs Gabriel
mourned him just as much as she thought proper. She had never professed
to love him, and had married him (as she calmly admitted) in order to
become mistress of the grand old castle. Besides, Gabriel had always
hampered her desire to rule, as he had sufficient of the old blood in
him to dislike being a cypher in his ancestral home. Consequently,
husband and wife quarrelled bitterly. Finally, he died, gladly enough,
and the Amazon had it all her own way. It was about two years after his
death that Leo came to live with her, and everyone was amazed that she
should behave so kindly towards the child of her dead brother, whom, as
it was well known, she hated thoroughly.

However, Leo came, and from the moment he entered the house she bullied
him. Spirited as the boy was, he could not hold his own against her
stern will and powers of wrathful speech. When he went to school and
college he felt as though he had escaped from gaol, and always returned
unwillingly to Colester. Mrs Gabriel called this ingratitude, and on
every occasion brought it to his mind. She did so now; but even this
could not induce Leo to speak. He declined to furnish fuel to her wrath
by argument or contradiction. This also was a fault, and Mrs Gabriel
mentioned it furiously.

"Can't you say something?" she cried, with a stamp. "Is it any use your
sitting there like a fool? What explanation have you for me?"

"To what?" asked Leo, wearily; the question had been asked so often.
"You have accused me of so many things."

"Then why do you do wrong? I am talking of those debts you have incurred
in London. You gave the list to me before you went out riding."

"I know, mother. I thought it best to avoid a scene. But it seems there
is no escape. When you have quite done perhaps you will let me speak?"

"You shall speak when I choose," rejoined Mrs Gabriel, fiercely. "All I
ask you now is, how comes it that your debts run up to three hundred
pounds? I allow you that income. You should make it do."

"Perhaps I have been a little foolish," began Leo, but she cut him
short.

"A little foolish, indeed! You have behaved like a fool, as you always
do. What right have you to be extravagant? Are you in a position to be
so? Have I not fed and clothed and educated you?"

"You have done everything that a charitable woman could have done."

"You mean that a _mother_ could have done. Had you been my own child--"

"You might have been kinder to me," finished the young man.

Mrs Gabriel stared aghast at this speech, and at last broke out
furiously, "Had you been my own child you would have been a stronger
man; not a weak fool squandering money, and defying your benefactress.
You ought to be ashamed of yourself."

"I am," replied Leo, bitterly, "ashamed that I have endured this
humiliating position for so long. I was only a child when you brought me
here, and had no voice in the matter. Yet, out of gratitude, I have
borne with your injustice, and--"

"Injustice!" broke in Mrs Gabriel. "What do you mean?"

"My meaning is not hard to gather, mother. You have never been just to
me, and the bread with which you have fed me has been bitter enough to
swallow. Do you think that I can go on listening to your angry words
without a protest? I cannot. My position is not of my own making, and
since you find me a burden and an ungrateful creature, the best thing
will be to put an end to the position."

"Indeed!" sneered the woman. "And how do you propose to do that? You are
quite unable to earn your own living."

"Oh, there is one way of doing that," replied Leo, grimly. "It does not
need much education to be a soldier."

"A soldier!" screamed Mrs Gabriel.

"Yes. I made inquiries while I was in London, as I knew very well what
welcome you would give me. It is my intention to volunteer for the war."

"You'll do nothing of the sort."

"I beg your pardon. I have made up my mind."

"Then I shall have nothing more to do with you."

"That is as you please, Mrs Gabriel. You are my aunt, and I suppose you
have the right to support me out of charity. At any rate, you have no
right to keep me here and taunt me all the time with my inability to
keep myself. Again I say that the position is none of my making.
However, I intend to relieve you of the burden of a useless man. Next
week I shall enlist. Then you will be well rid of me."

Mrs Gabriel gasped. "I forbid you!" she cried, with a stamp.

"I am afraid I must decline to accept the command," said Haverleigh,
with great coolness. "You have told me often enough that I am a beggar
and a loafer. You shall do so no longer. As to my debts, I shall see to
them myself. You need not pay them, nor need you continue my allowance.
I earn my own bread from this moment."

"How dare you, Leo? Do you not owe me something?"

"No! You have cancelled all obligation by the way in which you have
treated me. Everything you have done has been done grudgingly. If you
did not intend to behave as a woman should, why, in Heaven's name, did
you not leave me to be dependent on strangers? They could scarcely have
been more harsh to me than you have been. But this is the end of it. I
relieve you from this hour of the burden you complain of."

"Take care. I intended you to be my heir, and--"

"I decline to accept further favours at your hands," said Leo, proudly;
"for what you have done I thank you, but I do not care to accept an
inheritance as a favour. Now you know my intentions and I shall not
change them."

Mrs Gabriel raged for twenty minutes without making the least impression
on the young man. He was determined to put an end to the position, and
she found that she could not longer dominate him by her wrath. Then Mrs
Gabriel became aware that she had driven him like a rat into a corner,
and that, like a rat, he had turned to fight. For reasons best known to
herself she did not wish him to leave her. Forthwith she abandoned her
tyrannical attitude, and took refuge in the weakness of her sex.
Considering her boasting, this was ironical.

"It is cruel of you, Leo, to behave thus to a woman who loves you!"

Leo, leaning over the parapet, shrugged his shoulders and replied
without looking round. "That is just the point," he said. "You really do
not love me--no, not one little bit."

"I do. See how I have looked after you all these years."

"And made me feel that I was a pauper all the time," he retorted. "But
is it necessary to go over all the old ground? I have made up my mind."

"You shall not enlist."

"I tell you I shall."

The two faced one another, both pale and both defiant. It was a contest
of will, and the weaker would be sure to yield in the long run. Mrs
Gabriel quite expected that her adopted son would give in, as he had
often done before, but this time she found to her surprise that he
declined to move from his attitude of defiance. Seeing that she was
beaten, she suddenly calmed and proceeded to win the necessary victory
in another and more crafty way.

"Sit down, Leo," she said quietly. "It is time we had an explanation.
You are behaving very badly, and I must request you at least to listen
to me."

Haverleigh had been doing nothing else for nearly an hour, so this
speech was a trifle inconsistent. However, he could not be brutal, so
with another shrug he resumed his seat. All the same he was resolved in
his own mind that no argument she could use should make him alter the
course he had determined upon. Leo could be obstinate on occasions.

"I do everything I can for your good," said Mrs Gabriel in a complaining
tone, "yet you thwart me at every turn." Then she proceeded to recount
how she had sent him to Eton, to Oxford, how she had permitted him to go
to London and allowed him money, and how he had behaved foolishly. It
was at this point the young man interrupted her.

"I admit that I have been foolish, but that comes from want of
experience. You can't expect me to have an old head on young shoulders."

"Don't interrupt me, please," said Mrs Gabriel, sharply. "Now that you
have sown your wild oats, I want you to come here and take your position
as my heir. I am no longer so young as I was, and I need someone to help
me in administering the estate. Besides, I want you to marry."

Leo rose from his seat. "You wish me to marry," said he; then, after a
pause, he proceeded sarcastically, "And I suppose you have chosen me a
wife?"

"Just so," said Mrs Gabriel, coolly. "I want you to marry Miss Hale."

"Not if there was not another woman in the world!"

"That's all nonsense, Leo. She has a good dowry and she is an agreeable
girl. You _shall_ marry her."

"I don't love her," protested Leo.

"No matter; she loves you. Her brother told me so, and I am woman enough
to see that she is deeply attached to you."

"I won't marry her!" said Leo, doggedly. "I have a right to choose a
wife for myself, and Miss Hale is not my choice."

"Ah! Then what I have heard is true?"

"What have you heard?" he demanded, with a dangerous look in his blue
eyes. Mrs Gabriel was going too far.

"That you are in love with Sibyl Tempest."

"That is true. She is a beautiful and charming girl."

"And a beggar!" burst out Mrs Gabriel, savagely. "Her father has nothing
beyond his stipend, and that he spends on books. When he dies she will
be a beggar. If you married her she would bring you no dowry."

"She will bring me herself," replied Haverleigh, "and that is good
enough for me. I love Sybil with my whole soul."

"And how do you propose to keep her?" sneered Mrs Gabriel.

"Not as the heir to your property," said Leo, wrathfully. "In some way
or another I shall make my way in the world. Sybil is quite willing to
wait for me. We are engaged."

"Ha! You seem to have settled the whole matter."

"We have. And it will not be unsettled by anyone."

The young man looked so determined, there was such fire in his eye, such
a firmness about his closed mouth, that Mrs Gabriel felt that she was
beaten. For the moment she retreated gracefully, but by no means gave up
her point. By nagging at Leo she might be enabled to bring about things
as she wished. "Well, have it your own way," she said, rising. "I have
said my say, and you are behaving abominably."

"I am sorry you should think so, but I really cannot submit to this life
any longer. You quite understand that next week I go to London?"

"As you please." Mrs Gabriel was outwardly calm, but inwardly furious.
"I hope you have well considered what you are doing?"

"I have. My mind has been made up for some time."

"In that case, Leo, we may as well part good friends. I shall pay your
debts and fit you out. Now do not contradict me. If you have any feeling
of gratitude you will at least let me do this much."

Haverleigh did not like the proposition, as he felt that Mrs Gabriel was
preparing some snare into which he might blindly fall. However, as he
could not see his way to a refusal, and, moreover, was weary of this
bickering, he merely bowed. Mrs Gabriel had thus gained time, and in
some measure had secured the victory. It remained to her to make the
best use of it. She was determined that Leo should marry Edith Hale.

"Have you had luncheon, Leo?" she asked, changing the subject.

"No. But I am not hungry now."

"Nonsense. A big man like you. Come in and have something to eat at
once."

As a refusal would only have meant another outburst, Leo accepted the
inevitable, and moved towards the door with his mother. "By the way," he
said, "I met Mr Pratt down below. He intends to ask us to a
house-warming."

It might have been Leo's fancy, but he thought that Mrs Gabriel started
at the mention of the name. However, there was an emotion in her hard
voice as she replied, "I shall be rather glad to see the interior of his
house, Leo. It is said that he has the most beautiful things. Will he
ask us to dinner?"

"Yes. Hale and his sister are coming."

"Ah!" said Mrs Gabriel in gratified tones.

"And the vicar and his daughter. Also Raston, the curate."

"The church party," said Mrs Gabriel, disdainfully. She had no love for
Tempest, whom she regarded as half insane, nor for Sibyl, who was too
beautiful for womanly taste, nor for Raston, who had frequently fought
her on questions connected with parish affairs.

"By the way," said Leo, who had been meditating, "why has Mr Pratt
settled in these parts? I should think he found it dull."

Mrs Gabriel smiled contemptuously. "Mr Pratt is not a foolish young man
like someone I know," she said; "he does not find pleasure in the
follies of the Town. For my part, I think he is wise to settle here in
his old age. He is a delightful neighbour and a pleasant companion."

"He is all that," assented Leo, heartily. He liked Pratt. "You have
known him for many years, mother?"

"For ten or twelve," replied Mrs Gabriel, carelessly. "I met him in
Vienna, I think, and he called on me when I returned to London.
Afterwards he came down here and fell in love with the place. For years
he has been a rolling stone, but always said that when he settled down
he would come to Colester. He is liked, is he not, Leo?"

"He is more than liked. He is immensely popular--with our friends, if
not with the villagers. You have done a good deed in introducing him to
our dull parish."

"I don't think Mr Pratt, who has so many resources in himself, finds it
dull, my dear. However, I shall be glad to accept the invitation to his
dinner. I should like to see him married."

"Indeed! Have you chosen him a wife also?"

Mrs Gabriel laughed. "I thought he might take a fancy to Sibyl Tempest."

"Why, he's old enough to be her father. Besides--"

"Besides you love her," finished Mrs Gabriel, with a shrug. "Well, do
not get angry, Leo. I should like to see Mr Pratt marry Sybil and you
the husband of Edith Hale. Then everything would be right."

"I don't think so at all," commenced Haverleigh in vexed tones. "But
don't let us quarrel any more. I have the greatest regard for Pratt, but
I do not care to go the length of letting him marry the girl I love."

"You know very little of Mr Pratt," said Mrs Gabriel, looking suddenly
at the young man, "how, then, can you regard him so--"

"Oh, I have seen him often in Town," broke in Leo; "sometimes when I was
in difficulties and did not want to tell you Pratt helped me."

"With money?" asked Mrs Gabriel, sharply.

"Of course with money. But I paid him back."

Mrs Gabriel made no answer, but, rising suddenly, passed out of the
room, and left Leo eating his luncheon alone. Her usually calm face
looked disturbed and her hands were restless. Leo's information had
annoyed her.

"What does Pratt mean?" she asked herself. "Can't he leave the boy alone
after all these years? I wonder--" She broke off and pressed her hand to
her heart as though she there felt a cruel pain. Perhaps she did, but
Mrs Gabriel was not the woman to show it.




CHAPTER IV

THE DINNER-PARTY


Built on the lower slopes of the Castle Hill, Mr Pratt's residence,
commonly known as The Nun's House, stood a little distance back from the
highway which led down to King's-meadows. It was a plain, rough stone
building of great strength, two storeys in height, and with a high roof
of slate. Gloomy in the extreme, it was rendered still more so from its
being encircled by a grove of yew trees which gave it a churchyard air.
Not the kind of residence one would have thought attractive to a
cheerful and dapper man like Richard Pratt. But he had, so he declared,
fallen in love with it at first sight, and Mrs Gabriel, always having an
eye to business, had only too readily granted him a seven years' lease.
She was delighted at the chance of securing a tenant, as the house had
been empty for a long time owing to its uncomfortable reputation. There
was not a man, woman or child in Colester that did not know it was
haunted.

The name came from a tradition, probably a true one, that when the
Colester convent had been suppressed by Henry VIII., the evicted nuns
had found refuge in this dismal house, a dozen of them. In time they
died, and the mansion was inhabited by other people. But queer sounds
were heard, strange sights were seen, and it became known that the
twelve nuns re-visited the scene of their exile. There never was a house
so populated with ghosts; and the tenants promptly departed. Others,
lured by a low rent, came, and after a month's trial departed also.
Finally no one would stop in the ill-omened mansion until Mr Pratt
arrived. He liked the place, laughed at the gruesome reputation of the
dwelling, and announced his intention of making it his home.

"Ghosts!" laughed Pratt, with his cheery smile. "Nonsense. Ghosts went
out with gas. Besides, I should rather like to see a ghost, particularly
of a nun. I am partial to the fair sex."

"I wonder, then, you never married," said the person who had warned him
against the house, with the best intentions, of course.

Pratt looked at her--she was Mrs Bathurst, the gossip of the
neighbourhood--under half-closed eye-lids, and smiled. "Ah!" said he,
rubbing his plump white hands, "I have admired so many beautiful women,
dear lady, that I could not remain constant to one;" which reason,
although plausible, did not satisfy Mrs Bathurst. But then she was one
of those amiable persons always willing to believe the worst of people.

However, Pratt took up his abode in the chief Colester inn, and sent for
cartloads of furniture, while the house was being re-decorated. He took
a deal of trouble to make it comfortable, and as he was a man of
excellent taste, with an eye for colour, he succeeded in making it
pretty as well. In six weeks the place was ready to receive him, and up
to the period of his walk with the vicar, Pratt had occupied it for
another six without being disturbed by the numerous ghosts. The Colester
folks quite expected to hear that he had been carried off like Dr Faust,
and were rather disappointed that he met with no ghostly adventure. But
then Mr Pratt, as he said himself, was not imaginative enough for
spectres.

Failing his leaving the house, the gentry expected that he would
entertain them and show his treasures, for it was reported that he had
many beautiful things. But Pratt was in no hurry. He wanted first to
study his neighbours in order to see who were the most pleasant. In a
surprisingly short time he got to know something about everyone, and on
the knowledge thus acquired he selected his guests. In addition to those
already mentioned, he invited Mrs Bathurst and her daughter Peggy. The
girl was pretty and the mother talkative, so, in Pratt's opinion, it
paid to ask them. "There is no chance of an entertainment being dull if
Mrs Bathurst has her legs under the table," he said, and this being
reported to the lady, she accused Pratt of coarseness. Nevertheless, she
accepted the invitation. Not for worlds would Mrs Bathurst have missed a
sight of re-decorated Nun's House. Besides, it was her duty to go. She
supplied all the gossip of the neighbourhood.

Anxious to see as much as possible of the house, Mrs Bathurst was the
first to arrive. Pratt, in a particularly neat evening dress, advanced
to meet her and Peggy with a smile. He knew very well that her
ungovernable curiosity had led her to be thus early. "I am glad to see
you, Mrs Bathurst," he said genially; "pray sit down. You are the first
to arrive."

"I always like to be punctual," responded the lady, nodding to her
daughter that she also should be seated. "Dear me, how well this room
looks! I can see you have spared no expense."

"I like to make myself comfortable, Mrs Bathurst. We only have one
life."

"I wonder you care to spend it in such a dull place as Colester. If Mr
Bathurst were rich I should make him take me to London."

"You would soon get tired of the roar of that city."

Here Peggy, who was fair and pretty and fond of gaiety, shook her blonde
head vigorously. "I should never get tired of fun," she said. "I could
go to a dance every night and still want more."

"Ah, Miss Peggy, you are young and active!"

"Well, dear Mr Pratt, you are not old," said Mrs Bathurst, flatteringly;
"we must make you happy here. I am sure you are quite an acquisition. We
must find you a wife."

"I shall apply to you when I want one," he said, with a laugh; "but I
guess I'm not made to run in double harness."

"What odd expressions you use! I daresay that comes from your being an
American. Never mind, you'll soon lose all Americanisms here. I look
upon you as quite one of ourselves, dear Mr Pratt."

The fact is that Mrs Bathurst wished to bring about a marriage between
her daughter Peggy and the newcomer. He had been introduced by Mrs
Gabriel, so his social position was secure; and if one could judge from
the magnificent furnishing of the house, he was a wealthy man. That
Peggy herself should be consulted never entered her mother's head.

Pratt guessed what Mrs Bathurst was after, and chuckled. He had no
intention of having the good lady for a mother-in-law. Moreover, he knew
that Peggy was in love with Raston, the curate. Nevertheless, having a
love of tormenting people, and wishing to punish Mrs Bathurst, he
sighed, cast a languishing look at Peggy, and allowed the mother to
think that he might be guided by her wish. Seeing this, the lady pushed
her advantage vigorously, and was getting on very well by the time the
other guests arrived. Then, after some desultory conversation, dealing
with the weather and the crops, all went in to dinner.

The table was beautifully set out. The linen was snowy white, the silver
and crystal of the best, and the flowers, which Pratt had personally
arranged, were skilfully chosen and blended. The women present were
rather annoyed that a man should be able to manage a house so well, for
the dinner was one of the best that had ever been eaten in Colester, and
the service was all that could be desired. What was the use, thought Mrs
Bathurst, of suggesting a wife to a man who knew so well how to dispense
with one? She could not have arranged things better herself, and it was
vexing that a mere man should be able to beat a woman on her own
ground.

"You have certainly made a very pretty place of it, Mr Pratt," said Mrs
Gabriel, when they returned to the drawing-room. "I suppose you will
live here for many a long day?"

"I hope to die here," he replied, smiling. "But one never knows. I may
take a fancy to resume my travels."

"You are like Ulysses," put in the vicar, "you know men and cities."

"And, like Ulysses, I don't think much of either, Mr Tempest."

"Come now!" cried Leo, laughing. "I never heard that Ulysses was a
cynic."

"He was not modern enough," said Sybil, who was looking particularly
charming, much to the anger of Mrs Gabriel, who saw in her a man-trap
for her adopted son.

"I don't think cynicism is altogether a modern disease," remarked Sir
Frank Hale. "Solomon had not much belief in human nature."

"What could you expect from a man who had so many wives?" put in Pratt,
in a dry voice. The remark annoyed Mrs Bathurst. It augured ill for her
scheme to marry Peggy. A man who talked thus of women could never be
brought to respect his mother-in-law.

While this conversation was taking place Mrs Gabriel kept a vigilant eye
on Leo. Whenever he tried to edge up to Sybil she contrived to get in
the way, and, finally, by a dexterous move, she placed him 'longside the
baronet's sister. Edith Hale was a tall, raw-boned, thin girl, with
small pretensions to beauty or wit. She had a freckled skin and red
hair, an awkward way of carrying herself and a silent tongue. She was so
deeply in love with Leo that she followed his every movement with her
eyes, until he found her regard most embarrassing. However, Leo, to
avert a storm when he returned home, was obliged to show her every
attention, and strolled away with her into Mr Pratt's new conservatory.
Sybil looked disappointed, but controlled herself sufficiently to play
an accompaniment for Peggy. Raston turned over the leaves of the music,
and Mrs Bathurst, with a glance at Pratt, settled herself to listen. As
to Mr Tempest, he was moving round the room examining the objects of art
in his usual near-sighted way. Seeing everyone thus occupied, Mrs
Gabriel drew aside Sir Frank into a convenient corner.

The baronet was a pale-faced, hunchback, lame creature, with a shrewish
expression and a pair of brilliant grey eyes. He had been an invalid all
his life, and his temper had been spoilt thereby. The only person in the
world for whom he cherished the least affection was his sister. In his
eyes she was as beautiful as Helen and as clever as Madame de Stael. He
knew that she was breaking her heart for Leo, and resented the young
man's indifference. And as Hale had the spite of a cripple, his
resentment was not to be despised. But Leo did not know that.

"Frank," said Mrs Gabriel, addressing him thus familiarly, as she had
known him from his cradle, "I want to speak to you about Leo. It is
time he was married. Nothing but marriage will steady him."

"Sybil Tempest is ready enough to become his wife, Mrs Gabriel," snarled
the little man. "Why don't you speak to her?"

"Because she is not your sister," replied Mrs Gabriel, coldly. "I do not
intend that Leo shall throw himself away on a penniless girl who has
nothing but her face to recommend her. Edith has both brains and
beauty."

"Leo does not see that," said Hale, who implicitly believed in his
companion; "he is infatuated with Sybil. I don't say a word against
her," he added hastily; "I want to marry her myself."

Mrs Gabriel looked with secret contempt on the deformed man, and
wondered how he could have the impertinence to think that any woman
could take him for her husband. However, she was pleased to hear of this
new complication. If Sybil could be induced to marry the baronet--and
from a worldly point of view the match was a good one--she would be out
of the way. In despair Leo might marry Edith, and thus all would be as
Mrs Gabriel wanted. She wished to move human beings as puppets to suit
her own ends, and never thought that she might be thwarted by the
individual will of those with whom she played. However, she had an idea
of how to entangle matters so as to carry out her schemes, and commenced
her intrigue with the baronet. She knew he would help her, both for his
own sake and for the sake of his sister. At the same time she moved
warily, so as not to make a false step. It was no easy matter to deal
with Hale, as she knew. Once or twice he had got the better of her in
business.

"I don't mind being candid with you," said Mrs Gabriel softly. "It is my
wish that Leo should marry Edith, and I shall be delighted to help you
to become Sybil's husband."

"It's easy saying, but harder doing," said Hale, snappishly. "Sybil is
in love with Leo, and the woman who admires Apollo will not look upon
Caliban. Oh, I am under no delusions respecting myself," he added, with
a hoarse laugh. "I am not agreeable to look upon, but I have money, a
title and a good position. Nine women out of ten would be content with
these things."

"I am afraid Sybil is the tenth," said Mrs Gabriel, coldly. "However,
neither she nor Leo know what is good for them. Help me to marry him to
your sister, and then Sybil will fall into your arms."

"Do you think so?"

"I am certain of it."

"How are we to manage?" asked Hale, after a pause. "You have some
scheme."

"It is in order to explain my scheme to you that I have brought about
this conversation. Listen. I am not pleased with Leo. He has been
leading a wild life in Town, and is in debt to the tune of three hundred
pounds."

"Humph!" said Frank, under his breath. "These Apollos know how to waste
money. I shall see that Edith's dowry is settled on herself."

"And I shall tie up the Gabriel property so that Leo cannot waste it."

Hale looked at her from under his bushy eyebrows. "You intend that he
shall be your heir, then?"

"Assuredly. If he does what I want him to do."

"What is that?"

"He must marry Edith and take up his residence in the castle. No more
gadding about, no more wild living. Let Leo be a respectable country
gentleman and his future is secure."

"Have you explained that to him?" asked the baronet, sharply.

"No. Leo is a fool, and infatuated with that girl. I must force him to
do what I want. It is for his own good. You must help, both for the sake
of Edith, and because it is your only chance of marrying Sybil."

"I'm quite ready to help you, Mrs Gabriel. Go on."

Mrs Gabriel glanced round, bent her head, and spoke lower. "I intend to
refuse to pay this three hundred pounds for Leo. There is no chance of
his earning it for himself, and he will soon be in serious difficulty.
Now if you come forward as his old friend and--"

"I don't like lending money," said Hale, who was something of a miser.

"If you want to gain Sybil and make your sister happy, you must lend Leo
three hundred pounds. When he is in your debt, well--the rest is easy."

Hale nodded. "I see what you mean," said he, ponderingly. "The idea is
not a bad one. But Leo--humph! Three hundred pounds! A large sum!"

"Oh, I will be your surety for it," said Mrs Gabriel, impatiently. She
did not want her plans upset by this miser. "But if you want to gain
anything you must sacrifice something. You love Sybil?"

"With my whole soul," said the cripple, and flushed.

"And your sister?"

"I would give anything to secure her happiness."

"Three hundred pounds will be enough," said Mrs Gabriel, coolly. "Make
Leo your debtor, and then you can deal with him. He is so honourable
that he will keep his word even at the cost of his happiness. Well?"

Hale reflected. "I will think of it," said he, cautiously.

"As you please. But remember that if I do not have this settled within
the week, I shall allow Leo to marry Sybil."

Of course Mrs Gabriel had no such intention, but she determined
outwardly on this course to frighten the baronet. It had the desired
effect.

"I will see to the matter," he said hastily; "to-night I will ask Leo to
come and see me. It will all be arranged. But three hundred pounds!" He
winced and Mrs Gabriel smiled.

"I will be your surety," she said, rising. "Let me know when you have
made Leo your debtor. Come, we must not talk any more. Here is Mr
Pratt."

It was indeed the host who came to disturb them. He wished to take the
whole party round his house. Leo and Edith returned from the
conservatory, the former looking bored, the latter brilliantly happy.
Sybil did not like this, and glanced reproachfully at Leo, who
immediately would have gone to her side, but he was anticipated by Hale.
"Help me to get round the house, Miss Tempest," he said, pointing to his
lame leg. "You must be my crutch."

Sybil could not but assent, and so Leo found himself out in the cold.
Peggy, who approved of his love for Sybil, took his arm. "Never mind,"
she said softly, "I will manage to take Sir Frank away," and Leo gave
her hand a grateful squeeze.

"Come, all of you!" cried Pratt, cheerily. "The museum is open."

He led them through a series of rooms crammed with treasures. There were
valuable pictures, pieces of rich tapestry, exquisite examples of
goldsmith's work, and many other things of value. Mr Pratt had a story
for every object. This he picked up in the Great Bazaar at Stamboul;
that was a bargain obtained in an Italian town; the silver crucifix came
from Spain; the lacquer work from Japan. Apparently he had been all over
the world, and had made purchases in every part. Here was the evidence
of his travels and his wealth before the longing eyes of Mrs Bathurst.
More than ever was she determined that Peggy should become Mrs Pratt.

While Pratt discoursed and the company exclaimed at the treasures
displayed to their wondering eyes, Mrs Gabriel maintained her haughty
silence. She surveyed all the beautiful things in a cold, unemotional
manner, and kept an eye on the movements of Leo. He felt uncomfortable
under her gaze, and once or twice looked angrily at her. But Mrs Gabriel
met his indignant looks with a calm smile.

"You must have spent a fortune on all this," said Hale, inspecting a
tray of antique coins. "What a collection!"

"I have been buying for years," explained Pratt, smiling. "Mine has been
a varied life. I was born of poor parents and had to make my own way in
the world. For years I worked in the States, in South America and
elsewhere to make money. Finally I secured a fortune in South Africa,
and for the last ten years I have devoted myself to collecting these
things. They have been stored for years, and now that I have a house of
my own, this is the first time I have been able to arrange them. I am
glad you are pleased."

"We are more than pleased," gushed Mrs Bathurst. "It is a most beautiful
treat to see these lovely things and hear you talk about them. What is
this cup, dear Mr Pratt?"

"Ah!" said Pratt, taking it up. "This is the property of the vicar."

"Mine!" said Mr Tempest in mild surprise. "Dear me, Mr Pratt, what do
you mean? It would take half my year's stipend to buy this!"

"It is the cup of which I spoke to you, vicar." Pratt handed it to
Tempest and then turned to the group. "I wish to present this cup to the
chapel, Mr Raston," he said, "and I hope that you and Mr Tempest will
accept it on behalf of the town. It is an old Roman goblet, and has
been used for centuries as a communion chalice in an Italian city. I
bought it many years ago. Is it not beautiful?"

The cup was indeed an exquisite object of art. Of considerable size, it
was of pure gold. The rim and the stem were set round with gems of great
value, and the outside was embossed with faces peering from out a tangle
of flowers. It had two handles formed of twisted snakes with ruby eyes
and round its broadest part ran an inscription in Latin. The vicar held
the goblet to the light and translated the inscription. "'To the great
God, who maketh the heart joyful,'" he said, then added dubiously, "Does
that refer to a pagan god, or to the Maker of all things?"

"If the cup is Roman, probably it is an inscription to Bacchus," said
the curate, a shadow on his face. "If so, we cannot use it as a
communion cup." Pratt laughed and raised his eyebrows at this scrupulous
regard. "You can set your mind at rest," he said. "The priest who sold
it to me on account of the poverty of his parish church said that the
inscription was inscribed during the Middle Ages. It refers to the God
of Christendom."

"In that case," said the vicar beaming, "I accept the cup with pleasure
and with many thanks. It shall be consecrated and placed on the altar by
the end of this week."

While the others were thanking and congratulating Mr Pratt, an
expression of relief might have been noticed on his face. Mrs Gabriel,
who knew his every look, wondered to herself why he appeared to be so
pleased. Evidently he was thankful to be rid of the cup. However, she
said nothing, as she was a wise woman, but added her congratulations to
those of the others.

"Everyone will be delighted," she said coldly. "Such generosity is
unusual in Colester." But her glance hinted unusual as regarded Pratt.
He received the hint smilingly.

"I hope it will make me popular," said he. "I am weak enough to wish to
be liked, and hitherto I have not secured the goodwill of the people."

"You will have it now," said Raston, "and particularly that of Pearl
Darry. She loves beautiful things for the altar, and as she attends to
the decorating of the chapel, it will be a constant pleasure to her to
keep this cup bright and spotless."

"I hope it will be safe with her!" cried Mrs Bathurst. "These insane
people are like magpies, and steal anything glittering that attracts
their weak fancies. Are you _sure_ she will not take it away, Mr
Raston?"

The curate was indignant. "Pearl would no more do such a thing than take
her own life, poor soul," he said. "She is devoted to the church.
Religion, so far as her own poor brain understands it, is her one
consolation."

"She ought to be shut up," said Mrs Gabriel.

"There I differ from you," said the vicar, mildly. "She is not harmful
enough to be placed in durance. Let her enjoy liberty and sunshine, Mrs
Gabriel. It is little pleasure she has."

"She seems to me harmless enough," said Pratt, "and if this cup will be
an additional pleasure to her, I am the more glad that Mr Tempest has
accepted it. I shall have it wrapped up, vicar."

"Thank you. Be very careful, Mr Pratt. So beautiful an object must not
be carelessly dealt with." From which remark it will be seen that now
the Roman goblet was the property of the Church it assumed quite a new
value in the eyes of the priest. Formerly it was merely a beautiful
example of the goldsmith's art; now it was sacred.

After this the company repaired to the drawing-room, where Mr Pratt told
stories until quite a late hour for Colester. Never had there been so
agreeable a host in the dull little provincial town, and one and all
confessed themselves charmed with their evening. "Quite an acquisition,"
repeated Mrs Bathurst as she departed. "Mind you come and see me, Mr
Pratt. Peggy will never forgive you if you do not." A foolish speech
which sent poor Peggy away covered with blushes. But then Mrs Bathurst's
zeal always outran her discretion.

As Mr Pratt stood at his door waving a hearty good-bye to his guests, he
saw that Hale was beside Leo and overheard a remark. "Come and see me in
three days, Leo," the baronet was saying. "I want to speak to you most
particularly."

"Most particularly," echoed Pratt, thoughtfully. "Humph! What's up
now?"




CHAPTER V

LOVE'S YOUNG DREAM


The Colester folk were certainly pleased that Mr Pratt had adorned their
beloved chapel with so magnificent a gift. They unbent so far as to
smile when they curtsied or touched their hats, but did not take him to
their bosoms. However, Pratt saw that he had made a step forward in
their affections, and professed himself well pleased. "Rome was not
built in a day," said he, philosophically.

Mr Tempest installed the cup on the altar, where it glittered in front
of the crucifix. It was an object of wonder and reverence to the simple
villagers, and the vicar himself was no less pleased. Its weight, the
beauty of the workmanship, and the splendour of the jewels, filled him
with joy, and he came to regard the pagan vessel--as it undoubtedly
was--as a kind of Holy Grail. Having made some such reference to it, the
sexton Baker, an inquisitive octogenarian, wanted to know what the Holy
Grail was. Forthwith Mr Tempest prepared a lecture, compounded of
Mallory's prose work and Tennyson's poetical interpretation. This he
delivered in the village schoolroom, and had the sacred cup placed on
the table before him, so that his hearers might have the significance of
the gift borne home to them. Pearl heard the lecture, and so much of it
as her poor wits took in led her to look upon the cup as the very vessel
itself mentioned in the poem. To Pearl the Pagan cup, as Frank Hale
called it, was the veritable vessel from which the Master had drunk at
that last sad feast. And no argument could shake this belief when she
once got it into her head.

"So ridiculous," said Mrs Jeal, sniffing. "I daresay Mr Pratt bought it
in London. He is clever at inventing stories," whereupon Pearl flew into
such a rage that the elder woman never ventured to hint a doubt of the
cup. In her own queer way, and that was none of the most righteous, Mrs
Jeal was fond of Pearl. It is true that she regarded her as a half-baked
natural, but she would never let anyone but herself say so. Mrs Jeal was
superstitious, and kept Pearl in her humble cottage as a kind of
talisman against evil. Probably she felt it necessary for her to have
some pure and innocent thing beside her. The Colester people never
thought of this. They regarded Mrs Jeal as a hard-working, honest woman.
She was certainly all that, and more. What the "more" was Mrs Jeal never
explained. She was well able to hold her tongue.

Meanwhile the cup stood on the altar, and Pearl frequently stared at it
on her knees, dreaming Heaven knows what dreams, as its beauty flashed
in the sunlight. She attended to her duties as usual, and the vicar had
no reason to complain that the decking of the altar suffered. But the
insane girl passed hours before the cup, drinking in its lovely colour
and beauty of form. It was to her a kind of fetish, and she resented it
being touched even when Mr Tempest used it for the purpose for which it
had been presented. Pratt, hearing this, laughed, and was a little
touched. He was sorry for the girl, and pleased that he had been the
means of introducing a new element of beauty into her life.

One day while Pearl was on her knees with clasped hands, Sybil entered
the chapel. She had come here to meet Leo, for owing to the vigilance of
Mrs Gabriel, a meeting was not easily arranged. Whenever Leo and Sybil
were together, they would be joined by Mrs Gabriel, by Frank Hale or by
Edith. It was no use resenting this addition to the company, for the
inconvenient third would never take the hint. Consequently Leo met Sybil
by stealth, and as those who interfered rarely came to the chapel save
on Sunday, it was the chapel they chose for their meeting-place.
Certainly Pearl was always haunting the shrine, but she gave them no
trouble.

Although the day was warm, Pearl had draped a shawl of white Chinese
crape over her shoulders. This was a present from Mrs Jeal, who had many
such beautiful things, although she would never say how she came by
them. The girl still wore her favourite green dress and the straw hat,
which had a fresh wreath of oak leaves round it. Every day the wreath
was renewed, and some significance was attached to it by the wearer
which was not understood by her friends. With her eyes fixed on the cup,
and her hands clasped on her knee, she knelt on the lower step of the
altar with a wrapt expression and moving lips.

"And the foundations of the wall of the city were garnished with all
manner of precious stones," she murmured, and went on with the verse
enumerating the gems. Pearl knew much of the Bible by heart, and
frequently recited long passages to herself. But, like a parrot, she
could never be got to speak when she was wanted, and few knew the extent
of her knowledge. Sybil overheard the words, and guessed that the poor
creature applied them to the cup.

A strong ray of sunlight streamed in through a small plain glass window
in the chancel. It struck with a golden glory on the altar, and in its
burning light the cup flashed with many hues. The gems with which it was
adorned shot sparks of rainbow fire--the green or the emerald, the fiery
red of the ruby, the amethyst, purple in colour as a ripe grape, and
above all the fierce flash of a diamond that was in front of the vessel
immediately above the Latin inscription. Sybil did not wonder that Pearl
had a passion for the cup. It looked a singularly beautiful object
glowing in the splendour of the sunlight, and might well have been the
Holy Grail, as Pearl thought it was.

"What is it, Pearl?" she asked, drawing near, but speaking low so as not
to disturb the girl. For Pearl was like a wild animal, and shrank away
even at the slightest sound. And even as she spoke the sunlight passed
away.

"It is gone, gone!" cried Pearl, rising with a wild look. "The Master
has withdrawn His presence. I would that I could take it out where His
sun would ever shine. Did you see the angels, Miss Sybil?"

"What angels, Pearl?"

"In the beam of the Master's glory. They ascended and descended like the
angels of Jacob's dream. From the holy cup a shining pathway went up to
heaven, and now it is gone."

"The shining pathway will be there again at this same hour to-morrow,"
said Sybil, comforting the girl.

"But it endures only for a little while," sighed Pearl. "Oh, why doesn't
the Master take His cup into the bright sunshine where it could grow
warm and rejoice in the glory of day? And the sun would make it glitter
like a thousand fires, nor would the moon withhold her light."

"It is better here in this sacred place, Pearl."

"The roof shuts out the light, Miss Sybil." And the girl looked at the
great cup, now dull and colourless like a dead thing. "Only in the
sunshines does the Master put out His hand to grasp His cup."

"It is not the real cup, Pearl," said Sybil, incautiously.

"How dare you say so?" shrieked the girl, tearing herself away from
Sybil's grasp. "The vicar said it was the cup of the Master. I doubt you
are one of the evil things its presence makes to fear," and with an
indignant look Pearl moved swiftly down the aisle, murmuring as she
went. At the door she broke into a jubilant chant, and Sybil gathered
that she was recalling some lines of Tennyson which the vicar had
repeated in his lecture:--

    "Oh, yet methought I saw the Holy Grail,
    All palled in crimson samite, and around
    Great angels, awful shapes, and wings and eyes."

Half singing, half reciting, she passed out of the door and brushed by
Leo, who entered at the moment. Like a shadow she faded out of the
church, and left him staring after her. But high and sweet in the
distance rose her voice, singing like a lark.

"What's the matter with her now?" asked Leo as Sybil met him.

"Nothing much. She has a belief that yonder cup is the veritable Holy
Grail, and when I suggested that it was not she grew angry. But what a
memory she has!" added Sybil, linking her arm within that of Leo. "Did
you hear her recite Tennyson's lines? Well, she only heard them once
before."

"I daresay. But she cannot read, and those who can't read have always a
marvelous memory. But the wonder to me is that her poor, cracked brain
can hold anything. I know she's mad about the Grail, as she called that
cup. Mrs Jeal told me that Pearl expects the cup will some day be
snatched up to heaven to be used there. Poor soul!"

"It is a sweet belief, though," murmured Sybil; then, after a pause, she
drew Leo into the side chapel where the crusaders were set stiffly on
their tombs. "We are safe here, Leo. No one will come. Sit down beside
this pillar and let us talk. We have much to say to one another."

"And nothing very pleasant," sighed Leo, as he sat down, and slipped his
arm round the girl's waist. "Oh, Sybil, how foolish I have been getting
into debt and quarrelling with Mrs Gabriel! It will end with my going
away to the war. Indeed, I intended to have gone this week, only I could
not leave you, and besides--" Here Leo hesitated.

"What is it?" she asked, noticing that he looked nervous.

"There is a chance of my debts being paid."

"Mrs Gabriel?"

"No, indeed. At first she said she would pay. Now she has changed her
mind. But Hale has offered to lend me the money."

Sybil looked anxious. "I don't like that," she said decidedly. "It is
not like him to be so generous."

"My dear," said Leo, taking her hand, "you are too hard upon poor Frank.
I have known him now for many years, and it is reasonable enough that he
should be willing to help an old playfellow."

"It is not like him," insisted Miss Tempest. "I hope he is not laying a
trap for you, Leo. He is spiteful enough to do that."

"And when he has caught me in his trap, Sybil?"

She shook her head. "It is easy laughing, but I don't like your
accepting a favour from that cross-grained little man."

"You are uncharitable, my dear."

"I don't want to be. I am sure I am sorry poor Sir Frank is so
afflicted, but I really wish he had a sweeter nature. Besides," her eyes
fell and she began to play with a button on Leo's coat, "he is--I
think--too fond of me."

"Can anyone be too fond of you?" asked Haverleigh, not taking in the
real significance of this remark.

"You do not understand, Leo. I mean that I think he intends to ask me to
be his wife. Now don't be angry, for I am not sure if he will. It is
only a kind of instinct I have that such is his intention."

Haverleigh, confident in his good looks and virile strength, laughed
good-humouredly. "I am not angry, my dear. The idea of that wretched
little creature thinking of marriage!"

"Who is uncharitable now, Mr Haverleigh?"

The young man laughed. "Fairly hit," he said; "but really, Sybil, I
don't think you need trouble about Hale. No man of his build and
weakness would insult a woman by asking her hand in marriage. He is a
queer little creature, but for all his cross-grained temper his heart is
in the right place. I am sorry for him, and I feel his kindness in
offering to help me. To be sure he is well off, but the kindness is all
the same."

"And what about his sister? She is in love with you."

"So Mrs Gabriel says," responded Leo, coolly. "But that is all
nonsense--much the same as your suspicions of Hale. Why, the girl never
opens her mouth to me; she only looks and looks."

"With her soul in her eyes!"

"It must be a dull soul then, for I see no gleam in those eyes of hers."

"You are most unsuspicious, Leo," said Sybil at length. "I have a kind
of feeling that we are on the eve of some trouble. Have you noticed that
until we found out this quiet spot Mrs Gabriel or Sir Frank and his
sister always joined us?"

"I noticed that, but it meant nothing." Leo paused and then continued,
"I know that my mother wants me to marry Edith, but I told her plainly
that I would not, and she has agreed to let me have my own way."

"That is not like her," said Sybil, after a pause. "She always wants to
have _her_ own way."

"I think she is beginning to find me one too many for her, my love. It
is this way, Sybil. I told her that if she went on treating me so badly
I would enlist. That frightened her, and she has been kinder since."

"I don't trust her, no more than I do Sir Frank. Are you going to take
this money?"

"As a loan I am, but I hope to pay it back."

"How are you going to manage?"

"Oh, Pratt has promised to make it right with my mother. He has a
wonderful influence with her. You know he has been her friend for years,
and she has great reliance on his judgment. I told him all my trouble,
and he has promised to help me. It is not the first time he has done so,
Sybil. Several times last year he lent me money."

"I know he is a kind man," said Sybil; "but, Leo, I do wish you--"

He stopped her mouth with a kiss. "I know what you are going to say,"
was his half-laughing, half-serious remark, "and, indeed, my love, I am
not worthy of you. But now I am a man, and I intend to put away all
childish things--by which I mean the follies of youth. I have done
nothing very wrong, Sybil. Indeed, my wickedness has been of the mildest
description. I understood Mrs Gabriel to say that I was her heir, and so
I thought I had a right to spend money. I overstepped the mark, and I
own my fault. I should have been more sensible, but, indeed, Sybil, it
is difficult for a man brought up in luxury to know when to stop. If my
home had only been made more attractive to me, I should never have
behaved so foolishly. But that page of my life is turned down now. It
will close with the payment of this three hundred pounds, and henceforth
I shall try and deserve your love."

"That is right, darling. But don't you think it would be better to get
Mr Pratt to see your mother and induce her to give you the money than
take it from Sir Frank?"

"No, my dear," said Leo, decidedly; "if my mother thinks that I am able
to pay the money myself, she will be afraid lest she will lose me
altogether and be more amenable to reason. I have arranged it all with
Pratt. Hale is to lend me the money next week. I pay my debts. Then I
shall get him to speak to Mrs Gabriel."

"Does Mr Pratt know that Sir Frank proposes to lend you the money?"

"No; I did not tell him that at Frank's special request. I merely said
that I would put off paying the matter for a month. In the meantime he
will speak to my mother."

"It seems all wrong," said Sybil, with a sigh. "I can't help thinking
that you are behaving foolishly."

"I hope not, Sybil. But I must manage Mrs Gabriel somehow. I cannot have
her treating me so badly. Sometimes she really seems to hate me. When my
debts are paid I shall look about and see what I can do to earn my own
living. I am half inclined to enlist in the Yeomanry."

"Leo! Leo! Don't do that!" Sybil seized his arm. "I should lose you."

"My dear, it is the only thing I am fit for. My mother would not let me
have a profession, and I am not clever enough to make money. I should
have gone into the army long ago. Indeed, it was my wish, only Mrs
Gabriel would not consent. I think my father must have come of a
fighting stock, Sybil, as I feel so inclined to be a soldier."

"The Haverleighs were always simple country squires, Leo. I have heard
my father speak of them often. There were no soldiers amongst them!"

"Then I don't know where my aunt got her fierceness. By the way, Sybil,
don't you get mixed by the many different ways I refer to that lady; I
call her my mother, my aunt, and very often Mrs Gabriel."

"I think the last name suits her best," said Sybil, "she is such a hard
woman. Still, she has been kind to you, Leo."

"I don't quite agree with you there," he answered a trifle bitterly. "If
she took me in, she has made me feel my position. No, Sybil, I hope in
some way to make a position for myself. Then Mrs Gabriel may be proud of
me. At present I am only an object of her charity. Let me go for a
soldier, my darling."

"You must wait for a time, Leo," entreated Sybil. "If you are really
bent upon enlisting, I shall not try and dissuade you. But, oh! how
unhappy I shall be when you are in South Africa!"

"Come, come, you will never do for a soldier's wife. Is it not better
for me to be fighting for my country than staying here eating the bread
of idleness? I am sure you would be prouder of me dead on the
battlefield than to see me a hanger-on here."

"Yes," said Sybil bravely, "I should."

"In that case I shall enlist." And after taking her in his arms, he
kissed her tenderly. "I shall be here for another week. Let us make the
best of our time."

Hand in hand they passed from the chapel, but at the door they suddenly
separated. Mrs Gabriel was coming up the steps, and cast a cold smile at
the pair. "I want to see you, Leo, when you can spare the time," she
said.

"I will come with you now," said Haverleigh. "And you, Sybil?"

"I want to find Pearl Darry," said Miss Tempest; "she is offended with
me, and I must make my peace with her. Good-day, Mrs Gabriel!"

"Good-day!" said Mrs Gabriel in her stiffest manner. Then, as Leo walked
down the road beside her, back to the castle, she added, "I understand
that you are engaged, Leo, and without my consent?"

"I am sorry you should be vexed," he said formally; "but I cannot
sacrifice my life's happiness even for you."

"Bless the boy! I don't want you to do that," said Mrs Gabriel, sharply.
"And about this enlisting?"

"I intend to enlist."

Mrs Gabriel drew a long breath, and walked on in silence for a few
moments. "Well," she said at length, "I think it is about the best thing
you could do. Your debts?"

"I shall see that they are paid," said Leo, calmly.

"Oh, indeed! And where will you get the money?"

"From a friend."

Mrs Gabriel again became silent. "I don't think you are treating me
altogether fairly, Leo."

"I am willing to do whatever you think best, mother. But I am ashamed to
live on your charity any longer. However, I promise you one thing. I
shall not enlist for at least a month."

Mrs Gabriel laughed silently. Many things might happen in a month.




CHAPTER VI

TROUBLE


Still anxious to secure Mr Pratt for a son-in-law, Mrs Bathurst resolved
to make some return to his hospitality. Her husband had very little
money, and the lady was unable to give a dinner-party on account of the
cost. Also Pratt had "done things so well"--so she put it--that she was
unwilling to provoke comparisons. Nevertheless, some sort of
entertainment had to be given, and after much reflection and many
consultations with Peggy, it was decided that it should take the form of
a picnic. The scenery around Colester was beautiful, the weather was
fine, and the cost of an open-air entertainment would be comparatively
small. Mrs Bathurst therefore issued cards.

"We must make Mr Pratt one of ourselves," said the energetic lady; "and
although we cannot hope to vie with his luxury, we can at least bestow
what we have with liberal hearts."

What Mrs Bathurst had in the way of food was principally sandwiches--the
cheapest form of nourishment she could think of. As she had decided that
the picnic should take place on the moor, where there were no roads, it
was not necessary to hire vehicles to convey the party to the scene of
revelry. "A good brisk walk will give everyone an appetite," said the
hostess, "and the air will do us all good." Thus it came about that all
those who had partaken of Pratt's hospitality found themselves the
guests of Mrs Bathurst. Her husband, who characterised the picnic as
foolery, was not present.

By a dexterous arrangement the good lady contrived that Peggy should
find herself in the company of Pratt. The little man was as neat and
dapper as ever, and as Peggy strolled beside him over the heather, she
could not but admit that he was a pleasant companion. The principal meal
of the day had been devoured, and Mrs Bathurst's guests had been sent
hungry away. Tea and a limited quantity of sandwiches were scarcely
sufficient for appetites sharpened by the keen moorland air. However,
there was nothing else; and now the company, split up into small
parties, wandered here, there and everywhere. Peggy was with Pratt. He
saw how Mrs Bathurst had manoeuvred to bring this about, and resolved
to make use of the opportunity in a way of which the schemer would not
approve.

"Most beautiful place this, Miss Peggy," said Pratt, glancing round,
"but I fear the company is not to your mind."

"Oh! Mr Pratt, how can you say that!" said poor Peggy, divided between a
desire to keep him at a distance and to avoid giving offence to her
mother. "I am very pleased to be with you."

"Well, I don't know, Miss Peggy. I am not a parson, you know."

Peggy laughed and blushed. Her secret was everybody's property, and it
was well known in Colester that she and Raston were attached to one
another. Even Mrs Bathurst knew, but she was resolved to crush this
affection before it grew too strong for her control. As a matter of fact
it had already passed that stage, but Mrs Bathurst was not aware of
that. "Mr Raston is quite happy with Miss Hale," said Peggy, frankly.
She found Pratt sympathetic and did not mind speaking freely to him.

"And I think Miss Hale would rather be with young Haverleigh," said her
companion, "but he is with Miss Tempest."

"And with Sir Frank Hale."

"Who is the inconvenient third, Miss Peggy? We are all at sixes and
sevens, I fancy. Even Mrs Gabriel and the vicar are badly matched.
However, in a little time I shall ask Mr Raston to join us."

"Not on my account," cried Miss Bathurst, hastily.

"I understand, your mother would not be pleased."

"Mr Pratt!" Peggy bit her lip. "Really, Mr Pratt!"

"My dear young lady," said Pratt, with a twinkle, "do you think that I
flatter myself that a battered old man like myself is your choice? No,
indeed; although your mother would have it so. Like draws to like, and
if I can bring it about you shall be Mrs Raston."

"No chance of that," sighed Peggy. "Mr Raston is too poor!"

"Oh, no. He has three hundred a year of his own, and it is more than
probable that when Mr Tempest dies, Mrs Gabriel will give him the
living. Then why won't your mother consent?"

"She was not opposed to my engagement until--until--" Peggy hesitated.

"Until I arrived," finished Pratt. "Set your mind at rest, Miss Peggy; I
am not a marrying man; I have seen too much of the world."

Peggy laughed and looked at him. His pleasant face was turned towards
her, and she saw on his cheek a mark she had never noticed before. It
was a tattooed star, very small and placed just under the jawbone.
Unless looked for very closely it was apt to escape notice. But there it
was, and being so close to the man, Peggy saw it very plainly. Perhaps
she saw it the more clearly because Pratt held his head at a particular
angle. He noticed the curiosity in her eyes, and flushed a trifle. He
knew what she was looking at. "I had that done in the South Seas," said
Pratt, rubbing the star; "foolish thing to have had done, but I was a
reckless young sailor then. And see here, Miss Peggy," he rolled up his
sleeve, that of the left arm. Immediately below the elbow there was a
beautifully tattooed snake, half red and half blue. "That was done in
Japan," he said.

"You seem to have been everywhere, Mr Pratt?"

"I have. That is why I have come down here to end my days in peace. I
want everybody hereabouts to like me--you included, Miss Peggy."

"I _do_ like you, Mr Pratt," protested Peggy. "Not, of course, like--"

"I understand. Well, I shall speak to your mother about Mr Raston. Oh,
do not look so afraid, Miss Peggy. I know very well what I am about. I
have managed much more obstinate people in my time. All you have to do
is to look pleased as though you were delighted with me. That will put
your mother on the wrong scent."

"Harold will not like it," objected Peggy, as they returned to join the
others. "Harold is Mr Raston."

"I gathered that from your blush," said Pratt, with a chuckle. "Well,
leave it to me. There is Harold making signals. What is up now?"

Mrs Bathurst informed them as soon as they came within earshot. "Come
here at once, Peggy," she screamed. "Mr Pratt, come here! Mr Raston is
about to take a group with his kodak. It will be a memorial of my
picnic."

The American did not seem pleased. For the moment his usually active
tongue was silent, and he seemed unwilling to form part of the group. "I
do not care about having my likeness taken, Mrs Bathurst," he said.

"But indeed you must--in the group," said the lady, vigorously; "dear Mr
Pratt, do not spoil the little memorial of my picnic."

"It can be taken without me, Mrs Bathurst."

"That would be the play of Hamlet with the Prince left out," replied the
lady, gracefully. "Mrs Gabriel, add your entreaties."

"Oh! Mr Pratt will not listen to me," said Mrs Gabriel, severely, "I
know him of old. He can be obstinate when he chooses."

Pratt laughed but gave her a sly look which made her wince. Strong woman
as she was, there was something about this artless, good-natured little
man which made her turn white and draw her breath in quick gasps. "I
consent to be taken," said Pratt, withdrawing his gaze, "if I am
permitted to arrange the group myself."

"Certainly," said Raston, brightly. He had been exchanging a few words
with Peggy. "Arrange it as you please."

Leo, who had Hale at his elbow, ranged alongside the American. "You know
where to place me," he said softly, and Pratt nodded. It was mainly for
that reason that he wished to arrange the group.

The result of his efforts was that Leo and Sybil were together, much to
the wrath of the baronet and Mrs Gabriel. The others Pratt scattered
anyhow, and placed himself at the back. Raston did not approve of this.

"You can hardly be seen, Mr Pratt," he said. "Please come more forward."

Pratt hesitated, but, catching sight of a cold smile on the face of Mrs
Gabriel, he gave her a defiant look and placed himself in the position
indicated by Mr Raston's outstretched finger. Then the curate adjusted
his kodak and took three pictures. He also had to take a fourth, as Mrs
Bathurst wanted herself to be seen making tea, surrounded by her guests.
"To recall a happy, happy day," she explained.

"You are fond of photography, Raston?" said Pratt, when this was over.

"Very. I have taken pictures all round the place."

"And the other day he took a picture of the cup you gave," put in Sybil.

"I guess that's kind of him," said Pratt, gnawing his lip. "I suppose,"
he was addressing Raston, "that you send copies of these to your
friends?"

"Indeed I do not," replied the curate, cheerily, "I take only a few
copies and place them in an album. Certainly I have given a few to Miss
Bathurst."

"Natural, very natural," said Pratt, gravely; "you must give me one of
the group you took just now." And without waiting for an answer he
turned away. Somehow he seemed relieved to hear that the photographs
were not likely to be sent round the country. And all the time Mrs
Gabriel, who had listened to this conversation, heard it with a cold
smile. She seemed rather pleased that Pratt should be upset, and upset
he was, a remarkable thing in so calm a man.

After a time Leo and Sybil slipped away, and were some distance across
the moor before their absence was noticed. There was no chance of
following them save in the most pointed manner, so Sir Frank, with a
scowl, devoted himself to his sister. She was seated on the heather,
staring after Leo with a despairing look. Frank patted her hand kindly.
"He will come back, Edith," he whispered.

"No," she replied, quietly, "he will never come back. Sybil has taken
him away for ever. Don't worry about me, Frank."

"Oh! as to that," retorted Frank, savagely, "I approve of that no more
than you do. If you want to marry Leo, I wish to make Sybil my wife."

"I am afraid neither of us will get our wishes," said Edith, with a
sigh.

"We'll see about that," muttered Frank; "at all costs I'll stop that
marriage. Sybil must become my wife."

Mrs Gabriel overheard him. "Make your mind easy, Frank," she said, "I
can put an end to this." She cast a look at Pratt. "I could have done so
long ago but for--" She stopped.

"But for what, Mrs Gabriel?"

"Nothing! nothing!" she said hastily. "A matter which does not concern
you, Frank. But it is time to adopt strong measures. Mr Tempest"--she
went to the vicar--"come for a stroll with me. I wish to speak to you."

"About parish matters?" asked the vicar, rather nervously, for he knew
Mrs Gabriel's tongue and temper. "Won't you speak to Raston?"

"It is not about parish matters," said Mrs Gabriel. "It is concerning
your daughter and Leo."

Mr Tempest looked up sharply. "Indeed!" he said, with quite a new note
in his voice. "Nothing wrong, I trust?"

"I shall leave you to judge of that," replied Mrs Gabriel. "Come,
vicar!" and she carried the old man away. Hale started after them
distrustfully.

"What does she intend to do now?" he muttered. "I intend to take my own
way in this matter, and I don't trust her. Too clever by half!"

Meantime Leo and Sybil, not thinking of the envy their happiness caused,
were walking slowly along. Every now and then they would turn and look
at one another and smile. The action seemed childish, but those who are
deeply in love are often nothing but children. Then they came to talk of
their future.

"When are you going away, Leo?" asked Sybil.

"I go to Town next Monday," replied Leo. "I start at seven o'clock for
Portfront, and there take the steamer that leaves at ten."

"And the money for your debts?"

"That will be all right. Frank has promised to give it me this week. But
the queer part is, Sybil, that he will not give me a cheque."

"Why not?" she asked, stopping abruptly.

"I don't know. Some whim on his part. He intends that I shall take it in
sovereigns--yes, the whole three hundred pounds! There is a treasure to
travel with! However, I shall take it to London and pay it into my bank
there. Then I can settle with my creditors by cheque."

"Does he give any reason why he wants you to take it in gold?"

"No! But he is a queer chap, although a kind one. I must take the money
as he chooses to give it. But do you know, Sybil, I believe Hale has the
instincts of a miser, and likes to look at gold. I should not be
surprised if he had a chest of sovereigns in his house. I expect that
is why he gives me specie instead of a cheque or notes."

"I don't like it at all," said Sybil, decisively.

"There you go with your distrust!" said Leo, good-humouredly. "You will
not make allowance for the queerness of poor Frank. Never mind, I will
take the money as he chooses to give it. When my creditors are paid I
shall see about enlisting."

"You have made up your mind to that?"

"Fully. Mrs Gabriel understands as much. And I do not think, Sybil,"
said Leo, bending down, "that you will seek to dissuade me."

Sybil paused for a moment. "No," she said at length, and her voice was
firm, "it is a good thing for you to take up the burden of life, Leo.
Even if you die in South Africa it will be better than that you should
live on the charity of Mrs Gabriel. I admire your spirit."

Leo shook his head sadly. "Don't admire anything about me, dear," he
said. "Long, long ago, I should have earned my own living. I have been a
fool too long. But now, Sybil, I intend to work my hardest for you. I am
sure to get my commission, as there are plenty knocking about; and when
I return, your father will consent to our marriage, and Mrs Gabriel will
forgive me."

"I don't think my father would ever object, Leo," said Sybil. "He would
not care if you had little money. All he asks from anyone who marries me
is that they come of a good stock. He has much family pride, you know."

"Then he will easily be satisfied with the Haverleighs. They have been
established in the place down yonder for centuries. I did not know,
though, that he attached much value to pedigree, Sybil."

"It is his one failing. He would not mind if I married a pauper, so long
as my future husband had good blood in his veins. The one thing he would
not permit would be that I should marry what he calls a 'base-born' man.
But, of course, there is no danger of that."

"No; I think my pedigree will satisfy Mr Tempest. But it is strange that
he should attach such value to race."

"I'm not so sure of that," said Sybil, slowly. "I have a great opinion
of race myself, Leo. But, come," she broke off, "there is my father
waving to me. I wonder what he wants. To go home, I expect."

Mr Tempest did, indeed, want to go home, and, moreover, he seemed by no
means anxious for the company of Leo. Quite different to his usual self,
he was stiff and cold towards the young man. Mrs Gabriel saw this, and
smiled. Not in vain had she adopted the stronger measures of which she
had spoken to Sir Frank. However, she gave Leo no time to talk to the
vicar, but took possession of him and threw him into the company of Miss
Hale. Leo was obliged to talk to the girl, for, although she bored him
greatly, she was too unoffending a creature to hurt. Frank saw how
dexterously Mrs Gabriel had managed, and came up to her. "What have you
been doing?" he asked in a low voice.

"Talking Mr Tempest over to my views about this marriage. Set your mind
at rest, Frank. Leo will never become the husband of Sybil now."

Sure enough matters seemed to be quite in Mrs Gabriel's favour. On
arriving home Mr Tempest had a scene with his daughter, and forbade her
to think any more of Leo. "Had I known of this before, it would not have
gone so far," said the vicar; "but I have been blind. Fortunately, Mrs
Gabriel has opened my eyes. It must stop!"

"I am engaged to Leo Haverleigh," said Sybil, firmly.

"Nothing of the sort!" retorted the vicar. "I won't have it, I tell you.
I do not consider that Leo is a fit husband for you."

"And what is your reason, father?"

"I decline to give it you. Later on I may do so, but not now. Please do
not argue, Sybil. I won't hear a word. You are neither to see Leo again
nor are you to talk to him. I won't have it."

"But, father--"

"That's quite enough, Sybil. Not another word." And, as the girl knew of
the rages into which her father was capable of falling, she said nothing
more at the time lest she might provoke one. But this sudden change of
front on the part of her easy-going father bewildered her.

Leo was also at his wits' end to understand the new state of things.
From the day of the picnic he never had a chance of seeing Sybil alone,
nor was he asked, as formerly, to the Vicarage. Mr Tempest was coldness
itself when they met, and appeared to wish to see as little of him as
possible. Leo asked Mrs Gabriel what was the meaning of these things,
but could get no answer. She only laughed insultingly, and said that Mr
Tempest was of her opinion about this ridiculous marriage. Leo saw Mr
Pratt, and consulted him.

"I guess you'd better leave it to me," said Pratt, who was on the side
of the lovers. "I'll bring Mrs Gabriel to reason."

"But it is more the vicar that needs bringing to reason," argued Leo.
"He has changed wholly towards me."

"Perhaps he has heard of your debts," suggested Pratt, pondering.

"What if he had! He knows that I am not so wild as everyone tries to
make out. No. It is something else. I believe my mother has been saying
something to him about me."

Pratt looked up suddenly, but his face did not change. "I'll see Mrs
Gabriel," he said calmly. "If she has said anything to the vicar likely
to do you harm, I'll get her to tell me. I have known her for many
years, Leo, and she often takes my advice."

"I know. She has the very highest opinion of you, Pratt," said the
innocent Leo; whereat Pratt chuckled.

"I'll tell you what," he said. "I'll speak to Mrs Gabriel about your
debts at the same time."

"No; don't do that!" cried Leo in alarm. "You will only weaken my
position with her. I want to settle these debts without her knowledge.
I can raise the money, as I told you. Later on, when she comes round, I
can get her to give me the sum and settle. She will surely do that when
she hears that I have enlisted."

"I daresay. In fact, I'm sure she will," said Pratt, with his queer
smile. "Who is going to lend you the money meantime?"

"I can't tell you that, Mr Pratt," said Leo, with dignity.

"You might tell it to a worse person," said Pratt, rather offended.
"However, keep your secret; I'll do what I can."

"Don't be offended, Pratt. Indeed, as soon as possible I'll tell you."

"There! There! Don't make a fuss over it," he said testily. "I know you
are not such a fool as people think you are. And to tell you the truth,
Leo, if you can pay these debts independently of Mrs Gabriel, I fancy
she will think all the more of you. I don't offer to help you myself,
because if she asks me I want to be able to say 'no' for reasons which I
will explain later. But I tell you what, Leo. If, when you get these
matters settled and enlist, Mrs Gabriel won't come round, I'll give you
the money myself to repay the loan, and fit you out for South Africa."

"You are indeed a friend," cried Leo, with emotion, and the two men
shook hands. They understood each other very well.

But all this time Leo was pining to get a sight of Sybil. It is true
that he sometimes saw her in the distance; but she was always with her
father, and he could not come near. However, it came about that Sybil
induced Pearl to take a note to Leo. She explained in it that her father
had taken a dislike to the marriage, and that the only chance of things
being arranged lay in Leo going away for a time. Several notes passed
between the lovers, and then their kindly messenger fell ill, but not
before it was understood that Sybil was to leave a note or so in a
certain crack in the chapel wall, which they could use as a post-office.
And out of that subterfuge all the subsequent trouble arose.

Pearl was really ill. She was in the habit of wandering about at night,
and as the wet weather was coming she had been caught on the moor in a
thunderstorm. Now she was laid up with a severe cold. Raston was
particularly anxious about her. Leo met him one day, and the curate was
red with indignation. It seemed he had good cause for it.

"Did you ever hear of anything so wicked, Haverleigh?" he asked.

"What is the matter now?"

"Why, that poor mad child! She is very ill, as you know, but is getting
on all right; Dr James says she is well on the way to recovery. Now Mrs
Jeal took it into her head that the girl was dying, and has been
frightening her with stories of eternal torment. You know, Pearl always
believed that she would go to heaven, and be at the Supper with the
Master, as she calls Our Lord. She never had any doubt. Now these
gruesome stories of Mrs Jeal's have made her doubt if she will be saved.
In fact, she believes now that unless the Master gives her some sign she
will be lost!"

"How cruel of Mrs Jeal," said Leo, angrily.

"Oh! I believe she did it for the best. She is fond of Pearl, and kind
to her. But you know she came from the north, and she holds to that
gloomy Calvinistic religion that has terrified so many people. I gave
her a good talking to, and she has consented to leave Pearl alone. All
the same, she still holds that the child is a lost soul. I have been
trying to pacify the poor creature. She is haunted by terrible fears."

"Show her the cup!" suggested Leo. "She has such a belief in it as the
Holy Grail that it may soothe her."

"A good idea," said the curate. "I will ask Mr Tempest about it. But I
cannot take it to her till Monday. To-morrow I preach in the evening. I
hear you are going up to Town."

"On Monday morning early. When you next hear of me, Raston, I may have
enlisted."

"And a good thing too," said Raston. "But that I am a clergyman I should
have been a soldier. Good-day! Come to church to-morrow."

And to church Leo went to see Sybil in her pew. He also went to the
evening service. On Monday he departed for London. But no one heeded his
going. The village was excited by a rumour that the cup had been stolen.
On hearing the report Mr Tempest went to the church. It was true. The
cup was gone.




CHAPTER VII

A NINE DAYS' WONDER


Ill news spreads like circles on water when a stone is thrown in.
Barker, the old sexton, a white-haired, crabbed sinner, was the first to
discover the loss. He had gone to the chapel at seven in the morning to
make ready the church for early celebration, and on going to the altar
he had noticed that the cup was missing. Nothing else had been touched.
At once the old man had trotted off to see the vicar, and in a quavering
voice related what had taken place, finishing with a hope that he would
not be blamed for the loss.

"You locked the chapel up last night?" asked Mr Tempest, sorely
distressed, for indeed this was sacrilege and not a common robbery.

"'Deed and I did!" replied Barker, sturdily. "And I took the key home
with me. My wife saw me place it on its nail just inside the door."

"Was the church door locked?"

"Fast locked, sir. And all the windows fastened. I went round the chapel
to see if I could find any sign."

"When did you leave the church last night, Barker?"

"At nine o'clock, after I made everything right for the night. It was
after evening service, if you mind, Mr Tempest. Then I went home and put
the key in its place. My Joan and I went then to a neighbour for a bit
of supper. We got home again about eleven."

"And the key was still on its nail?"

"Well, sir," said Barker, scratching his white locks, "I didn't look.
But it was there this morning; so it could not have been taken away.
Besides, my Joan locked the door of our cottage. No one could have got
in."

"The cup was on the altar when you left the church last night?"

"On the altar where it ought to be. But this morning it's nowhere to be
seen. I hope you don't think it's my fault, sir."

"No," replied Mr Tempest. "I cannot see that you are to blame. But this
is a very serious matter, Barker. I did not know that there was anyone
in Colester who would have committed such a crime."

"It's terrible," sighed the sexton. "And what that poor lass Pearl will
say I don't know."

"She must not hear of it," said Raston, who entered at the moment. "She
thinks so much of the cup that in her present state of health its loss
may do her much harm."

"Is she very ill, Raston?"

"Yes, sir. Much worse than she was last night. But Mrs Jeal is giving
her all attention, and I have sent Dr James. But about this loss, sir?"

"We had better go to the chapel, Raston, and see with our own eyes."

Followed by Barker, still protesting that it was not his fault, the
vicar and the curate went up to the church. It was surrounded with a
crowd of people, for the news had spread quickly. Some looked in at the
door, but no one had ventured to enter, as each one was afraid if he did
an accusation might be levelled against him. Mr Tempest told Harris, the
local policeman, to keep back the crowd, and entered the chapel followed
by his curate. All was as Barker had said. There was the altar covered
with its white cloth, and with the withered flowers still in the vases.
The gilded crucifix was also there; but not a sign of the cup. It had
vanished entirely. Tempest sighed.

"A terrible thing for the man who stole it," he muttered. "This is no
common robbery. Raston, let us examine the church."

The two went round it carefully, but could find nothing for a long time
likely to enlighten them as to the cause of the robbery. Then in the
lepers' window, a small opening at the side of the chancel, Raston
discovered that some of the stones had been chipped. "I believe the
church was entered through this window," said Raston, but the vicar was
inclined to doubt.

"The window is so small that no grown man could have got through," he
said.

They went outside, and certainly against the wall and immediately under
the window were marks, and scratches of boots, as though someone might
have climbed the wall. Also the sides of the window were broken, as
though a way had been found through. The lepers' window was so small
that no care had been taken to put in glass or iron bars. Besides, no
one had ever expected that the chapel would be robbed. In all its
centuries of history nothing up till now had ever been taken from it.
And now the most precious thing of all had vanished!

"And during my occupation of the Vicarage," said Mr Tempest. "It is
really terrible!"

However, in spite of the loss, he held the service as usual, and as a
great number of people, attracted by the news of the robbery, had come,
the chapel was quite full. Service over, Tempest returned to the
Vicarage, and found Mr Pratt waiting to see him.

"This is a nice thing!" said Pratt, looking annoyed, as well he might,
seeing that his magnificent gift had disappeared. "I did not know that
you had thieves in the parish, Mr Tempest!"

"Neither did I," groaned the vicar, sitting down. "Hitherto we have been
singularly exempt from crime. And now one of the very worst sort has
befallen us! Not a mere robbery, Mr Pratt. Sacrilege, sir, sacrilege!"

The American turned rather white as Tempest spoke. He had not regarded
the robbery save as a common one. The idea that it was sacrilege placed
it in a new light. Yet Mr Pratt was sharp enough to have guessed this
before. The wonder was that he had not done so.

"What are you going to do?" he asked, after a pause.

"Raston has sent for the police at Portfront. I expect the inspector
will come over this afternoon."

Pratt shrugged his shoulders. "I don't think much of the police," he
said. "The metropolitan detectives are stupid enough; but the provincial
police--oh, Lord! I beg your pardon, Mr Tempest; I forgot myself."

"No matter, no matter," said Tempest, wearily. "I can think of nothing
save our great loss. And your gift, too, Mr Pratt! Terrible!"

"Well," said the American, cheerfully, "if this cup can't be found, I
guess I must find you another one."

"The cup _shall_ be found," cried the vicar, vehemently. "The culprit
must belong to this parish, else he would not have known the lepers'
window in the chapel. We shall find the guilty person yet, Mr Pratt."

"I hope so," said Pratt, with another shrug; "but he seems to have got
away very cleverly. I shall see you this afternoon when you interview
the inspector, Mr Tempest. I should like to have a hand in the
discovery."

"Certainly, certainly. Who but you, the giver of the cup, should wish to
help? Come here this afternoon, Mr Pratt."

As Pratt left the Vicarage he met Sybil, who looked sad. "Don't take on
so, Miss Tempest," he said; "we'll find the cup yet."

"I was not thinking so much of that," explained Sybil; "but this morning
my poor dear Leo went away."

"When is he coming back?"

"Towards the end of next week. I wonder who can have taken the cup?"

Pratt sneered, an unusual thing for so good-natured a man. "No doubt the
Portfront police will tell us," he said; "but I haven't much opinion of
law officers myself, Miss Sybil. I once lost a lot of gems in London,
and the thief was never found. Are you fond of gems? Come to my house
and I'll show you my collection. I have several thousand pounds' worth."

"Is it not dangerous to keep them in your house after this robbery?"

Pratt laughed. "I don't think a thief would steal them so easily as the
cup!" he laughed. "I have a good dog and a capital revolver. No, Miss
Sybil, I can look after my property well, I assure you."

When he went away Sybil sighed and sought her room. The departure of Leo
had left her very sad. She did not know what would become of him. He
would pay his debts and then enlist for South Africa. In that case she
would not see him again for months. Perhaps never--for it might be that
some bullet would lay him low on the veldt. However, for the sake of her
father, she strove to assume a light-hearted demeanour. The vicar felt
the loss of the cup keenly. And although Sybil thought he had treated
her hardly in her love affair, she laid all thoughts of self aside so as
to comfort him in his trouble.

As for Pratt, he walked back to his own house. At the foot of the Castle
Hill he met Mrs Gabriel, who seemed to be in a great state of
indignation. As usual, her anger was directed against Leo.

"He came to me last night and said that he was going up to London to pay
his debts. This morning he went off at seven without taking leave. Now,
Mr Pratt, you have been giving him the money to pay his debts."

"Indeed I have not, Mrs Gabriel," said Pratt, quite prepared for this
question. "I have not given him a sixpence."

"Then where did he get so large a sum?" asked the lady, anxiously.

"I don't know. He told me that someone had lent it to him."

"A likely story! As if anyone here would trust him with money without a
guarantee! Mr Pratt--" Here Mrs Gabriel stopped and her face went white.
A thought had struck her and she was about to speak. But she saved
herself in time and stared at her companion.

"What is the matter?" said Pratt, anxiously. He thought she would faint,
a weakness he had never hitherto associated with Mrs Gabriel.

"Nothing," she replied in a strangled voice. "But Leo--I must see
Frank," and without another word she hurried away.

Pratt stared after her as he could not conjecture what she meant. Then
he shrugged his shoulders and went back to The Nun's House. That same
afternoon he called again at the Vicarage, and there found Mr Tempest in
consultation with a grey-haired man whom he introduced as Inspector
German. The police officer, who had a shrewd face with keen eyes, nodded
in a friendly manner. "I understand you gave this cup to the chapel, Mr
Pratt," he said. "Pity it is lost."

"A great pity," replied Pratt, who was making a thorough examination of
the man, and now seemed much more at ease than when he had entered. "I
hope the thief has gone away, however. I have in my house several
thousand pounds' worth of gems, and I don't want him to come after
them."

"How do you know it was a man?" asked German, quietly.

"I don't know," responded the American, with a stare and a laugh. "I
only speak as others do. For my part, I believe that there were two
people concerned in the robbery--a man and a boy."

"Certainly a boy," replied Tempest, looking up. "No one but a small boy
could have forced himself through that window."

"Then you don't think, Mr Tempest, that a woman can have had anything to
do with the matter?"

Tempest stared. The idea seemed ridiculous. "I do not think a woman
would commit so wicked an act," he said stiffly.

"Oh, as to that," interposed Pratt, "women are as wicked as men, and
worse when the fit takes them. But I see what Mr Inspector means. He has
heard of Pearl Darry's devotion to the cup."

"It was not Pearl!" cried Mr Tempest, indignantly. "I am sure of that.
Why, the poor child regarded that cup as something too holy to be
touched--as it was," added the vicar, reverently.

"Well," said German, after a pause, "I have been talking to your
villagers about her. It seems that she was always haunting the chapel
and looking at the cup. She might have been seized with a desire to have
it for her very own. She is insane, I believe, and insane people have
very mad ideas. Also she is small and could easily have forced herself
through the lepers' window, of which she would know the position."

Pratt looked with contempt at the officer. He was even more stupid than
he had given him credit for. "You can rest easy, Mr Inspector," he said.
"It was not Pearl who stole my cup. She has been ill in bed for the last
few days and unable to move, as Mrs Jeal and Dr James will tell you."

"I must make certain of that myself," said the inspector. "Will you come
with me, Mr Pratt?"

"Not I," replied the American. "I think you are going on a wild-goose
chase. The best thing for you to do, Mr Inspector, is to see if any
vagabonds have been in the village lately."

"I have already done so," replied German, coolly; "and the villagers
assure me that no stranger has been seen hereabouts for some days.
However, I am willing to give this girl the benefit of the doubt. But I
must see her."

As Pratt still refused to come and Tempest was unwilling to call at the
cottage of Mrs Jeal on such an errand, the inspector went himself. He
found no difficulty in entering, as Raston was at the door. All the
same the curate was indignant on hearing the accusation. He took German
into the sitting-room, but refused--and in this he was backed up by the
doctor--to let the inspector enter the bedroom of the sick girl. Not
that German desired to do so after an interview with Mrs Jeal. She was
most indignant at the slur cast upon the character of the girl she
called her adopted daughter. There was a scene, and Mrs Jeal proved
herself to be more than equal to the official from Portfront.

"I never heard anything so wicked in my life," cried Mrs Jeal. "The poor
child may be mad, but not mad enough to take what is not her own. I
wonder at you, sir, that you should come here on such an errand."

"My duty is clearly before me," replied the inspector, stiffly. "Is the
girl really and truly ill?"

"You can take my word for that, Mr German," said Raston. "Or, if you do
not believe me, here is Dr James!"

"Ill!" repeated the doctor, when the question was put to him. "She had a
bad attack of inflammation of the lungs, and she is worse this morning
than I have ever seen her. I do not wish her disturbed, Mr Inspector."

"She could not have gone out last night to the chapel, doctor?"

"Not without the risk of being dead this morning," replied James, dryly.
"Besides, Pearl Darry is not a thief. No, sir. Whosoever stole that cup,
it was _not_ my patient."

"And I would have you know," cried Mrs Jeal, with her arms akimbo, "that
I sat beside her the most of last night, and not one step did she stir
off the bed."

"Ah, well," said German, who could not go against this evidence, "it is
very plain that I am in the wrong. Unless--"

"There's no _unless_ about it, sir," cried Mrs Jeal. "Pearl wasna oot o'
this hoose;" in her excitement she was falling into the Scotch speech of
her childhood. "I wonder at ye, I do that! Hoots, awa' wi' ye!"

Baffled in this quarter, the inspector took his way into the village.
First he examined the chapel. Then he started out to make inquiries. For
quite three days he exasperated everyone in the village with his
questions and suspicions. But for all his worry he was unable to get at
the truth. No tramps had been to the village. Old Barker proved his
innocence with the assistance of a wrathful wife, and there was not a
single person to whom the well-meaning but blundering inspector could
point as likely to have stolen the cup. Finally, he was obliged to state
that he could do nothing, and withdrew himself and his underlings from
Colester, much to the relief of the villagers, whom he had grievously
offended by his unjust suspicions. The cup had vanished as though it had
been swallowed up by the earth, and no one was able to say who had taken
it.

"A grievous loss," sighed Mr Tempest, when he became resigned. "But I
sorrow not so much for the theft of the cup as for the awful sacrilege
of which the thief has been guilty." And he took occasion to refer to
the terrible deed in a wrathful sermon. The villagers shook in their
shoes when they heard of the ills likely to befall the thief. But not
one was able to say who was guilty.

For a whole week things went on much as usual, and the excitement died
away. Leo was still in London, and, through Pratt, Sybil had heard from
him. He had seen his creditors and had settled all his debts. He was now
thinking about enlisting. Before he could do so, however, Sybil sent a
message recalling him to Colester to defend his good name.

It so happened that Barker held his tongue for some time, but when the
first effects of the fright lest he might be accused passed away, he
began to talk. The old man was given to babbling in his cups. Thus it
came about that he mentioned that he believed Mr Haverleigh had taken
the cup. It seemed that Barker had seen Leo near the chapel, as he was
leaving it about half-past nine. Mr Haverleigh, said the old man, had
seemed to shun recognition, and had hurried past him. Not thinking
anything of the matter, Barker had left him near the chapel door. Now,
however, he hinted that Leo might have had some reason to be there at so
untoward an hour. Also, he had gone away the next morning early. It was
well known in Colester that the young man was in debt, and that his
mother had refused to pay his debts. What, then, was more likely, people
argued, than that Leo should have stolen the cup, should have taken it
up to London before the loss was discovered, and should have sold it to
pay his debts? In a few hours this sorry tale was all over the place,
and so came to Sybil's ears. It was her father who heard it, and her
father who told her.

"But surely you do not believe it!" cried the girl, when the accusation
was made. "You have known Leo all these years! Whatever you may have
against him, father, you know that he would never commit so wicked an
act."

"I say nothing until I hear what _he_ has to say," replied the vicar,
who, for some reason, seemed to be biased against Leo. "But you must
admit that it was strange he should be near the chapel at so late an
hour. And we know that he is deeply in debt. Mrs Gabriel told me herself
that he owed three hundred pounds. In a moment of madness--"

"I won't hear a word against Leo!" interrupted Sybil, pale but resolute.
"Not if an angel came down to accuse him would I believe him guilty! How
could he have got the key? And if he did not get the key, how could he
have forced himself through that small window?"

"I say nothing until I hear his defence," said the vicar, obstinately;
"but the whole affair is highly suspicious."

"I never knew you to be unjust before, father," cried Sybil. "Mrs
Gabriel has infected you with her dislike of Leo. I shall say nothing
myself, although I could say more than you think. But I shall send at
once to Leo, and he shall come back to rebut this wicked accusation."

Without listening to another word, Sybil ran off to see Pratt, who was
equally indignant. "It is disgraceful," he said furiously. "Leo never
would do such a thing, never! Be comforted, my dear. I'll ride over to
Portfront this very day and send a wire to him."

And this he did without delay. More than that, he defended Leo heartily
when he returned; so did Raston. Hale kept silent. But the majority of
the villagers were against the young man. Leo returned in disgrace.




CHAPTER VIII

HAVERLEIGH'S DEFENCE


Thanks to the care of Dr James, and the nursing of Mrs Jeal, the sick
girl took a turn for the better. In a remarkably short space of time she
began to improve, and when Leo arrived back in Colester she was on a
fair way of recovery. Although the doctor did not like Mrs Jeal, he
could not but admit that no mother could have been kinder than the
midwife. She waited hand and foot, day and night, on Pearl, and refused
to let anyone take her place, even when she was worn out with watching.
In the middle of her trouble she was called away to London.

One day shortly after the theft of the cup she received a telegram from
Town informing her that her father was seriously ill, and that she was
to come up at once if she wanted to see him alive. Now, if there was one
strong feeling Mrs Jeal possessed it was love for her father, of whom
she often spoke. Much as she liked Pearl, she was not prepared to stay
beside her in the face of such a summons. The old man might die if she
delayed.

"I can get Joan Barker in to nurse Pearl," she said to the doctor, "and
go at once to London. I may be away a week or two."

"Humph!" said James, running his eye over the telegram. "I suppose you
must go; the matter seems urgent. Mrs Barker is not so good a nurse as
you, though."

"But Pearl is much better, doctor," said Mrs Jeal, anxiously.

"Yes, I'll pull her through. Well, pack your traps, Mrs Jeal. Myself and
Mr Raston will attend to Pearl with the assistance of Mrs Barker. You
must leave me some address, though, in case anything goes wrong during
your absence. Not that I think anything will; Pearl is mending rapidly."

Mrs Jeal gave an address in a humble Battersea street, and in a few
hours was ready for the road. She took a tender leave of Pearl, to whom
she appeared to be sincerely attached, and that same morning left for
Portfront by a carrier's waggon. When she departed the village was still
filled with anxiety regarding the loss of the cup.

As has been said before, no railway had yet opened up the solitudes of
Colester and King's-meadows. But those who wished to get quickly to
London took the steamer from Portfront, and in a few hours came to
Worthing, at which place a train was easily procurable. Mrs Jeal took
this route, and having started early she arrived in Town that same
night. She sent a wire telling of her arrival to Dr James. He showed it
to Sir Frank Hale.

"Quick work," said James; "yet we are far enough away from the world
here."

"That's true," replied the baronet. "So Mrs Jeal has gone to Town! I
saw her at Portfront when I was there yesterday morning. It is not often
she goes to Town. I suppose she does not wish to lose the money."

"The money, Hale? What do you mean?"

"Why, it seems, from what Mrs Jeal told me, that her father is not badly
off, and if he dies she will come into a tidy bit of money. There are
other relatives, though, and she was afraid lest they should get the old
man to leave the fortune to them."

"Fortune!" said James, with a smile; "a large word for a small legacy."

"I don't know so much about that," responded the cripple, snappishly.
"From what the woman told me, her father is well off. He was a porter or
something in a stockbroker's office, and dabbled in mines himself. It
seems he was lucky in his speculations and made money. By the way,
James, has Haverleigh turned up yet?"

"No, but I heard that Mr Pratt had sent a telegram to him. I expect he
will wonder what is the matter that Pratt should ask him to come back."

"Not he!" growled Hale. "He knows well enough."

"Why, Hale, you don't believe he stole the cup?"

The cripple remained silent for a time. "It is a difficult thing for me
to say," he finally remarked. "You know, James, that my sister Edith is
deeply in love with the man. I don't like him myself; I never did. But
if he would marry my sister I should not decline the alliance. I put her
happiness before my own feelings. Well, under the circumstances, I
really am not prepared to give an opinion. I know that Leo was in debt,
and it is common talk that Mrs Gabriel refused to pay his debts; yet she
informed me that he went up to London to settle them. Now, he must have
got the money from somewhere, and who would trust him?"

"It looks black against him, I confess," replied James, shaking his
head; "still, I cannot believe that Haverleigh would sink to being a
common thief. You will see when he returns that he will be able to
explain."

"If he ever _does_ return," growled Hale, doubtfully.

"He will. Why, Miss Tempest believes in him, and he must come back if
only to justify her faith. I believe those two are in love with one
another, Hale. Well, they will make a handsome couple."

"He will have to get back his good name first," retorted Hale,
jealously. "And as to there being anything between them--I don't believe
it. Good-day, James. Don't go spreading cock-and-bull stories."

As the baronet walked off the doctor looked after him with a smile of
contempt. He knew that Hale was madly in love with the vicar's daughter,
and that he regarded Leo as a too successful rival. "You'll be delighted
if the poor chap comes to harm," muttered James; "you are a viper! But I
am sure Haverleigh will clear himself. A girl like Sybil Tempest is not
likely to be deceived in the character of the man she loves. I would
rather believe her than you, Sir Frank Hale!" And James, who had no
great love for the spiteful little cripple, walked away to see Pearl.

By this time the opinion was that Leo would not return. It was positive,
said the gossips, that he had stolen the cup in order to procure money
for the payment of his debts. The most likely thing was that he would
clear out of the country.

"What fools these people are," said Pratt, who heard this. "If the man
intended to leave the country he certainly would not pay his debts. Only
a heaven-born ass would do that. He would take the money himself and
leave his creditors unpaid." But the gossips did not see matters in that
light. They were bent upon thinking the worst of Leo.

All this time Mrs Gabriel said nothing, but remained shut up in the
castle. She knew well enough what was being said about Leo, and could
not bear to face anyone, the more particularly as she did not know how
to defend him. She denied herself to everyone, even to Pratt, although
he called several times to interview her on behalf of her nephew. The
young man had a strong defender in Pratt. He went about everywhere
insisting on Haverleigh's innocence. In this opinion he was supported by
Sybil, by the curate, and, strange to say, by Mrs Bathurst.

"The whole thing is absolute nonsense," said Mrs Bathurst. "Why should
Mr Haverleigh be such a fool? Mrs Gabriel would have paid his debts in
the long run. And then if he had not wished to pay them himself, he
could have enlisted and slipped away to Africa without anyone being the
wiser. Then there's another thing. He would not commit a crime for such
a purpose. If he was in difficulties before, he would not make them
worse by putting himself within reach of the law." All of which was
common-sense, although Leo's enemies were too much bent on thinking the
worst of him to accept such a reasonable view.

It was while matters were in this state that Leo Haverleigh returned. He
drove up to the castle one night without informing anyone of his coming.
Mrs Gabriel was amazed when he presented himself before her. He looked
bright and cheerful, not at all like a man who had been accused of a
sordid crime. But it must be remembered that Leo knew nothing of his new
reputation. All he knew was that Pratt, at the instance of Sybil, had
recalled him to Colester. He thought that this telegram had to do with
some new difficulty with regard to his love affairs.

"Good evening, mother," he said as he marched into the room where Mrs
Gabriel was sitting. "I have returned, you see."

"And are you not ashamed?" cried Mrs Gabriel, rising, with a wrathful
expression. "I thought some feeling of decency would have kept you
away."

"Oh, come now, mother," returned Leo, trying to keep his temper, "I am
not so bad as all that. If I have been foolish and extravagant, surely
you can forgive. Besides, my debts are paid. I am a free man."

"You won't be a free man long," said Mrs Gabriel, grimly. "I am willing
to do what I can for you, badly as you have treated me. But I cannot
condone a felony! That is out of the question."

Leo stared and sat down. "You use very extraordinary words," he said at
length. "I never heard that a man who was in debt could be called a
felon. Come, mother," he went on, trying to be amiable--a difficult task
with a woman like this. "Don't use big words for a trifle. I intended to
enlist, but I thought I would come down first to see you and talk the
matter over. You have been kind to me and I do not want to part in
anger. Let us arrange matters in a kindly spirit."

Mrs Gabriel looked at him aghast at his boldness. "How dare you speak to
me like this," she cried. "Are you not aware that everyone in Colester
is talking of your crime?"

"Crime!" Leo started to his feet. "What crime?" He looked bewildered.

"As if you didn't know! I wonder you have the impertinence to come back
here! How much did you sell the cup for?"

Leo still looked puzzled. "Cup!" he echoed. "What cup?"

Mrs Gabriel grasped him by the shoulders and shook him, her eyes blazing
with anger. "You are absolutely shameless," she cried. "I mean the cup
which Mr Pratt presented to the chapel, and you know too! It has been
stolen, and _you_ are the thief."

Haverleigh stared at her for a moment and then burst out laughing. "Is
this a joke, mother?" he said at length. "If so, it is a very poor
one."

"It is not a joke," retorted Mrs Gabriel, still angry. "The cup was
missing on the very morning you went up to London. You stole it, Leo,
and took it away to pay your debts. I never--"

"Nor did I!" cried Haverleigh, now beginning to lose his temper. "Who
dares to say such a thing about me?"

"The whole village says it, and everyone believes it."

"Does Sybil?"

"I don't know; nor do I care. And so far as she is concerned, you need
not think to marry her. Mr Tempest will never let his daughter become
the wife of a--"

"Stop!" cried Leo, before she could utter the shameful word. "How dare
you call me by a foul name? I know perfectly well you hate me; but you
have no right to believe that I did this thing. I know that Sybil
believes me guiltless. She would never credit the man she loves with
such a contemptible crime. And Pratt believes in me also. He sent me a
telegram asking me to come back. I thought it had to do with some
trouble you had made over my engagement to Sybil. I never expected this.
How dare you accuse me of such a crime?"

"The whole village accuses you," said Mrs Gabriel, passionately. "You
have paid your debts. I know you have. Where did you get the money? Not
from me--not from Pratt, for I asked him. And Barker saw you lurking
about the chapel on Sunday night at a late hour. What were you doing
there if it was not to steal? Oh, shame upon you, Leo! How can you
stand there and deny your guilt?"

"Because I am not guilty!" cried Leo, furiously. "I tell you I did not
steal the cup. I did not even know that it was lost. I _was_ near the
chapel on that night and at that hour. I can explain why I was there."

"Explain then," said Mrs Gabriel, with a stamp.

"Not to you, and not until I have thought over my position. Everyone
seems to have judged me guilty without giving me an opportunity of
defending myself."

"You cannot," muttered Mrs Gabriel. "You dare not!"

The scorn of her speech carried Leo beyond all bounds of prudence. He
had not intended to defend himself until he had consulted with Pratt.
The situation was so unpleasant and dangerous that he wanted an older
and wiser head than his own to deal with the matter. But Mrs Gabriel's
taunt made him forget his resolutions. "I dare, and I can!" he burst
out. "I went to the chapel to meet Sybil. Her father would not let us
see one another, so we had to do so by stealth. I was going away on
Monday morning, and she wished for a meeting, as I did myself. In her
pew she left a note, and she let me know by signs during the service
that she had done so. I looked in the vicar's pew after the service was
over, and found that she asked me to meet her at the door of the chapel
shortly after nine. I was there, and I saw old Barker going away. I
think he saw me, but as I did not wish to attract attention, I kept out
of his way as much as possible. Sybil came about half-past nine, perhaps
later, and we had a talk. Then I took her back to the Vicarage, and
returned here to sleep. I was on my way to Portfront by seven in the
morning. That is all I know."

"A likely story," sneered Mrs Gabriel. "I do not believe one word of
it."

Leo looked at her with great dignity. "If you do not choose to believe
me I cannot make you," he said; "but from this moment all is at an end
between us. God knows why you hate me so. I have done nothing to deserve
it. What I have told you is the truth. Sybil can vouch for it. I have
some hesitation in asking her to do so, as she will have to say that she
was alone with me at that late hour, and you know well what the gossips
will say. Still, if I am in danger of arrest, she will come forward,
although I would rather suffer myself than that she should be lightly
spoken of. I shall see her, and her father. For some reason best known
to you, Mrs Gabriel, Mr Tempest has taken a dislike to me. But he is a
just man, and I am sure he does not believe me guilty."

"You'd better see him and ask," said Mrs Gabriel, tartly. "I say again
that I don't believe your explanation. Where did you get the money to
pay your debts if it was not from selling the cup?"

"I borrowed it," retorted Leo, after a pause. "I did not intend to tell
you, but it seems I must, in order to clear my character. You would not
help me, and Pratt was not ready to do so. I daresay if I had pressed
him he would have helped me, but I did not think it right he should pay
for my folly. I borrowed the money, if you must know, from Frank Hale."

Mrs Gabriel, who had seated herself, looked at the young man
indignantly.

"Why will you tell these lies?" she said, trying to speak calmly. "I had
an idea that Hale might have assisted you, and I went to see him. He
absolutely denies that he lent you a penny."

Leo looked bewildered. "He denies the debt," said he. "Why he has my
acknowledgment! He gave me the three hundred pounds in gold on Sunday
morning. I packed it in a Gladstone bag, and took it to London with me.
There I paid it into my bank, and gave my creditors cheques for--"

"In gold!" burst out Mrs Gabriel, contemptuously. "Is it likely that in
these days a man would pay such a large sum otherwise than by cheque?
Why, if you said notes it would be more reasonable, but gold--bah!"

"I tell you he did," said Leo, now thoroughly angry. "I wondered myself
at the time, and I mentioned to Sybil how inconvenient it was. I asked
Hale for notes, for a cheque, he refused both, and said I must take the
money as he chose to give it, or not at all. He gave it to me in three
bags, each containing a hundred sovereigns. I paid that into my London
bank."

"Oh, I daresay you did," sneered Mrs Gabriel. "But you should have got a
better price for the cup."

"You still believe me guilty," cried Leo, recoiling.

"I do. Hale denies that he paid you the money."

"I shall see him about it to-morrow," said Leo. "He will not dare to
deny what is the truth. And I leave the castle this very night, Mrs
Gabriel. I shall never call you 'mother' again. You are cruel and
wicked. Tell me why you hate me so."

Mrs Gabriel's eyes flashed. "If I told you that--" she began, then
closed her mouth and turned away.

"Then you _do_ hate me?"

"Yes. With all my soul!" She turned on him like a fury. "I have hated
you from the moment you came into my house. All these years I have been
on the point of turning you out. Go now, and never darken my doors
again. I was a fool to have anything to do with you. Go! Go!"

For a moment Leo stood bewildered at her furious speech. He thought she
was mad, for he could not conceive why she should speak so. It was
useless to talk or to remonstrate, or to seek an explanation. He looked
at her for a moment, then, without a word, he walked away. In another
quarter of an hour he had left the castle, bag and baggage.

"Thank God!" cried Mrs Gabriel when alone. "I am rid of him at last!"




CHAPTER IX

A BAD REPUTATION


Pratt sat alone in his library. He was not reading, for although he
had many books he rarely looked into one of them. He collected rare
editions, he indulged in gorgeous bindings, and placed all his
gatherings on shelves behind glass doors. It was the look of the thing
Pratt liked. If his collection had been so many volumes of blank pages
he would have been just as well pleased.

As the evening was cold there was a fire in the steel grate. The room
looked comfortable and luxurious. It was decorated in dark red, with
bookcases of rosewood, and many busts of celebrated men. On the desk
stood a reading lamp, and this was the only light in the room. Before
the desk sat Pratt. He was playing with a small pile of precious stones
which he had shaken out of a leathern belt. The jewels gleamed in the
light with rainbow hues, and Pratt fingered them with loving care,
recalling where each one had been bought and found. He was crazy about
his gems, but never showed them to anyone. Moreover, in addition to his
liking for such things, it was a portable way of carrying about his
wealth.

The door opened softly and a servant entered. Pratt did not turn his
head, for he knew the footstep. But when he heard that Leo wished to
see him, he poured the jewels back into the belt, flung it into a drawer
and told Adam--that was the man's name--to admit Mr Haverleigh. Adam was
a tall, soldierly looking man, of the fair Saxon type. He had been with
Mr Pratt for years, knew all his secrets and was absolutely devoted to
him. As well he might be, for Pratt had once saved his life. Adam never
forgot the obligation, and was Pratt's devoted slave.

"Hullo, Leo!" said Pratt, rising, when the young man entered the room.
"Where did you come from?"

"From London, if you want to be precise," said Leo, after shaking hands.
"My bag is in the hall, Pratt."

"What? Have you not been to the castle?"

"I have been there, and I have come away. In fact, Pratt, she has turned
me out at last. I always knew that it would come to this."

As Leo sat down Pratt frowned, and when he frowned he did not look
pleased. "Ah!" said he, calmly, "so she has turned you out--on account
of this theft, I suppose?"

"Yes. It is the first I ever heard of it!" said Leo, looking up. "Your
wire said nothing about such an accusation. I don't suppose you could
very well have mentioned it in a telegram. However, Mrs Gabriel insisted
that I had stolen the cup and sold it in London in order to pay my
debts. We had a few words on the subject and parted. I am now here to
ask you for a bed!"

"My dear fellow, you shall stay here as long as you please. Let me ring
for Adam to bring you some supper!" and Pratt touched the bell.

"A few sandwiches and a glass of port will be sufficient," said Leo. "I
am not in the humour to eat. By the way," as Adam entered, "I see he has
got back?"

"Who? Adam? Yes. Where did you meet him?"

"At Portfront," said Leo, with a nod to Adam, who smiled. "He told me he
had been up to London on your business. I gave him a lift part of the
way. Didn't I, Adam?"

"I shouldn't have got home otherwise, sir," said Adam, respectfully, and
departed to get food for his benefactor. Pratt seemed pleased that his
servant was so friendly with Leo. He had a great opinion of Adam's
intelligence. Also, Adam was a power in the house--but Leo did not know
that. Later on, he learned all about it, to his great astonishment.

"Come now," said Pratt, when Leo had eaten and had finished a glass or
two of port. "Tell me about this cup. _Did_ you take it?"

"I certainly did not!" said Leo, stiffly. "I wonder at your asking me
such a question, Pratt! I am not a thief!"

His host laughed somewhat nervously. "I only wanted to be sure, my dear
lad," he said. "Don't get angry with your best and only friend."

"I have another friend," said Leo, looking up from the cigar he was
cutting, "and that is Sybil. She does not believe that I am guilty."

"Have you seen her, then?"

"No. But I do not want to see her in order to know that. She loves me,
Mr Pratt, and would never believe me guilty. No; not though the evidence
was twice as strong against me!"

"The evidence _is_ strong," said Pratt, rubbing his chin. "You were seen
at the chapel, and--"

"And I have paid my debts," finished Leo. "So I have, and I can explain
how I paid them; also my movements on that night." And he forthwith
related to Pratt the story he had already told Mrs Gabriel. The man
believed him much more readily than the woman. But then Pratt liked Leo,
and Mrs Gabriel--as she had shown plainly--hated him with all the
intensity of her stern and cruel nature.

"You say that Hale lent you the money?" asked Pratt.

"As I told you--in gold."

"And he now denies that he did so?"

"So Mrs Gabriel says. But I shall see for myself to-morrow."

Pratt reflected, staring into the fire. "It seems to be a conspiracy,"
he said slowly. "I wonder what his game is?"

Leo remembered that Sybil had also been uncomfortable when she heard
that Hale intended to lend him the money. A thought flashed into his
mind as Pratt spoke. "I believe that Hale is in love with Sibyl," said
he.

"Humph! And his sister Edith is in love with you."

Leo coloured a little at this very direct remark. "I believe she is,"
said he, with an embarrassed laugh; "but I assure you, Pratt, the
feeling is not reciprocal. The only woman I have ever loved, whom I
shall ever love, is Sybil Tempest. And the course of our true love does
not run smooth," he finished, with a sigh.

"A conspiracy," repeated Pratt, who was not paying much attention to
what Leo was saying. "Yes! I believe it to be one. By lending you that
money Hale hoped to get you into his power, so as to induce you to give
up Sibyl to him and marry Edith."

"If he ever did have so ridiculous an idea," said Leo, angrily, "he has
thrown away the fruits of it by denying the loan."

"No! The unforseen has happened and he is simply making use of the new
development," said Pratt. "You are accused of having sold this cup to
pay your debts. If Hale acknowledged that he gave you the money he would
take away the motive and would in a measure prove your innocence. That
is exactly what he will not do. Unless--" he hesitated.

"Unless I give up Sybil and marry his sister?"

"Precisely," replied Pratt. "However, this is only a theory. You had
better wait until you see Hale before you make up your mind. I don't
mind making you a bet, Leo, that what Mrs Gabriel says is true."

"Do you think Hale will deny the loan?"

"I am certain of it. I have studied human nature a great deal during a
not uneventful life, and if ever I saw a crafty scoundrel Hale is the
man. I wish you had told me that he was the friend who was to lend you
the money. I would rather have found it for you myself than have let you
go to him."

"I wish I had spoken out. But it's too late now. And how did I know the
man would be such a scoundrel? Not that we yet can be certain that he
is, Pratt. Only the worst of it is," added Leo, wrinkling his young
brows, "that I cannot now repay the money."

"If he denies the debt you will not need to repay it."

"I shall insist upon doing so when I am able!" cried Leo, vehemently.
"But Mrs Gabriel won't help me."

"I will let you have the three hundred pounds," said Pratt.

"I don't see why you should, Pratt. As it is, you are too kind to me.
No! I will borrow no more. This interview with Mrs Gabriel has fixed my
mind as to enlisting. I shall see if I can't arrange about the money for
Hale. I have some jewellery and other things I can sell. In some way or
another I'll contrive to get out of his debt."

"He won't admit that you are in his debt," persisted Pratt; "but it is
no use talking all night about these things, Leo. You have a friend in
me, and as I know you are innocent I'll get you out of this trouble
somehow. To-morrow you can see Hale and Miss Sybil."

"I'll see him first," said Leo, grimly, after which speech--ominous of
evil--he retired to bed. Worn out with his long journey and by the
anxiety attendant on his new position--which was that of an absolute
pauper--he soon fell into a dreamless sleep. Pratt remained in the
library and for a long time sat watching the dying fire. He also saw
trouble ahead, but it had to do more with himself than with his guest.

Since the illness of Pearl, Sybil had attended to the decorating of the
altar. Sometimes she had the assistance of Peggy Bathurst. But Mrs
Bathurst, still fearful lest Peggy might become engaged to the curate,
would not let her come as often to the chapel as Sybil wished. So Miss
Tempest usually decked the altar alone. The morning after Leo's arrival
she was in the chapel at mid-day with her arms full of flowers. Taking
these and the altar vessels into a quiet corner she began to arrange the
blossoms. While thus engaged she heard a step. At once she sprang to her
feet with the love-light in her eye. She had no need to see the
newcomer. Her heart told her it was Leo.

"My dear!" She took him into her arms. "How glad I am to see you again!
Oh, Leo, I have so many sad things to tell you."

"I know all, my love," said the young man, kissing her. "I arrived last
night and saw Mrs Gabriel. _She_ did not spare me."

"Your mother?"

"She is no more mother of mine, Sybil. She told me she hated me; called
me a thief, and turned me out of the castle. I shall never enter it
again--never! Last night I slept at Pratt's. He was a good Samaritan
and took me in. This morning I went to see Hale."

Sybil clapped her hands. "Oh, then it is all right!" she cried joyfully.
"I could have told my father that you had got the money from him, but I
thought it better you should do so yourself."

"I can't do that without Hale calling me a liar."

"Leo! What do you mean?"

"That in the eyes of the people here I am both a liar and a thief. Hale,
whom I saw this morning, denies having given me the money."

"Has he spread that all about the town?" asked Sybil, scarcely able to
believe her ears.

"No, he is too clever for that. Now I know, Sybil, why he gave me the
money in gold. So that he might be able to deny the debt if occasion
arose, as it has done. Had he given me a cheque his signature would have
given him the lie."

"But what does he mean by denying that he lent you the money?"

"Well, I'll give you Pratt's theory. I believe it is the true one," and
the young man rapidly repeated the conversation he had had with the
American on the previous evening. "So you see you were right, Sybil."

"I knew it," said Sybil in low tones. "Do you remember how I told you on
the day of Mrs Bathurst's picnic? What is to be done now?"

"There is nothing to be done save to fight," said Leo, fiercely, "and
fight I shall. I had intended to enlist, but I shall not do that until I
have cleared my name. To leave here now would be to give colour to the
lies that are being told about me. I shall stay with Pratt. He is my
friend, and you, Sybil, also. We three will fight it out."

"Mr Raston is also your friend, Leo. He says he does not believe for one
moment that you did what you are accused of doing."

"Thank God for that! How can anyone who knows me believe me guilty of so
terrible a crime? To rob a church! Think of it, Sybil. Your father? Does
he believe I did this vile thing?"

"He suspends his judgment, Leo, until he has heard your defence."

"Alas, Sybil, what defence can I make save state that I am innocent? I
cannot make Hale confess that he lent me the money, and I cannot prove,
independently of him, that he did so. This morning he coolly denied all
knowledge of the loan, but said that for my sake he would not speak of
the visit I had made or the threats I had used."

"Did you use threats, Leo?"

"I am afraid I did, dear. But is it not enough to make an honest man's
blood boil to be placed in such a position? I threatened to give him a
thrashing. But when I remembered that he was a cripple, of course I
could not do that. But for all his physical weakness, he is a venomous
beast. No, Sybil, without Hale I can do nothing." He paused for a
moment, and then went on. "I think the best way to do is to wait," he
said. "If this is a plot on Hale's part he will continue to carry it
out--that is, he will make some proposition to me about giving you up.
I don't suppose he will want me to marry his sister, now that I am
called a thief."

Sybil placed her hand over his mouth. "You must not be so bitter, Leo. I
will not have you revile yourself in this way. Don't you think you had
better see my father?"

"What good would that do, my dear? I can only tell the story I tell you,
and as I have no evidence to prove its truth, he probably will not
believe me. No, Sybil. It is best for me to remain quietly with Pratt,
and wait until Hale makes some move. Besides, Pratt is a clever man of
the world, and can guide me. No doubt everyone will be disagreeable, but
I must put up with that. I refuse to go away, as though the charge
against me were true. You will see me sometimes, Sybil?"

"Whenever I can," she replied; "but it will not be easy. When my father
hears that you are back he will be more particular than ever to keep me
from meeting you."

Leo mused. "I wonder why he has changed so, Sybil? He used to like me."

"I think Mrs Gabriel said something which has turned him against you."

"Very probably," replied Leo, bitterly; "for some reason she hates me.
But all is at an end between us. I wait here, Sybil, to vindicate my
character, and afterwards I shall carry out my plan of enlisting. I may
be years away from you, but you will be true, I know."

"I swear to be true, Leo! I marry no one but you."

"Not even Hale," whispered Leo, straining her to his breast.

Sybil laughed. "If I disliked him before, think how I hate him now!" she
said. "He is acting a mean part. But his punishment will come. Now go,
Leo, for my father may come at any moment."

The two lovers embraced and parted. Leo went away much comforted by the
belief Sybil had in his innocence. He returned to The Nun's House, and
spent the day with Pratt talking over the position of affairs. It was a
disagreeable position, and at the present moment he could see no way of
mending it. Hale alone could prove his innocence, and Hale refused to
speak out. Bitterly did Leo regret that he had ever been tempted to
believe in this fox.

The days went by, and the position remained much the same as it was. By
this time the excitement consequent on the loss of the cup had died out.
Leo remained mostly within doors, as he did not care about meeting the
cold looks of those he had known from childhood. Mrs Gabriel gave no
sign, but secluded herself within her own grounds. Once or twice Pratt
saw her on Leo's behalf, but he could do nothing with her. However, he
told Leo to keep up his spirits, that all would come right. But how this
alteration was to be brought about he did not say. Pratt knew when to
keep his own counsel.

Towards the end of the week Mrs Jeal returned. Her father was much
better, she said, and she had come back to look after Pearl. The mad
girl was now out of bed, but, as yet, unable to leave the cottage.
Someone had conveyed to her the news of the loss--Raston shrewdly
suspected Joan Barker--but, strange to say, she was not so upset about
it as had been expected.

"The Master has taken His cup to use in heaven," she told the curate,
who often came to sit with her. "When he thinks fit he will bring it
back again to the altar."

Raston was puzzled by this queer view, but as it prevented the girl from
fretting he outwardly agreed with her. Having settled the matter thus,
Pearl rarely referred to the loss. She was quite content to wait until
the cup was restored. Taking a hint from Raston, Mrs Jeal never
discussed the matter. All the same she knew more about the missing cup
than the Colester people knew. And it was in this way she explained the
matter to Harold Raston.

"Sir," she said one day shortly after her return, "I want you to get me
speech with his reverence. I wish to make a statement to him."

"Indeed, Mrs Jeal! What is the statement?"

"It is about the cup, sir. But I prefer to speak to the vicar and to Mr
Haverleigh. I hear he is staying with Mr Pratt."

"I believe he is. Some foolish people accuse him of having stolen the
cup, Mrs Jeal. I hope you will be able to give us some information
likely to lead to its discovery, so that Mr Haverleigh's character can
be cleared."

Mrs Jeal screwed up her mouth, and sent out a flash from her wicked
eyes. She absolutely refused to speak save in the presence of Mr
Tempest and Leo. Therefore, after a consultation with the vicar, Raston
went to see Leo, and asked him to come to the Vicarage. Leo was
surprised at the summons, and not very willing to obey it. He resented
the way in which he had been treated by Mr Tempest. Still, from what was
hinted by Mrs Jeal, he fancied that she might be able to clear his
character, so he accompanied Raston to the place of meeting.

Mrs Jeal was already in the study, seated beside the vicar's desk. She
was dressed in her best, and looked demure as any cat. Tempest reddened
when he saw Leo, and held out his hand. Leo refused to take it. "No,
sir," he said coldly; "you have not treated me well. I thought you were
my friend, but I find you believe me to be a thief."

"Pardon me," replied Tempest, suddenly growing hard, "I do not say that
you took the cup. I refuse to believe anything against you until I hear
what you have to say in your own defence."

"I make no defence, Mr Tempest," rejoined Leo. "Sybil believes me
guiltless; so does Pratt; Raston also is my friend. I can only wait
until I am vindicated by time. Or perhaps Mrs Jeal will prove to you
that I did not steal the cup," and Leo looked at the crafty face of the
woman.

Mrs Jeal at a nod from the vicar, rose and folded her hands. "I can
prove that you did steal it, Mr Haverleigh," she said. "I saw you pawn
the cup in London."




CHAPTER X

THE PRICE OF SILENCE


For a few moments there was a dead silence. Tempest looked gravely
shocked. Mrs Jeal triumphant, and the curate much disturbed. He had been
so certain of Leo's innocence that this precise evidence took his breath
away. Leo was thunderstruck, and passed his hand across his eyes to make
sure that he was not dreaming.

"You saw me pawn what I never had in my possession!" he said quietly.

Mrs Jeal shrugged her plump shoulders. "I can say no more than I know,"
she said. "Of course, I quite expected you would deny my story."

"I have not heard it yet," replied the accused man, slowly; "and I shall
be glad to hear it. At the present moment, I declare most solemnly that
I never took the cup. I did not even know it was stolen until I returned
from London."

"Where you had pawned it," finished Mrs Jeal.

The vicar interposed. He was struck by Leo's calmness, which was not
that of a guilty person. "I think you had better tell your story, Mrs
Jeal," he said; "then we can hear Mr Haverleigh."

"I thank you for giving me a fair trial, Mr Tempest," said Leo,
quietly, and sat down with his eyes on the face of the woman.

Mrs Jeal cleared her throat, and in a slow voice began to speak. She
rather enjoyed her position, and made the most of it. "But before
speaking of what I know, sir," she said, looking at the vicar, "might I
ask if it is true that you have offered a reward for the recovery of the
cup?"

"I have not done so myself," said Tempest, gravely; "but Mr Pratt, who
presented the cup to me, has offered the sum of fifty pounds to
whomsoever will give information likely to lead to its recovery. If you
know of anything, Mrs Jeal--"

"I'll get the reward," said the woman, a greedy light in her small eyes.
"Yes, sir, I do know of something. I went up to Battersea, in London, to
see my father, who is ill. He is a retired gardener, your reverence, and
has invested his savings in a seed shop. My mother is still alive, and
she looks after him. They do fairly well out of the shop, and, of
course, your reverence, I give them some assistance, as becomes an only
child."

"This is not to the point, Mrs Jeal!"

"I am coming to the point shortly," said the woman, with a look at Leo,
who made no remark; "but it is necessary that your reverence should
understand how it was that I came to see Mr Haverleigh taking the cup to
Old Penny's pawnshop."

Leo could bear it no longer, and started to his feet. "It is absolutely
false!" he exclaimed passionately. "I did _not_ pawn the cup. I never
had it in my possession. I was never in Battersea in my life, and I do
not know the name of Penny."

"Better wait and hear the story, Leo," said Tempest in a more friendly
tone. He was beginning to be impressed by the bearing of the young man.
Even in the face of Mrs Jeal's evidence, he thought Leo might be
innocent. After all, the evidence was circumstantial, and that is not
always to be relied upon. "You shall have every justice," he said,
patting Leo's shoulder.

"I know what I know," said Mrs Jeal when Leo sat down again. "One
evening last week I was out late. I had been to get some medicine for my
dear father. In Barry Street there is a pawnshop kept by an old man
called Penny. I have known it most of my life. As I passed I saw Mr
Haverleigh ahead of me. He did not stop immediately at the shop."

"You saw _me_!" cried Leo, bewildered. "How was I dressed?"

"In a blue serge suit, with a hard, fawn-coloured hat," said Mrs Jeal,
glibly. "Over your arm you carried a coat, and under it you had a
parcel. It was the cup."

"You are telling a pack of lies!" said Leo, angrily. "How did you know
the cup was in the parcel?"

"Wait and you shall hear," said Mrs Jeal, tartly. "I do not care about
being hurried. You passed the shop; I recognised you at once and
wondered what you were doing in so poor a quarter of the town. Of course
I knew that the cup had been stolen, but I never thought that you had
it under your arm. You had a silk muffler round your throat although the
evening was warm, and apparently you wished to escape observation. I was
determined to find out what you were doing so, I followed you. You went
round the block until it grew darker. Then you returned to the shop, and
entered. I waited on the other side of the road. In half-an-hour you
came out again. You had the great-coat on and your hands in your pocket.
After looking up and down the street to see if anyone was observing you
I saw you walk rapidly to the end. I did not follow as I was anxious to
see why you had been to the pawnshop."

"Why all this anxiety, Mrs Jeal?" asked Tempest, annoyed.

"Well, sir! of course I know that Mrs Gabriel does not approve of Mr
Haverleigh's behaviour--"

"That has nothing to do with the matter," interposed Mr Tempest,
sternly, and Leo gave him a grateful look. "All you have to do is to
state facts."

Mrs Jeal dropped an ironical curtsey. "Very good, sir," said she; "but I
must say that I thought Mrs Gabriel had cut off Mr Haverleigh's
allowance and that he was pawning some jewellery to keep himself in
bread."

"I never pawned anything in my life," said Leo, disgusted at the plain
spite of the woman. "Go on, Mrs Jeal. You saw this man Penny, no doubt?"

"I did that!" cried the woman, triumphantly. "I have known him for many
years. I went into the shop and into his back parlour. On the table I
saw the cup. Yes, gentlemen, you no doubt are surprised. But it was the
very cup I had so often seen on the altar of the chapel."

"It is wholly false!" cried Leo, rising. "I never pawned the cup.
Someone must have impersonated me."

"It was yourself, Mr Haverleigh," insisted the woman. "I had a talk with
Old Penny, but of course I said nothing about having seen the cup
before. I did not mention that I knew you. Penny told me that he had
given you four hundred for the cup. It was worth much more he said, and
he was chuckling over the bargain he had made. I left the cup in his
possession and returned home. Several times I went to the shop to hear
if you had redeemed the cup. But it was still with Penny. I then had to
attend to my father and gave the matter little thought. But when I
returned and heard how you, Mr Haverleigh, had stolen the cup, it became
my duty to let his reverence know what you had done with it. And I
hear," added Mrs Jeal, with a malignant smile, "that your debts have
been paid."

"Who told you so?" asked Raston, who hitherto had been silent.

"Mrs Gabriel. I went to tell her what Mr Haverleigh had done. She said
that she expected as much, as she had refused to give him the money to
pay his debts. So that is all I know. I am prepared to take my oath in a
court of law that this is true."

There was a pause. Then Tempest observed quietly, "If that is all you
have to tell, Mrs Jeal, you can go. I will speak to Mr Haverleigh."

"But will I not--"

"You will do nothing," interrupted the vicar. "Go away and hold your
tongue, lest you get into trouble."

"You're going to let him off, I see," said Mrs Jeal, with a toss of her
grey head. "Well, I have done my share. Good-day, gentlemen," and she
sailed out of the room quite satisfied that she had ruined Leo.

When the three were alone Tempest addressed Leo, who sat silently beside
the table. "Leo," he said sadly, "I do not want you to get into trouble.
If you will confess to me that you did what Mrs Jeal says I will see
about getting the cup back and say nothing more about the matter. I will
give you money to leave the town."

"I tell you I am innocent!" cried Leo passionately. "Why do you want me
to confess a crime of which I am not guilty? I shall not leave Colester.
Here I stay until my innocence is acknowledged."

"But the evidence against you," urged the vicar, sorely perplexed. "You
were seen about the chapel on the night the cup was stolen. Your debts
are paid, yet Mrs Gabriel did not give you the money, and you have none
of your own. And now Mrs Jeal says she saw you pawn the sacred vessel."

"I admit that the evidence is strong," said Leo, recovering his
calmness. "All the same I am guiltless. I was at the chapel on that
night. I was to meet Sybil since you had forbidden me to meet her."

"Please leave my daughter's name out of this," said Tempest, an angry
spot on each cheek. He was annoyed at the mention of the meeting, but in
the presence of Raston he controlled himself out of pride.

"I can't leave Sybil's name out of it," said Leo, sadly. "I would if I
could; but she is as anxious as I am that I should recover my good name.
I did meet Sybil, and she will tell you that I left her at the door of
the Vicarage before ten o'clock. I therefore could not have stolen the
cup. I got the money to pay my debts from Frank Hale."

"From Hale? Then he will say as much!" cried the vicar. "This will go
far to prove your innocence, Leo."

"I don't think Hale will help me much," said Leo, coldly. "However, we
can talk of that later, or you can see Hale for yourself, Mr Tempest.
But I declare most solemnly that Hale lent me the money. As to pawning
the cup, I said before, and I say again, that I did no such thing. I did
not take the cup. I was never in Battersea, and I do not know the man
Mrs Jeal calls Old Penny. If you want to have me arrested, Mr Tempest,
you will find me at Mr Pratt's. Far from wishing to run away, I court an
investigation."

"Leo," stammered the vicar, restlessly, "I do not want to get you into
any trouble. If I can help--"

"I am in the deepest trouble," returned Leo, "and more will not matter.
You can have me arrested if you like. I know that Sybil believes me to
be innocent, so does Pratt. I do not care for anyone else's opinion. I
think you are treating me cruelly, Mr Tempest, and some day you will be
sorry that you showed so little charity. I go now, and I shall not see
you again until such time as you give evidence against me in court," and
with this last bitter speech Leo walked out of the room with his head in
the air.

The two clergymen looked at one another. They did not know very well
what to say. Tempest sat down with a sigh. "I do not know what to
think."

"I do," said Raston, sharply. "Notwithstanding the woman's story, I
still believe that Haverleigh is guiltless. Circumstances have so
culminated that he appears to be in the wrong. There is a mystery about
the whole of this affair, and it seems to me that Haverleigh has some
enemy."

"That may be so," admitted Tempest, struck by this remark. "But what is
to be done? I can't have Leo arrested. Even if he were guilty, which I
am now inclined to doubt, I cannot ruin his life."

"What we need," replied the curate, "is some clever man who will get to
the bottom of this. If you can spare me for a few days, Mr Tempest, I
will go to London and see Marton?"

"Marton?" repeated the vicar. "Who is Marton?"

Raston laughed. "Such is fame," said he, lightly. "Marton is one of the
best detectives in England. He was leaving college when I went up, and
we met for a few weeks. When I was curate in the Battersea slums I met
him again, as he has a wide acquaintance with the criminal classes. We
renewed our college friendship, and I still write to him. Now, with
your permission, Mr Tempest, I will put this case into Marton's hands.
It is just the kind of mystery he would love to solve."

"The man is a gentleman, I suppose, Raston?"

"Certainly. He is my friend. I know the pawnshop of Old Penny. He is a
Scotsman, if you can grasp the idea of a Scotsman keeping a pawnshop.
I'll tell Marton the whole case, and we can then go to this shop. If
possible, we may get back the cup."

"Who is to pay four hundred pounds for it?" asked Tempest.

"We'll see," replied Raston, quietly. "I shall do nothing without
Marton's advice. Have I your permission?"

Tempest nodded. "I think it is the best thing you can do. Go to London
and keep me advised of everything. I should like to know Mr Marton's
opinion of the matter."

"It is probable he'll come down here later on," said the curate; "but in
the meantime, Mr Tempest, do nothing to Haverleigh."

"I promise you that," replied the vicar, and the matter being settled in
this way, the two men shook hands. Afterwards Raston went to prepare for
his departure.

While this was taking place, Leo was talking in the chapel with Hale.
Haverleigh had gone up to see if Sybil was about, as he wished to tell
her of this new development of the conspiracy against him. Leo felt sure
by this time that there was a conspiracy, and that Hale was concerned
in it. He was therefore rather pleased when he saw the cripple walking
up the hill before him. Leo made up his mind to force the truth out of
him, and hurried on so as to catch him. Hale heard his steps, and turned
with a queer smile on his face. He was not at all abashed by the
presence of the man to whom he had told a lie, but, on the contrary,
welcomed him in the most friendly manner. Haverleigh was irritated by
this false behaviour. "Either you think me innocent, and wish to be my
friend," he said, "or you believe that I am guilty and have some reason
to be feigning good fellowship. I must have some understanding with you,
Hale. Come into the chapel. We will not be disturbed there as it is
mid-day and everyone is at dinner," and Leo, without waiting for a
reply, entered the door.

The chapel was empty; even Sybil was not in sight. Hearing the halting
steps of the cripple behind him, Leo led the way into the crusaders'
chapel, where he sat down beside one of the tombs. Hale paused before
him and looked down in a whimsical manner. "You have chosen a strange
place," he said, looking round.

"It is a sacred place," replied Leo, coolly; "and you may be the less
inclined to tell lies. I presume you have some religion."

"How dare you say I tell lies?" cried the baronet, scowling.

"Because I have had some experience of your capability in that
direction. And now I should like to know what you mean by denying that
you lent me the three hundred pounds?"

Hale shrugged his unshapely shoulders and sat down with a painful
effort, placing his crutch beside him. "You were fool enough to speak to
me in the presence of my sister," he said. "I could only say what I did
say. Now that we are alone I am willing to answer any questions you may
put to me."

"You will answer truthfully, I hope?"

"Assuredly. It is time we understood one another. Go on."

"You lent me three hundred pounds?" said Leo, in the form of a query.

"In gold," assented Sir Frank, coolly.

"Why did you lend it to me in gold?"

"A whim of mine."

"I don't think so," said Leo, slowly. "You had some scheme in your head.
I believe you wanted to deny the loan if you found it convenient."

"You are very clever, Haverleigh. That is just what I did want. Had I
given you a cheque you could have proved the loan. Even notes might have
shown the truth. But I wanted to be free to act as I pleased, so I went
to the trouble of getting gold from the bank."

"Then it seems to me that you had this cup stolen by some confederate,
and intended to lay the blame on me so as to get me into a trap!"

"Indeed, no," protested Hale, so loudly that Leo believed he was
speaking the truth. "The stealing of the cup, and the subsequent blame
being thrown on you, was unexpected. But I took advantage of the
opportunity. You can prove your innocence only by my help, Haverleigh,
and I give my evidence only on conditions."

"I was prepared for such a speech," said Leo, calmly; "but it won't do,
my friend. You must go to Tempest and tell him that you gave me three
hundred pounds to pay my debts. Perhaps then he may disbelieve this
ridiculous story of my being a thief."

Hale sat up alertly. "Then you didn't steal the cup?"

"Certainly not. How dare you suggest such a thing? I suspect you know
more about the loss of the cup than I do."

The baronet looked down on his crooked leg and smiled ironically. "Do
you mean to infer that I thrust this misshapen body through that
window?"

"No! But you have plenty of money to pay for any rascality."

"I am not so fond of parting with money," said Hale, dryly. "I know
nothing about the cup. But I really thought you stole it. Mrs Jeal's
tale--"

"Ha!" Leo started up. "She told you that? Why?"

"Because she is a woman who is fond of money," said Hale, quietly.
"Knowing that my sister is in love with you, Haverleigh, she came to
threaten me. She declared that she would proclaim you a thief if I did
not pay her. It was her belief that such a course would break my
sister's heart."

"And what did you do?"

"I told her I would inform the police if she dared to speak to me in
that manner again. I believe she then went to the vicar. But if I come
forward, Haverleigh, and state that I lent you the money, it will go a
long way towards clearing you. Of course, I do not understand this
pawning business. The woman says she saw you."

"She saw my double, or someone dressed up to resemble me," said Leo,
vehemently; "but she did not see me. I was never near the shop."

"So you say," said Hale, smiling cruelly. "However, you must see that I
can help you. I will do so on one condition--no, on two."

"I can guess the two," said Leo, looking at his mean face. "You want me
to surrender Sybil so that you may marry her, and to make your sister my
wife? Is that not so?"

Hale smiled again. "You save me the trouble of an explanation," he said.

"Then I absolutely refuse to do what you want, Hale. I respect your
sister, who is a kind and good-hearted girl; but I do not love her, and
not for all the gold in the world would I marry her. On the other hand,
nothing will induce me to give up Sybil. She shall never become your
wife. I wonder you have the impertinence to propose such a thing to me!"

"If you don't do what I ask," said Hale, very pale and venomous, "I
shall refuse to help you. I shall deny that I lent you the money."

"Deny what you please!" Leo walked to the door of the chapel.
"Everything is in your favour, and you can have me arrested if you
choose. But I decline to sell my love to buy my safety. Good-day, Hale,"
and he marched away.




CHAPTER XI

THE LONDON DETECTIVE


Sybil had seen Leo go into the room where her father was waiting with
Mrs Jeal, and wondered what the woman had to do with her lover. She was
called out to see a sick woman on behalf of her father, and on her way
home bethought herself how she could see Leo. The girl was in a perfect
fever of nervous fear for the young man. Then it struck her that the
best thing to do would be to call at Mr Pratt's. No sooner had she made
up her mind to brave her father's anger in this respect than she went at
once to The Nun's House. She feared if she delayed that her courage
might evaporate.

The door was opened by Adam, who explained that Mr Pratt was from home.
"He went into Portfront to-day, miss," said Adam. "I only hope he will
be able to get back this night, as there is a sea-fog coming up the
Channel."

"There is no danger of his losing the road, Adam," said Sybil,
cheerfully; "but I don't want to see Mr Pratt. It is Mr Haverleigh
who--"

"He is in the library, miss," replied Adam, and admitted her into the
house. When Sybil found herself alone with Leo she had a qualm. What
would her father say should he ever come to know that she had paid such
a visit?

Leo was seated at the desk, his face hidden in his arms, looking most
dejected. He lifted his head as she entered, and, at the sight of his
face, Sybil forgot all about her father and the impropriety of the
visit. At once she ran to her lover, and drew his head down on to her
breast with a look of almost divine pity. "My darling Leo," she said, "I
knew that you were miserable, and I have come to comfort you."

"How good of you, dear!" replied Haverleigh, stroking her hair; "but
your father? I did not think he would let you come to me."

"My father does not know that I am here," said Sybil, blushing, as he
placed a chair for her; "but I knew you had been to see him, and I could
not rest until I heard all about the interview. Was he very angry?"

"No; I think he is inclined to believe in my innocence in spite of Mrs
Jeal's story. And Heaven knows she has painted me black enough!"

"I wondered what Mrs Jeal was doing at the Vicarage, Leo; I don't like
that woman. She looks sly and wicked. But what story can she have to
tell about you, dear?"

"Sybil, she says that she saw me pawning the cup in London," and while
Sybil, filled with surprise, sat looking at his agitated face, Leo told
all that Mrs Jeal had said. "So you see, dear," he continued, "that
there is some sort of conspiracy against me. I believe Hale is in it
too."

"It is a strange story," she said musingly. "I wonder who it was could
have impersonated you? Did the man give your name?"

"By Jove!" cried Leo, starting up, "I never thought of asking. Yet the
rascal must have given it for the pawn-ticket. Sybil, I can't help
thinking that Hale knows something about this. He saw me in the chapel
an hour ago and said that he would make a statement to the effect that
he had paid me the money if I would give you up and marry his sister."

Sybil's eyes flashed. "How dare he?" she cried. "He wants to drive you
into a corner, Leo. What did you say?"

"I refused to have anything to do with him, dear. He can join with your
father in having me arrested for all I care. I would rather that than
give up my Sybil! But you see the position. What is to be done?"

"Can't you go to London and see this man Penny?"

"No. I dare not leave the place. Your father and the others would think
that I was seeking safety in flight. I might be arrested before I got as
far as Portfront. I don't say that your father would go so far but there
is always the chance. I am sure Mrs Gabriel would not counsel mercy. For
some unaccountable reason she hates me thoroughly."

"My poor Leo!" Sybil stroked his cheek. "Fate is very cruel to you. But
never mind. In spite of everything I will be true to you. And what is
more, Leo, I'll help you to prove your innocence."

"How can you do that, my love?"

She pursed up her pretty mouth, and, crossing her slender feet, looked
on the ground with an air of portentous gravity. "I don't believe this
story of Mrs Jeal's," she said; "there is something behind it. As you
cannot go to London--and I see it would be foolish of you to go away
from Colester at present--we must do the best we can through the
newspapers."

Leo looked at her in surprise, and knelt beside her. "What can we do
with the newspapers, darling?"

"Put an advertisement in every London daily paper saying that the cup
has been lost, giving a description, and offering a reward if any
information is given to _me_."

"To _you_, Sybil! What would your father say?"

"He won't know. Besides, Leo, darling, you are more to me even than my
father, and I am angry at the unjust way in which you are being treated.
I will write out a number of these advertisements, and send them up with
post-office orders. The replies to be sent to 'S. T. Colester
Post-office.'"

"But what good will that do?"

"Oh, you stupid darling! I have to think for two, I see. Why, this
pawnbroker--what is his name?--Penny. Well, if Penny sees the
advertisement, he will recognise the cup from the description, and know
that it has been stolen. He will be afraid of getting into trouble with
the police, and he no doubt will write saying that the cup was pawned
with him and that he will be willing to sell it back for the price
paid. Then we'll get it back, Leo. When I am certain, I'll tell my
father, and he will arrange about buying it again."

"Yes. But how does all this benefit me?"

"This Penny creature will explain who pawned it, and he will give the
name of the person Mrs Jeal said resembled you. He might do that if the
matter were made public by advertisement. If we approach him privately
he will very likely deny everything. We can't be too careful, Leo."

"But the reward," said Haverleigh, puzzled. "I have no money; you have
no money. What will you do?"

"When the cup is back, or if information is given likely to recover it,
I am sure my father can arrange about the money with Mrs Gabriel. Now do
not say a word, Leo. She has nothing to do with you now. And, after
all," added Sybil, naively, "I don't see why any money need pass. This
is a trap I am laying for that pawnbroker. That is if Mrs Jeal's story
is true, which I am inclined to doubt. I'll put the advertisement in on
chance, Leo, and see what comes of it."

"But it is such a mad idea," remonstrated the young man, who could not
follow all these feminine arguments. "Let me tell Pratt about your
suggestion. He will be able to advise us."

Sybil rose to her feet and shook her head obstinately. "If you say a
word to Mr Pratt I'll never forgive you. Let me try this experiment all
alone, Leo, dear. It can do no harm, and it might do a lot of good. We
must not tell anyone about it."

"Sybil, I kept the fact of my borrowing that money from Hale a secret,
and I have regretted it ever since. Let us ask Pratt's advice."

"No, Leo." Sybil was still obstinate. "I want to try this myself. If it
fails it can do no harm, and if it succeeds I shall have the joy of
knowing that it was I who got you out of this trouble. Now promise not
to tell!"

At first Leo refused. He did not want Sybil to mix herself up in this
disagreeable case even for his sake. But she used such endearments, and
kept to her point with such pertinacity, that he gave in. It was useless
to contend against Sybil when she set her heart on getting anything. She
never would give in, however discouraged. Therefore, before she left the
library, she had drawn out an advertisement with the assistance of Leo,
in which the appearance of the cup and its Latin inscription were
carefully set down. A reward of fifty pounds was offered, and the
answers were to be sent to S. T., at the Colester Post-office.

"There!" said Sybil, when this document was completed, "I have set my
trap. Now we shall see who will fall into it. I'll make a dozen copies
at once, and have them sent off by to-morrow. Not a word, Leo, about
this."

"I will be silent, as I have promised. All the same, I do not feel
comfortable about your experiment. To tell you the truth, Sybil, I can't
see the sense of it. Now, don't look angry, dear. I know it is all done
out of love for me."

"I am not sure that you deserve my love," pouted Sybil as he escorted
her to the door. "You place all kinds of obstacles in my way!"

She was rather angry, for her heart was fully taken up with the
magnificence of her scheme. However, Leo managed to calm her, and gain
her forgiveness. He was quite unaware of what he had done wrong. But
Sybil said that he had behaved disgracefully, so he apologised. Then she
said that she was a wicked girl, and after kissing him ran away. All
this was very foolish, but very sweet. Leo often recalled that interview
to her in after days, and they both agreed that they behaved like two
most sensible people. But at present Leo was too sad to enjoy the stolen
meeting as a true and loyal lover should have done.

That same night the sea-fog rolled up thick and white. Mr Pratt did not
return home, at which non-arrival Adam was not surprised. Mr Pratt was
too fond of his creature comforts to drive twenty miles through a damp
and clinging mist. Leo had the whole house to himself, and Adam, who
thought a good deal of him, did his best to make him comfortable. He
consulted with the cook and gave Leo a capital little dinner, together
with a bottle of superfine Burgundy. Then he supplied him with cigars of
the best and coffee of the finest, and left him comfortably seated
before the drawing-room fire. Under these circumstances Leo felt happier
than he had expected, seeing at what a low ebb his fortunes were.

The position of the unfortunate young man was undeniably hard. Here he
was, deserted by his aunt, Mrs Gabriel. She had taken him up, brought
him up to expect a large fortune, and then, for no cause at all, had
suddenly cast him out on the world to earn his own living as best he
could. And in addition to this, although it was hardship enough, poor
Leo's character was gone. He was accused of a sordid crime, and might
have to answer for it to the law. He did not see what defence he could
make. Certainly, if he acceded to Hale's terms, he could vindicate his
position in some measure by accounting for the sum of money he had used
to pay his debts. But in this case Sybil would be lost to him. And what
would life be without Sybil? Altogether, Leo was in low spirits, in
spite of the fire and the Burgundy, and the memory of that charming
interview. But it was no use lamenting, as he very truly observed to
himself, so he tried to shake off the feeling of depression and went to
bed. He was young, the world was large, and he hoped in some way or
another to sail out of these troubled waters into a peaceful haven. Hope
was the silver lining to his cloud of black despair.

Meanwhile, Raston had written to his friend Marton a full account of the
loss of the cup, of the accusation by Mrs Jeal of Leo, and of the
suspicions entertained by the villagers concerning the probity of the
young man. For some days he heard nothing. Then one evening Marton
himself arrived unexpectedly at Colester. He went at once to the
curate's lodgings and was received with great surprise.

"My dear Marton, this is an unexpected pleasure," said Raston, assisting
his distinguished visitor to pull off his coat. "I thought you would
have written to me about your visit to Penny."

"I didn't go there," replied Marton, with a laugh. "The fact is, Harold,
I cannot quite understand this case. You have not explained matters
clearly enough in your letter. I have set a detective to watch Penny and
Penny's shop, and I have come down to hear all details from your own
worshipful lips. But what a foggy sort of place you have here! I have
been driving in your mail-coach through a kind of cotton-wool. The guard
thought we would never reach Colester. I felt like a character of
Dickens in that coach. You are a primitive people here. Do you know I
rather like it!"

Marton was a tall, slim, black-haired man, neatly dressed in a tweed
suit. He constantly smoked cigarettes, and maintained a perfectly calm
demeanour. No one ever saw Marton excited. His face was clean-shaven,
and his grey eyes were sharp and piercing. He looked what he was, a
thorough gentleman, and a remarkably shrewd, clever man. His fame as a
detective is so well known that it need hardly be mentioned.

"I must get you something to eat," said Raston.

"No. I dined at Portfront before I left. Give me a glass of port, and I
can smoke a cigarette. This fire is comfortable after the fog."

"I have some excellent port, Marton. My dear mother is under the
impression that I am delicate, and keeps me well supplied from my
father's cellar. I don't know what he says to it."

"Being a clergyman, you had better not know," said Marton, dryly. "Your
father had a vocabulary of--There, there, I'll say nothing more. I want
my port, my cigarette, and a full account of this case. It seems to be
an interesting one. I shouldn't have come down otherwise, even for your
sake, my dear Harold. I have just twice as much business on hand as I
can do with. The detective life is not a happy one."

Raston poured out a glass of port and placed it at Marton's elbow. He
watched his friend light a cigarette, and himself filled his well-worn
briar. Then, when they were comfortably established, he related all that
he knew about the case. Marton listened with his eyes on the fire, but
made no observation until the recital was finished. Indeed, even then he
did not seem inclined to talk.

"Well?" said Raston, rather impatiently. "What do you think?"

"Wait a bit, my friend. It is a difficult case. I am not prepared to
give you an opinion straight away. I must ask something about the people
concerned in it first. This Leo Haverleigh? What about him?"

"He is a good man, and perfectly honest. I should as soon have suspected
myself of stealing the cup as Leo. And I have known him for some time."

"Well, if anyone ought to know the truth about a man's character I
should think a clergyman was the person," said Marton. "Is it not Balzac
who says the clergy are all in black because they see the worst side of
human nature? Humph! Have you had to put on mourning for this
Haverleigh?"

"No. He has been a trifle wild, and has got into debt; but otherwise
there is nothing wrong about him. Besides," added the curate, "Miss
Tempest is in love with him, and they are engaged. She is a noble girl,
and would not love a scoundrel."

"Ah!" said Marton, cynically, "I have seen a remark of that sort in
novels, my good man. In real life--But that is neither here nor there. I
should like to meet this young man."

"I can take you with me to-night. He is staying with Mr Pratt at The
Nun's House. It is no very great distance away."

"I can wait till to-morrow, Harold. I have no very great desire to go
out into this dense fog. By the way, who is this Mr Pratt?"

"A newcomer to Colester. He has been here off and on for the last few
months, and has decided to settle here. He is well off, and has
travelled a great deal. His house is beautifully furnished."

"Quite an acquisition to the neighbourhood!" said Marton, drowsily. "I
must make the acquaintance of your people here to-morrow. Just now I
feel inclined to go to bed."

"But tell me your opinion of this case?"

"Well," said Marton, thoughtfully, "from all the evidence you give me it
seems that Haverleigh is guilty."

"No, Marton," replied the curate, "I'll never believe that. And you
forget that he claims to have obtained the money from Sir Frank Hale."

"Well, then, his possession of three hundred pounds is easily proved. I
shall see Sir Frank Hale and question him. With regard to this Mrs Jeal,
her story seems credible enough. I don't suppose she has any enmity
against Haverleigh?"

"No. But she is a woman I neither like nor trust. A demure, cat-like
creature, with a pair of wicked eyes."

"You make me long to see her," said Marton, waking up. "That is just the
sort of person I like to meet. Do you think she may have stolen this cup
herself, and have invented this wild story to account for the loss? I
have heard of stranger and even more daring things."

"No. That is out of the question, Marton. On the night the cup was
stolen Mrs Jeal was watching beside this sick girl--the mad creature I
have told you about. She is innocent."

"Then I can only say that young Haverleigh seems to be the most likely
person. Only, the evidence against him is so plain that I believe him to
be guiltless. I always mistrust too plain evidence, Raston. It shows
signs of having been prepared. Well, I'll see this young man to-morrow,
and have a chat. I go by the face a great deal. Have you a photograph of
him?"

"No," said the curate on the spur of the moment. "Oh, yes, by the way! I
took a group of our people at a picnic. It is not a bad picture,
although small. You can see the whole lot at a glance."

Raston got out the photograph, and Marton went to the lamp to see it the
more plainly. He glanced at first carelessly at it, then his eyes grew
large, his attention became fixed. At that moment there was a ring at
the door. Marton looked at the clock. "You have a late visitor," he
said.

"A call to see some sick woman probably. Why do you look so closely at
that picture, Marton?"

"There is a face here I know. Who is that?"

Raston looked. "That is the man with whom Haverleigh is staying. Pratt!"

"Pratt?" repeated Marton in a thoughtful tone. "Has he a tattooed star
on his cheek just under the cheek bone?"

"Yes. And he is tattooed on the arm also--the right arm. I expect he had
it done while he was a sailor."

"Oh!" said Marton, dryly, "he says he was a sailor."

"Not to my knowledge; but he has mentioned something of being an amateur
one. Do you know him, Marton?"

"If he is the man I think he is, I know him better than you do, Raston!"

"Then who is--" Raston had just got thus far, when the landlady opened
the door to announce Mr Pratt. "Here is the man himself, Marton."

"Marton!" echoed Pratt, who was standing in the doorway.

"Yes, Mr--Angel," said Marton, looking straight at him.

Pratt stood for just half a moment as though turned into stone. Then he
turned on his heel, and went out of the door and down the stairs as
swiftly as he was able. Without a word Marton darted after him. By the
time he reached the street door Pratt had disappeared in the fog.




CHAPTER XII

A SURPRISE


Raston was astonished when Pratt disappeared so suddenly, and Marton
rushed out after him. He went to the door, but his friend was not to be
seen. It was little use following, for he did not know which direction
the man had taken, and the fog was so thick that he could hardly see the
length of his hand before him. The whole of the spur upon which Colester
was built was wrapped in a thick white mist, and those who were abroad
in the streets ran every chance of being lost. The village was small,
but the alleys and streets were tortuous, so there would be no great
difficulty in mistaking the way.

For over an hour the curate waited, yet Marton did not return. He could
only suppose that the detective had followed Pratt, for what purpose he
could not divine. Evidently Marton knew something not altogether to
Pratt's advantage, and Pratt was aware of this, else he would hardly
have disappeared so expeditiously. Moreover, Marton had addressed Pratt
as "Angel," which hinted that the American was masquerading under a
false name. Still wondering at what was likely to be the outcome of this
adventure, Raston placed himself at the door and waited for the return
of his friend. But, as time passed, he made sure that the detective, a
stranger in the village, had lost his way.

"I can't leave him out of doors all night," soliloquised Raston, peering
into the fog; "yet I do not know where to look for him. However, his own
good sense must have told him not to go too far."

It was now after ten o'clock, and most of the villagers were in bed. Mr
Raston then ventured upon a course of which he would have thought twice
had the situation been less desperate. He placed his hands to his mouth
and sent an Australian "cooe" through the night. This accomplishment had
been taught to him by an Australian cousin. As this especial cry carried
further than most shouts, Raston congratulated himself that he knew how
to give it. It was the only way of getting into communication with
Marton.

After shouting once or twice, Raston heard a faint cry in response. It
came from the right. So the curate, feeling his way along the houses,
started in that direction, shouting at intervals. Shortly the answering
cry sounded close at hand, and after some difficulty and inarticulate
conversation the two men met. With an ejaculation Marton grasped the
hand of his friend. "Thank Heaven you have found me," said the
detective. "I have been going round in a circle."

"Did you catch up with Pratt?" asked Raston.

"No; the rascal disappeared into the fog, and I lost myself in pursuit
of him in about three minutes."

"Why do you call him a rascal?"

"Because he is one; I know all about him. But I never thought I should
have stumbled on 'Mr Angel' in this locality. I feel like Saul, who went
out to look for his asses and stumbled on a kingdom."

"Is his name Angel?"

"That is _one_ of his names; he has at least a dozen. Why he should have
chosen one that fitted him so badly I cannot say."

By this time Raston, holding on to Marton's coat sleeve, had guided the
detective back to his lodgings. The man was shivering with cold, for he
had gone out without coat or hat. He hastily swallowed a glass of port,
and began getting his things to go out. "You're not going into that fog
again!" protested Raston. "You'll only get lost."

"Not under your capable guidance," laughed the detective. "You must
guide me to the house of this Mr Pratt. I intend to arrest him."

"Arrest him!" echoed the curate, staring. "Dear me, what has he done?"

"Ask me what he hasn't done," said Marton, with a curl of his lip, "and
I'll be better able to tell you. It's a long story, Raston, and time is
passing; I want to go to the man's house. Is it far from here?"

"Some little distance," replied the curate, wondering at this haste. "I
can find my way to it by guiding myself along the walls. But you can't
arrest him, Marton, whatever he has done, unless you have a warrant."

"I accept all responsibility on that score," replied Marton, grimly.
"The police have wanted Mr Angel, _alias_ Pratt, for many a long day.
Now the rascal knows that I am here, he will clear out of Colester in
double quick time. I want to act promptly and take him by surprise. Now
don't ask questions, my dear fellow, but take me to the house. I'll tell
you all about this man later on. By the way, he is the individual who
gave your church this celebrated cup?"

"Yes. I really hope there is nothing wrong."

"_Everything_ is wrong. I expect the cup was stolen--"

"It _is_ stolen--"

"Pshaw! I don't mean this time. Pratt stole it himself. I wonder he
dare present his spoils to the Church. The fellow must have very little
religion to think such an ill-gotten gift could be acceptable."

"Stolen!" murmured Raston, putting on his coat. "But why--who is Pratt?"

"Simply the cleverest thief in the three kingdoms. Come along!"

Raston gasped, but he had no time to ask further questions. The
detective had him by the arm and was hurrying him to the door. When
outside he made the curate lead, and followed close on his heels.
Raston, rather dazed by this experience, turned in the direction of The
Nun's House, and, guiding himself along the walls and houses, managed to
get into the street in which it stood--that is, he and Marton found
themselves on the highroad which led down to King's-meadows. It was
fully an hour before they got as far as this, for the fog grew denser
every moment. Finally, Raston stumbled on the gate, drew his friend
inside with an ejaculation of satisfaction, and walked swiftly up the
path that led to the house. On the ground floor all was dark, but in the
centre window of the second storey a light was burning. Marton did not
wait for the curate, but ran up the steps and knocked at the door; he
also rang, and he did both violently. For a time there was no response,
then the light disappeared from the window above.

In a few minutes the noise of the bolts being withdrawn was heard, and
the rattle of the chain. The door opened to show Leo in his
dressing-gown standing on the threshold with a lighted candle in his
hand. He looked bewildered and angry, as though he had just been aroused
from his first sleep, which indeed was the case. "What the devil is the
matter?" he asked crossly, peering out into the night. "You make enough
noise to wake the dead! Who is it?"

"It is I, and a friend, Haverleigh," said the curate, pushed forward by
the detective. "Is Mr Pratt within?"

"I suppose so," replied Leo, much astonished at this nocturnal
visitation; "he is no doubt in bed. I can't understand why he did not
hear the noise you made. Has he left anything at your place, Raston?"

"Ah! You knew he was going to see Mr Raston?" put in Marton, sharply.

"He left here over two hours ago, and I went to bed. Then I heard him
come back just as I was falling asleep, but he did not come up to my
room. If you will tell me what is the matter, I'll rouse him.

"Let us enter, Haverleigh," said the curate, who was shivering. "We have
much to tell you."

Still much puzzled, Leo led the way to the library after shutting the
door, and the two men followed him. He lighted the gas--Colester was not
sufficiently civilised for electric light--and then turned to ask once
more what was the matter. Raston thought the best way to bring about an
explanation was to introduce his friend, who was already looking keenly
round the well-furnished room. "This is Mr Marton," he said. "He is a
London detective."

With a bitter laugh Leo set down the candle on the table. "What," he
said, "are you the man with the bow-string, Raston? Scarcely worthy of
your cloth! If you wanted to arrest me, you might have waited until
morning!"

"Who is this young gentleman?" asked Marton, suddenly.

"I am Leo Haverleigh, Mr Detective," replied the young man, sharply;
"and I suppose you have come here at the instance of Mr Tempest to
arrest me!"

Marton snatched up the candle, and held it close to Leo's face. He was
apparently quite satisfied, for he spoke in a more friendly tone.

"You need not be afraid, Mr Haverleigh," he said soothingly. "I have not
come to arrest you--but to investigate the case. I don't think there is
any chance of your being arrested. Your face is enough for me. But this
is all very well," he added impatiently; "I want Pratt!"

"I will go and wake him," said Leo, who could make neither top nor tail
of all this, but who was relieved to find that he was not in danger of
arrest. He retired from the room, while Marton darted about here there,
and everywhere. He was like a bloodhound nosing a trail. Suddenly he
stopped before a cabinet, a drawer of which was open.

"Too late!" said Marton in a tone of disgust. "He's bolted."

"How could he bolt in this fog?" asked Raston, dubiously.

"Oh, he'll find his way somehow. Tony Angel is the cleverest of men for
getting out of a difficulty. He has evaded the police for years. See, my
dear chap, this drawer is open. That means he has taken money or
valuables from it, and is now on his way to Heaven knows what
hiding-place.

"Can you be sure of that? The open drawer may be an accident. Besides,
he would not think you would act so promptly."

"Indeed, that is just why he has bolted so expeditiously," said Marton,
with something of admiration in his tones. "Angel has experienced my
promptitude before, and several times I have been on the point of
capturing him. He has taken French leave within the last two hours. But
for that infernal fog I should have stuck to him till I ran him down.
Or, at all events, I might have disabled him with a shot."

The curate looked at his friend aghast. "A shot!" he stammered.

Marton produced a neat little revolver. "I should have used that had I
been able," he said quietly. "It does not do to adopt half measures with
our mutual friend. Besides, if hard pressed he would have returned the
compliment. Your Haverleigh fellow is a long time!"

"He'll be back soon. You can trust Leo. Surely, Marton, you do not think
he knew anything of Pratt's doings?"

"With such a face as that he knows precious little," retorted Marton;
"he is a good fellow, but not sharp. He did not steal that cup, nor did
he help Pratt to get away. No, Raston. Our criminal friend came back
here while I was blundering in the fog, and after taking some money
cleared out without loss of time. I sha'n't catch him now. I suppose the
telegraph-office is closed?"

"Yes. It closes here at nine o'clock. And even if you sent a wire, it
would not be delivered at Portfront to-night."

"No, I suppose not. You are all so slow in these country places! It is
clever of you to mention Portfront, Raston. You think that Tony Angel
will go there?"

"How else can he get away?"

"I don't know. You know the country better than I do. But I tell you
what, our friend will not go to Portfront or anywhere near it."

"Why not?" asked the curate, bewildered.

"Because you expect him to go there. Angel always does the thing that is
not expected. I wish I had caught him! I've been years trying to hunt
him down. And the beast has made himself comfortable here!" said Marton,
with a glance round. "I bet you, Raston, that the greater part of these
things have been stolen."

"Stolen, Marton! How terrible. And the cup?"

"He stole that also," replied Marton, promptly, lighting one of his
cigarettes. "Oh, he is a clever man, is Angel. Ah! here is our young and
enterprising friend. Well, Mr Haverleigh, so Pratt has gone?"

"Yes," said Leo, looking puzzled. "I went to his room and found that his
bed had not been slept in. The back door is open, although closed--that
is, it has not been locked. How do you know Pratt has gone?"

"I'll tell you later. Throw a few logs on that fire, Raston. It will
soon burn up. Here is a bottle of whisky, too, and some soda."

"I left that for Pratt," said Leo, somewhat surprised at the cool way in
which this man was behaving.

"And Pratt was too clever to muddle his head when he needed all his wits
about him. By the way, has his jackall gone also?"

"Adam is not in, if that is what you--"

"Yes, Mr Haverleigh, that is exactly what I do mean. Ha! Clever man
Pratt! He came back here straight, and, warning his pal, walked off,
leaving the empty house to me and to you, Mr Haverleigh. Did you hear
him leave?"

"I heard nothing until you knocked at the door. Then I wondered why Adam
did not hear you. The other servants are asleep at the back of the
house, and I suppose they also expected Adam to answer the bell."

"That is extremely probable. Well, let us hope the remaining servants
will sleep well. To-morrow they must leave this house!"

"Why, in Heaven's name?" asked Leo, starting up.

"For the very simple reason that the police will be put into possession
here by me to-morrow."

"What? Did Pratt steal the--I don't understand. Raston, what does this
man mean? Who is he? What are--"

"Wait a bit, Mr Haverleigh," interrupted Marton, motioning the curate to
hold his tongue, "all in good time. I am Horace Marton, a detective. I
was asked by Mr Raston to investigate this robbery, and he was telling
me about it at his lodgings. Your friend Mr Pratt arrived, and when he
saw me he bolted out into the fog. I followed and lost him. Then I got
back to Raston here, and we have been over two hours looking for this
confounded place. During that time Pratt and Adam have made themselves
scarce."

"But why should they do that?" asked Leo, still puzzled.

"Because this man who calls himself Pratt, and poses as a giver of gifts
to the Church, is a well-known London thief, and his man Adam is what he
would call a pal. 'Tony Angel,' that is the real name of Mr Pratt, but
he had half-a-dozen others beside. I congratulate you on your friend, Mr
Haverleigh!"

"I never knew anything of this," cried Leo, utterly taken aback.

"I am quite sure of that, Haverleigh," said the curate, heartily.

Marton chuckled. "Wait a bit, Harold," he said; "do not be in such a
hurry. How do we know that Mr Haverleigh has not been working together
with Tony Angel? He may know all about him and may have been employed by
him to steal the very cup which was given by Pratt as an evidence of his
respectability."

Leo jumped up and would have flung himself on Marton; but Raston held
him back. "How dare you make such an accusation against me?" cried the
young man, furiously. "Let me go, Raston; don't you hear what he says?"

"Wait a bit, Haverleigh," urged the curate. "Marton does nothing without
a motive. He can explain if you will remain quiet."

Thus advised, Leo sat down again, but in rather a sulky humour. "I am a
trifle tired of being called a blackguard," he said, frowning at Marton,
who regarded him with a friendly smile. "I know absolutely nothing about
Mr Pratt, save that he was a friend of Mrs Gabriel's, and that he has
been very good to me. I always thought he was what he represented
himself to be."

"Small wonder you did," said Marton, coolly. "Angel would deceive a much
cleverer man than you appear to be, Mr Haverleigh! And look here, I may
as well tell you at once that I am certain you knew nothing about him.
Also I am equally certain that you have had nothing to do with this
robbery. I cannot say yet whether Pratt--as I may continue to call him
for clearness' sake--stole the cup. But you are innocent, Mr
Haverleigh; and I intend to do my best to get you out of your trouble.
Shake hands."

At first Leo hesitated, for he was still sore about the accusation. But
the detective regarded him in a friendly manner, and his smile was so
irresistible, that in the end he shook hands heartily. He felt that the
man who spoke thus would be a good friend. "You know all about the
case?"

"All that Mr Raston could tell me," said the detective, "even to the
fact that you borrowed the money for which you are accused of stealing
the cup from Sir Frank Hale."

"Then I wish you would make him acknowledge the loan," said Leo,
petulantly.

Marton started and looked at the young man. "Does he not do so?"

"No. He is in love with Miss Tempest, who is engaged to me, and he says
he will deny the loan if I do not give her up."

"And marry his sister, I suppose!" interposed the curate, whereat Leo
nodded.

"Humph!" said Marton, thoughtfully, caressing his chin. "It seems to me,
Mr Haverleigh, that you have been made a tool of by unscrupulous people.
But I'll give my attention to this to-morrow. I'll get the truth out of
this Hale! He don't dare to palter with me. Leave yourself and your
reputation in my hands, Haverleigh."

"Very gladly," said Leo, heartily; "but what about Pratt?"

Marton reflected, and took a sip of whisky and water. "He's gone. I do
not think he will appear again in Colester."

"But he has left his house and all these beautiful things behind him,"
put in Raston, with a glance around.

"I see he has made himself comfortable," said Marton, with a shrug; "it
was always his way! This is not the first time he has furnished a house,
settled down. He has been driven out of every burrow, however. This time
I discovered his hiding-place by accident. Colester was about the best
place in the whole of England he could have chosen. No one would have
thought of looking for him here. I daresay he expected to settle down
and die in the odour of sanctity, surrounded by his ill-gotten gains.
But he has not gone empty-handed, Haverleigh. He is too clever for that,
and is always prepared for an emergency."

"But _who_ is Pratt?"

"Well; you are asking me a hard question. I understand he is a workhouse
brat of sorts. He himself claims to be the illegitimate son of a
nobleman. Certainly, he has a very gentlemanly appearance. He has been
working for at least thirty years, and has always contrived to evade the
English police. I believe he was laid by the heels in America."

"He has travelled a great deal."

"I believe you! He knows the whole world and all the scoundrels in it. A
king of crime! That is what Pratt is. The generality of thieves adore
him, for he has his good points, and he is generous. Well, we have
talked enough for to-night. I'll sleep here, Haverleigh. Raston?"

"I'll return to my own place," said the curate, rising to go.

And this he did, but Marton, having found the burrow of Pratt, _alias_
Angel, did not intend to leave it. He was quite as clever as the man he
was hunting.




CHAPTER XIII

AN INTERESTING DOCUMENT


Marton did not wish the identity of Pratt to be concealed. On the
contrary, he gave it as wide a publicity as possible, hoping that it
might lead to the man's capture. Everyone from Portfront to Colester
knew the would-be country gentleman, so it was not unlikely that he
might be caught. Considering that only a night had elapsed, it was
impossible that he could have got far away, especially in a fog. And if
Pratt escaped there was always the off-chance that Adam might be laid by
the heels.

An examination next morning showed Marton that the two bicycles were
missing, so he judged that both men had gone off together. It was
improbable in Marton's opinion that they had gone to Portfront, as they
could not possibly leave before the steamer at seven o'clock, and the
police could be communicated with by telegraph before they could get
clear of the place. At half-past six Marton routed a telegraph operator
out of his bed, and set him to work. He wired to the inspector at
Portfront to arrest Pratt and his man forthwith, or, at all events, to
detain them until the London police could be communicated with and a
warrant for Pratt's manifold iniquities procured.

But, to Marton's surprise, no answer was returned from Inspector German.
Yet the inspector knew Pratt well, and, if the man set foot in
Portfront, could easily seize him. Later on, somewhere about nine
o'clock, the reason that no answer had arrived became apparent. A
messenger came from Portfront to say that the telegraph wire between
that place and Portfront had been cut midway. There was only one line,
so all communication had been broken off. The steamer had started, and,
without doubt, the two men were on board. At once Marton started off to
Portfront on the curate's bicycle. On his arrival he went to see German.

The inspector was much astonished when he heard the story. He had not
received the wire, and therefore had done nothing. In Marton's company
he hurried to the office of the steamer.

"You see the kind of man we have to deal with, German," said Marton,
much vexed. "It was a clever dodge to cut the wire, and yet he gave
himself away. I did not think he would go to Portfront, but the cutting
of the wire proves he did. We'll wire to Worthing, and stop him there."

An inquiry at the steamer office resulted in nothing. It seemed that Mr
Pratt had a season ticket, and therefore had not purchased one. Nor had
Adam, so it might be that he was still in the town. The loafers on the
pier said they had not seen Pratt go aboard.

"Humph!" said Marton, "he sneaked on in some disguise."

"Is he clever at disguising himself?" asked German.

"I should think so. His own mother would not know him. Still, he had no
time to make-up before he left Colester, so he may not be so carefully
disguised. I daresay we can catch him at Worthing."

A wire was sent to Worthing forthwith, and another to Scotland Yard,
requesting that someone might be sent down to take charge of Pratt's
house, and to identify the goods he had in it. There was a list of the
houses Pratt had broken into, and a list of the stolen goods also, so it
would be easy to have this brought down and compared with the contents
of The Nun's House. Having thus done all that he could under the
circumstances, Marton returned to Colester, where he found the curate
and Leo waiting for him. The latter had now taken up his quarters at the
inn. But he kept within doors, as now that the identity of Pratt was
known, Leo was credited with having been his confederate.

There was tremendous excitement in Colester over the discovery that the
village had entertained unawares a well-known London thief. Many of the
villagers flattered themselves on the stern and non-committal attitude
they had adopted towards the too fascinating stranger. Mr Pratt had
never been very popular, but now he was spoken ill of on every hand. The
whole village would have been delighted to have seen him in the power of
the law.

But Pratt was too clever for them all. The wire to Worthing produced no
result. Neither Pratt nor Adam were on board. It then appeared that the
steamer had put in at Bognor. Marton had omitted to advise the police
there of the fugitives, so it was presumed that they had got off with
the rest of the passengers. The captain did not know Adam by sight, and
Pratt had evidently disguised himself well. At all events, in the crowd
the two had passed unnoticed. Although the London stations were watched,
no sight could be caught of them.

"A clever man Pratt!" said Marton, when informed of his ill success. "I
am perfectly certain of the way in which he went about the matter. He
and his servant got off at Bognor, and alighted at some station just
outside the metropolis. They got to their own haunts by some back way."

"Do you know of their haunts?" asked Leo, who was keenly interested in
the matter, and could not help feeling relieved that Pratt had escaped.

"Oh! they change them every now and then. Besides, Adam will keep out of
sight, and Pratt will so disguise himself that there will be no
recognising him. He's got clean away this time. And I believe, Mr
Haverleigh," added Marton, with a laugh, "that you are rather pleased!"

"Well," said Leo, with some hesitation, "in spite of all you say, I
can't bring myself to believe that Pratt is a bad sort of chap. He was
very kind to me."

"He is kind to most people. He poses as a kind of modern Robin Hood, who
robs the rich to give to the poor. I have known him to do many kind
actions. But he is a scamp for all that, and if I could lay my hands on
him I'd get him!"

Mrs Gabriel was much annoyed to find that Pratt was so notorious a
character. She determined to clear herself of complicity in his sordid
crimes, although no one ever suspected that she had any knowledge of the
man's true character. She sent for Marton, and had a long talk with him
about Pratt; incidentally a reference was made to Leo.

"I have asked you to see me, Mr Marton," she said, "because it was I who
introduced Mr Pratt to Colester. I have known him ten years, and he
always appeared to me to be a most respectable American."

"He is not an American at all," said Marton. "But he could assume any
nationality that suited him for the moment. He is a brilliantly-clever
man, Mrs Gabriel, and I do not wonder he took you in."

"He got no money out of me, at all events," said the lady, grimly.

"Ah! Then you escaped easily. The wonder is he did not try and marry
you! A rich widow is exactly the kind of victim he would like."

"I am not the sort of woman to be anyone's victim, Mr Marton."

Marton, looking at her stern, strong face, quite agreed, but he was too
polite to give vent to his feelings. He merely inquired how Mrs Gabriel
had become acquainted with this Prince of Swindlers. She had no
hesitation in giving him full details.

"I met him at a Swiss hotel many years ago," she said. "He was then
called Pratt, and he posed as a rich American. I met with an accident
while out walking on the hill above Montreux, and lay out till
nightfall. Mr Pratt rescued me from this very unpleasant position, and
took me back to the hotel. A friendship sprang up between us, and when
he returned to England he called on me. As he was always the same for
ten years, and I saw much of him, I never suspected that he was other
than he represented himself to be. Besides, Mr Marton, you must admit he
is a most fascinating man."

"Much too fascinating, Mrs Gabriel, as many have found to their cost."

Mrs Gabriel reflected a moment. "Do you think he will be put in prison?"

"Certainly, if we catch him," replied Marton, quietly; "he is a man
dangerous to society. All his life he has been a rogue and a criminal.
All his money comes to him in the wrong way. That house below--I believe
you let it to him, Mrs Gabriel--is filled with the proceeds of his
robberies. He bought the furniture, but the objects of art--even the
pictures--have all been stolen. In a few days I shall have some people
down from Scotland Yard to identify the things and restore them to their
owners. But as to Mr Pratt, I fear he has escaped out of the clutches of
the law--as usual."

"I cannot say I regret it," said Mrs Gabriel, boldly. "Bad as he is,
there are worse people in the world, Mr Marton. But tell me, sir. You
are investigating this robbery. My adopted son, Mr Haverleigh is
suspected."

"He is perfectly innocent, Mrs Gabriel. The money he was said to have
obtained from the sale of the cup was given to him by Sir Frank Hale."

"Sir Frank denies it."

"So Mr Haverleigh says. But I'll see Sir Frank myself, and see what I
can make of him. I would rather believe Mr Haverleigh than anyone else.
He has an absolutely open nature."

"He is a fool, if that is what you mean."

"Pardon me, I do not think so! A man can be straightforward and
honourable, as Mr Haverleigh is, without being a fool. As yet I have not
investigated this case, as my attention has been taken up with Pratt.
But in a day or so I hope to go to work and then I am prepared to say
that the crime will not be brought home to your nephew."

"Have you any suspicions?"

"Not yet. I have not searched out the evidence sufficiently."

"Mrs Jeal saw my nephew pawn the cup."

"Ah! That is a mystery which I must fathom, Mrs Gabriel. A person
resembling Mr Haverleigh pawned the cup, but I am sure it was not your
nephew. There is a conspiracy against him, on whose part I am not
prepared to say yet. But I shall find it out, clear his character, and
punish those who have been concerned in it. And now, Mrs Gabriel, I must
bid you good-day, as my time is fully occupied. Let me, however, inform
you that there is no need to excuse your association with Mr Pratt. I
quite understand how he wriggled himself into your acquaintance, and
you are in no way to blame. Once more, good-day!"

Marton bowed himself out. But he had seen enough of Mrs Gabriel to note
the strong hatred she bore towards Leo, and he wondered what could be
the reason. Also, he saw that for a moment she had flinched at the
mention of conspiracy, which set him on the alert as to whether her
detestation of her nephew had carried her so far as to plot against his
good name.

"If there is anything the matter, Hale is the man to know," murmured the
detective; "he lent the money, and now declines to acknowledge the loan.
I believe there is something bad at the back of all this. Poor
Haverleigh seems to be the most harmless of men, yet he is being ruined
in some underhand way. Well, I'll settle Pratt's matter, and then clear
his name."

But before Marton could do this, Providence took the task out of his
hand. For the next ten days he was busy consulting with those sent down
from Scotland Yard about the numerous stolen articles found in The Nun's
House. The cabinet of antique coins was restored to a famous collector,
who had lost them five years before. Many pictures were replaced in the
galleries of country houses, and, in one way and another, by the time
The Nun's House was denuded of what belonged to other people, there
remained very little but the furniture. And even some choice articles of
furniture were found to be the property of other people. It was really
wonderful the amount of stolen goods that Pratt had collected. He must
have thieved for years to have got together such a collection.

"But he will start no more burrows," said Marton, when all was at an
end. "He never expected that I should find him here, and therefore
collected all his treasures. His life is not long enough to enable him
to bring together such a collection of things again. Besides, he has not
the same wide field for his knaveries. The police are one too many for
him now."

Marton said this to the vicar, who was deeply shocked to hear of the
wickedness of the man from whom he had accepted the cup. "Do you think
that sacred vessel was stolen also, Mr Marton?" asked the good man.

"I am perfectly sure of it," replied the detective, promptly; "but we
have not got the cup down on our list, and no one has come forward to
claim it."

"It has not been advertised, Mr Marton."

"Pardon me, sir, it has been advertised, and by someone in this place. I
saw this notice in the _Daily Telegraph_, also in the _Times_. Can you
tell me who 'S.T.' is, Mr Tempest?"

The vicar took the newspaper handed to him and looked at it in a
bewildered manner. He read the notice carefully, but it never struck him
that the initials were those of his own daughter. "I really do not know
who can have inserted this, Mr Marton," he said. "It seems to be
carefully worded, too, and a reward of fifty pounds has been offered.
Dear me!"

"I have a rival who is investigating the case," said Marton, with a
smile. "Is the description accurate, vicar?"

"Perfectly; even the inscription. If you will permit me to take this
away, Mr Marton, I will see if I can discover who has put it in. I am
annoyed that the thing should have been taken out of your hands. But, Mr
Marton, before I leave you, let me state to you my conviction that my
young friend Leo Haverleigh did not steal the cup."

"Ah, indeed, Mr Tempest," said Marton, eyeing the old man keenly. "And
what has led you to such a happy conclusion?"

"I have no grounds for it save my inward conviction."

"There is the story of Mrs Jeal, you know."

Mr Tempest looked troubled. "Most remarkable story," he said. "But we
have heard of many cases of accidental resemblances, Mr Marton. I fear I
have been unjust to Leo, and I wish to withdraw any charge I may have
made against him. I heard his defence, and saw his face while he was
making it. Unless the face is not the index of the mind, I cannot bring
myself to believe that he lied. No, Mr Marton, I cannot give you my
reasons, but I am convinced that I misjudged Leo."

"Were you prejudiced against him by Mrs Gabriel?" asked Marton, for Leo
had told him his suspicions on this point.

Mr Tempest hesitated. "I admit that I was," he said at length. "She said
something to me which I am not at liberty to repeat."

"Does it make Mr Haverleigh out a villain?"

"By no means," said the vicar, hastily. "What she told me is sad, but
not wicked. More his misfortune than his fault. I can say no more. I can
keep this paper, Mr Marton? Thank you, sir. Good-day, good-day!" and the
vicar walked away, leaving Marton pondering.

It was three days after this, and when Marton was about to begin his
investigation of the case, that he received a letter from London. He was
more surprised than he chose to say when he found that it came from Mr
Pratt. That gentleman gave no address--he had posted the letter at the
General Post-office, so that even the district where he was hidden
should not be traced. The letter--as Marton said afterwards--was one of
consummate impudence, and it took him all his time to read it with
patience. As a human document it possessed a certain value. The letter
ran as follows, and Marton swore as he read:--

  "DEAR MARTON,--So you have let me slip through your fingers again.
  Is it not about time that you stopped setting your wits against
  mine? Several times you have tried; but always you have been
  beaten. Really, you must take lessons in the art of
  thief-catching, if you want to deserve the reputation you possess.

  "I am bound to say that but for the fog I should have been caught.
  But, thanks to its friendly shelter, I ran back to my house, while
  you were blundering about like a lost sheep, and warned Adam. I
  knew you would have to get Raston to show you the way, and would
  be some time. Still, I knew your infernal pertinacity, and made
  myself as scarce as possible in a very short space of time. I
  should like to have seen your face when you came to my house and
  found your prey had escaped.

  "I packed up my jewels, which I always keep prepared for such an
  emergency as this, and, dressing myself warmly, I mounted my
  bicycle. Adam, who had likewise made his preparations, mounted
  another, and we both went down the main road. In spite of the mist
  there was no difficulty. The highway runs in a straight line to
  Portfront, and there was no vehicle abroad to make our travelling
  dangerous. We did not hurry, but took our time, as I did not wish
  to get to Portfront before the steamer went. As a matter of fact
  we did, but hung about the outskirts of the town until it was time
  to be aboard. Of course I do not need to tell you how I stopped
  you from communicating with the Portfront police. I suggested the
  idea, and Adam climbed the pole to cut the telegraph wire.

  "We had a very pleasant trip as far as Bognor, where we got on the
  train, and stopped at some station, the name of which I need not
  tell you. We are now in London in very comfortable circumstances.
  If you are clever enough to find me--which I don't think you
  are--I promise to give myself up as soon as you appear. But there
  is no chance of my seeing you. Better remain in Colester, my dear
  Marton, and turn farmer. It is all you are fit for. Upon my honour
  it is.

  "One thing I should like to know. How the devil did you manage to
  find out my retreat? I never thought you had it in you. I went to
  see Raston on some business likely to enhance my popularity in the
  parish, and I dropped across you! For the first time in my life I
  was taken aback. Was it design or accident that I found you there?
  I do not wish to compliment you undeservedly.

  "Well, you have driven me away, and I must find a new place in
  which to pass my old age. It is too bad of you, Marton! On my
  soul, too bad! I was getting so popular in Colester. Now, I
  suppose, everyone of the honest men are swearing at me. Yet I
  never robbed them.

  "One other thing. If you came down to investigate that robbery of
  the cup I presented to the church, you can spare yourself the
  trouble. I stole it myself. It went to my heart to lose so
  valuable an object, and I was sorry when I had given it. I could
  not ask for it back, so I resolved to steal it. I went to the
  church, and, as I am a small man, I climbed in through the lepers'
  window. I got the cup, climbed out again, and went back to my
  house. Then I was afraid lest the cup would be seen by chance, and
  all my popularity would go. I therefore resolved to pawn it. That
  is a way I have kept safe many a piece of jewellery. I could not
  go myself, but I sent Adam. He is rather like Leo Haverleigh, and
  so that fool of a Mrs Jeal made the mistake. You need not look for
  the cup in Battersea now, as I have redeemed it. I took the ticket
  from Adam, and went myself. It is now in my possession, again,
  and I do not intend to part with it any more. You know how fond I
  am of beautiful things, dear Marton.

  "Well, I daresay you guessed that I stole the cup. Here is my
  confession, and you can tell all those fools at Colester,
  including the vicar, that Leo Haverleigh is perfectly innocent. He
  has not enough brains to steal anything. I only took back my own,
  and I am proud of it, as I have bamboozled the lot of you--clever
  Mr Marton included!

  "Leo got the money with which he paid his debts from Sir Frank
  Hale. You can ask him--Hale, I mean. If he denies it, I leave him
  to you, as you are clever enough to get the truth out of him. He
  wants to marry Sybil Tempest, and desires Leo to marry his sister
  Edith. All this was a plot to get Leo into his power, and force
  him to do what was wanted. I hope you will punish the young man
  Hale. He is a cripple, and has all the spite of one. I should have
  punished him myself, but you have deprived me of that pleasure. I
  therefore call upon you to do your best.

  "And now, my dear Marton, good-bye. Give my love to all the
  mourning population of Colester, and especially to Mrs Gabriel, my
  dear and life-long friend. I am afraid she will not get her rent.
  Also I had the house re-decorated at her expense. The bills will
  be sent in to her. Let her pay them with my blessing. I will write
  to Leo myself, and give him my blessing. I have much to say to him
  that will be of no interest to you. He is a good fellow, and I
  wish to see him married to Sybil. He will be some day. I can
  manage her fool of a father even at a distance.

  "Now, I hope you will look after yourself, for my sake, Marton. So
  long as the Scotland Yard idiots keep you on my track, I am safe.
  If you died, they might perhaps pick a clever man, dangerous to
  me, my friend. So, with all kind regards and best wishes until we
  meet.--Believe me, my dear failure, yours never--in the flesh,

                                                "RICHARD PRATT."




CHAPTER XIV

AN UNEXPECTED MEETING


"I have been much to blame," said the vicar. "I set myself up as a judge
when I had no right to do so. Leo, you must forgive me."

"I forgive you freely," replied the young man, grasping the hand held
out by Mr Tempest. "Appearances were against me, so it was little wonder
that you did not entirely trust me. Still, Mr Tempest, you should have
known me better than to think me guilty of such a crime."

"I know--I know I have been wrong."

"Well, let us drop the subject. My character is now clear, and I have no
wish to recall a very disagreeable past."

This conversation took place in the study of Mr Tempest, and in the
presence of Sybil and Marton. The detective had shown the vicar the
insolent but welcome letter he had received from Pratt. The confession
therein entirely exonerated Leo, and he could again hold up his head. He
and Mr Tempest were quite reconciled. Sybil, with her hand in Leo's,
looked thoroughly happy.

"_I_ never lost faith in you, Leo!" she said. "Sooner or later I knew
that all would be well."

"I have to thank Marton for the clearing of my character, Sybil."

"Faith, you are wrong there!" said Marton, smiling. "I thought you were
innocent; but as I had not looked into the case, I saw no means of
proving it. Had not Pratt sent this confession I should still be in the
dark. He is a scoundrel, but he is a good friend to you, Haverleigh!"

"I don't agree with you," said Tempest, sharply, for he was still sore
on the subject of the cup. "Pratt knew that Leo was suspected, and he
should have come forward long ere this to put the matter right."

"You ask too much from a man of Pratt's nature," said Marton, dryly. "It
is wonderful that he should have confessed his guilt even at the
eleventh hour. However, this closes the case, and I can go back to
London. We know now who stole the cup, and we know also that it cannot
be recovered. Pratt will stick to it this time. It was only his vanity
and desire for popularity that made him give it away in the first
instance."

"If it came back to me I should never accept it," said the vicar,
emphatically. "A stolen cup should never have been put to sacred uses. I
wonder at the daring of the man!"

"Oh! a man like Pratt is capable of anything," said Marton, with a
shrug. "But you will never see him again, Mr Tempest. And now, Mr
Haverleigh, I think you should see Sir Frank Hale and make him confess
that he lent you the money."

"There will be no difficulty about that," replied Leo. "Hale told only
two people that he repudiated all knowledge of the loan. One was my
aunt, the other myself. He is too cunning to tell the world the untruth
he told us. Besides, my character being cleared, he can have no further
hold over me. I fear he will be angry."

"I am certain he will. Let us see him together."

Leo was quite willing to do this, so after taking a fond leave of Sybil,
and a cordial one of her father, he set out with the detective to bring
Sir Frank Hale to his bearings. On the way Marton asked Leo's permission
to touch upon a delicate subject. Haverleigh told him to speak freely.
"I owe you too much to take offence at anything you may say," he
observed. "You have been my very good friend, Marton."

"Oh, that's all right," replied the detective, brightly; "and I really
do not deserve your thanks. Any help I have given you has been purely
accidental. If Pratt had held his tongue, you would still have been in
the same position as before. But I am bound to say, Haverleigh, that
even before the arrival of this letter Mr Tempest expressed his belief
in your innocence."

"I am glad of that," said Leo. "He treated me badly, and it is a
pleasure to me to hear that his own good sense told him I was innocent
before he had the actual proof. I am anxious to stand well with him,
Marton."

"Ah! That is the matter I wish to discuss. I see that you and Miss
Tempest are much attached to one another. Do you think the vicar will
consent to the marriage?"

"I really can't say. Even before this scandal he seemed to be displeased
with me, and kept me away from his house as much as possible. He did not
want to see me, and he would not let me see Sybil. We had to meet by
stealth. Now he may have changed his mind."

"And if he has? What, then?"

"Then I can announce my engagement to Sybil," said Leo. "But, you see, I
am not in a position to marry, and may not be for a long time. I have to
make my way in the world, and to make money also. I thought of enlisting
for this war, and of fighting my way through the ranks to a commission."

"Even then I do not see how you could marry. You might gain a
commission, but not money. Until your worldly prospects are more secure,
I do not think you should engage yourself to Miss Tempest."

"That is straight speaking, Marton."

"You gave me permission to speak out. I like you, Haverleigh, and after
the trouble you have come through I think you should be rewarded by
getting your heart's desire. But if you love Miss Temple, you will not
marry her until you can give her a comfortable home. Even if you are
successful in South Africa, a baggage waggon is not the place for a
delicate girl. You can offer her nothing better than that."

"True enough. I admit that what you say is correct. But what am I to
do?"

"Well," said the detective, after a pause, "it seems to me that you
have some claim upon your aunt. She took charge of you and brought you
up. I understand she intimated that you would be her heir, and you
received an education to fit you for the position. If she intended to
send you adrift as she _has_ done, she should at least have had you
taught some profession or trade whereby you could earn your bread and
butter. Yes; I think you have a right to demand some assistance from
her."

Leo shook his head and flushed. "I can't bring myself to do that," he
said in a low voice. "She has insulted me so deeply that it goes against
my nature to eat humble pie. I would rather make my own way in the
world. As to Sybil, I shall not ask her to engage herself to me
until--as you say--I can offer her a home."

"You can do nothing but enlist, I suppose?"

"No. Soldiering is all I am fit for. Now that my name has been cleared I
will bid farewell to Sybil and enlist straight away. She will wait for
me, I am certain. I get my commission I can perhaps see my way to make
her my wife. If I am shot--well," Leo shrugged his shoulders, "there is
an end to all things."

"Haverleigh!" said Marton, after a pause. "Will you tell me what reason
your aunt has for disliking you so much?"

"I don't know. She has always been stern and hard with me. Lately she
has openly hated me. That is why I left her."

"There is something connected with you that is wrong?"

"Not to my knowledge. I have been foolish, but not wilfully wicked."

"I know that. But Mrs Gabriel knows something--it may be about your
parents--that has prejudiced the vicar against you. It was her influence
that made him turn against you. He admitted as much to me. But he
refused to say what she had told him."

"I guessed all this," said Leo, quietly; "but what can I do?"

"Insist upon knowing what has been said. You have a right to. If the
vicar will not speak out--and he has given his word not to--Mrs Gabriel
may be forced to do so. Were I you, Haverleigh, I should see her and
insist upon an explanation."

"She won't give it."

"I should force it out of her," said Marton, determinedly. "Oh! I know
she is a hard woman, but if you persevere she must give way."

Leo thought for a few moments. "Well, Marton," he said at length, "I
will see the vicar first and speak to him on the subject of Sybil. From
what he says I may see the reason of his attitude towards me. Then I can
call upon Mrs Gabriel. You may be sure I shall do my best."

Marton nodded, but said no more for the present, as by this time they
were at the door of Hale's house. A demure servant opened the door and
took in their names. Shortly she ushered them into a room where Sir
Frank was seated in a chair by the window reading to his sister. Edith
Hale looked pale and ill. She lay on a sofa, but started up and blushed
rosy red when she saw Leo. There was no doubt that the poor girl was
deeply in love with the young man. Leo, in the kindness of his heart,
felt a pang. It seemed to him that he was treating her cruelly, although
the position was none of his making.

"Good-day!" said Hale, without rising, and including Leo and Marton in
one swift glance. "I am surprised to see you, Haverleigh. I thought you
did not care about keeping up my acquaintance."

Leo would have replied sharply, but as Edith was present he cast a
meaning glance in her direction. "I should like to speak with you
alone," he said, "that is, in the presence of Mr Marton."

Before Hale could reply Marton interposed. "Wait a bit," he said in his
smooth voice, and with a glance at the girl. "There is something to be
said first in the presence of Miss Hale."

"In my presence!" she exclaimed turning red, while her brother scowled.

"Yes. Something you will be pleased to hear. You both know that Mr
Haverleigh has been accused of stealing this chapel cup."

"I never believed it, never!" cried Edith, eagerly, and Leo gave her a
look of gratitude, which made her turn pale with emotion.

"And you, Sir Frank?"

Hale shrugged his shoulders. "I never thought much about the subject,"
he said, the lie coming at once to his practised lips. "The evidence was
against Haverleigh, I admit; but I tried to think the best of him."

"Your speech is rather contradictory, Sir Frank," was the dry response
of Marton. "But I think you must have thought well of Haverleigh or you
would not have helped him out of his difficulty by lending him money."

"Oh, Frank, did you do that?" cried Edith, taking her brother's hand. "I
love you for it. How good you are!"

Hale's face grew blacker and blacker. Had he been alone he would have
lied, but in the presence of the sister he loved so deeply he could not
bring himself to deny the truth. Moreover, he had a kind of instinctive
feeling that Marton had come to proclaim the innocence of Leo, else why
should he come at all? His plot of getting Leo into his power had
failed--he was clever enough to see that--so it only remained for him to
retreat with as much dignity as possible.

"I was only too glad to help Haverleigh," he said quietly, and with
marked courtesy. "He was in debt, and the three hundred pounds I gave
him was of some use, I believe. I beg that he will say no more on the
subject."

"How good you are--how good you are!" gasped Edith, caressing her
brother. Leo and Marton glanced at one another. Hale's masterly retreat
took them both by surprise. When Leo remembered the conversation in the
chapel he could hardly believe his ears. The only thing to be done was
to beat the man with his own weapons.

"I will say no more, Hale, save that when I am able the money shall be
repaid. I thank you heartily for your kindness."

Sir Frank bit his lip, but summoned up sufficient dignity to be
gracious. He and Leo were both wearing masks for the benefit of Edith.
"Pay the money when you like," he said, sitting up. "I am shortly going
abroad with my sister, and I do not think we shall see one another for a
long time. However, my solicitor at Portfront will attend to the matter
of the loan."

"Then there really _was_ a loan," said Marton, determined to get the
plain truth out of Hale in the presence of witnesses.

"Certainly. I gave Leo three hundred pounds in gold. I have already said
so."

"And it was with that loan he paid his debts?" pursued Marion.

"Yes," said Leo, seeing his drift, "I paid them with that money. But the
good people here declared that I sold the cup to pay them!"

"How could they! How could they!" muttered Edith.

"Because they are fools," cried Sir Frank, seeing that he was completely
beaten. "For my part, I never believed that Haverleigh did such a
thing!"

"Thank you," said Leo, inwardly smiling at the lie.

"Then you will be delighted to hear that the thief has been found."

As Marton spoke Hale suddenly turned pale, and rose with an effort.
"The thief has been--found!" he stammered.

"Yes," replied Marton, with a swift glance, thinking at once of his
theory of a conspiracy. "It seems that this man Angel--I beg your
pardon, you know him as Pratt--stole the cup."

"But it was Mr Pratt who gave it!" cried Edith.

"Quite so, Miss Hale. Afterwards he was sorry that his generosity had
led him to make so great a sacrifice. Therefore he stole what he had
bestowed."

"And what about this story of Mrs Jeal?" asked Hale, trying to be
amiable.

"Oh! that was part of the business, Sir Frank. Pratt thought the cup
would be seen here, even if he kept it in his house. So he sent it up to
London to be pawned for safe keeping. You do not understand why this
should be done. But then you have never come into contact with a man
like Pratt. However, for reasons I need not explain, he pawned the cup.
His servant Adam is rather like Mr Haverleigh, and it was thus that Mrs
Jeal, not having a clear view, made a mistake. You understand, Sir
Frank?"

"Quite," replied Hale in a strangled voice. He was pale and
anxious-looking. Leo thought that this was anger at his escape. But
Marton took another and a more serious view.

"I am sure you are pleased that Haverleigh's character has been
cleared."

"I am pleased--very--very pleased," said Edith, joyfully, "and so is
Frank. Are you not, Frank?"

"Yes! very pleased." Hale forced himself to say so much; then he walked
to the door. "I am not well," he said, turning for a moment; "you will
excuse me, gentlemen. My sister will see you out. If you--" He paused,
and darting a look of hatred at Leo, left the room. Haverleigh was more
surprised than Marton, who had captured a fresh idea, and was already
building up a theory.

Leo remained only a short time. He was most embarrassed by the looks of
Edith, and escaped as speedily as courtesy permitted. When they left the
house and were some distance on the road, Marton spoke. "I think there
is insanity in that family," he said.

"Why do you think so?"

"The girl is queer. No woman in her sane senses would give herself away
as she does. The brother is a cripple, and queer too. Never you marry
into that lot, Haverleigh! They have some hereditary taint."

"I have no intention of marrying anyone but Sybil," said Leo, dryly;
"but did you see how Hale backed out of his false position?"

"Yes; and I believe he has more to do with this matter than you think. I
should not be at all surprised to find that he and Mrs Gabriel for some
reason had been working together against you. Oh! there has been--there
may be yet some conspiracy against you."

"I can understand Hale conspiring," said Leo; "he wants to marry Sybil,
and wishes Edith to become my wife. But Mrs Gabriel, why should she?"

"We have yet to find that out," interrupted Marton. "Go and see what the
vicar says. I must be alone for a time. I want to think the matter out.
At all events, Hale has acknowledged that he lent you the money, in the
presence of witnesses. You are all right in that quarter. I daresay
he'll make another attempt to best you, though."

"Nonsense. Did you not hear him say that he was going abroad with his
sister? I think he will leave me alone now."

"Perhaps," replied Marton, thoughtfully. "We'll see. I'll believe he is
going abroad when he is across the Channel. I'm off for a long walk,"
and the detective set off at a brisk pace.

Leo thought no more about this especial matter, leaving it entirely to
Marton. Forthwith he returned to the Vicarage, saw Mr Tempest, and then
and there asked him if he objected to him as a suitor for Sybil. At this
very direct question Mr Tempest wriggled and looked uncomfortable.

"You put a very painful question to me, Leo," he said, after a pause. "I
am ashamed of myself for having thought so ill of you, and I should like
to make amends, if possible. I know that you are attached to Sybil, but
now that you are at variance with your aunt, I do not see that you are
justified in asking me to consent to this engagement."

"I know what you mean," said Leo, proudly, "and I do not intend to
engage myself until I am in a better position. All I ask is that you
will not force Sybil to marry Hale when I am away."

"I should not let her marry Hale in any case!" cried the vicar, angrily.
"I would never give my child to a cripple. Moreover, the Hales are not
so sane as they might be. And, Leo, I shall not force Sybil's
inclinations in any way. She can remain unmarried all her life if she
pleases."

"That is all I want," said Leo, gladly. "I am going to enlist, Mr
Tempest, and if I get a commission there may be some chance of my asking
Sybil to be my wife. She will be true to me while I am away; I know she
will."

"Humph!" said the vicar, doubtfully. "A commission, eh?"

Leo interpreted his objection. "Then you have something against me
personally," he said, "and for this reason you do not want me to think
of Sybil in any way. What is the matter, Mr Tempest?"

"I can't tell you, Leo." The vicar looked directly at him. "So far as
you are concerned, I do not wish for a better husband for my daughter,
but Mrs Gabriel has informed me of something which makes me unwilling to
countenance the marriage. Don't ask me what it is. I cannot tell you."

"I do not ask you to tell me, Mr Tempest. This very night I shall ask
Mrs Gabriel herself what she has been saying."

"Better not," advised the vicar. "It will only cause you much distress."

Leo looked at him in astonishment. What could his aunt have been saying
about him or his parents likely to make the vicar take so strong a view
of the matter? "If there is anything wrong I have a right to know," he
said at length. "I shall insist upon an explanation, Mr Tempest. If I
discover any valid reason why I should give Sybil up, I am quite ready
to yield. When you next see me, Mr Tempest, I shall either have given up
the idea of marrying your daughter, or I shall insist upon marrying her
in spite of you and Mrs Gabriel! You cannot say that I am treating you
unfairly. I go now."

"But, my dear boy--" called out Mr Tempest, much distressed. He spoke to
the empty air. Leo had already left the room and was out of the gate.

After leaving The Nun's House, Leo had taken up his residence at the
Colester Arms. Marton was there also, and Leo expected to see him at
dinner. He was anxious to tell him what the vicar had said. But the
detective did not return from his walk, and after waiting for him till
close upon nine o'clock, Leo left the hotel and walked towards the
castle to have it out with Mrs Gabriel.

The night was moonless, but there were many stars. Here and there a
swathe of mist lay on the plains below; but up on the hills all was
comparatively clear. Leo, who knew every inch of Colester, walked slowly
out of the town gate and crossed to the other hill. He took a narrow
private path which he knew of, wishing to get unobserved to the castle.
Just at the foot of this path he met Marton. The recognition was mutual.

"You are going to see Mrs Gabriel?" said the detective.

"Yes. Where have you been, Marton?"

"I have been trying to see her, but she is ill--at least so the butler
says. I suspect, however, this is a lie. She doesn't want to see me!"

"Shall I--"

"Yes, you go up. I must return to the hotel and get some dinner. I have
been walking and thinking until I am worn out. I'll wait your return,
and we can talk over the matter."

"What matter?"

"The conspiracy of Mrs Gabriel and Hale," said Marton, promptly. "Get on
with you, Haverleigh. I'm off to dinner." And he went away at a quick
pace, leaving Leo much astonished.

However, there was no use in standing and wondering, so he pursued his
way. As Mrs Gabriel was said to be ill, and had denied herself to
Marton, it was not unlikely that he would be treated in the same way.
Therefore, instead of going to the front door, Leo went round the castle
on to the terrace. This was shut off from the rest of the ground by a
high fence with a gate in it. Leo had retained the key of this gate and
had no difficulty in getting in. The room which looked on to the terrace
was lighted, but the blinds were down. Leo peered in. He saw Mrs Gabriel
seated in a chair. Standing near her was Mr Richard Pratt.




CHAPTER XV

A NEW COMPLICATION


Leo was so surprised by this unexpected sight that for the moment he
stood still. Then he made up his mind to interview the pair. Mrs Gabriel
and Pratt evidently understood one another, and the two of them together
might probably tell him more about himself than one would do. Moreover,
Leo was angry at the way in which Pratt had let him lie under the
imputation of being a thief when he could have lifted the disgrace from
off his shoulders. Certainly Pratt could have done so only at the risk
of incriminating himself, but at the time Leo was too much annoyed to
think of this. He saw that there was some mystery, and thinking it might
have to do with Mrs Gabriel's enmity towards himself, he interrupted
what seemed to be a furious conversation by knocking at the window.

Mrs Gabriel and Pratt turned in the direction where the sound came, she
with a pale face, and Pratt with a levelled revolver which he took from
his breast pocket. Leo might have been in danger of his life, but that
he chanced to remember a peculiar tune which Pratt had taught him, in
order to announce his coming while he was staying at The Nun's House. At
the time Leo had thought this was only a freak of the old man's, but
now that he knew who Pratt was, he saw that there was use in it, to
Pratt if not to himself. At all events, he began to whistle.

Hardly had he got through the first few bars before Pratt's watchful
attitude relaxed, and he tossed the revolver on to the table. Mrs
Gabriel still continued to look agitated, but Pratt stepped towards the
window and opened it coolly.

"I knew it was you," he said, pulling Leo into the room and shutting the
window. "It is a lucky thing you remembered my signal, else I might have
drilled a hole in you. You come at a happy moment." Here he stopped and
looked suspiciously at the young man. "Have you that infernal Marton
with you?" he asked, with a glance at the window and a movement towards
the revolver.

"No, no," replied Leo, hastily. "I am all alone."

"That's a good thing," said Pratt, grimly. "I won't be taken alive, I
promise you. But I knew you would not give me away. I said so to Mrs
Gabriel. She said you would--speaking the worst of you as usual."

Leo was too much taken aback by the discovery that Pratt was in the
castle to reply immediately. Moreover, the man was so cool and composed
that he felt as though he were in the wrong. He tried to collect his
scattered thoughts, but before he could open his mouth Mrs Gabriel spoke
in her usual domineering tones.

"What are you doing here, Leo?" she asked. "How did you get on to the
terrace? No one can get on without the key of the gate."

"I happen to have the key," said Leo, showing it. "You gave it to me
yourself some years ago. When I left you I took it with me by mistake.
It has come in useful to-night. You may thank your stars, both of you,
that I did not bring Marton back with me. He left me at the foot of the
hill with a story that you were ill, Mrs Gabriel."

"Leo," said Pratt in an agitated tone, "surely you would not have
brought the man here to get me into trouble?"

"I did not know you were here," said Haverleigh, carelessly, for he was
still angered at the man.

"I have been here ever since the night I fled from Raston's house. It
was Adam who went on to London and cut the wire."

"And the letter in which you said you had stolen the cup?"

"I wrote that here and posted it to Adam that he might send it from
London. Mrs Gabriel helped me to hide. No one knows that I am in this
house save herself, and now you are a sharer in our secret."

"It must be difficult to keep your presence here a secret from the
servants," said Leo, wondering how the man had forced Mrs Gabriel to
help.

Here the lady herself interfered. "It is not difficult at all," she said
in her most offensive tones. "You know nothing of what you are talking
about. Pratt is up in the tower room, and I take him food myself from my
own meals. It is impossible that anyone can guess."

"Well, my dear aunt," said Haverleigh, emphatically, "I know that Pratt
is here. I think, therefore, you had better behave towards me in a more
civil manner."

"Ha!" scoffed Mrs Gabriel, folding her arms and looking defiant. "You
would not dare to state the truth."

"How do you know that?" said Leo, dryly. "Pratt is wanted by the law. He
committed a theft here and allowed me to lie under suspicion. Why should
I not give him up and accuse you of being an accessory to his
concealment?"

Mrs Gabriel frowned and her black eyes flashed, but Pratt, who had taken
a seat, did not move. He merely laughed. "I don't think you will give
away, Leo," he said. "I admit that Mrs Gabriel is enough to irritate a
saint; but if you punish her you punish me also."

"And you deserve punishment," retorted Leo.

"Probably I do; but I have my own opinion of the matter. All I ask you
to do is to hold your tongue until such a time as I can get away."

"When are you going away?"

"Soon, I hope," cried Mrs Gabriel, spitefully. "I am rather tired of
having a jail-bird in my house."

"Oh! you refer to that American affair," said Pratt, airily. "I had
quite forgotten it. Well, my dear lady, I do not intend to burden you
with my presence after to-morrow. By this time no one will be watching
for me hereabouts, as I am supposed to be in London. I shall go
to-morrow night and return to my London quarters, where Adam awaits me.
By the way, Haverleigh, has that fool of a detective gone?"

"He is going to-morrow," said Leo in a surly tone.

"All the better. We can travel to London together. Ah, you smile, my
dear Leo, but I assure you that if I chose to travel with Marton I
should do so. I can disguise myself so effectively that even _he_ would
not know me. It is not the first time I have baffled him."

"Look here, Mr Pratt, or whatever you choose to call yourself," said the
young man, calmly, "you have been kind to me in your own way, and I do
not want to take advantage of your present unfortunate position. At the
same time, you are a thief and a criminal, and I want to have nothing to
do with you. Mrs Gabriel may approve of your company, but I do not wish
to have you for a friend. I shall hold my tongue, but I recommend you to
leave this place as soon as possible."

Mrs Gabriel glared at Leo, as she could ill brook his references to
herself. She half rose as though she would have flown at him, but a
glance from Pratt quelled her, and she sat down with more meekness than
could have been expected from such a redoubtable termagant. Pratt, still
keeping his temper, turned to Leo. "It is very good of you to interest
yourself in my movements," he said in silky tones, "but I can look after
myself. It is a grief, my dear fellow, a great grief, that I should be
compelled to leave this neighbourhood. I like the place, and the people
are fairly agreeable. I was nicely settled in The Nun's House, and--"

"Surrounded with stolen goods," interrupted Leo, wrathfully.

Pratt sighed. "I had some charming things," he said; "how I shall miss
them! I am too old to make another such collection. I suppose they have
all returned to the people I took them from, I fear the stupid creatures
will not appreciate them as I have done."

Pratt's impudence was so consummate that Leo could not help laughing,
but Mrs Gabriel rose in a black fury and shook her fist in the man's
face. "How dare you boast of your iniquities in my house?" she cried.

"In your house, my dear lady?" queried Pratt, blandly. Mrs Gabriel got
very white and sat down again. Apparently Pratt had some power over her,
which she was afraid he might use. Leo had never seen the woman so
cowed.

"Well, well," continued Pratt, stretching his legs; "I have to go,
thanks to that wretched man Marton. How was it he appeared so
unexpectedly?"

"Raston sent for him to London to find out who committed the robbery."

"Ah!" Pratt laughed. "I hope Mr Marton is satisfied now. My letter
should have pleased him."

"It pleased me more," said Leo, bluntly; "my name is now clear! And you
will be glad to hear," he added, turning to Mrs Gabriel, "that Hale, in
the presence of Marton and his sister, confessed that he lent me the
money. I am afraid your plot against me has failed, my dear aunt."

"Hold your tongue!" said Mrs Gabriel, angrily.

"No. The time has passed for that. I am no longer in your power. I
intend to make my own way in the world."

"With assistance from Mrs Gabriel," said Pratt, quietly. "She will start
you with a thousand pounds, my dear Leo."

"I won't give one penny," said Mrs Gabriel, glaring. "You can do your
very worst, Pratt. I have been your milch cow long enough."

"I would not take anything from her," said Leo, interposing; "and I'll
thank you, Mr Pratt, to leave my affairs alone. If you will persist in
meddling with them, I shall not keep my promise of silence."

"Oh, yes, you will!" chimed in Pratt, fixing him with his eye. "You dare
not betray me, Leo."

"_Dare_ not!" echoed the young man, angrily.

"Not unless you want to be called an unnatural son, my boy!" Leo stared,
not taking in the meaning of this speech. "For you are my son, Leo,"
added Pratt in low tones, his eyes never leaving Haverleigh's face.

"Your--your--Great Heavens!"

Mrs Gabriel burst into a taunting laugh. "Ah, you know it at last!" she
cried triumphantly. "And he has told you after threatening me with all
sorts of things to keep me silent."

"It's--it's not true!" gasped Leo.

"It is perfectly true," said the woman, jeeringly. "You are the son of
the cleverest thief in the three kingdoms."

"Hold your tongue, you hag!" shouted Pratt, angrily, for Leo was as
white as ashes and his face wore an expression of terrible agony.

"I won't be quiet. You told him yourself, and now he shall know all--as
the vicar does," finished Mrs Gabriel, laughing fiercely.

Leo started to his feet. "Sybil!" he cried out, staring at his enemy. "I
know now why the vicar will not let me marry her. You--you--"

"Told him you were an illegitimate son," said Mrs Gabriel, rapidly. "I
did not say who was your father, but now that Pratt's true character is
known I shall tell Tempest everything. Then we shall see if he will let
you speak to Sybil again."

"You dare say a word, Mrs Gabriel, and I--"

But the woman was not to be stopped. She turned like a fury on Pratt,
who had risen angrily. "Hold your tongue," she said savagely; "I have
had about enough of you and your precious son. You made me take him to
my home and tell everyone that he was the son of my dead brother. A lie,
as you well know. And you," she added, turning on Haverleigh, "you know
now why I have hated you all these years. That man knows a secret of
mine and he forced me to do his bidding. I took you here. I brought you
up, I gave you money, and I let you take a position to which you were
not entitled. Position!" Mrs Gabriel laughed scornfully. "Your position
should be in the gutter, where you were born. You are no kith or kin of
mine, thank God!"

"And I do thank God," said Leo, vehemently. "You are a bad, evil-minded
woman. Although my father is a thief, I would rather be his son than
connected with you in any way. For years you have made my life a hell on
earth with your vile temper. Terrible as is what you have told me, I
prefer the thief to the righteous woman."

The mistress of the castle recoiled aghast before this outbreak of
anger. Never had the usually good-tempered young man spoken so fiercely
to her. As he advanced towards her she believed that he was going to
strike her, and put up her arm with a look of terror in her eyes. For
once the bully was cowed.

"Bravo, my boy!" cried Pratt, laughing at her discomfiture, and clapping
Leo on the back. The young man started away.

"Don't touch me," he said harshly. "Is it not enough that I should have
the shame of being your son, but that you should approve of any action I
do? But I do not believe that you are my father. Where is the proof?"

"In London," said Pratt, very quietly, and wincing at the tone of Leo's
speech. "If you come with me to London I can show you sufficient proof
to make you believe."

"My mother?" Leo, with a sudden thought, cast a look at Mrs Gabriel.

"_I_ am not your mother," she said scornfully. "Didn't I say there was
no blood of mine in your veins?"

"Your mother is dead, Leo," said Pratt in a low voice.

Mrs Gabriel laughed insultingly. "And I daresay she was some--"

"If you dare to say another word," growled Pratt, casting a bitter look
at her, "I'll give your secret to the world."

"I don't care if you do," retorted Mrs Gabriel; but Leo saw that she
quailed. What could she have done to give a man like Pratt--he could not
call him father--a power over her?

"You _do_ care," said Pratt, quietly; "but if you don't I'll begin by
telling Leo. Here goes. Leo, my son--"

In a moment Mrs Gabriel's defiant attitude became one of supplication.
She sprang forward and caught Pratt by the arm. "Don't! don't," she said
faintly. "I'll do whatever you wish."

"Will you dare to speak again as you have done?"

"No, no; I know you are the stronger. I could kill you," she muttered,
with a flash of her old temper. "But I have to give in--I have to!"

"Well," drawled Pratt, taking a pleasure in bringing her to her knees, a
position to which she was quite unaccustomed. "You have persecuted my
poor son so that I think he should have something to hold over your
head. It would serve you right."

"I don't want to know your wicked secrets," said Leo, very pale, but
otherwise calm. "It seems to me that you are an evil couple. And
I--Heaven help me!--have a father who is a thief."

"What of that!" said Mrs Gabriel, getting angry again. "You are a thief
as well, are you not? The cup--"

"I did not steal it," said Leo, proudly. "You know as well as I do that
this--this"--he winced--"father of mine took it away from the chapel."

"That is just where you are wrong. He did not--"

"Mrs Gabriel!" Pratt's voice sounded dangerous. She was quiet at once,
and looked at him in a frightened way. But Leo had heard enough to
arouse his suspicions. He turned on Pratt and seized him by the arm.

"Have you been telling a lie?" muttered the unhappy young man.

His father shook him off. "It's no use telling another one," he said in a
dogged way; "now you know so much you may as well know all. I know
nothing about the cup; but, to clear you, I took the blame on myself.
You see, Leo," he said calmly, "my character is already so bad that a
robbery more or less does not matter. I did it for you, my boy, as I
have done everything else. I wanted you to be a gentleman and marry the
girl of your heart. Sybil loves you, and I thought when the vicar knew
you were innocent that he would let you marry her."

"He might have done so," said Leo, sitting down in absolute despair;
"but since Mrs Gabriel told him that I was illegitimate, he has never
been the same. He is a proud man."

"Too proud to let the son of a thief marry his child!" taunted the
woman.

"He doesn't know that Leo is my son," said Pratt, fiercely.

"I intend to tell him as soon as you are away," she said.

"You will do nothing of the sort," said Pratt in a slow, venomous way
which made her shrink back. "By speaking to the vicar and telling a lie
you have caused trouble enough. He must know no more."

"I did _not_ tell a lie."

"You did. My son was born in lawful wedlock."

"Then why didn't you bring him up yourself?" said Mrs Gabriel, with a
sneer. "You gave him to me in London, and made me adopt him. I had to
say that he was my nephew. Oh, how you have used me!"

"And I have not done using you. Hold your tongue, or it will be the
worse for you. You know the power I have. I will not scruple to use it
if you dare to do anything against my orders. Now, you can go. I want to
speak to my son alone."

Mrs Gabriel seemed inclined to dispute this order, but a look from her
tyrant cowed her. With a defiant flinging up of the head she walked out
of the room, and closed the door.

"She will tell the servants," said Leo.

"Oh, no, she won't," said Pratt coolly. "You don't know the power I have
over her. She will not dare."

"I don't want to know anything," said Leo, looking down on the ground,
with folded arms. "I know quite enough. Are you speaking truly?"

Pratt met his gaze in a perfectly composed manner. "I am speaking the
truth," he said; "you are my son, and your mother died two years after
you were born. I was then in some danger from a--Well, no matter. To
make a long story short, I wanted to procure a home for you where you
would be brought up like a gentleman. Having a certain power over Mrs
Gabriel, I fixed upon her, and made her tell the story of your being her
nephew. She did all I wished, but had I known how she treated you," he
muttered, clenching his fist, "I should soon have brought her to her
bearings."

"And it was this power that made her introduce you into Colester
society?"

"Yes. I can do what I like with the woman. I know it is a terrible thing
for you to find out what I am. But I took to bad courses early, Leo, and
I went from bad to worse. It is a second nature for me to steal--"

"Oh!" Leo rose with a sickening sensation of disgust. "Don't tell me any
of your evil doings. I know that you are my father; that you are a
thief; I want to know no more. You have ruined my life."

"I have not," said Pratt. "How can you say such a thing! What you have
heard to-night need go no further. I shall say nothing, and Mrs Gabriel
will be forced to hold her tongue. Your name is cleared of this theft."

"Did you not steal the cup?" broke in Leo, looking at his father.

"No; I did not. If I had stolen it I should say so. But I do not know
who took it. I am going to London to find out. Old Penny, the
pawnbroker, is a friend of mine. I know enough to get him into trouble
as a receiver of stolen goods, so he will have to tell me who it was
impersonated you."

"You said in your letter that Adam--"

Pratt interrupted impatiently. "Adam had nothing to do with it," he
said. "I invented all that to throw dust in Marton's eyes. I suspect
that Hale has something to do with the stealing of the cup. He may have
taken it himself, for all I know. But Old Penny will tell me. I'll get
to the bottom of this, you may be sure. As to you, Leo, hold your tongue
about being my son and come back to Mrs Gabriel. She will be quite
willing to receive you, and I can force her to make you her heir. Then
you can marry Sybil. When you are rich and have an assured position, the
vicar will overlook the stain on your birth. It is a lie, certainly,"
added Pratt, with a shrug, "but to tell the truth would be to make
matters worse, so we must leave things as they are. For once Mrs Gabriel
has got the better of me. But it won't occur again. You stay with her,
and I promise you she will be as polite as possible to you. You will be
master here."

Leo listened to this long speech with his aching head between his hands.
When Pratt had finished, he looked up quietly. "It is good of you to
take all this trouble," he said, "but I cannot come back to Mrs
Gabriel. Even if she loved, instead of hating me, I could not come back
on those terms. I can never marry Sybil either. Do you think that I
would let her become my wife, knowing who I am? Your sins must be
visited on me, Pratt--I can't call you father. You say you are my
father, and you declare that you can prove it. When you are in London I
expect you to do so. Let me know your address, and I'll come up. But for
the moment I assume that you are speaking the truth. In that case there
is nothing for me to do but to go to South Africa and seek a soldier's
death. I would rather die than marry Sybil now."

"Don't talk like that, Leo," said Pratt, much moved, and wincing at the
contempt of the young man. "I am not so bad as you think. I have done
many a kind action. I can--"

"Oh, don't defend yourself," said Leo, rising to go. "I must get away by
the same way I came. I shall say nothing, but I hope you will be out of
Colester by to-morrow night. Marton leaves in the morning, so the coast
will be clear. I'm going now, and I hope to hear from you, so that you
may give me proof of the truth of this story."

"You don't believe me?"

"I do--in a way. It seems to be true. You say so, and Mrs Gabriel also.
I suppose I am your son. But I am hoping against hope that you may not
be able to prove the truth."

"Leo," said Pratt, following him to the window, "I am your father, and
if you intend to leave Sybil you may as well come with me. I can go with
you to South America, and there I can lead a new life. I am rich in
spite of losing The Nun's House. I have a belt of jewels!--thousands of
pounds of the most valuable--"

"And all stolen," cried Leo, thrusting him back in disgust. "For God's
sake don't speak to me any more, or I shall forget that you are my
father! If you only knew how I loathe myself for being your son! I never
thought it would come to this. Let me go--let me go!" and Leo, pulling
his arm from the grasp of Pratt, rushed out on to the terrace.

In another ten minutes Mrs Gabriel re-entered. She found Pratt with his
head buried in his arms, sobbing like a child. At the sight she burst
out laughing. Then she locked the window Leo had left open.

"Get to bed, Pratt," she said, contemptuously, "and pleasant dreams to
you!"




CHAPTER XVI

SYBIL'S VISITOR


Leo had never felt so wretched in his life as he did the next day.
Seeing that he was greatly disturbed, Marton wished to learn the reason.
As Haverleigh had promised to keep secret the presence of his father at
the castle, he was obliged to evade a direct answer.

"I saw Mrs Gabriel," he said quietly. "We had a long conversation, and
she told me what she had said to the vicar."

"Is it a serious matter?" asked the detective.

"Serious enough to prevent my marriage," replied Leo; "but what it is I
do not feel called upon to explain. It concerns myself and no one else.
If you could help me, Marton, I should tell you, but you cannot--no one
can. I don't think there is any more to be said."

Seeing the young man thus determined, Marton said no more, as he did not
wish to force Leo's confidence. The next morning he took his departure,
assuring Haverleigh that he was always at his disposal when wanted.
"Depend upon it," he said, as he took leave, "you are not yet done with
Mrs Gabriel. She will get you into more trouble. When she does, write to
that address."

"Thank you, Marton; should I require your assistance I will write."

The two men parted, Marton to London, and Leo back to the inn. He was
very miserable, the more so as he had to avoid the society of Sybil.
Knowing what he did, it was impossible for him to talk of love to her.
He felt that he had no right to do so--that he was gaining her
affections wrongly. Sooner or later he would have to leave her, but he
did not wish to break away abruptly. Little by little he hoped to
withdraw himself from her presence, and thus the final separation would
be more easy. All the next day he wandered alone on the moor, where
there was no chance of meeting with Sybil. The morning afterwards he
received a note from Mrs Gabriel stating that a certain person had taken
his departure, Leo was then in a fever of anxiety lest the person should
be captured.

However, he learned within twenty-four hours that there was no need to
worry. An unsigned telegram came from London, intimating that the sender
was in safety, and would communicate with him when the time was ripe.
Leo took this to mean that Pratt could not easily get at the papers
verifying his story, owing to the vigilance exercised by the police, who
were on the look-out for him. Leo therefore possessed his soul in
patience until such time as all should be made clear.

Meantime, as he told Pratt, he was hoping against hope that the story
was not true. Certainly Pratt had spoken in what appeared to be a most
truthful way, he had exhibited an emotion he would scarcely have given
way to had he been telling a falsehood. But Haverleigh knew what an
actor the man was, and, until proof was forthcoming, still cherished a
hope that a comedy had been acted for some reason best known to Pratt
himself. That is, it was a comedy to Pratt; but to Leo Haverleigh it
approached perilously near to tragedy. Afterwards, looking back on the
agony of those few days, he wondered that he had not killed himself in
sheer despair.

But he could not remain in the same place with Sybil without feeling an
overwhelming desire to tell her the whole story, and thus put an end to
an impossible situation. Once she knew the truth, that he was the son of
a criminal, she would see that a marriage was out of the question. Leo
was quite certain that she would still love him, and, after all, he was
not responsible for the sins of his father. But for the sake of Mr
Tempest, she could not marry him, nor--as he assured himself--would he
ask her to do so. Two or three times he was on the point of seeking her
out and revealing all; but a feeling of the grief he would cause her
made him change his determination. He resolved finally to leave her in a
fool's paradise until he had proof from Pratt of the supposed paternity.
But to be near her and not speak to her was unbearable. So he sent a
note saying he was called away for a few days on business, and went to
Portfront. Here he remained waiting to hear from Pratt. And no man could
have been more miserable, a mood scarcely to be wondered at considering
the provocation.

Meantime, Colester society had been much exercised over the discovery of
Leo's innocence and the supposed delinquency of Pratt. Certainly, as
Haverleigh and Mrs Gabriel knew, Pratt had generously taken on his own
shoulders the blame which had wrongfully rested on those of the young
man. But no one else knew this, and even if Pratt had come forward and
told the truth, no one would have believed him. He had been so clearly
proved to be a thief, and the scandal concerning the stolen goods in The
Nun's House was so great, that there was no ill deed with which the
villagers and gentry of Colester were not prepared to credit him. Mrs
Bathurst was particularly virulent in her denunciations of the rascal.

"But I always knew that he was a bad lot," said Mrs Bathurst. "Did I not
say it was incredible that a wealthy man should come down to pass his
days in a dull place like Colester? How lucky it is that we found out
his wickedness, thanks to that dear Mr Marton, who is, I am sure, a
perfect gentleman, in spite of his being a police officer. I shall
always look upon him as having saved Peggy. The creature," so she always
called her former favourite, "wanted to marry Peggy. I saw it in his
eye. Perhaps I might have yielded, and then what would have happened? I
should have had a Jack the Ripper in the family!"

"Oh! scarcely as bad as that, Mrs Bathurst," said Raston, to whom she
was speaking. "Pratt was never a murderer."

"How do you know that, Mr Raston? For my part, I believe he was capable
of the most terrible crimes. If he had married Peggy! The very idea
makes me shudder. But the dear child has escaped the snares of evil, and
I hope to see her shortly the wife of a good man," here Mrs Bathurst
cast a look on her companion.

Raston smiled. He knew perfectly well what she meant. Failing the
wealthy Pratt, who had been proved a scoundrel, the humble curate had a
chance of becoming Mrs Bathurst's son-in-law. And Raston was not
unwilling. He loved Peggy and she loved him. They understood one
another, and had done so for some time. Never would Peggy have married
Pratt had he asked her a dozen times. But, as she had told Raston, the
man had never intended to propose. Knowing this, Raston was glad to see
that Mrs Bathurst was not disinclined to accept him as a suitor for her
daughter. He then and there struck the iron while it was hot.

"I do not know if I am a very good man, Mrs Bathurst," he said, still
smiling, "but if you think me good enough for Peggy, I shall be more
than satisfied. I have the curacy and three hundred a year. My family
you know all about, and I suppose you have formed your own conclusions
as to the merits of my personality. I am not likely to turn out a
criminal like Pratt, you know."

"Really, Mr Raston, you take my breath away," said Mrs Bathurst, quite
equal to the occasion. "I never suspected that you loved Peggy. Still,
if such is the case, and she loves you, and you are prepared to insure
your life in case you die unexpectedly, I do not mind your marrying
her. She is a dear girl and will make you an excellent wife."

"Thank you, Mrs Bathurst. Then I may see Peggy now."

"She is in the garden, Harold." Mrs Bathurst had long since informed
herself of the curate's Christian name, so as to be prepared for an
emergency of this sort. "Go to her and take with you a mother's
blessing."

Thus burdened, Raston sought out Peggy, and then and there told her that
all was well. They could love one another without let or hindrance. The
engagement had been sanctioned officially by Mrs Bathurst. Peggy laughed
consumedly when Raston related the pretty little comedy played by her
mother. "She must think you a donkey, Harold," she said. "Mother thinks
everyone is as blind as herself."

"Mrs Bathurst fancies herself very wide awake, my dear."

"Those who are particularly blind always do, Harold."

Then they began to talk of their future, of the probability of Sybil
becoming the wife of Leo, and the chances of Mrs Gabriel taking the
young man again to her castle. From one subject to another they passed
on until Peggy made an observation about Pearl. "She is out and about, I
see," said Peggy, "but she still looks thin."

"And no wonder. Her illness has been a severe one. But she will soon put
on flesh and regain her colour. She is always wandering on the moor,
and the winds there will do more to restore her to health than all the
drugs in the pharmacopoeia of James."

"Why does she go on the moor?" said Peggy. "I thought it was the chapel
she was fond of sitting in."

"Ah! She has changed all that," said Raston, sadly. "It seems--I think I
told you this before--that Mrs Jeal told her some horrible Calvinistic
doctrine, and poor Pearl thinks she is lost eternally. It was her idea
that the cup was given into her charge, and now she believes that the
Master has taken it from her because she is not good enough to be the
custodian."

"Poor girl!" said Peggy, sympathetically. "But I thought, Harold, that
she believed the cup had been taken up to Heaven for the Supper of the
Master?"

"She did believe that till Mrs Jeal upset her mind anew. Now she thinks
she is lost, and I can't get the terrible idea out of her head. She is
like a lost thing wandering about the moor. Only one cure is possible."

"What is that, Harold?"

"The cup must be restored to the altar she has built."

"An altar! Has she built one?"

"I followed her on to the moor the other day, wishing to calm her mind.
Some distance away, in the centre of the heather, she has erected an
altar of turf, and she told me that if the Master forgave her He would
replace the cup which He had taken from her on that altar. She goes
there every day to see if the cup has returned. If it did, I believe
she would again be her old happy self."

"But there is no chance of the cup being returned."

"No," said Raston, a trifle grimly; "Pratt has got it again in his
possession, and he will not let it go. Save for Pearl, I do not think it
matters much. We could never again use it for the service of the chapel.
A cup that has been stolen cannot be put to sacred uses."

"Do you think it was stolen?"

"I am certain of it. Everything belonging to that man was stolen. What a
pity, Peggy, that such a clever fellow should use his talents for such a
bad purpose."

"A great pity. I liked Mr Pratt, and even now, although he is such a
wretch, I can't help feeling sorry for him."

"So do I, Peggy. There was good in Pratt. Let us hope he will repent.
But now, darling, don't let us talk more of him. He has gone, and will
never come back. What about the wedding-day?"

"Oh, Harold!" began Peggy, and blushed. After this the conversation
became too personal to be reported. It is sufficient to say that the
wedding-day was fixed for two months later.

While all these discoveries in connections with Pratt were being made in
Colester, events which had to do with Sybil's advertisement had happened
which prevented her keeping it any longer a secret from her father. She
put off telling him till the very last moment, but when one day a London
visitor arrived she was forced to speak out. A card inscribed with the
name "Lord Kilspindie" was brought to her, and on the back of it was a
pencilled note hinting that the gentleman had called about the
advertisement. Sybil ordered that he should be shown into the
drawing-room, and went to her father's study. The vicar was preparing
his sermon, and looked up ill-pleased at the interruption.

"What is it, Sybil?" he asked. "I am busy."

"Please forgive me for interrupting you, father," she replied, coming to
the desk and putting her arm round his neck, "but I have something to
tell you, something to confess."

"You have been doing nothing wrong, I hope," said Tempest, suspiciously.

"I don't think it is wrong, save in one particular. That advertisement!
It was I who put it into the papers."

"Sybil! And you never told me!" The vicar was annoyed. At the same time
he felt relieved that it was nothing worse. He fancied that she might be
about to confess that she had married Leo.

"It was no use telling you until something came of it, father," replied
Sybil, calmly, "so do not be angry. Now that the whole mystery has been
cleared up, the advertisement is useless. But I received one answer to
it. A gentleman called Lord Kilspindie wrote to me at the post-office as
'S. T.,' asking to see me about the cup. He had something serious to say
about it. I was curious--I think you would have been curious yourself,
father--so I wrote, and, giving my real name and address, asked him to
come down here. He is now in the drawing-room."

Tempest rose to his feet, looking vexed. "Lord Kilspindie in the
drawing-room, and I only know of the matter now. Really, Sybil, you have
behaved very badly. What does he want?"

"To tell us something about the cup, I suppose," said Sybil. "Do you
know Lord Kilspindie, father?"

"No more than that he is a border lord and a wealthy man. I believe he
has a splendid and famous castle near the Tweed. Sybil, you should have
told me."

"I am sorry, but I didn't think it was worth while until he came. You
are not angry, father. I have done nothing so very bad, and it was my
eagerness about Leo that made me take up the matter."

"You offered a reward of fifty pounds! How is that to be paid?"

Sybil laughed. "I don't think there will be any question of reward with
Lord Kilspindie," she said. "Besides, he has not brought the cup. You
know that Mr Pratt has it, and is likely to keep it. Come, father,
forgive me, and let us see Lord Kilspindie. I am filled with curiosity."

"You are a wicked girl," said the vicar, indulgently, and gave her a
kiss. "If you do this again--"

"I never will, father--unless Leo is again in danger."

The vicar sighed. His conscience pricked him about Leo, and he did not
know how to act towards making amendment. Certainly if he gave his
consent to the marriage Leo would be more than repaid for the ill
thoughts entertained about him. But Tempest was filled with pride of
race, and could not bring himself to give his beautiful daughter to a
nameless man. However, he could not consider the matter now, since his
illustrious visitor was waiting in the drawing room, so with Sybil he
went to greet him.

"Miss Tempest?" said Lord Kilspindie, coming forward, with a look of
admiration at the beautiful girl before him, "and you, sir?"

Sybil allowed her father to speak, as was right and proper. "I am the
vicar of this place, Lord Kilspindie," said Tempest, politely, "and this
is my daughter. It was she who put the advertisement in the paper. I
presume that it is to that we owe the pleasure of your company."

"That and nothing else," said Lord Kilspindie, taking the seat pointed
out to him by the vicar. "I have been looking for that cup for over
twenty years. It is not in your possession?"

"It was for a few weeks," replied the vicar, who was very curious. "I
had better tell you the whole story, and then you can judge for
yourself."

"If you will be so kind," replied Lord Kilspindie, courteously.

He listened attentively while Mr Tempest narrated all the events in
connection with the cup from the time Pratt had arrived in Colester. The
story was a strange one, and the visitor was much interested. However,
he did not offer one interruption. Sybil watched him the meanwhile.

He was a tall, grey-haired man of over sixty, but still vigorous and
straight. His face was lined, however, as though he had undergone much
trouble. He had a soldierly look about him, and all the time the vicar
was speaking tugged at a long grey moustache, the only hair he wore on
his face. Sybil thought of the line in the "Ancient Mariner" about long
and lean and brown as the seashore sand (she could not quite recall the
quotation), but to her it described Kilspindie perfectly. He was rather
sad-looking, and his quiet grey eyes looked as though he had known
bitter trouble. And indeed he had. Sybil learned that later.

"A very interesting story," he said politely when Mr Tempest had
finished, "but disappointing in its ending. You say this man Pratt has
now the cup in his possession?"

"He confessed as much, my lord, in a letter to the detective in charge
of the case. It is a pity he has escaped with it."

"A great pity," responded the other. "I suppose there is no chance of
his being captured?"

"From what Mr Marton said I should think not," put in Sybil. "He says
that Pratt has baffled all the cleverest detectives in England for a
great number of years."

Kilspindie sighed. "No chance of getting it back," he murmured; "and the
luck will still be bad."

"The luck!" echoed Sybil, catching the word.

"You will think me superstitious," he said, with a smile; "but the fact
is that the cup is said to be a fairy gift, and has been in our family
for generations. The luck of the family goes with the cup."

"Like the luck of Edenhall!" said Sybil, remembering Longfellow's poem.

"Precisely," responded Kilspindie. "The legend is a curious one. I must
tell it to you some time. Of course my opinion is that the cup is of
Roman manufacture. I recognised it from its description, and especially
from the Latin motto you set down in the advertisement. I think that
goblet was dedicated to Bacchus, and was probably lost by some Roman
general when Scotland was invaded by the Caesars."

All this time Mr Tempest was trying to recover from the horror of his
thoughts. "A pagan cup!" he gasped, "and a stolen cup! Oh, my lord, and
it was used as a communion cup. Pratt said that he had brought it from
Italy, where it was so used by the Romish Church. I thought it was
sanctified by such a use, and did not hesitate to put it again on the
altar. I really don't know what to say. It is like sacrilege."

"I am sorry, Mr Tempest. But the cup has been at Kilspindie Castle for
five hundred years. It never was used in the service of the Church. Over
twenty years ago it was stolen by a woman."

"By a woman," echoed Sybil. She had quite expected to hear Pratt's
name.




CHAPTER XVII

LORD KILSPINDIE EXPLAINS


"Before you begin your story, my lord," said the vicar, "will you please
inform me how you came to know of the loss of the cup?"

"I have already done so, Mr Tempest. I saw the advertisement offering a
reward for its recovery. The description and the quotation of the Latin
motto were sufficient to show me that it was my heirloom. I wrote to the
office of the paper, and afterwards received a letter from Miss Tempest,
here, asking me to call. I have taken up my abode at the inn, as I may
stay here for a few days. I want to know all I can about the matter. If
I can only trace and recover the cup through your agency I shall be
eternally your debtor."

"I cannot tell you more than I have related," replied the vicar. "This
man Pratt took back the cup, and is now in London--where, no one knows.
I fear the cup is as lost as though it had been swallowed up by the
ocean!"

"It is enough that I know in whose possession it is," said Kilspindie,
with determination. "In some way or another I shall find this man. For I
may tell you, Mr Tempest, that, besides the recovery of a family
treasure, I have another and more important object in view--the recovery
of my son, who was stolen from me at the time the cup disappeared."

Tempest expressed much astonishment at this information, and Sybil
opened her eyes wide. She had never thought that her attempt to clear
the character of her lover would lead to such a result. Neither she nor
her father knew what to say, and, seeing them silent, Lord Kilspindie
continued to speak.

"How the cup came into the possession of this man I cannot say. It was
taken from the castle by a nurse called Janet Grant, who also carried
away the child."

"Why did she do that?" asked Sybil, horrified.

"Out of revenge for a fancied slight she received from my wife," replied
Kilspindie, with a sigh; "but it is best I should tell you all from the
beginning. First, you must know the legend of the cup, that you may
understand the value we Grants attach to its possession."

"I am fond of folk-lore," murmured the vicar, settling himself down for
a pleasant half-hour. "Your family name is Grant, then, my lord?"

"Yes. Our title is Kilspindie, an earldom. My son who was stolen--my
only son and only child, alas!--is Lord Morven, if he be still alive.
But who knows if I shall ever see him again?"

"Hope for the best," said the vicar, gently. "God is over all!"

"You are right, Mr Tempest. But how many weary years have I waited, and
have had to comfort myself in that fashion. Now, when I had lost all
hope, the advertisement roused it again. If I find the cup I may
discover my boy, or, at all events, I may find out if he is alive or
dead."

"I am sure he is alive," said Sybil, impulsively. "Dear Lord Kilspindie,
if there was no chance of your finding him I should not have been guided
to put in that advertisement. It was entirely my own doing, and had I
consulted with my father it would never have appeared."

"It certainly would not," said the vicar, promptly. "I had placed the
matter in the hands of Mr Marton, and I was angry when I saw the
advertisement--very angry, indeed."

"You must not be angry any more, Mr Tempest," said Kilspindie, with a
smile, "seeing that it may lead to the discovery of my son. I owe much
to Miss Tempest's indiscretion, as you no doubt call it."

"No," said Sybil, resolutely; "I am sure papa does not call it that. I
did it to help Leo, and I would do it again. But tell us the legend,
Lord Kilspindie."

The old man laughed. "If you have not the imagination of the Celt you
will think it but a poor thing," he said. "In the days of Bruce, and on
the Border, Nigel Grant, the head of the clan--my ancestor, Mr
Tempest--was riding home from a foray against the English. He had been
successful, and had collected a large mob of cattle, which were being
driven to the castle by his followers. He was anxious to get home, for
when he had left, two weeks previously, his wife was expected to give
birth to a child. The chief eagerly desired that it might be a boy, for
he had few relatives, and those he had were his bitterest enemies."

"What!" said Tempest, "and the Scotch so clannish?"

"They are more clannish in the Highlands than on the Border," replied
the old lord. "Many of the Border families fought with one another. My
clan did also for many a long day, although they are friendly enough
now. However, you know the reason that Nigel Grant was so eager for an
heir."

"Wouldn't a girl have done?" asked Sybil mischievously.

"By no means. The chief wanted a brave boy, to bestride a horse and
wield a sword, and govern the unruly Grant clan with a strong hand. He
had prayed to the Virgin to give him his heart's desire--they were all
Roman Catholics in those days, remember. So you may guess he rode home
at top speed, and as he neared the castle he was far in advance of his
followers and alone. And then came the fairies."

"The fairies!" echoed Sybil. "This is interesting," and she laughed.

"We call them the Good Neighbours in Scotland, you know, because the
fairies don't like to be talked about with disrespect. But to go on with
my story. Nigel Grant was on a wide moor all alone, although the lances
of his men-at-arms glittered on the verge of the horizon. Suddenly--from
the viewless air, apparently, since there was no rock or tree or shelter
of any kind--there appeared a small woman dressed in green, with a
golden crown. At the sight of her the chief's horse stopped all at
once, as though stricken into stone. The fairy queen--for it was she,
the same, I suppose, who appeared to Thomas the Rhymer."

"Ah! _she_ was mounted on a horse!" said Sybil, half to herself.

"Indeed? Well, this queen was on foot, and in her arms she carried a
child. Stopping before Nigel, she placed the child on his saddle-bow,
and told him to take it home for a year and a day. 'If it returns to us
safe and sound,' she continued, 'great good fortune will befall the
Grants. But if anything wrong is done to it, then will sorrow come.' So
speaking she vanished, and the horse, suddenly regaining motion,
galloped home to the castle, bearing the amazed chief with his child in
his arms."

"His child, my lord?" asked the vicar, smiling.

"It had to be his child for a year and a day. He found that during his
absence his wife had given birth to a fine boy, but that a day or so
after it was born the cradle was found empty. Lady Grant was in a great
state of terror, as you may imagine. When the chief told his story she
declared that her child had been carried off by the Good Neighbours. It
was her wish to kill the changeling. But this the chief, mindful of the
prophecy, would not permit. It was supposed that the fairy child
required to be nursed by a mortal woman, and this was why the chief's
boy had been carried away."

"I never heard that version of the old story before," said Tempest.

"No? It is usually said that the fairies want the child for themselves.
But in this story what I have told you was believed. Lady Grant, hoping
to get back her own child in a year and a day, nursed the changeling. It
was a peevish, cross, whimpering creature, and marvellously ugly. But
when she fed it with her milk it grew fat and strong, and became
good-tempered.

"On the night when the year and a day were up, there was heard the sound
of galloping horses round the castle. A wind swept into the rooms and
down the corridors. Everyone in the castle fell into a magic sleep. But
in the morning the true child was found smiling in his cradle and the
fairy changeling was gone. In the cradle also was the cup I am seeking,
and a scroll saying that while it was kept in the family no ill would
befall, but that if lost the line would be in danger of extinction."

"And did the prophecy ever come true?" asked Sybil.

"Twice," replied Kilspindie, with the most profound conviction. "In the
reign of the first James of Scotland the cup was stolen, and three
brothers of the chief were slain in battle. Only the child of one of
them lived, for the chief had no family. Then the cup was brought
back--I could tell you how, but the story is too long--and the child was
spared to become the father of a large family."

"And the second time?" asked Tempest, wondering how much of this wild
tale the old lord believed.

"The second time was in the reign of Henry VIII. The castle was sacked
and the cup taken. All the family were killed, but the nurse managed to
save one child, with whom she fled. After a series of adventures the cup
was restored and the child regained his inheritance."

"How strange!" said Sybil. "And now that the cup is lost again?"

Kilspindie smiled. "Well, you see, Miss Tempest, I have but one son and
he is lost. If I do not find him the title and estates must go to a
distant cousin, and the prophecy of the fairies will be fulfilled. That
is why I am so anxious to get the cup. If I can find it and bring it
back to Kilspindie Castle, I am certain that I shall find my boy."

"A wild story," said the vicar, after a pause. "There is oftentimes a
grain of truth in these folktales. But tell me, how came it that the cup
was stolen the third time?"

"I am about to tell you," replied the visitor. "There was a woman called
Janet Grant, the daughter of one of my tenants. She was in service at my
place, but after some years she became weary of the dull life. We are
not very lively up in the north," said Kilspindie, with a laugh.
"However, this woman got tired and went up to London. There, I believe,
she obtained a situation, but what her life was while absent I do not
know. She was always reticent on the point. After six years she
returned. In the interval I had married, and at the time Janet returned,
or a year before, my wife became a mother. I was the father of a
splendid boy, my son and heir, Lord Morven. Janet was taken back into
my service as an under nurse, for she was a very capable woman."

"Had she a good temper?" asked Sybil, guessing what was coming.

"One of the worst tempers in the world. Also she was evil in her
disposition. Had I known then what was told to me afterwards by the
other servants, she should never have re-entered my service. But they
were all afraid of Janet and her wicked ways, and therefore remained
silent when it was their duty to speak out. When the boy was two years
of age, or it may be a trifle over, the head nurse died. Janet expected
to succeed, but my wife appointed another woman."

"She did not trust Janet," hinted the vicar.

"No. By this time Janet was not so careful in her behaviour, and my wife
began to suspect her true character. Janet was very angry at the
slight--as she called it--and swore she would be revenged. Of course,
she knew the legend of the cup, so it struck her, no doubt, that if she
stole the cup the usual disaster would follow."

"What superstition!" murmured Mr Tempest.

"Well, I don't know, sir," said Kilspindie, quietly. "You see, Mr
Tempest, we had chapter and verse for what might happen. However, Janet,
out of revenge, took away the child and stole the cup. She had no
difficulty in doing either. The cup was placed in the picture gallery
under a glass shade, for no one ever expected that it would be stolen.
It was not guarded so carefully as it should have been. But who would
have thought that any one of my faithful servants would steal? As to the
child, Janet was one day sent out with him. The head nurse remained at
home. I believe she then took the cup with her. At all events she never
returned, and when a search was made both the child and the cup were
missing." Here Lord Kilspindie stopped and shook his head.

"What happened after that?" asked Sybil, curiously.

"There is no more to tell, Miss Tempest. The woman vanished utterly with
the child and the cup. My wife, poor soul, died of grief. I employed all
manner of means to find the woman, but without result. I even offered a
reward and a pardon if she would bring back what she had taken. But she
gave no sign of her existence. Well"--Kilspindie sighed--"that is all. I
have been a lonely man for over twenty years, and things have gone wrong
with me in every way. I am certain that prosperity will not return to me
and mine until the cup is brought back. Then I may hope to recover my
son. You can understand now how anxious I am to find this man Pratt. I
would willingly pardon him all if he would give back the cup."

"I wonder how he became possessed of it?" said Tempest.

"Ah!" said Kilspindie, "that is what we must find out. He seems to be an
accomplished thief, so it may be that he stole the cup. On the other
hand, Janet, finding herself hard up, may have pawned it, and Pratt may
have got it into his possession in that way. You tell me that he has a
love for beautiful things."

"Such a love," said the vicar, sadly, "that he is willing to be a thief
to obtain them. Well, my lord, at present I do not see how we can help
you."

"There is one way," said Kilspindie, after a pause. "Give me a letter to
this Mr Marton, and with his aid I may succeed in tracing Pratt. In the
meantime I intend to wait here for a few days. At my age I am not able
to get about so rapidly as I once did."

The man did indeed look old and worn-out. But he was a fine, courtly
gentleman of what is called the old school, and Sybil was quite
fascinated with him. After some further conversation it was arranged
that he should remain at the inn until the end of the week--it was now
Wednesday--and that afterwards the vicar should accompany him to London
to introduce him personally to Marton. Leaving her father and Kilspindie
together, Sybil went to her room to think over the strange episode which
was the outcome of her advertisement.

She was anxious to tell Leo all about it, but he was at Portfront, and
she had received no letter from him. Sybil wondered at this, as it was
not like Leo to neglect her. For the moment she was inclined to drive to
Portfront and see him. He had given her no reason for his departure, and
she was becoming anxious about him. Mrs Gabriel still remained in
seclusion, and, so far as Sybil knew, Leo had never been to see her. It
was therefore no use talking to Mrs Gabriel about the man she had so
cruelly cast off. Her father she could not appeal to because, although
he wished to make amends to Leo for his unjust suspicions, he did not
wish him to marry her, and would therefore do nothing likely to bring
them together. In this dilemma it struck Sybil that she might see
Raston; he was a kindly creature, and all through the dark day had
believed in Haverleigh's innocence. She thought that Raston might be
induced to bring Leo back from Portfront, so Sybil put on her hat and
sought out the curate. He was at home and delighted to see her.

"This is an unexpected pleasure, Miss Tempest," he said, wheeling the
armchair forward. "I hope there is nothing wrong."

"Why should there be anything wrong?" asked Sybil, smiling.

Raston passed his hand across his forehead with a troubled air. "This
fact is I do not feel well this morning," he said. "I have received a
letter from Town which has worried me. But do not let me inflict my
troubles on you, Miss Tempest. What can I do?"

"I'll tell you, Mr Raston. But, first of all, you must promise to keep
all I tell you a secret. I don't think I am breaking confidence in
saying what is in my mind, as I gave no promise of secrecy. But I must
tell you all, as you are the only person who can advise me."

"I promise to keep your secret, whatever it may be, Miss Tempest."

"Then listen to the latest information about the cup," said Sybil, and
forthwith related to Raston the news of Lord Kilspindie's arrival, and
how he had been brought to Colester by means of the advertisement.
Having made this preliminary explanation, she related the story which
had been told to her father and herself. As no promise of secrecy had
been given, Sybil did not think she was doing wrong; and, besides, it
was necessary for Raston to know all the details before he could help
her to bring Leo back. Finally, she had the utmost confidence in the
curate's silence.

"It is a most extraordinary story," he said, when she had finished; "and
more curious still--" here he stopped short and considered. "I can tell
you what is in my mind later," he said; "at present you must let me know
in what way I can serve you."

"I want you to help me with Leo," said Sybil, promptly. "For some reason
he has gone to Portfront and is stopping there. I would go over myself
and bring him back, but I am afraid of offending my father. I want Leo
to be introduced to Lord Kilspindie."

"For what reason, Miss Tempest?"

Sybil looked at the ground, and began to draw diagrams with a dainty
shoe. "Well, Mr Raston, you know that I want to marry Leo," she said,
with a blush, "and at present there are so many obstacles to our
engagement. My father is not so just towards Leo as he should be. I
suppose this is because he is poor and has no prospects. If he enlists
and goes to the war, I do not see how that will bring us together. Even
if he gets a commission I cannot marry him. There will not be enough
money. Now, I thought that as I had done something to bring Lord
Kilspindie a chance of getting back the cup, he might be induced to do
something for myself and Leo."

"Something might come of it, certainly, Miss Tempest."

"I am sure Lord Kilspindie is very kind," she said in a feminine way.
"He looks kind. Leo has delightful manners, as you know, Mr Raston. He
is clever in his own way and well educated. Lord Kilspindie might take a
fancy to him and make him a secretary or something. At all events, he
might put him in the way of earning money, for I am sure that Lord
Kilspindie has power as well as wealth."

"Then you want Leo to come back and meet him?"

"Yes. You must tell him all I have told you, and say that if he loves me
he must come back at once."

"I shall do what you say, Miss Tempest, and if I can induce Leo to
return he certainly shall. I do not know why he went to Portfront. His
name was cleared, and he need have had no hesitation in remaining at
Colester."

"I'm sure I don't know what is the matter with him," said Sybil, with a
sigh; "he has been so strange lately. I am sure he is keeping something
from me. But if I get him to myself I'll find out what it is. But you
_will_ go to Portfront, Mr Raston?"

"Yes. This afternoon. In fact, I was going that way in any case, Miss
Tempest, as I intend to journey to London."

"Why are you going to London?" asked Sybil in surprise. She knew that
Raston rarely went to the great city.

The curate hesitated again and rubbed his hair in a distracted way. "I
would rather you did not ask me, Miss Tempest," he said at length. "I am
going to London in answer to a letter. I hope to be back on Saturday. I
have to preach on Sunday, as you know. The vicar said something about
taking a service at Portfront."

"As Lord Kilspindie will be at church on Sunday," said Sybil, "I think
papa will stay. He looks upon Lord Kilspindie as his guest."

"Well, in any case I'll be back," said the curate, with a nod; "then I
shall be able to tell you the reason I had to go. In the meantime, Miss
Tempest, I wish you would see Pearl Darry occasionally. She goes
wandering about the moor lamenting her lost soul, poor creature. I have
been with her a good deal, but while I am away she may do something
desperate. You see her, Miss Tempest, and persuade her that she is under
the care of the Master."

"I'll do my best," replied Sybil; "but I am afraid I am not good enough
to preach, Mr Raston. What a shame of Mrs Jeal to put these ideas into
the girl's head! She knew that Pearl was not sane, and to make her think
such things was downright dangerous."

"I know." Raston sighed. "If we could only get back the cup, Pearl would
be satisfied that the Master is pleased with her and has taken her into
favour again. Then she would recover her old faith in the goodness and
love of God which Mrs Jeal, with the best intentions, no doubt, has
destroyed. I cannot think Mrs Jeal is a good woman."

"I am sure she is a very bad one," said Sybil, emphatically. "However,
I'll do as you wish, Mr Raston. Good-day. A pleasant journey," and she
departed.

The curate took out a letter, glanced at it, shook his head. He was
puzzled by the communication, and knew not what to make of it.




CHAPTER XVIII

A MIRACLE


That same afternoon Raston notified the vicar that he was going for a
few days to London. On the understanding that the young man would be
back for morning service on Sunday, the vicar readily consented that he
should go. Raston forthwith packed his bag, and driving to Portfront
stayed there the night. But for Sybil's message he would have waited
until the next day, and have gone directly to London without pausing on
the way. However, he wished to have a talk with Leo, both on account of
Sybil's message and because he wanted to consult with the young man
about the letter which worried him. This entailed a long conversation,
so Raston put up at the hotel at which Leo was staying, and sent a
message that he wanted to see Mr Haverleigh.

Leo made his appearance, looking haggard and worried, and very much
unlike his usual self. He seemed nervous on seeing Raston, and hurriedly
approached him as though he expected to hear bad news. The events of the
last few weeks had shaken Leo's nerves, and he was prepared for any
calamity--even to hear that Pratt had been arrested. Something of the
sort he expected to hear now.

"Hullo, Raston!" he cried, with an affectation of brightness. "What
brings you here?"

"I am on my way to London," said Raston, shaking hands in a friendly
fashion, "and I am staying here for the night, as I want to have a long
talk with you."

"Very glad," replied Leo, mechanically. Then after a pause he raised his
head. "There is no bad news, I trust?" he asked anxiously.

"By no means. My news is good."

"Then it cannot concern me," said Leo, bitterly. "No good news ever
comes my way now. What is it?"

"I'll tell you after dinner."

"No; tell me now! I can't wait. I am so anxious and worried that my mind
cannot bear suspense."

"You brood too much on things," said Raston. "However, the matter is
very simple. Miss Tempest wants you to return at once to Colester."

"What for? Has her father discovered anything bad about me?"

Raston laughed. "No. You are getting morbid on the subject--the result,
I suppose, of your late experience of man's injustice. If you will sit
down I will tell you what she asked me to say. It is a long story."

"An agreeable one, I hope," muttered Leo, dropping dejectedly into a
chair. "I really cannot bear much more worry without going to chuck
myself into the water."

"Haverleigh," said the curate, severely, "that is an ungrateful way to
speak, after the mercy God has shown you. Has he not brought you
through much tribulation, and set your feet on a rock of safety!"

"Well, there are two answers to that, Raston. However, I'll try and
behave myself while you tell me what Sybil said."

Raston sighed. Not knowing Leo's worry, he was beginning to think him
wrong to behave as he did. Still, this was not the time to preach, and,
unlike most clergymen, Raston knew where to stop. He sat down near Leo
and related the whole story of Lord Kilspindie and his loss. Then he
detailed Sybil's idea that Kilspindie might do something for the young
man. "And if your future is arranged you can then be married."

"I shall never be married, Raston," said Leo, gloomily. "If you
knew--But I must keep my own counsel. What takes you to London?" he
asked suddenly. "You are such a home bird that there must be some strong
reason."

"The very strongest," replied the curate, drawing a letter out of his
pocket. "But first you must promise to hold your tongue about what I am
going to tell you."

Leo nodded. "I have too many unpleasant secrets of my own not to keep
those of others," he said. "Well, what's up?"

"Read this letter from Pratt."

"Pratt!" Haverleigh took the letter hurriedly. "Why, what is he writing
to you about?" He cast his eyes over the letter. It was to the effect
that Pratt would be glad to see Raston at a certain place in London to
speak with him about the cup which had been lost. It asked the curate to
keep the contents of the letter a secret, or at all events to tell only
Leo Haverleigh. Also, it warned Raston that if he behaved treacherously,
and brought down the police on Pratt, that there would be the devil to
pay. These last words were underlined and shocked the curate. The time
and place of the appointment were also underlined, and from the way in
which the meeting was arranged Leo could see that his father had
contrived to see Raston without running the risk of arrest.

"I wonder what he wants to see you about!" said Leo, handing back the
letter and speaking uneasily. He fancied that Pratt might be going to
reveal to Raston the secret of his own paternity.

"About the cup," said Raston, returning the letter to his pocket. "I
suppose he is about to give it back to us again. Not that it will ever
be used again for so sacred a purpose. I shall take it and return it to
Lord Kilspindie. That is only right, as the cup was stolen from him."

"Ah, I forgot! You think that Pratt has the cup?" said Leo.

"He has. Do you not remember the letter he wrote to Marton saying he had
stolen the cup and again had it in his possession?"

"I remember; but that was one of Pratt's fairy tales."

"How do you know?" asked Raston, astonished. "Has he written to you?"

"No. I have seen him."

"In London?"

"In Colester."

Raston pushed back his chair and stared at his friend. "When did you see
him in Colester?" he asked, open-mouthed.

"A few days ago." Leo pondered for a moment while Raston stared at him.
He wondered if it would not be as well to make a confidant of the
curate, and ask his advice. The secret was rapidly becoming too much for
him to bear alone. Raston was his friend, a good fellow, and a wise
young man. Certainly it would be well to confide in him. Leo made up his
mind. "I have to tell you something that will astonish you. I speak in
confidence, Raston."

"Anything you tell me will be sacred," replied the curate, with dignity.

Leo nodded, quite satisfied with this assurance. Then he related all
that had taken place in the castle on that night when he had discovered
Mrs Gabriel and Pratt in company. Raston fairly gasped with surprise as
the recital proceeded, and when Leo confessed that Pratt claimed him as
a son he sprang from his seat.

"I don't believe a word of it!" he cried, bringing his fist down on the
table. "The man is a vile liar. Whomsoever you may be, Leo, you are
certainly not the son of this wretch. Can a bad tree bear good fruit?
No."

"But he can give me proofs."

"He has not done so yet. Let me speak to him, Leo. I may be able to get
more out of him than you. I am your friend, you know that! so if you
will place the matter in my hands, I promise to find out the truth
somehow."

"Well," said Leo, with some hesitation, "I rather thought of coming with
you to London. Pratt expects me."

"He has not written to that effect," said Raston. "I tell you, Leo, the
man is dangerous and unscrupulous. The fact that he claims you as his
son will prevent you dealing freely with him. I can manage him better
myself. You go back to Colester and Miss Tempest. It is but right that
you should do what she wishes, as she has held by you in your time of
trouble. Besides, I quite approve of her wish to introduce you to Lord
Kilspindie. And if--oh!--" Raston stopped short.

"What's the matter, Raston?"

"Suppose you should be the long-lost son of Lord Kilspindie?"

"Ridiculous!" said Leo, shaking his head and flushing.

"It is no more ridiculous than that you should be the son of a
thief--or, rather, believe yourself to be so. Why should you believe the
bad and doubt the good? See here, Leo"--Raston was much excited--"the
cup was lost along with the child. Pratt has the cup, why should you not
be the child? The woman who stole both might have died and passed them
on to Pratt. For his own purposes he says that he is your father."

"I can't believe it, Raston," said Leo, shaking his head.

"Well; disbelieve it if you choose. If the thing is so, what you think
will not alter it. All I ask is that you should let me represent you at
this interview. I have to see Pratt on my own account. Let me see him on
yours."

"Very good, Raston. You can do what you like. I am greatly obliged to
you for the trouble you are taking."

"Indeed, it is only right, Leo," protested the curate. "I begin to see
that you have been wronged. I may not be right in my surmise about your
being the son of Kilspindie. But I am sure that I am correct in saying
you are not the son of that scoundrel. Now, go back to Colester, hold
your tongue, and wait till I come back on Saturday."

"I'll do as you wish," said Leo, sadly; "but indeed I have no hope."

"I have," said the curate, emphatically, and the conversation ended.

The next day Raston departed by the steamer to London, _via_ Worthing,
and Leo returned to his old quarters at the Colester Arms. His meeting
with the curate had done him good, and although he did not adhere to
Raston's theory about his noble paternity, yet he felt more cheerful and
hopeful. He was particular as to his toilet, which, in his despair, he
had rather neglected of late, and went to the Vicarage. Sybil was away
with Pearl on the moor, the servant said. Leo would have followed, but
Mr Tempest caught sight of him, and insisted that he should enter and
be introduced to Lord Kilspindie. Leo willingly obeyed, as he was
anxious to see his supposed father according to Raston. He could not
help smiling when he was presented.

Kilspindie was taken by that smile. He saw before him a singularly
splendid young man, with a graceful, slender figure and a handsome face,
but best of all was the kindly look in the eyes. Kilspindie shook hands
heartily with Leo, and sighed as he thought that his lost son might be
just such another. Had he known of what Raston and the young man before
him had talked about on the previous night, he might have been more
particular in his inquiries, and might perchance have been brought to
think as Raston did. However, he knew nothing, Leo said nothing, and the
conversation resolved itself into the common-place. Tempest was kind to
Leo, Kilspindie was friendly, and the three got on very well.

Meanwhile, Sybil and Pearl were walking across the moor. After a time
they stopped at the turf altar erected by the mad girl, and she
explained to her companion the reason she had made such a place.

"The Master is angry with poor Pearl now," she said sadly, "and He has
taken the sacred cup from her. She is not good enough to keep it. But
when the Master is pleased, and will save Pearl from the Pit"--she
shuddered--"He will place the cup on this altar, and Pearl will bring it
back to the chapel. Then she will be saved and happy."

"But, Pearl, you must not think of God in this way. He is your Father,
and He loves you."

"He _did_ love Pearl, but He made her ill, and Mrs Jeal told Pearl that
she was wicked and in danger of the Worm."

"Pearl! Pearl! Do not believe that. Mrs Jeal is wrong. God loves you!"

"Why, then, did He make Pearl ill if He loved her? And why did He take
away the Holy Grail which Pearl watched over so carefully?"

"He did not take it away," said Sybil, hardly knowing what reply to
make.

"Yes, He did," persisted the poor, mad creature. "Pearl was not good
enough to keep it. But when she is good the cup will come down to earth
again."

"Do you think it is in heaven now, Pearl?"

"I am sure it is. No roof here to stop the cup from floating up to the
New Jerusalem. In the chapel it would have stayed, because the bad roof
kept it down, but here it went up and up and up to the sky."

Sybil did not know what to make of this talk. She soothed the girl as
much as she could and tried to bring her back to that old happy state of
mind which Mrs Jeal had destroyed with her gloomy Calvinistic creed. But
it was all of no use. Only the restoration of the cup would make Pearl
believe that she was good again. However, Sybil induced her to talk of
other things, of birds and flowers, and the poor creature was in a
quieter state of mind when Sybil brought her back to the cottage.

"I go every morning to the altar," said Pearl, as she went inside. "The
cup will come back when the Master is sorry for Pearl."

At this moment Mrs Jeal pulled her into the house and scolded her for
being away. When she saw Sybil she became more civil, but still behaved
in a covertly insolent manner. Sybil grew angry.

"You have behaved very wickedly in putting these ideas into Pearl's
head, Mrs Jeal," she said severely. "The poor creature is not
responsible. She does not understand."

"She understands more than you give her credit for, miss," retorted Mrs
Jeal, coolly, "and she is not fit to be left alone. But when I go away I
shall put her in an asylum."

"Indeed, you will do nothing of the sort!" cried Miss Tempest,
indignantly. "The poor thing would die. Liberty is all in all to her.
When are you going away?"

"I go with Sir Frank Hale, miss. I am going to be the maid of his
sister."

"I heard Sir Frank was leaving Colester," said Sybil, coldly, "and I
think it is the best thing he can do. When does he go, Mrs Jeal?"

"In a week, miss. I have got a good situation, miss, and I do not want
to be burdened with Pearl. She must go to an asylum."

"No, no! I shall take charge of her myself," said Sybil. "You leave her
to me, Mrs Jeal, and I'll look after her."

"Well, I might, miss; I'll see." Then, after a pause, Mrs Jeal asked,
"About that gentleman at your place, miss--will he stay long?"

"Only till the end of the week. I suppose you mean Lord Kilspindie?"

Mrs Jeal's wicked eyes blazed. "Yes, I mean him," she said, and gave an
unpleasant laugh. "Oh! so he goes at the end of the week! Well, miss,
before I take up my situation with Miss Hale, I'll come and see you
about Pearl. If you could take her I should be glad, but you'll find her
a nuisance."

"I don't think so," said Sybil, coldly. "When will you call?"

"After the departure of Lord Kilspindie," said Mrs Jeal, with another
wicked look, and went into the house. Sybil departed, wondering why the
woman had asked about Lord Kilspindie, and why she seemed afraid to meet
him. Had she been clever enough, she might have guessed the truth. As it
was the matter passed out of her mind.

After this there were some very pleasant evenings at the Vicarage. Leo
felt almost happy, in spite of his troubles. He could not as yet bring
himself to tell Sybil that he could never marry her. Besides, he was
hoping against hope that Raston would bring back some good news from
London. Not, indeed, that he (Leo Haverleigh) was the lost son of Lord
Kilspindie--that such good fortune should be his never entered Leo's
head--but that Pratt was not his father. Leo felt that he would rather
be proved to be illegitimate, as Mrs Gabriel had told the vicar he was,
than have such a father as the criminal, Pratt. Yet, at times he felt
sorry for the man. It was certain that he had in him some good
qualities. But whenever Leo thought of him as his father, he became
enraged against him. The thing was too horrible.

Lord Kilspindie took wonderfully to Leo, and this the vicar was pleased
to see. Owing to Leo's want of an honest name, he could not bring
himself to consent to the marriage, so he hoped that the Scotch lord
might take a fancy to the young man and carry him off. Thus Sybil would
be safe, and Leo would be provided for. Mr Tempest had evidently
forgotten his own youth, or he would have remembered that loving hearts
are not so easily severed. Leo and Sybil loved one another too well for
aught to come between them.

On Saturday night Raston returned. It was so late that Leo had not
expected him, so they did not meet until the next morning. Then it was
on the way to church.

"Well," Leo asked eagerly, "and what does my--what does Pratt say?"

"I'll tell you after service," said Raston, hastily. "At present I can't
think of these things."

"But one word, Raston," urged Leo. "Is Pratt my father?"

"No," replied the curate, emphatically, "he is not." And before Leo
could ask another question he ran off. Filled with joy at the
intelligence, but much bewildered, Leo went to church to offer up
thanks.

Kilspindie was also in church, and with Sybil, in the vicar's pew. Mr
Tempest allowed Raston to preach, as had been arranged, and took a very
minor part in the service. Indeed, he did little else but read the
lessons. The church was filled, as everyone was anxious to see Lord
Kilspindie. Mrs Bathurst was there, wondering if his lordship could be
induced to marry Peggy. She quite forgot that she had promised her
daughter's hand to the curate, and was already scheming to get at the
old nobleman. That he _was_ old did not matter to Mrs Bathurst. She
would have sold her daughter to anyone, provided the match was a good
one. And, curious to say, she would have considered that she had done
her duty as a mother. Her moral nature was decidedly warped.

The service was almost over, and the church-wardens were handing round
the bags for the collection when a sweet voice was heard singing in the
distance. Everyone recognised the voice--it was Pearl's--and the vicar,
kneeling at the communion table, looked rather disturbed. He knew the
eccentric ways of the girl, and he feared lest she might come in and
distract the attention of the congregation. And his fears were
fulfilled--Pearl, still singing, entered the church. The scandalised
church-wardens would have kept her out, but that she bore something
which made them open their eyes. The congregation also became aware of
Pearl's burden, and a gasp of astonishment went round. Still singing
some wild, vague melody, the mad girl walked slowly up the aisle,
bearing the sacred cup.

Lord Kilspindie did not see her until she was almost at the chancel
steps. He then gave a cry of astonishment, in spite of the building and
the occasion. Surely he might have been pardoned, for the fairy cup
upon which depended the fortunes of the Grants glittered before his
eyes. There was a dead silence. Everyone was too astonished to speak or
move. The vicar himself was staring from the communion table at this
miracle. But Raston, who had come down to receive the collection, stood
quietly waiting till the girl reached him. She came up singing, placed
the great gold cup in his hand and fell on her knees.

"The Master has forgiven Pearl," she said in a voice which could be
heard all over the church. "_She_ is saved and the cup will be here to
watch over for ever and ever. Amen. Amen." And she bowed her face in her
hands.

Raston paused for a moment in hesitation and glanced at the vicar, then
at Lord Kilspindie. Then he made up his mind, and walking up to the
altar, placed the cup in its old position. And there it glittered, all
gold and gems, with the sunlight striking down on it, until it became
almost too glorious to look upon. Lord Kilspindie stared, with tears in
his eyes. The cup would be his again and he would soon have his son. He
never doubted but that the restoration of the one was the prelude to the
discovery of the other.

Raston pronounced the Benediction and the organ broke forth into
jubilant music. Shortly the congregation streamed out. Everyone was much
excited. The old nobleman came out with Sybil, and they waited at the
porch for the vicar. Leo also was with them.

Suddenly a woman broke through the crowd in the churchyard. It was Mrs
Jeal, and she was seeking Pearl. In her haste she never noticed Lord
Kilspindie, until she almost ran into his arms. Suddenly he saw her
face, started, and made one stride forward to clutch her by the arm.

"The cup and then the heir!" he said loudly, while all looked on amazed.
"Janet Grant, where is my son, Lord Morven!"




CHAPTER XIX

A STORY OF THE PAST


Half-an-hour later and Lord Kilspindie was back in the Vicarage library
with Janet Grant, or, as it may be more convenient to call her, Mrs
Jeal. Mr Tempest was present, together with Leo and Mr Raston, and they
had assembled to force the truth out of Mrs Jeal. This was no easy
matter. All the evil in the woman was uppermost, and with her shawl
wrapped round her tightly she sat there and defied them all.

"You may burn me, you may put me in prison," said Mrs Jeal, savagely,
"but I won't open my mouth."

"I'll have you arrested unless you tell the truth," said Lord
Kilspindie.

"Arrest me, then," snarled Mrs Jeal. "There's a policeman handy, my
lord."

"Why are you behaving like this, woman?" asked the vicar, sternly.

"Why!" she retorted violently. "Because I was badly treated by my lord
there. I served him faithfully for many years, yet, in place of giving
me the position to which I was entitled, he set another woman--a woman I
hated--over my head. But I paid him out," she said revengefully. "Oh!
many a sad hour you have had, my lord! And many more you will have. I
know where your son is; but I won't tell. You have got back the cup, but
the son, my Lord Morven," she sneered, "will remain in the humble
position in which I have placed him."

"Something is gained," said Kilspindie. "You have revealed that my son
is alive and well. I'll get the rest out of you."

"Never!" Mrs Jeal shut her mouth with a snap and shook herself. "I'll
not speak another word!"

"What a wicked woman you are," said the vicar, sadly. Mrs Jeal's eyes
flashed a wicked glance at him, but, true to her determination, she held
her peace. It seemed impossible to do anything with so pronounced a
vixen.

Hitherto Raston had been silent. Now he came forward. "I am able to deal
with this matter," he said quietly, "and I have a way of making the
woman speak."

Mrs Jeal shook her head and glared. The vicar and Kilspindie both looked
at the curate. So did Leo. He was beginning to have a faint hope that
the scene would end in the discovery that he was the rightful son of
Lord Kilspindie. With an anxious face he sat in the corner and drank in
eagerly every word which fell from Raston's lips. Mrs Jeal maintained
her self-imposed silence.

"Mr Tempest," said Raston, "when I asked you if I might go to London, I
did not tell you my errand. I tell it to you now. It was to see the man
known as Pratt."

"What!" exclaimed the vicar. "You saw that man!"

"Two days ago. He wrote asking me to see him, hinting that he had
something to tell about the cup."

"Which he stole," said Kilspindie.

"No, my lord. Pratt did not steal the cup. He took the blame upon
himself, so as to clear the name of my friend Haverleigh."

Both the old men looked at Leo, who winced.

"Are you sure of that?" asked the vicar. "Pratt wrote to Marton,
remember."

"To take the blame upon himself. Quite so. But he was not guilty for all
that. His record was so black when Marton unmasked him that he thought a
crime more or less would not matter."

"But why should he shield Haverleigh?" asked Mr Tempest.

Leo started forward. He saw that the time had come for him to speak out.
"I can answer that," he said. "Pratt told me that I was his son."

Tempest uttered an exclamation. "You must be mistaken," he said; "Mrs
Gabriel informed me that you were illegitimate."

"That would not have made any difference," said Leo, bitterly. "I might
as well be the illegitimate son of Pratt as of anyone else. As a matter
of fact, however, he told me that I was born in wedlock. His wife--my
mother--died, and he placed me with Mrs Gabriel to bring up. She
believed that I was a nameless orphan, and what she told you, Mr
Tempest, was true so far as she knew. Her telling was none the less
spiteful, however. It was that which made you unwilling that I should
marry Sybil."

"Yes," said the vicar, with a flush. "I did not like to think that a
daughter of mine should marry a nameless man."

"And you visit the sins of the parents on the head of their innocent
offspring," said Leo. "You have not treated me well, Mr Tempest. You
thought me guilty of theft; scorned me because I was nameless! Is this
the conduct of a minister of the Gospel?"

The grey head of the vicar drooped. "I admit that I have been wrong,
Leo," he said in a faltering tone. "You have vindicated your character.
I ask your pardon. And more," said he, when Leo grasped his hand, "even
although there is a stain on your birth--"

"No," said Leo, "I don't want you to bind yourself to anything. Wait
till this mystery is cleared up. At present, so far as I know, I am the
son of a criminal. If that is true, I should refuse to marry Sybil."

Here Mrs Jeal burst out into a taunting laugh. Lord Kilspindie frowned
upon her, and took Leo's disengaged hand. The vicar held the other. "You
are a good man, Haverleigh," said his lordship, far from suspecting the
truth. "I wish I had you for a son," and Mrs Jeal laughed again.

When quiet was restored, Raston went on with his story. "First," he
said, "I must tell you how I recovered the cup. I went up and met Pratt.
As I promised not to deliver him into the hands of the law, much as he
deserved punishment, he spoke to me freely and I was with him three
hours. I do not know if I was right in letting such a dangerous
criminal escape," said the curate, looking round, "but if I had given
information to the police I should never have heard the truth about Leo,
nor should I have secured the cup."

"Then I am not his son?" cried Leo, eagerly.

"No. Pratt gave me his word for that. Who you are you shall hear
presently." Here Raston gave a glance at Mrs Jeal, who was moving her
hands restlessly and seemed to be ill at ease. "Meantime I must go on
with the story of the cup. It seemed that Pratt knew the pawnbroker
Penny, and having learnt from Mrs Jeal's story that he had the cup, he
went to get it back and to learn who had pawned it."

"And who did?" asked the vicar, sharply.

Raston gave the answer he least expected. "Mrs Jeal pawned it," said he.

The woman sprang to her feet and found her tongue. "It is a lie!" she
shouted, furious with rage; then she made a rush for the door. Lord
Kilspindie put his hand on her shoulder and forced her back into the
chair.

"I am beginning to suspect the truth," he said sternly. "Sit still or I
will have you punished."

She scowled and relapsed into a dogged silence. Raston went on to tell
how the cup had been stolen. "It seems that when Pearl Darry was ill,"
he said, "this woman watched by her bed. The poor, mad creature was
delirious and raved about the cup. Mrs Jeal persuaded her that she would
be eternally punished, what for Heaven only knows--"

"She is a child of sin," groaned Mrs Jeal.

"She is as pure and good as an angel," cried the curate, frowning. "It
is you who are the evil doer, Mrs Jeal! Well, Mr Tempest, the girl
thought in her half-delirious state that she would test the goodness of
God. She proposed to take the cup out of the chapel and place it on an
altar of turf which she had prepared on the moor. It was her idea that
if God wished to save her, He would take the cup up to Heaven, and then
replace it at a later date on the altar. She, therefore, while Mrs Jeal
was absent, dressed herself and ran out of the house. She went to the
house of old Barker the sexton. His door was not locked--he told a lie
about that to save himself--and she knew where the key of the church
hung. It was in her hand in a moment, and she went to the church
sometime about ten o'clock. She entered and took the cup. Then she
replaced the key on its nail after relocking the door."

"One moment," interrupted Mr Tempest; "those scratches on the lepers'
window--we thought, if you remember, that the robber had entered that
way."

"I shrewdly suspect that old Barker made those scratches to save his own
skin," said Raston. "You had better ask him." And it may here be
mentioned that the vicar did, and learned that what Raston said was
true. The old sexton, finding the cup gone, feared lest he might be
accused of the robbery, and so conceived the idea of making marks as
though someone had entered at a window which his fat body could not
possibly have squeezed through. It was a clever idea and misled all.
But old Barker was punished by being sent to Portfront after he had
confessed.

"It was when Pearl left Barker's cottage with the cup that Mrs Jeal met
her," went on the curate. "She had missed her out of bed, and thinking
that the mad girl had gone to the chapel, followed. She met her at the
door of the cottage and saw that she had the cup. It was then that the
idea came into her wicked head to steal the cup."

"It's a lie!" cried Mrs Jeal again.

"It is what you told Old Penny, anyhow, as he is prepared to swear in
court," said the curate, coolly. "He would not give you what you asked
for the cup until you told him where you got it. For a wonder, you told
the truth. Yes, Mrs Jeal, you followed Pearl on to the moor and saw her
set the cup on the turf altar. Waiting till she got back to your
cottage, you took the cup and concealed it under your shawl. You took it
home, and found the girl back again in bed, very ill from the effects of
exposure. For a time you nursed her while the hue and cry was being made
about the cup. Then you made the excuse that your father was ill and
went to London. You have no father, Mrs Jeal, and Old Penny, in answer
to a letter of yours, sent the wire. You told him you had something for
him, and so he aided you with your plot. You took the cup to London,
pawned it to Old Penny after telling him the story, and got five hundred
pounds for it."

"I did not--I did not!" Mrs Jeal tried again to rise, and again had to
remain; Lord Kilspindie kept his heavy grip on her shoulder. In his
rage at her duplicity he could have slain her, but he spared her for the
moment that he might learn the truth. After many years of darkness dawn
was breaking. Mrs Jeal saw that the end was in sight and began to sob.

"Then," continued Raston, "you banked the money and came down to tell
that wicked lie about Leo Haverleigh. You know that he was never near
the place--that he was innocent and that you were guilty. However, Pratt
got all this out of Old Penny, and then gave him the five hundred pounds
for the cup. He took it to his own place, and when I was with him he
handed it to me."

"Come," said Kilspindie, "there is some good in the man."

"He has to make reparation to you, my lord," said Raston, solemnly, "for
he is this woman's husband, and it was by his direction that your son
was stolen. Yes," here the curate pointed to Leo, "and there is your
son."

Leo rose slowly, as pale as a corpse. He had expected this, yet when it
came the thing was too much for him. He could only look at his
newly-found father in silence. Lord Kilspindie gasped and he too turned
pale. Then he made one stride forward, and grasping Leo's hands stared
into his face. "Yes," he muttered, "I believe. You have her--her--" He
turned on Mrs Jeal. "Woman, is this true?" he demanded. But Mrs Jeal,
with a cruel smile on her fat, puffy face, still sat silent. "I could
strangle you," muttered Lord Kilspindie, exasperated by her obstinacy.

"I can make her speak," said Raston, taking an envelope out of his
pocket, "and here is the means of doing so."

Still holding Leo's hand, Lord Kilspindie looked at the curate. Mrs Jeal
remained quiet, a contemptuous smile on her lips and her eyes on the
floor. Tempest, much interested in this strange scene, sat waiting for
the end. It would seem that the result was in Raston's hands.

"After I had received the cup and had heard its story," the curate
continued, "I began to question Pratt about Leo. At Portfront Leo had
already told me of the claim Pratt had made to being his father. I did
not believe it, for I know Haverleigh's upright nature and could not
think that he was the child of such a bad man. At first Pratt insisted
that he was the father. I then appealed to his better instincts and told
him how Leo had made up his mind to give up Miss Tempest rather than
make her the wife of a man with such antecedents as his. I think Pratt
really loves you, Leo, for after a time he yielded to my entreaties and
told the truth."

"I am sure he likes me," said Haverleigh, quietly; "he was always very
kind to me. Bad as he is, I at least have no reason to complain of his
treatment."

"But what did he say?" asked Lord Kilspindie, anxiously.

"I shall leave Mrs Jeal to tell. She can repeat to you the story Pratt
told me."

"I'll not say a word," muttered the woman, resolutely.

"I can compel you!" replied Raston, sternly.

"Try!" was Mrs Jeal's disdainful retort.

The curate turned towards Kilspindie. "Pratt's story had a great deal to
do with his wife, my lord, and on several points he referred me to her.
I told him that she would never speak, for I well know how obstinate she
is. Pratt then agreed to help me, 'for Leo's sake,' he said. He wrote
out something and placed what he had written in this envelope. I did not
see what it was and I do not know now. The envelope is sealed as you
see. Now," added the curate, looking at Mrs Jeal, who was beginning to
show signs of uneasiness, "if you tell the story of how you stole the
child and prove that Mr Haverleigh is really Lord Morven, I will hand
this letter to you with the seal unbroken. If you refuse, I will open
the envelope now and act on the contents. Pratt assured me that what is
contained herein would cost you much more than your liberty!"

The three men looked at the woman. Her face was livid, and the
perspiration beaded her forehead. Twice she tried to speak, but her
mouth opened and shut without a sound.

"Will you speak?" asked Raston, quietly.

"Give it to me," she muttered in a husky tone, and stretching out her
hand for the envelope Raston withdrew it beyond her reach.

"Not until you have told us the story," he said.

"If I do, will you give me the letter?"

"Yes--with the seal unbroken. I do not know what iniquity you have been
guilty of; but we are all willing not to know so long as you inform us
of your minor fault."

"I have your promise to give me the letter as it is?" asked Mrs Jeal.

"Yes," said Raston, and the other three men echoed his response. Mrs
Jeal nodded, well satisfied, and wiped her pale face with the end of her
shawl. She then took a key out of her pocket.

"Will one of you gentlemen go to my cottage," she said, "and open the
third drawer in the chest of drawers in my bedroom standing opposite to
the door? There you will find a parcel wrapped up in brown paper. I want
it brought here immediately."

"Shall I go?" said Leo, rising.

"No," said Lord Kilspindie. "I have you and I mean to keep you. Mr
Tempest, no doubt, has a servant whom he can trust."

Tempest nodded and touched the bell. The old butler, who had been with
the vicar for over twenty years, appeared. "Take this key," said his
master, handing it to him. "Mrs Jeal will give you directions how to use
it. Lose no time in coming back."

Mrs Jeal repeated her instructions and the servant departed on his
errand. Then the woman rose to her feet and began to talk with an
assumption of courage which would have been ludicrous had it not been so
pitiful. Still, she fought well, and was game to the last.

"You have got the better of me," she said, "or, rather, that brute of a
Tony Angel has peached. If he had held his tongue I could have defied
the lot of you. As it is--" She shrugged her fat shoulders and paused.
"Ask me what questions you like," she said, "I am in your power. I
_must_ reply."

"Is this my son?" asked Kilspindie, his hand on Leo's shoulder.

"Yes. That is Lord Morven!"

Leo uttered a cry and looked at his father with moist eyes. The
revulsion of feeling was too much for Kilspindie, and he sank down into
a chair. Leo held his hand, and there was silence for a few moments. "I
am thankful to God that he has spared me to see my son again!" said
Kilspindie, solemnly, and the vicar added a solemn "Amen."

"And thank God that I have a father and an unsullied name!" said Leo,
almost too moved to speak. Nor was this emotion unmanly on the part of
father and son. The least sentimental person must grant this much.

Kilspindie remained seated in his chair and holding the hand of his
newly-recovered son. Both men fixed their eyes on Mrs Jeal, who in a
cold and unemotional way continued her confession.

"I was brought up on your estate, my lord," she said, "and there I met
with Pratt--or, rather, with Tony Angel. He came on a visit to the
village to get away from the police. He was a handsome and fascinating
man and I fell in love with him. Whether he loved me or not I cannot
say. At all events, he pretended to. I left your service and married
him. We went to London, and then I discovered that my husband was a
thief. At first I was horrified. In those days, my lord, I was not the
hardened sinner you see me now. But after a time Pratt--as I may call
him--made me as bad as himself. He taught me to love fine things and
comfort, and as he always made plenty of money by stealing I had a gay
life. Oh! we had fine times I can tell you! He--"

"Go on with your story, Mrs Jeal," said the vicar, sternly.

She tossed her head, but obeyed. "After a time things got bad. Pratt was
so well known to the police that he was not so successful as he had
been. I used to tell him about Kilspindie Castle and the cup. Pratt, who
loved beautiful things, wanted to get the cup. He proposed that I should
go back and steal it. I was already known in the castle, so there would
be a better opportunity for me to get it than himself. As I wanted money
I agreed, and I came back to the castle."

"Did you re-enter my service in order to steal the cup?" asked Lord
Kilspindie.

"Yes," replied Mrs Jeal, defiantly, "you had plenty without it. I
entered as an under-nursemaid, and as I was comfortable I thought I
would stay for a while. Pratt came up and urged me to steal the cup at
once. I refused, as I did not wish to leave my good situation. Then an
idea came into his head that if I could obtain the child of a nobleman
he could hold it as a hostage."

"What do you mean?" asked Raston.

"The meaning is not difficult," said Mrs Jeal, coolly. "Pratt was always
in danger of being taken by the police, and his record was so bad that
he would have been shown no mercy. He thought if he had Lord
Kilspindie's son, that when he got into trouble he could promise to
restore the child on condition that he was set free."

"A clever idea," muttered the vicar.

"And a very wild one," said his lordship. "What influence could I bring
to bear towards helping a criminal?"

"What, indeed?" sneered Mrs Jeal. "I assured Pratt that your lordship
had no power. But the idea of getting the child as a hostage fascinated
him, and he commanded me to steal the boy. For a time I refused. Then
the head nurse died and another woman was set over my head. My lady
treated me badly--she insulted me; she showed that she mistrusted me. I
was angry and I determined to be revenged. I was revenged by obeying
Pratt. I took the cup and the child and went away. How I--"

"I know how you stole both the child and the cup," said Lord Kilspindie.

"Very good, my lord. Well, I went to London with Pratt. He pawned the
cup, and on the money we lived for a time. Then he insisted that, as he
might some day have to restore the child--we called him Leo," said Mrs
Jeal, with a glance at the young man, "it was necessary that he should
be brought up as a gentleman. He knew Mrs Gabriel, whom he had met
abroad. He had some power over her--"

"And what _is_ the power?" asked Leo.

Mrs Jeal shook her head. "That has nothing to do with you or with the
restoration of your rights, Lord Morven," she said. "I keep that secret
to myself. Pratt had a power over her and used it. He brought the child
to her and said he was a natural child. He insisted that she should
bring him up as the son of her brother who had just died abroad. How
Pratt knew this I do not know; but then he knew everything. Well, it was
done, and Leo was established at the castle. Mrs Gabriel brought him
up."

"Yes," said Leo, bitterly, "she brought me up." And he looked back on
the long life of petty worry and contemptible tyranny that had been his.
"I know all this. But yourself, Mrs Jeal?"

"I remained with Pratt. I was only too glad to get rid of you. I hated
you for your mother's sake--"

"Stop that!" cried Lord Kilspindie, and Mrs Jeal dropped a mocking
curtsey.

"At your lordship's service! However, I found out that Pratt was
treating me badly. He went about with other women. He even struck me. I
made up my mind to leave him, and I did. I went from one place to
another, and finally I came to settle in Colester."

"Why did you come here?" asked the vicar.

"Oh, your reverence can understand that I wanted to keep an eye on the
young lord!" said Mrs Jeal, obsequiously. "He was my property as well as
Pratt's, and when the day came to give him up to his father I wanted my
share of the spoil."

"You shall have nothing," said Lord Kilspindie, sternly. "You ought to
be glad that I do not hand you over to the police!"

She scowled and would have become vituperative, but Raston moved the
hand which held the envelope significantly. At once a frightened look
came over her face, and she sat down. "I stayed here," she continued
feebly, all the strength having gone out of her, "and saved Pearl Darry
from her father. When Pratt came I was afraid; I was always afraid of
Pratt. No one knows but myself what a devil he is. He told me to hold my
tongue, and I was too frightened of him to disobey. Now I'll go away
from here with the Hales, since Miss Sybil has promised to look after
Pearl. I want to put the seas between myself and that man. He terrifies
me, and I am not a woman easily terrified."

"Why did you tell that lie about my having pawned the cup?" asked Leo.

Mrs Jeal shook her head. "I can say no more," she said. Leo would have
insisted, but at that moment the servant entered with the parcel of
which the woman had spoken. When he went out Mrs Jeal opened this, and
spread out the contents on the table.

"Here are the evidences your lordship wished for," she said, glancing at
Lord Kilspindie. "This is the dress Lord Morven wore when I took him
away, his name is marked--the underclothing is also marked. The coral
necklace which your lordship may perhaps recognise as an heirloom. And
your lordship may perhaps remember some mark by which Lord Morven can
be recognised. There _is_ a mark, if your lordship remembers."

Kilspindie drew his hand across his forehead and thought. "My wife
showed me the child one day and pointed out the mark. Yes, three moles
in a line just above the elbow of the left arm."

Mrs Jeal nodded, and Leo, hastily stripping off his coat, drew up his
sleeve to show the three moles in question. "But I don't need that to
assure me that you are my son," said the old nobleman; "you have the
eyes of your mother. Yes; you are my son and Lord Morven!"

"I congratulate you, Leo," said Raston, shaking his friend's hand.

"And I have to thank you with all my heart," said the new Lord Morven,
"for if it had not been for you this would never have been discovered. I
should like to know, however, how it was that Pratt claimed me as a
son?"

"That was Mrs Gabriel's fault," said Raston. "She told him that you
intended to denounce him to the police. When you discovered him at the
castle on that night he was afraid lest you might do so, therefore he
said you were his son, so as to put such a betrayal out of your power."

"As if I would ever have betrayed him!" said Leo. "There was good in
Pratt."

"There is _no_ good in him," cried Mrs Jeal, fiercely. "How dare you say
so? He is a bad and wicked man. I hate him with all my soul! But never
will I set eyes on him again. He might kill me as he has often
threatened to do. But I have told all; I have proved your identity, Lord
Morven, and you have the cup, my Lord Kilspindie. The--the--letter--"
She hesitated. Those present looked at one another. "Should this
dangerous woman go free to be a pest to society?" said the vicar,
sternly.

"You promised," said Mrs Jeal, terrified and white to the lips.

Leo looked at her for a moment, then took the letter from the hands of
Raston, and gave it to her. "We must keep our word," he said.

"And you must leave this place at once," said Mr Tempest, austerely.

But Mrs Jeal was paying no attention to them. She had torn open the
letter, and was reading the few lines it contained. "I thought so," she
muttered, with a black look. "I wish I could kill him." She crushed up
the paper and put it into her pocket again. Then she walked to the door.
"Good-day, my Lord Morven, and good-bye, Lord Kilspindie. You are poor
creatures, both of you. Your reverence will now be glad to sell your
daughter for a title! As to you, Mr Raston, the girl you love would have
been sold to my husband by her mother. I wish you joy, all you men
fools." And with a mocking curtsey Mrs Jeal walked out of the room.

"Let her go. We know the truth," said Lord Kilspindie. "Leo!"

But Leo, with a nod, was making for the door. "I must tell Sybil," he
said, and vanished.

Half-an-hour later the vicar and his father went in search of him. They
found him sitting hand in hand with Sybil in the drawing-room. "It's
really wonderful, wonderful!" she was saying.

"And your father will let me marry you now, darling," said Leo.

"If you will grant him your pardon," said the voice of Mr Tempest.

Leo shook the vicar's hand, kissed Sybil, and Kilspindie smiled,
well-pleased.




CHAPTER XX

MRS GABRIEL'S SECRET


Mrs Jeal was not pleased. She was a woman who liked to make mischief,
and preferred to leave sorrow rather than joy behind her. In her time
she had caused a good deal of misery, and she had always rejoiced over
it. But now that she had been forced to undo the evil she had committed,
her heart ached. Bad as Pratt was, his wife was worse, and if he had
indeed killed her, as he had threatened, he would have been doing a
service to mankind. Mrs Jeal was a noxious snake who should have been
killed without pity.

On leaving the Vicarage she went home at once and found the cottage
empty, as Pearl had not yet returned. Mrs Jeal brought out the letter
and again read it. Then she turned white and shivered; finally she put
it into the fire, and watched it burn to black ashes. Afterwards she
filled herself a glass of brandy and drank it neat. Yet she was an
abstemious woman as a rule. There must have been something very terrible
in that letter to make her take to strong drink. And what was in it no
one in Colester ever found out. Having burned it, Mrs Jeal put it out of
her mind as well as she was able. Yet often afterwards she shivered to
think of what would have happened had it been opened in the Vicarage
library. "A narrow shave that," muttered Mrs Jeal.

Shortly, when she had recovered herself in some measure, Pearl danced
into the room. She was now quite her old happy self. The restoration of
the cup made her believe that God had forgiven her, and that the Master
believed her worthy to be the guardian of the Holy Grail. Raston had
arranged the matter in order to save her from further misery. Early on
Sunday morning he had taken the cup across the moor and had placed it on
the turf altar, knowing that there Pearl, as was her custom, would come
and seek it. He had not anticipated such a dramatic scene as had taken
place in the chapel. Pearl believed in her own weak mind that the Master
had brought the cup down again from Heaven. She was therefore glad and
merry, and her singing and dancing annoyed Mrs Jeal.

"Keep quiet, you minx!" she cried savagely, "or I'll have you shut up.
Where have you been after making an exhibition of yourself?"

"I have been looking at the cup," said Pearl, gaily. "It is on the
altar. I am pleased the Master has given it again into my charge. He has
forgiven me, and some day I shall be with Him in Paradise."

It was in Mrs Jeal's wicked mind to tell the truth to the girl. But she
knew that Pearl would not accept the explanation. Besides, strange as it
may seem, even Mrs Jeal had some compunction in making the girl
miserable. The woman was evil to the core, but she must have had some
good in her. Therefore she held her tongue on the subject of the cup.

"Where were you so early this morning?" she asked. "I found your bed
empty at six o'clock."

"I went to the altar to find the cup brought down by the dear Master,"
replied Pearl, "and I was watching Sir Frank Hale and his sister going
away. They drove with two horses and many boxes. I did not--"

Mrs Jeal jumped up and seized Pearl's arm. "What do you mean?" she
asked. "Has Sir Frank Hale gone?"

"And his sister," said Pearl, twisting away with a frightened face.
"They have left Colester and gone away--away, oh, far away! Oh! Oh! what
are--"

"Hold your tongue," said Mrs Jeal, thrusting her into a chair, "and sit
you there till I come back." She hurriedly put on her bonnet and shawl.
"If you stir I'll kill you," and she hurried out of the house.

Pearl's news was true. There was no one in the Hale's house save an old
woman who was to act as caretaker. She explained that Sir Frank and his
sister had left early that morning, and by this time were on their way
to London, whence they departed in a few days for the Continent.

"Did they leave no message for me?" asked Mrs Jeal, her face growing
black as she clenched her hand.

"No; why should they?" asked the crone, contemptuously. "What have fine
folks like them to do with a woman like you?"

"I'll slap your face if you talk to me like that," raged Mrs Jeal, her
worst nature coming uppermost.

"I have influence with your master. I can have you turned away."

"No, you can't," replied the other hag. "Why I heard Sir Frank say how
glad he was to get away without seeing you. He called you a witch. He!
He!"

"He did, did he?" muttered Mrs Jeal, furiously. "Now just you--" She
was going on to threaten the caretaker when she found the door banged in
her face and heard the mocking laughter of the old woman behind it.

Treated thus scornfully, Mrs Jeal stamped and raged like one possessed.
"Not a penny," she muttered, "and he promised--ugh, the miser--the
beast! I'll be even with him. There's the money for the cup. I can
follow. I can--but I want more. Now that I have given up my secret"--her
face grew dark as she thought of the burnt letter--"I shall be poor.
Ha!" She stopped, and biting her finger looked towards the castle. "I
can make her pay. This evening, then. It will be worth more than the
cup. One secret is of no use. But I have another--another."

She shook her fist at the house of Sir Frank, said something about him
that was not exactly a blessing, then returned home with her mind made
up. She wished to leave Colester, which was now too hot for her. As
Sybil would look after Pearl, there would be no difficulty in that
quarter. She had saved money, and with what she had got from pawning the
cup she was fairly well off for her station in life. But Mrs Jeal was
greedy and wanted more. Mrs Gabriel was to be the milch cow this time.
Thus it came about that Mrs Gabriel was informed that evening that Mrs
Jeal wished to see her at once on important business.

The underlying insolence of the message annoyed Mrs Gabriel, who always
prided herself on keeping the lower orders in what she called their
proper place, which was under her heel. And Mrs Gabriel was in no mood
to be merciful to insolence. Some kind friend had informed her of the
discovery of Leo's true position. She was savagely angry. On account of
Pratt she had hated the young man, and later on, when he came to defy
her, she had disliked him on his own account. That he should have a
title, and that he should marry Sybil Tempest! These things were all
gall and bitterness to the haughty woman. She wanted Leo to be her
slave, to punish him for Pratt's misdemeanours. But her slave had
escaped, and she could do nothing save sit in the empty room, eating out
her heart in the bitterness of impotent anger. She could do nothing. Leo
was gone; Pratt was gone, and she was left a lonely woman. She had not
even the comfort of feeling that she could revenge herself.

Feeling in this mood, she was not unwilling to see Mrs Jeal. Here, at
least, was someone on whom she could vent her rage. With an imperious
gesture she ordered the woman to be admitted, and received her with a
stormy brow. Mrs Jeal smiled. She knew that she had the upper hand, and
was not to be intimidated by stormy looks. Waiting till the servant had
departed and the door was closed, she introduced herself.

"I have to speak to you on important business, my lady," she said, with
assumed meekness, and addressing Mrs Gabriel by a title to which she
laid no claim. This was done to accentuate the later part of the
interview. Mrs Jeal was quite as well prepared as was Mrs Gabriel to
make herself disagreeable. She also was out of tune.

"What business can a woman like you have with me?" demanded Mrs Gabriel,
with scorn, and put up a _lorgnette_ to freeze Mrs Jeal with a look.

But Mrs Jeal had borne the looks of even greater ladies than Mrs
Gabriel. "It is strange, is it not, my lady?" she sniggered; "but I have
something to talk about which will interest your ladyship very much."

"Indeed!" Mrs Gabriel looked more scornful than ever. "And I believe you
have to do with this precious discovery?"

"I have, my lady. Mr Haverleigh is now Lord Morven. I proved his right
to the title. You see, my lady, I was a nurse at Kilspindie Castle, and
I stole his lordship when a child."

"How dare you speak to me like this?" cried Mrs Gabriel. "Do you not
know that I can have you arrested for such an admission?"

"Oh, no; you cannot, my lady," retorted Mrs Jeal, coolly; "only Lord
Kilspindie can do that, and he has let me go free."

"Then you leave this place," said Mrs Gabriel, haughtily. "I'll have no
one in Colester likely to corrupt the morals of the people."

"Ah, you have great power here, my lady--great power," mocked Mrs Jeal.

Mrs Gabriel's blood grew cold as she saw the look in the woman's eye. "I
don't understand you. Leave the room and the place," she said.

"All in good time, my lady," replied Mrs Jeal, calmly, and took a seat.
As this was more than Mrs Gabriel could bear, she rose.

"You infamous creature!" she cried furiously. "Out of my house, or I'll
have you thrown out by my servants."

"_My_ house, _my_ servants, _my_ estates!" sneered Mrs Jeal, keeping an
eye on her victim. "Are you sure you can talk like that, my lady?"

"I repeat I don't understand you," stammered Mrs Gabriel, sitting down.
She was beginning to be afraid. Mrs Jeal would not dare to speak so
unless she possessed some information dangerous to the lady of the
castle.

"I shall leave the parish to-morrow," went on Mrs Jeal, coolly. "I have
no wish to remain. Miss Tempest will take charge of Pearl, and--"

"What have I to do with all this?" said Mrs Gabriel, sitting up.

"This much: I want your ladyship to give me a thousand pounds."

"Ah! I thought so. Your mission here is one of blackmail?"

Mrs Jeal shrugged her plump shoulders. "Some people would call it that,"
she said, dropping the courtesy title; "and as you have paid blackmail
to Pratt all these years, I don't see why you should not give me a
thousand pounds to get rid of me."

"Pratt!" Mrs Gabriel could hardly speak. "What do you know?--"

"I know that Pratt was married to you in Switzerland when you were Miss
Haverleigh, and that you afterwards married Mr Gabriel. The property was
left by Mr Gabriel to--'_my wife_.' Those were the words used in the
will. And you, Miss Haverleigh, were never Mr Gabriel's wife."

"It is not true," muttered Mrs Gabriel, her lips quivering.

"It is true; you know it is!" said the other woman. "A word from Pratt,
and you would have been turned out of possession here. He held his
tongue so long as you took the child and brought him up. I have held my
tongue also, because I was afraid of Pratt. But now he has told my
secret about Lord Morven, I want money on my own account, so as to get
away from him across the seas."

Mrs Gabriel drummed on the table. She saw that this woman was too much
for her. "What you say is perfectly true," she said. "I met Pratt in
Switzerland when I was a young girl. We were married in Geneva, and I
afterwards found out what a brute he was. We parted. Afterwards I heard
that he was dead, and regarded myself as free to marry Gabriel."

"Oh, that was one of Pratt's jokes," said Mrs Jeal, easily. "He was
always a merry sort of brute. But, you see, I can turn you out."

"Not without Pratt's aid," said Mrs Gabriel, fiercely. "I won't give up
the property to go to the Crown! I love power, and I intend to keep what
I have. Pratt made me take that child, and lie about him. He made me
introduce him to Colester society, and for years he has taken money from
me. After doing all this, do you think I'll give it up? No; I'll fight!"

Mrs Jeal laughed unpleasantly. "I can put a weapon into your hand to
fight with," she said; "that is, if you give me a thousand pounds."

"What do you mean" panted Mrs Gabriel, throwing herself forward and
seizing Mrs Jeal by the shoulders. "Can you?--will you?--"

"If you give me a thousand pounds," replied the other woman, quite
unmoved, and looking up with her wicked eyes into Mrs Gabriel's agitated
face.

"What do you know? Quick--tell me!" Mrs Gabriel shook her.

"Don't shake me," said Mrs Jeal, tartly, twisting herself free. "If you
want to know my secret, I'll tell it to you--I am Pratt's lawful wife."

Mrs Gabriel put her hand to her forehead, and reeled to the end of the
room. "Wife--wife!" she muttered. "Then I am not--"

"You are _not_ his wife," finished Mrs Jeal, coolly. "You never were his
wife, seeing he was married to me before he met you. You are Mrs
Gabriel, the widow of John Gabriel, and the possessor of this property."

"Can you--can you prove this?" asked the other woman, gasping.

"I'll give you my marriage certificate for a thousand pounds," said Mrs
Jeal. "I don't want it. I've had enough of Pratt. Then you can see the
church where we were married, and search the register. Oh, it's all
right."

"Give me the certificate," Mrs Gabriel stretched out her hand eagerly.

"Not without the thousand pounds," said Mrs Jeal, resolutely.

"I'll give you a cheque," said Mrs Gabriel, hurrying to a writing-desk.

Mrs Jeal shook her head. "Won't do!" she remarked. "I've had to do with
ladies before. You might stop that cheque when I had given you what you
wanted. No. Come to the bank; give me the money in notes, and I'll place
the certificate in your hands."

"We can't go to the bank to-night," said Mrs Gabriel, frowning.

"Oh! I can wait till to-morrow," replied Mrs Jeal, coolly.

Mrs Gabriel lost her temper and stamped her foot. "Give me that
certificate, or I'll have you arrested."

"Oh! So you want me to tell my story in court, my lady."

"You dare to!"

"Then give me the thousand pounds." Mrs Jeal was beginning to lose her
temper. "Here's a coil about a trifle," she said angrily; "instead of
asking you for blackmail, as I could have done, I offer to give you
freedom. And you won't pay for it."

"I will. Here's a cheque. Come with me to the bank at Portfront
to-morrow, and you can cash it in my presence. The certificate--"

"Will be given to you when the notes are in my hand. You can take me to
Portfront with my boxes, as I then can catch the afternoon steamer to
London. I have given up my cottage, and sold my furniture, and packed my
things. To-morrow I'll take Pearl to Miss Tempest, and then we can drive
to the bank."

"You insolent woman!" raged Mrs Gabriel, but she was obliged to yield.
For once in her life she had met a person of her own sex who had as bad
a temper as herself. The two women had a royal battle, but in the end
victory declared itself on the side of Mrs Jeal, and she departed in
triumph.

The next morning Sybil was informed that Mrs Jeal and Pearl were waiting
to see her. Guessing the woman's errand, Miss Tempest descended. Mrs
Jeal, perfectly respectful, dropped a curtsey.

"I've brought you Pearl, my lady," she said.

"I am not 'my lady,'" said Sybil, coldly.

"You soon will be," smirked Mrs Jeal, "Lady Morven. Well, I don't grudge
it to you. You're not so bad as some. Here's Pearl."

Sybil took the hand of the poor creature, who was shedding tears at the
thought of losing Mrs Jeal. "Don't cry, Pearl, you will be quite happy
with me. Remember you have to look after the cup." Whereat Pearl clapped
her hands and was joyful again.

"I shan't want you any more," said Pearl to Mrs Jeal; "the Master has
given me the cup to look after, and you are too wicked to come near
me."

Mrs Jeal winced, and looked down. "Here's gratitude," she sighed. "I've
loved but one thing in my life, and it turns against me. Well, Pearl, I
hope you will be happy. Good-bye." She paused, and then went on. "And,
my lady, I would like to tell you the reason I told that lie about Lord
Morven having pawned the cup. It was Sir Frank Hale made me do it."

"Sir Frank!" echoed Sybil in amazement. "Why should he?"

"It was partly your fault, miss," said Mrs Jeal, coolly; "he loved you,
and he loved his sister. If Lord Morven had married Miss Edith, and you
had married Sir Frank, all would have been well. But on that night I
brought back the cup he saw me, and got the truth out of me. There he
used me for his own ends, so as to get the blame laid on Mr Haverleigh."

"How wicked of him!" said Sybil, angrily.

Mrs Jeal laughed. "It was his way, my lady. But he has gone away, and
will not trouble you again. Neither shall I. Good-bye, my lady. Pearl?"

But Pearl turned away like a cross child. Mrs Jeal had to go without a
farewell kiss, and her wicked nature felt the slight. However, she
controlled her emotion, and went off to Portfront with Mrs Gabriel.
There the cheque was cashed, and Mrs Jeal became possessed of a thousand
pounds in Bank of England notes--she would take no other.

"And there's the certificate," she said to Mrs Gabriel.

"Thank God!" cried that lady, seizing it, "now I'm free of that man. If
he comes to Colester again I'll put him in gaol. And you, hussey, I'll
have you ducked."

"I said you would talk like that," jeered Mrs Jeal. "A lucky thing I
have the notes. Good-day, Miss Haverleigh!" And with this last insulting
speech, which she knew was untrue, Mrs Jeal went away. What became of
her no one ever heard. But creatures like Mrs Jeal always fall on their
feet like cats, perhaps because they have so much of the cat nature in
them. Mrs Gabriel, rejoicing in her freedom, returned to Colester, and
became more domineering than ever. Whether Pratt guessed that his wife
would tell her the truth, it is impossible to say. But he never came
near Mrs Gabriel again, nor did he write to her. If he had, she would
have set to work to trace him out and have him arrested. With the
certificate of marriage it was easy for Mrs Gabriel to prove that she
had been deceived by a villain, and she would have had no hesitation in
making the affair public. Pratt knew this, and knew her savage nature.
He therefore kept away, and Mrs Gabriel, unrestrained by any fear,
became more of a tyrant than ever.

She refused to come to Leo's wedding, or even to see him, intimating to
Sybil, who called upon her to entreat her to be reconciled to the new
Lord Morven, that she hated both of them. Mrs Gabriel went away to
London for six months, and amused herself by hunting for Pratt. In the
meantime, Lord Morven and Sybil were married. Also Raston was united to
his Peggy on the same day--Mrs Bathurst bore up heroically. Only she
regretted that she had not known of Leo's true parentage. He might have
married Peggy. "She would grace a title," said Mrs Bathurst.

"And now," said Lord Kilspindie, when the wedding was at an end, "we
will go to our own place and take the cup with us."

So it came about that the Pagan Cup, which was the luck of the Grants,
was replaced in Kilspindie Castle. There was a brave home-coming for the
long-lost son and his bride. And there Lord and Lady Morven lived
beloved by all. It was a happy ending to Leo's troubles.

After a time Mr Tempest found that he could not live without his
daughter, so he took up his residence in Kilspindie Castle as a kind of
chaplain. Pearl was already established at the castle, and constituted
herself the guardian of the cup, which in her mad fancy she still called
the Holy Grail. No one tried to undeceive her. But there is no danger of
the cup being lost again while Pearl looks after it. And that is a good
thing for the Grants, since their luck is wound up in its possession.
"And who would doubt the truth of the tradition!" said Kilspindie,
"seeing that three times the legend has come true."

Raston succeeded Mr Tempest as vicar of Colester, as Mrs Gabriel rather
approved of him. Thus it was that Mrs Bathurst came to think herself
entitled to interfere in parish affairs as the mother-in-law of the
vicar. She and Mrs Gabriel fought bitterly, and still fight over the
affairs of the kingdom. Raston and Peggy take no notice. They are
perfectly happy.

Pratt wrote one letter to Lord Morven telling him that he was going to
lead a new and decent life in South America, and asking the young man
not to think too badly of him. As he gave no address, Leo could not
answer the letter, so he burnt it and said nothing about it save to his
father. "There was some good in Pratt," said Lord Morven.

"Well, yes," assented Kilspindie; "he was a thief, a liar, and a rogue
in grain. Nevertheless, I believe he had a sincere affection for you, my
dear boy. He certainly did a kind act when he restored to me my son and
my cup--"

"And a daughter," said Sybil, who entered at the moment.

"Who is the light of my eyes," said Morven, kissing her. "We are happy
now, father. After the storm comes the calm."

"Therefore, remember to give thanks," said Mr Tempest, pointing to the
cup. "I think we can make use of the line on that goblet," and he read
out in English the inscription, "'To the great God who maketh the heart
joyful.' The God of Israel," said Mr Tempest, solemnly. "Amen, and
Amen."


THE END.




ECCENTRICITIES OF GENIUS

By Major J. B. Pond.


READ WHAT IS SAID OF IT.

"It is distinctly one of the most interesting books of the year from any
point of view."--_Rochester Sunday Herald._

"It is many a day since I have read so fascinating a book of
reminiscences. Many a day--or perhaps I should have said a 'night'--for
this volume has given me delight during hours, when, according to the
laws of nature, I should have been asleep."--_Newell Dwight Hillis._

"One of the most simple, naive and straightforward books ever written.
It fairly reeks with personality.... No man living has had such
interesting association with so many interesting people."--_Home
Journal._

"Adorned by many pictures, never before published."--_Detroit Journal._

"Possesses unparalleled attractions."--_Boston Journal._

"Major Pond goes deep into his subject, furnishing pen-portraits that
are admirably clear and graphic."--_The Mail and Express._

"The whole book, stuffed as it is with anecdotes and extracts from
personal letters, is marvelously interesting."--_Boston Transcript._

"All the world loves a teller of stories, and readers will surely take
approvingly to the man who gives them so much of entertaining reading as
is found in Major Pond's 600 pages of bright personal description."--_N.
Y. Times._

"Shining by reflected light, its pages literally teem with interesting
anecdotes of many sorts."--_Chicago Evening Post._

"Originality stamps the volume, copiously illustrated with
portraits."--_The Boston Globe._

"It has a thousand charms, and a thousand points of interest. It is full
of striking gems of thought, rare descriptions of men and places,
biographical bits that delight one by their variety, and the distinction
of those alluded to. From a literary view it is as interesting as
Disraeli's famous 'Curiosities of Literature.'"--_Philadelphia Item._

"If any more charming and interesting book has appeared this season, it
has not come to our notice. The get-up is worthy of the matter of the
book."--_Philadelphia Evening Telegraph._

       *       *       *       *       *

It is a handsome octavo volume, 53/4 x 83/4 inches, of 620 pages, with
nearly 100 half-tone portrait illustrations. Beautifully bound in
English silk cloth, with gold stamp on side, gilt top. At all
Bookstores. $3.50.



THE VOYAGE OF ITHOBAL

BY

SIR EDWIN ARNOLD


Ithobal was the first African explorer we know about. He was a sea
captain of Tyre, who rescued and married an African Princess, and then
induced the King of Egypt to put him in charge of a voyage of
exploration of the wonderful land of his wife's birth.

After a voyage of fifteen thousand miles around Africa, he returns after
numerous and exciting adventures, which bring out almost every feature
of African life and scenery. Ithobal relates the story of his enterprise
in a discourse of seven days before the throne of Pharaoh, who crowns
him with honors.

SIR HENRY M. STANLEY, in a letter to the author, says of it:--"You have
added greatly to the happiness of many of your race by the production
of so unique a poem, so rich in the beauties of the sweet English
language."

Other able critics who have read the blind poet's new epic poem unite
in calling it even better than the old favorite, "The Light of Asia."

       *       *       *       *       *

_12mo, Cloth, Gilt Top. Illustrated from 36 drawings by Arthur Lumley.
$1.50_



EQUAL PARTNERS.

 By HOWARD FIELDING. "This is a thoroughly enjoyable detective
  story, written in good, crisp style, and with a decided surprise
  in the last pages. It is adroitly contrived that almost every
  character in the book shall be suspected of the crime of attempted
  murder before the actual culprit is discovered. The characters are
  excellently differentiated, and the story is vastly diverting, nor
  are there any repulsive features about the book. It is a stirring
  tale and will enliven a dull evening successfully."--_Chicago
  Tribune._ Illustrated. Cloth bound.                        $1.25


DORIS KINGSLEY, Child and Colonist.

 By EMMA RAYNER, author of "Free to Serve," "In Castle and Colony,"
  etc. This story of the South in the first half of the eighteenth
  century, opens with one of the strangest episodes in the early
  history of South Carolina--the pursuit and capture by the Governor
  of Carolina of a pirate vessel, full, not of treasure, but of
  English men and women; and the selling of those same unfortunate
  voyagers as bond servants in the colony. Doris Kingsley, a child
  stolen from the streets of London, is the youngest of the party,
  and is the heroine of the story. Doris Kingsley is a novel of
  absorbing interest, dramatic and historically true.
  Illustrated. Cloth bound.                                  $1.50


OLD JED PROUTY (A Narrative of the Penobscot).

 By RICHARD GOLDEN and MARY C. FRANCIS. In "Old Jed Prouty" the
  reading public is presented with a New England character story of
  unusual interest and merit. The plot, although not an involved
  one, hides enough mystery to lend the spice of the unknown to the
  reader's zest, and the simple and natural denouement emphasizes
  the high moral ethics of the story, and throws into strong relief
  the deep human sentiments that dominate the tale. Standing out
  above all, infusing into the fiber of every chapter the rugged
  sincerity, the homely wit and the quaint philosophy of New
  England, is the central character about which the pivot of the
  story turns, "Old Jed Prouty," real in name and real in goodness,
  who at the time of his life, some thirty years since, was a
  landmark in the Valley of the Penobscot. Cloth bound.      $1.50


A MASTER OF FORTUNE, being Further Adventures of "Captain Kettle."

 By CUTCLIFFE HYNE. "It has the dash and tinge of reality that makes
  you feel as if you were in the midst of it all."--_Detroit Free
  Press._

 "The many readers who followed with bated breath the wild
  adventures of Captain Kettle in the book named for him, will
  welcome Cutcliffe Hyne's new collection of tales dealing with
  that remarkable sea dog. The volume is well called 'A Master
  of Fortune.'"--_Philadelphia Press._

 "Nobody who has followed the gallant sailor--diminutive, but oh,
  my!--in his previous adventures around the earth, is going to
  miss this red-hot volume of marvelous exploits."--_N. Y. World._
  Illustrated. Cloth bound.                                  $1.50


THE ADVENTURES OF CAPTAIN KETTLE.

 By CUTCLIFFE HYNE. The best sea story since the days of Marryat.
  Captain Kettle is a devil-may-care sea dog, half pirate and half
  preacher. The author carries him through many hairbreadth escapes
  and makes him a character that will live long in the annals of
  fiction. The success of this book is marvelous. Over 80,000 copies
  have been sold. Illustrated. Cloth bound.                  $1.50


THE MULLIGANS. A Novel.

 By EDWARD HARRIGAN. The _New York World_ says: "Mr. Harrigan gave
  to his Mulligan dramas the most distinctly typical character plays
  which have ever been seen on the native stage. They were studied
  and displayed straight from the life of New York and their
  popularity was unbounded.

 His book is one of the most generally interesting of the new
  season's output."

 _It is a marvelously entertaining novel, possessing a keenness of
  wit and humor unsurpassed by any recent work. All the characters
  stand out, as true to life, as natural and as vivid as if
  portrayed by Dickens._
  12mo. Cloth bound. Illustrated. Price,                     $1.50


NORMAN HOLT, a Story of the Army of the Cumberland.

 By GENERAL (Capt.) CHARLES KING. "No more charming historic war
  story has ever been written. It is Captain King's best, and
  bearing, as it does, on the great battle of Mission Ridge,
  although the story is woven in fiction, it adds an invaluable
  record of that gigantic contest between the two great armies."

 "The characters are real, their emotions natural, and the romance
  that is interwoven is delightful. It is wholesome and one of
  General King's best, if not his best book."--_N. Y. Journal._

 "From the first chapter to the last page the interest of the reader
  never fags. General King has written no more brilliant or stirring
  novel than 'Norman Holt.'"--_N. Y. Press._
  Illustrated, cloth bound.                                  $1.25


JOHN HENRY, (25th Thousand.)

 By HUGH MCHUGH. "'John Henry' has just 'butted' its way in between
  the literary bars and capered over the book counters to the tune
  of twelve thousand copies before its publishers could recover
  their breath.

 "Every page is as catchy as a bar from a popular song.

 "The slang is as correct, original and smart as the newest
  handshake from London.

 "In the lottery of humorous books 'John Henry' seems to approximate
  the capital prize."--_N. Y. Journal._

 "All who have laughed over 'Billy Baxter' will heartily enjoy this
  book."--_The Bookseller, Newsdealer and Stationer._
  Cloth bound.                                               $0.75


THE KING OF HONEY ISLAND, (45th Thousand.)

 By MAURICE THOMPSON, author of "Alice of Old Vincennes," etc. "'The
  King of Honey Island' bears quite as many marks of the genius of
  the author as does 'Alice of Old Vincennes,' with the additional
  charm, perhaps of more buoyancy and beauty of thought and
  expression. In 'Alice' Mr. Thompson plumed himself as a master
  word painter. In 'The King of Honey Island' he developed into a
  veritable American Ouida, for his descriptive powers are
  marvelous. Like the true artist that he was, he paints Nature as
  it looks, not as it is, so that the reader, in glimpsing the
  battle of New Orleans, hears, almost, the cannon's roar."--_The
  Topeka Capital._ Illustrated, cloth bound.                 $1.50


JOHN WINSLOW.

 By HENRY D. NORTHROP. "'John Winslow' is one of those inviting
  books of country life of which the best part of 'Eben Holden' has
  come to be the accepted type. Plenty of shrewd common sense in the
  chief character, a dash of love on the side, an incidental and
  inevitable bit of human wickedness--but everything in the picture
  and the framing attractive. This is a book for a wide reach among
  readers."--_N. Y. World._

 "Properly ranks with 'Eben Holden,' 'David Harum,' and 'Quincy
  Adams Sawyer.' The four may be put in a class by themselves as
  distinctive types of homespun Americans."--_The North American._

 "Worthy to live with 'David Harum' and 'Eben
  Holden.'"--_Publishers' Weekly._
  12mo, illustrated, cloth bound.                            $1.50


UNDER A LUCKY STAR, a New Book on Astrology.

 By CHARLOTTE ABELL WALKER. Tells what occupation to adopt, and what
  line of life to follow, what associates and partners to choose,
  how to recognize the possibilities and limitations of our friends
  and ourselves, and of other important matters to human life,
  including suggestions on marriage, being mainly culled from the
  minds of ancient and modern philosophers.
  Illustrated, cloth bound.                                  $1.50


THE WAY OF A MAN WITH A MAID.

 By FRANCES GORDEN FANE. A clever, well-written story, full of love
  and pathos, and thrilling with dramatic crises. Each step of the
  domestic tragedy is skilfully portrayed, until the final climax is
  reached.

 "Its author has made it a powerful, telling story to read."--_N. Y.
  World._ Cloth bound.                                       $1.50


THE CROSSROADS OF DESTINY, a Story of Chivalry in the Fifteenth Century.

 By JOHN P. RITTER. Author of "The Man Who Dared." This is a
  wonderfully interesting story, and will find a welcome with all
  who love to read of deeds of chivalry.

 "It is a clean, clear and clever story of chivalry at its best, and
  will find a great many well-pleased readers."--_New York World._
  Cloth bound, illustrated.                                  $1.25


A CHEQUE FOR THREE THOUSAND.

 By ARTHUR HENRY VEYSEY. (Tenth edition.) It's a jolly good story,
  bright and clear. Dramatic, full of life and action and a
  brilliant farce from end to end. You cannot put it down until
  you finish it, and you will mention it many a time when you
  want to relate something novel and odd among your friends.
  Attractively bound in cloth.                               $1.00


A PEDIGREE IN PAWN.

 By ARTHUR HENRY VEYSEY. Author of "A Cheque for Three Thousand,"
  which has run into its _seventh edition_. Original, bright,
  sparkling fun runs all through "A Pedigree in Pawn." It will be
  talked about and laughed over more than any other book of the
  year. Illustrated with 14 character drawings. Cloth bound. $1.25


HATS OFF.

 By ARTHUR HENRY VEYSEY. Author of "A Cheque for Three Thousand,"
  etc. A splendid story for summer reading. Are you tired, blue?
  Read HATS OFF! Do you want a story for the hammock? Read HATS OFF!
  Do you want a story with "go," with an original plot? Read HATS
  OFF! Do you want to laugh? Read HATS OFF! Cloth bound.     $1.25
                                            Paper covers.       50


THE STATEROOM OPPOSITE.

 By ARTHUR HENRY VEYSEY. Author of "A Cheque for Three Thousand,"
  etc. Is a well balanced detective story. It is not overdrawn as
  such books usually are, but full of mysterious and vital interest.
  It is a departure from Mr. Veysey's previous humorous style in "A
  Cheque for Three Thousand," and "A Pedigree in Pawn," proving him
  to be a remarkably versatile writer. Most of the events take place
  on shipboard. It is a powerful story, with a most dramatic climax,
  and inimitably original characters. Cloth bound.           $1.25
                                      Paper covers.             50


CLEO THE MAGNIFICENT; or, The Muse of the Real.

 By LOUIS ZANGWILL. _The Boston Times_ says: "The story is drawn
  with a master hand and the characters stand forth in clear relief.
  It is in every way worthy of Mr. Zangwill's reputation." One of
  the best novels of the year. Cloth bound.                  $1.50


THE MAID OF BOCASSE.

 By MAY HALSEY MILLER. Author of "Raoul and Iron Hand." This is a
  delightful fourteenth-century romance. The Maid of Bocasse was
  the orphan daughter of a rich count, who dwelt in the Kingdom
  of Navarre. A Gascon knight made a daring attempt to win the
  fair chatelaine and her estates, and the entire story is one of
  struggle, heroism, love, and passion. It is a romance of strength
  and power. Cloth bound, illustrated,                       $1.50


WIDOW MAGOOGIN.

 By JOHN J. JENNINGS. The inimitable widow's philosophy on the
  topics of the day, spoken in her own dialect, is wonderfully
  funny. As a critic, the "Irish widow" touches upon the foibles of
  fads and fashions with masterly sarcasm, and Mr. Jennings, in his
  art, has characterized her with skilful touches true to Nature.
  Cloth bound,                                               $1.25


THE SONG OF THE SWORD, A Romance of 1796.

 By LEO DITRICHSTEIN. This author needs no introduction to the
  public. In this thrilling story he displays a perfect wealth of
  plots and critical situations. It is an excellent work, fine and
  subtle, with many exciting scenes. A spirit of chivalrous romance
  exudes from each chapter. There is, in fact, an odor of romance
  all about it. The work spent on the central figures is splendid,
  and the entire book satisfies the demand for combined
  entertainment and interest in a historical novel.
  Cloth bound, illustrated,                                  $1.50


FATHER ANTHONY.

 By ROBERT BUCHANAN. "One of the most touching and dramatic stories
  ever written in connection with Irish life. It is a heart-stirring
  story; and it is the more attractive because Mr. Buchanan writes
  of Irish life from personal knowledge, and describes places and
  people with which, and with whom, he has had a long familiarity.
  Father John is a typical Irish character. Mr. Buchanan has
  never conceived a more finely-drawn character than Father
  Anthony. The book can be heartily commended to all classes of
  readers."--_London Weekly Sun._ Ten editions have been sold in
  London. Cloth bound,                                       $1.50




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE


1. Printer's errors were silently corrected.

2. The author's punctuation style as well as archaic and variable
spelling has been preserved.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Pagan's Cup, by Fergus Hume

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PAGAN'S CUP ***

***** This file should be named 34835.txt or 34835.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/8/3/34835/

Produced by eagkw, Suzanne Shell and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
