The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Secret of Sarek, by Maurice Leblanc,
Translated by Alexander Teixera de Mattos


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Secret of Sarek


Author: Maurice Leblanc



Release Date: January 13, 2011  [eBook #34939]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SECRET OF SAREK***


E-text prepared by Steven desJardins and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustration.
      See 34939-h.htm or 34939-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/34939/34939-h/34939-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/34939/34939-h.zip)





THE SECRET OF SAREK

by

MAURICE LEBLANC

Translated by Alexander Teixeira de Mattos


[Illustration: "We're Done For! They Are Aiming At Us!"]






[Illustration]

FRONTISPIECE

A. L. Burt Company
Publishers  New York

Published by arrangement with The Macaulay Company

Copyright, 1920
By The Macaulay Company

Printed in U. S. A.




FOREWORD


The war has led to so many upheavals that not many people now remember
the Hergemont scandal of seventeen years ago. Let us recall the details
in a few lines.

One day in July 1902, M. Antoine d'Hergemont, the author of a series of
well-known studies on the megalithic monuments of Brittany, was walking
in the Bois with his daughter Veronique, when he was assaulted by four
men, receiving a blow in the face with a walking-stick which felled him
to the ground.

After a short struggle and in spite of his desperate efforts,
Veronique, the beautiful Veronique, as she was called by her friends,
was dragged away and bundled into a motor-car which the spectators of
this very brief scene saw making off in the direction of Saint-Cloud.

It was a plain case of kidnapping. The truth became known next morning.
Count Alexis Vorski, a young Polish nobleman of dubious reputation but
of some social prominence and, by his own account, of royal blood, was
in love with Veronique d'Hergemont and Veronique with him. Repelled and
more than once insulted by the father, he had planned the incident
entirely without Veronique's knowledge or complicity.

Antoine d'Hergemont, who, as certain published letters showed, was a
man of violent and morose disposition and who, thanks to his capricious
temper, his ferocious egoism and his sordid avarice, had made his
daughter exceedingly unhappy, swore openly that he would take the most
ruthless revenge.

He gave his consent to the wedding, which took place two months later,
at Nice. But in the following year a series of sensational events
transpired. Keeping his word and cherishing his hatred, M. d'Hergemont
in his turn kidnapped the child born of the Vorski marriage and set sail
in a small yacht which he had bought not long before.

The sea was rough. The yacht foundered within sight of the Italian
coast. The four sailors who formed the crew were picked up by a
fishing-boat. According to their evidence M. d'Hergemont and the child
had disappeared amid the waves.

When Veronique received the proof of their death, she entered a
Carmelite convent.

These are the facts which, fourteen years later, were to lead to the
most frightful and extraordinary adventure, a perfectly authentic
adventure, though certain details, at first sight, assume a more or less
fabulous aspect. But the war has complicated existence to such an extent
that events which happen outside it, such as those related in the
following narrative, borrow something abnormal, illogical and at times
miraculous from the greater tragedy. It needs all the dazzling light of
truth to restore to those events the character of a reality which, when
all is said, is simple enough.




CONTENTS

   CHAPTER                                             PAGE
   I       THE DESERTED CABIN                            11
   II      ON THE EDGE OF THE ATLANTIC                   25
   III     VORSKI'S SON                                  43
   IV      THE POOR PEOPLE OF SAREK                      67
   V       "FOUR WOMEN CRUCIFIED"                        87
   VI      ALL'S WELL                                   113
   VII     FRANCOIS AND STEPHANE                        133
   VIII    ANGUISH                                      149
   IX      THE DEATH-CHAMBER                            167
   X       THE ESCAPE                                   181
   XI      THE SCOURGE OF GOD                           200
   XII     THE ASCENT OF GOLGOTHA                       221
   XIII    "ELOI, ELOI, LAMA SABACHTHANI!"              243
   XIV     THE ANCIENT DRUID                            262
   XV      THE HALL OF THE UNDERGROUND SACRIFICES       283
   XVI     THE HALL OF THE KINGS OF BOHEMIA             309
   XVII    "CRUEL PRINCE, OBEYING DESTINY"              328
   XVIII   THE GOD-STONE                                349





THE SECRET OF SAREK




CHAPTER I

THE DESERTED CABIN


Into the picturesque village of Le Faouet, situated in the very heart of
Brittany, there drove one morning in the month of May a lady whose
spreading grey cloak and the thick veil that covered her face failed to
hide her remarkable beauty and perfect grace of figure.

The lady took a hurried lunch at the principal inn. Then, at about
half-past eleven, she begged the proprietor to look after her bag for
her, asked for a few particulars about the neighbourhood and walked
through the village into the open country.

The road almost immediately branched into two, of which one led to
Quimper and the other to Quimperle. Selecting the latter, she went down
into the hollow of a valley, climbed up again and saw on her right, at
the corner of another road, a sign-post bearing the inscription,
"Locriff, 3 kilometers."

"This is the place," she said to herself.

Nevertheless, after casting a glance around her, she was surprised not
to find what she was looking for and wondered whether she had
misunderstood her instructions.

There was no one near her nor any one within sight, as far as the eye
could reach over the Breton country-side, with its tree-lined meadows
and undulating hills. Not far from the village, rising amid the budding
greenery of spring, a small country house lifted its grey front, with
the shutters to all the windows closed. At twelve o'clock, the
angelus-bells pealed through the air and were followed by complete peace
and silence.

Veronique sat down on the short grass of a bank, took a letter from her
pocket and smoothed out the many sheets, one by one.

The first page was headed:

     "DUTREILLIS' AGENCY.

     _"Consulting Rooms._
     _"Private Enquiries._
     _"Absolute Discretion Guaranteed."_

Next came an address:

     _"Madame Veronique,_
         _"Dressmaker,_
             _"BESANCON."_

And the letter ran:

      "MADAM,

      "You will hardly believe the pleasure which it gave me
      to fulfill the two commissions which you were good
      enough to entrust to me in your last favour. I have
      never forgotten the conditions under which I was able,
      fourteen years ago, to give you my practical
      assistance at a time when your life was saddened by
      painful events. It was I who succeeded in obtaining
      all the facts relating to the death of your honoured
      father, M. Antoine d'Hergemont, and of your beloved
      son Francois. This was my first triumph in a career
      which was to afford so many other brilliant
      victories.

      "It was I also, you will remember, who, at your
      request and seeing how essential it was to save you
      from your husband's hatred and, if I may add, his
      love, took the necessary steps to secure your
      admission to the Carmelite convent. Lastly, it was I
      who, when your retreat to the convent had shown you
      that a life of religion did not agree with your
      temperament, arranged for you a modest occupation as a
      dressmaker at Besancon, far from the towns where the
      years of your childhood and the months of your
      marriage had been spent. You had the inclination and
      the need to work in order to live and to escape your
      thoughts. You were bound to succeed; and you
      succeeded.

      "And now let me come to the fact, to the two facts in
      hand.

      "To begin with your first question: what has become,
      amid the whirlwind of war, of your husband, Alexis
      Vorski, a Pole by birth, according to his papers, and
      the son of a king, according to his own statement? I
      will be brief. After being suspected at the
      commencement of the war and imprisoned in an
      internment-camp near Carpentras, Vorski managed to
      escape, went to Switzerland, returned to France and
      was re-arrested, accused of spying and convicted of
      being a German. At the moment when it seemed
      inevitable that he would be sentenced to death, he
      escaped for the second time, disappeared in the Forest
      of Fontainebleau and in the end was stabbed by some
      person unknown.

      "I am telling you the story quite crudely, Madam, well
      knowing your contempt for this person, who had
      deceived you abominably, and knowing also that you
      have learnt most of these facts from the newspapers,
      though you have not been able to verify their absolute
      genuineness.

      "Well, the proofs exist. I have seen them. There is no
      doubt left. Alexis Vorski lies buried at
      Fontainebleau.

      "Permit me, in passing, Madam, to remark upon the
      strangeness of this death. You will remember the
      curious prophecy about Vorski which you mentioned to
      me. Vorski, whose undoubted intelligence and
      exceptional energy were spoilt by an insincere and
      superstitious mind, readily preyed upon by
      hallucinations and terrors, had been greatly impressed
      by the prediction which overhung his life and which he
      had heard from the lips of several people who
      specialize in the occult sciences:

      "'Vorski, son of a king, you will die by the hand of a
      friend and your wife will be crucified!'

      "I smile, Madam, as I write the last word. Crucified!
      Crucifixion is a torture which is pretty well out of
      fashion; and I am easy as regards yourself. But what
      do you think of the dagger-stroke which Vorski
      received in accordance with the mysterious orders of
      destiny?

      "But enough of reflections. I now come . . ."

Veronique dropped the letter for a moment into her lap. M. Dutreillis'
pretentious phrasing and familiar pleasantries wounded her fastidious
reserve. Also she was obsessed by the tragic image of Alexis Vorski. A
shiver of anguish passed through her at the hideous memory of that man.
She mastered herself, however, and read on:

      "I now come to my other commission, Madam, in your
      eyes the more important of the two, because all the
      rest belongs to the past.

      "Let us state the facts precisely. Three weeks ago, on
      one of those rare occasions when you consented to
      break through the praiseworthy monotony of your
      existence, on a Thursday evening when you took your
      assistants to a cinema-theatre, you were struck by a
      really incomprehensible detail. The principal film,
      entitled 'A Breton Legend,' represented a scene which
      occurred, in the course of a pilgrimage, outside a
      little deserted road-side hut which had nothing to do
      with the action. The hut was obviously there by
      accident. But something really extraordinary attracted
      your attention. On the tarred boards of the old door
      were three letters, drawn by hand: 'V. d'H.,' and
      those three letters were precisely your signature
      before you were married, the initials with which you
      used to sign your intimate letters and which you have
      not used once during the last fourteen years!
      Veronique d'Hergemont! There was no mistake possible.
      Two capitals separated by the small 'd' and the
      apostrophe. And, what is more, the bar of the letter
      'H.', carried back under the three letters, served as
      a flourish, exactly as it used to do with you!

      "It was the stupefaction due to this surprising
      coincidence that decided you, Madam, to invoke my
      assistance. It was yours without the asking. And you
      knew, without any telling, that it would be effective.

      "As you anticipated, Madam, I have succeeded. And here
      again I will be brief.

      "What you must do, Madam, is to take the night express
      from Paris which brings you the next morning to
      Quimperle. From there, drive to Le Faouet. If you have
      time, before or after your luncheon, pay a visit to
      the very interesting Chapel of St. Barbe, which stands
      perched on the most fantastic site and which gave rise
      to the 'Breton Legend' film. Then go along the Quimper
      road on foot. At the end of the first ascent, a little
      way short of the parish-road which leads to Locriff,
      you will find, in a semicircle surrounded by trees,
      the deserted hut with the inscription. It has nothing
      remarkable about it. The inside is empty. It has not
      even a floor. A rotten plank serves as a bench. The
      roof consists of a worm-eaten framework, which admits
      the rain. Once more, there is no doubt that it was
      sheer accident that placed it within the range of the
      cinematograph. I will end by adding that the 'Breton
      Legend' film was taken in September last, which means
      that the inscription is at least eight months old.

      "That is all, Madam. My two commissions are completed.
      I am too modest to describe to you the efforts and the
      ingenious means which I employed in order to
      accomplish them in so short a time, but for which you
      will certainly think the sum of five hundred francs,
      which is all that I propose to charge you for the
      work done, almost ridiculous.

        "I beg to remain,
                "Madam, &c."

Veronique folded up the letter and sat for a few minutes turning over
the impressions which it aroused in her, painful impressions, like all
those revived by the horrible days of her marriage. One in particular
had survived and was still as powerful as at the time when she tried to
escape it by taking refuge in the gloom of a convent. It was the
impression, in fact the certainty, that all her misfortunes, the death
of her father and the death of her son, were due to the fault which she
had committed in loving Vorski. True, she had fought against the man's
love and had not decided to marry him until she was obliged to, in
despair and to save M. d'Hergemont from Vorski's vengeance.
Nevertheless, she had loved that man. Nevertheless, at first, she had
turned pale under his glance: and this, which now seemed to her an
unpardonable example of weakness, had left her with a remorse which time
had failed to weaken.

"There," she said, "enough of dreaming. I have not come here to shed
tears."

The craving for information which had brought her from her retreat at
Besancon restored her vigour; and she rose resolved to act.

"A little way short of the parish-road which leads to Locriff . . . a
semicircle surrounded by trees," said Dutreillis' letter. She had
therefore passed the place. She quickly retraced her steps and at once
perceived, on the right, the clump of trees which had hidden the cabin
from her eyes. She went nearer and saw it.

It was a sort of shepherd's or road-labourer's hut, which was crumbling
and falling to pieces under the action of the weather. Veronique went up
to it and perceived that the inscription, worn by the rain and sun, was
much less clear than on the film. But the three letters were visible, as
was the flourish; and she even distinguished, underneath, something
which M. Dutreillis had not observed, a drawing of an arrow and a
number, the number 9.

Her emotion increased. Though no attempt had been made to imitate the
actual form of her signature, it certainly was her signature as a girl.
And who could have affixed it there, on a deserted cabin, in this
Brittany where she had never been before?

Veronique no longer had a friend in the world. Thanks to a succession of
circumstances, the whole of her past girlhood had, so to speak,
disappeared with the death of those whom she had known and loved. Then
how was it possible for the recollection of her signature to survive
apart from her and those who were dead and gone? And, above all, why was
the inscription here, at this spot? What did it mean?

Veronique walked round the cabin. There was no other mark visible there
or on the surrounding trees. She remembered that M. Dutreillis had
opened the door and had seen nothing inside. Nevertheless she determined
to make certain that he was not mistaken.

The door was closed with a mere wooden latch, which moved on a screw.
She lifted it; and, strange to say, she had to make an effort, not a
physical so much as a moral effort, an effort of will, to pull the door
towards her. It seemed to her that this little act was about to usher
her into a world of facts and events which she unconsciously dreaded.

"Well," she said, "what's preventing me?"

She gave a sharp pull.

A cry of horror escaped her. There was a man's dead body in the cabin.
And, at the moment, at the exact second when she saw the body, she
became aware of a peculiar characteristic: one of the dead man's hands
was missing.

It was an old man, with a long, grey, fan-shaped beard and long white
hair falling about his neck. The blackened lips and a certain colour of
the swollen skin suggested to Veronique that he might have been
poisoned, for no trace of an injury showed on his body, except the arm,
which had been severed clean above the wrist, apparently some days
before. His clothes were those of a Breton peasant, clean, but very
threadbare. The corpse was seated on the ground, with the head resting
against the bench and the legs drawn up.

These were all things which Veronique noted in a sort of unconsciousness
and which were rather to reappear in her memory at a later date, for, at
the moment, she stood there all trembling, with her eyes staring before
her, and stammering:

"A dead body! . . . A dead body! . . ."

Suddenly she reflected that she was perhaps mistaken and that the man
was not dead. But, on touching his forehead, she shuddered at the
contact of his icy skin.

Nevertheless this movement roused her from her torpor. She resolved to
act and, since there was no one in the immediate neighbourhood, to go
back to Le Faouet and inform the authorities. She first examined the
corpse for any clue which could tell her its identity.

The pockets were empty. There were no marks on the clothes or linen.
But, when she shifted the body a little in order to make her search, it
came about that the head drooped forward, dragging with it the trunk,
which fell over the legs, thus uncovering the lower side of the bench.

Under this bench, she perceived a roll consisting of a sheet of very
thin drawing-paper, crumpled, buckled and almost wrung into a twist. She
picked up the roll and unfolded it. But she had not finished doing so
before her hands began to tremble and she stammered:

"Oh, God! . . . Oh, my God! . . ."

She summoned all her energies to try and enforce upon herself the calm
needed to look with eyes that could see and a brain that could
understand.

The most that she could do was to stand there for a few seconds. And
during those few seconds, through an ever-thickening mist that seemed to
shroud her eyes, she was able to make out a drawing in red, representing
four women crucified on four tree-trunks.

And, in the foreground, the first woman, the central figure, with the
body stark under its clothing and the features distorted with the most
dreadful pain, but still recognizable, the crucified woman was herself!
Beyond the least doubt, it was she herself, Veronique d'Hergemont!

Besides, above the head, the top of the post bore, after the ancient
custom, a scroll with a plainly legible inscription. And this was the
three initials, underlined with the flourish, of Veronique's maiden
name, "V. d'H.", Veronique d'Hergemont.

A spasm ran through her from head to foot. She drew herself up, turned
on her heel and, reeling out of the cabin, fell on the grass in a dead
faint.

       *       *       *       *       *

Veronique was a tall, energetic, healthy woman, with a wonderfully
balanced mind; and hitherto no trial had been able to affect her fine
moral sanity or her splendid physical harmony. It needed exceptional and
unforeseen circumstances such as these, added to the fatigue of two
nights spent in railway-travelling, to produce this disorder in her
nerves and will.

It did not last more than two or three minutes, at the end of which her
mind once more became lucid and courageous. She stood up, went back to
the cabin, picked up the sheet of drawing-paper and, certainly with
unspeakable anguish, but this time with eyes that saw and a brain that
understood, looked at it.

She first examined the details, those which seemed insignificant, or
whose significance at least escaped her. On the left was a narrow column
of fifteen lines, not written, but composed of letters of no definite
formation, the down-strokes of which were all of the same length, the
object being evidently merely to fill up. However, in various places, a
few words were visible. And Veronique read:

      "Four women crucified."

Lower down:

      "Thirty coffins."

And the bottom line of all ran:

      "The God-Stone which gives life or death."

The whole of this column was surrounded by a frame consisting of two
perfectly straight lines, one ruled in black, the other in red ink; and
there was also, likewise in red, above it, a sketch of two sickles
fastened together with a sprig of mistletoe under the outline of a
coffin.

The right-hand side, by far the more important, was filled with the
drawing, a drawing in red chalk, which gave the whole sheet, with its
adjacent column of explanations, the appearance of a page, or rather of
a copy of a page, from some large, ancient illuminated book, in which
the subjects were treated rather in the primitive style, with a complete
ignorance of the rules of drawing.

And it represented four crucified women. Three of them showed in
diminishing perspective against the horizon. They wore Breton costumes
and their heads were surmounted by caps which were likewise Breton but
of a special fashion that pointed to local usage and consisted chiefly
of a large black bow, the two wings of which stood out as in the bows of
the Alsatian women. And in the middle of the page was the dreadful thing
from which Veronique could not take her terrified eyes. It was the
principal cross, the trunk of a tree stripped of its lower branches,
with the woman's two arms stretched to right and left of it.

The hands and feet were not nailed but were fastened by cords which
were wound as far as the shoulders and the upper part of the tied legs.
Instead of the Breton costume, the woman wore a sort of winding-sheet
which fell to the ground and lengthened the slender outline of a body
emaciated by suffering.

The expression on the face was harrowing, an expression of resigned
martyrdom and melancholy grace. And it was certainly Veronique's face,
especially as it looked when she was twenty years of age and as
Veronique remembered seeing it at those gloomy hours when a woman gazes
in a mirror at her hopeless eyes and her overflowing tears.

And about the head was the very same wave of her thick hair, flowing to
the waist in symmetrical curves:

And above it the inscription, "V. d'H."

Veronique long stayed thinking, questioning the past and gazing into the
darkness in order to link the actual facts with the memory of her youth.
But her mind remained without a glimmer of light. Of the words which she
had read, of the drawing which she had seen, nothing whatever assumed
the least meaning for her or seemed susceptible of the least
explanation.

She examined the sheet of paper again and again. Then, slowly, still
pondering on it, she tore it into tiny pieces and threw them to the
wind. When the last scrap had been carried away, her decision was taken.
She pushed back the man's body, closed the door and walked quickly
towards the village, in order to ensure that the incident should have
the legal conclusion which was fitting for the moment.

But, when she returned an hour later with the mayor of Le Faouet, the
rural constable and a whole group of sightseers attracted by her
statements, the cabin was empty. The corpse had disappeared.

And all this was so strange, Veronique felt so plainly that, in the
disordered condition of her ideas, it was impossible for her to answer
the questions put to her, or to dispel the suspicions and doubts which
these people might and must entertain of the truth of her evidence, the
cause of her presence and even her very sanity, that she forthwith
ceased to make any effort or struggle. The inn-keeper was there. She
asked him which was the nearest village that she would reach by
following the road and if, by so doing, she would come to a
railway-station which would enable her to return to Paris. She retained
the names of Scaer and Rosporden, ordered a carriage to bring her bag
and overtake her on the road and set off, protected against any ill
feeling by her great air of elegance and by her grave beauty.

She set off, so to speak, at random. The road was long, miles and miles
long. But such was her haste to have done with these incomprehensible
events and to recover her tranquillity and to forget what had happened
that she walked with great strides, quite oblivious of the fact that
this wearisome exertion was superfluous, since she had a carriage
following her.

She went up hill and down dale and hardly thought at all, refusing to
seek the solution of all the riddles that were put to her. It was the
past which was reascending to the surface of her life; and she was
horribly afraid of that past, which extended from her abduction by
Vorski to the death of her father and her child. She wanted to think of
nothing but the simple, humble life which she had contrived to lead at
Besancon. There were no sorrows there, no dreams, no memories; and she
did not doubt but that, amid the little daily habits which enfolded her
in the modest house of her choice, she would forget the deserted cabin,
the mutilated body of the man and the dreadful drawing with its
mysterious inscription.

But, a little while before she came to the big market-town of Scaer, as
she heard the bell of a horse trotting behind her, she saw, at the
junction of the road that led to Rosporden, a broken wall, one of the
remnants of a half-ruined house.

And on this broken wall, above an arrow and the number 10, she again
read the fateful inscription, "V. d'H."




CHAPTER II

ON THE EDGE OF THE ATLANTIC


Veronique's state of mind underwent a sudden alteration. Even as she had
fled resolutely from the threat of danger that seemed to loom up before
her from the evil past, so she was now determined to pursue to the end
the dread road which was opening before her.

This change was due to a tiny gleam which flashed abruptly through the
darkness. She suddenly realized the fact, a simple matter enough, that
the arrow denoted a direction and that the number 10 must be the tenth
of a series of numbers which marked a course leading from one fixed
point to another.

Was it a sign set up by one person with the object of guiding the steps
of another? It mattered little. The main thing was that there was here a
clue capable of leading Veronique to the discovery of the problem which
interested her: by what prodigy did the initials of her maiden name
reappear amid this tangle of tragic circumstances?

The carriage sent from Le Faouet overtook her. She stepped in and told
the driver to go very slowly to Rosporden.

She arrived in time for dinner; and her anticipations had not misled
her. Twice she saw her signature, each time before a division in the
road, accompanied by the numbers 11 and 12.

Veronique slept at Rosporden and resumed her investigations on the
following morning.

The number 12, which she found on the wall of a church-yard, sent her
along the road to Concarneau, which she had almost reached before she
saw any further inscriptions. She fancied that she must have been
mistaken, retraced her steps and wasted a whole day in useless
searching.

It was not until the next day that the number 13, very nearly
obliterated, directed her towards Fouesnant. Then she abandoned this
direction, to follow, still in obedience to the signs, some
country-roads in which she once more lost her way.

At last, four days after leaving Le Faouet, she found herself facing the
Atlantic, on the great beach of Beg-Meil.

She spent two nights in the village without gathering the least reply to
the discreet questions which she put to the inhabitants. At last, one
morning, after wandering among the half-buried groups of rocks which
intersect the beach and upon the low cliffs, covered with trees and
copses, which hem it in, she discovered, between two oaks stripped of
their bark, a shelter built of earth and branches which must at one time
have been used by custom-house officers. A small menhir stood at the
entrance. The menhir bore the inscription, followed by the number 17. No
arrow. A full stop underneath; and that was all.

In the shelter were three broken bottles and some empty meat-tins.

"This was the goal," thought Veronique. "Some one has been having a
meal here. Food stored in advance, perhaps."

Just then she noticed that, at no great distance, by the edge of a
little bay which curved like a shell amid the neighbouring rocks, a boat
was swinging to and fro, a motor-boat. And she heard voices coming from
the village, a man's voice and a woman's.

From the place where she stood, all that she could see at first was an
elderly man carrying in his arms half-a-dozen bags of provisions, potted
meats and dried vegetables. He put them on the ground and said:

"Well, had a pleasant journey, M'ame Honorine?"

"Fine!"

"And where have you been?"

"Why, Paris . . . a week of it . . . running errands for my master."

"Glad to be back?"

"Of course I am."

"And you see, M'ame Honorine, you find your boat just where she was. I
came to have a look at her every day. This morning I took away her
tarpaulin. Does she run as well as ever?"

"First-rate."

"Besides, you're a master pilot, you are. Who'd have thought, M'ame
Honorine, that you'd be doing a job like this?"

"It's the war. All the young men in our island are gone and the old ones
are fishing. Besides, there's no longer a fortnightly steamboat service,
as there used to be. So I go the errands."

"What about petrol?"

"We've plenty to go on with. No fear of that."

"Well, good-bye for the present, M'ame Honorine. Shall I help you put
the things on board?"

"Don't you trouble; you're in a hurry."

"Well, good-bye for the present," the old fellow repeated. "Till next
time, M'ame Honorine. I'll have the parcels ready for you."

He went away, but, when he had gone a little distance, called out:

"All the same, mind the jagged reefs round that blessed island of yours!
I tell you, it's got a nasty name! It's not called Coffin Island, the
island of the thirty coffins, for nothing! Good luck to you, M'ame
Honorine!"

He disappeared behind a rock.

Veronique had shuddered. The thirty coffins! The very words which she
had read in the margin of that horrible drawing!

She leant forward. The woman had come a few steps nearer the boat and,
after putting down some more provisions which she had been carrying,
turned round.

Veronique now saw her full-face. She wore a Breton costume; and her
head-dress was crowned by two black wings.

"Oh," stammered Veronique, "that head-dress in the drawing . . . the
head-dress of the three crucified women!"

The Breton woman looked about forty. Her strong face, tanned by the sun
and the cold, was bony and rough-hewn but lit up by a pair of large,
dark, intelligent, gentle eyes. A heavy gold chain hung down upon her
breast. Her velvet bodice fitted her closely.

She was humming in a very low voice as she took up her parcels and
loaded the boat, which made her kneel on a big stone against which the
boat was moored. When she had done, she looked at the horizon, which was
covered with black clouds. She did not seem anxious about them, however,
and, loosing the painter, continued her song, but in a louder voice,
which enabled Veronique to hear the words. It was a slow melody, a
children's lullaby; and she sang it with a smile which revealed a set of
fine, white teeth.

    "And the mother said,
    Rocking her child a-bed:

    'Weep not. If you do,
    The Virgin Mary weeps with you.

    Babes that laugh and sing
    Smiles to the Blessed Virgin bring.

    Fold your hands this way
    And to sweet Mary pray.'"

She did not complete the song. Veronique was standing before her, with
her face drawn and very pale.

Taken aback, the other asked:

"What's the matter?"

Veronique, in a trembling voice, replied:

"That song! Who taught it you? Where do you get it from? . . . It's a
song my mother used to sing, a song of her own country, Savoy . . . .
And I have never heard it since . . . since she died . . . . So I want
. . . I should like . . ."

She stopped. The Breton woman looked at her in silence, with an air of
stupefaction, as though she too were on the point of asking questions.
But Veronique repeated:

"Who taught it you?"

"Some one over there," the woman called Honorine answered, at last.

"Over there?"

"Yes, some one on my island."

Veronique said, with a sort of dread:

"Coffin Island?"

"That's just a name they call it by. It's really the Isle of Sarek."

They still stood looking at each other, with a look in which a certain
doubt was mingled with a great need of speech and understanding. And at
the same time they both felt that they were not enemies.

Veronique was the first to continue:

"Excuse me, but, you see, there are things which are so puzzling . . ."

The Breton woman nodded her head in approval and Veronique continued:

"So puzzling and so disconcerting! . . . For instance, do you know why
I'm here? I must tell you. Perhaps you alone can explain . . . It's like
this: an accident--quite a small accident, but really it all began with
that--brought me to Brittany for the first time and showed me, on the
door of an old, deserted, road-side cabin, the initials which I used to
sign when I was a girl, a signature which I have not used for fourteen
or fifteen years. As I went on, I discovered the same inscription many
times repeated, with each time a different consecutive number. That was
how I came here, to the beach at Beg-Meil and to this part of the
beach, which appeared to be the end of a journey foreseen and arranged
by . . . I don't know whom."

"Is your signature here?" asked Honorine, eagerly. "Where?"

"On that stone, above us, at the entrance to the shelter."

"I can't see from here. What are the letters?"

"V. d'H."

The Breton woman suppressed a movement. Her bony face betrayed profound
emotion, and, hardly opening her lips, she murmured:

"Veronique . . . Veronique d'Hergemont."

"Ah," exclaimed the younger woman, "so you know my name, you know my
name!"

Honorine took Veronique's two hands and held them in her own. Her
weather-beaten face lit up with a smile. And her eyes grew moist with
tears as she repeated:

"Mademoiselle Veronique! . . . Madame Veronique! . . . So it's you,
Veronique! . . . O Heaven, is it possible! The Blessed Virgin Mary be
praised!"

Veronique felt utterly confounded and kept on saying:

"You know my name . . . you know who I am . . . . Then you can explain
all this riddle to me?"

After a long pause, Honorine replied:

"I can explain nothing. I don't understand either. But we can try to
find out together . . . . Tell me, what was the name of that Breton
village?"

"Le Faouet."

"Le Faouet. I know. And where was the deserted cabin?"

"A mile and a quarter away."

"Did you look in?"

"Yes; and that was the most terrible thing of all. Inside the cabin was
. . ."

"What was in the cabin?"

"First of all, the dead body of a man, an old man, dressed in the local
costume, with long white hair and a grey beard . . . . Oh, I shall never
forget that dead man! . . . He must have been murdered, poisoned, I
don't know what . . . ."

Honorine listened greedily, but the murder seemed to give her no clue
and she merely asked:

"Who was it? Did they have an inquest?"

"When I came back with the people from Le Faouet, the corpse had
disappeared."

"Disappeared? But who had removed it?"

"I don't know."

"So that you know nothing?"

"Nothing. Except that, the first time, I found in the cabin a drawing
. . . a drawing which I tore up; but its memory haunts me like a
nightmare that keeps on recurring. I can't get it out of my mind . . . .
Listen, it was a roll of paper on which some one had evidently copied an
old picture and it represented . . . Oh, a dreadful, dreadful thing,
four women crucified! And one of the women was myself, with my name
. . . . And the others wore a head-dress like yours."

Honorine had squeezed her hands with incredible violence:

"What's that you say?" she cried. "What's that you say? Four women
crucified?"

"Yes; and there was something about thirty coffins, consequently about
your island."

The Breton woman put her hands over Veronique's lips to silence them:

"Hush! Hush! Oh, you mustn't speak of all that! No, no, you mustn't
. . . . You see, there are devilish things . . . which it's a sacrilege
to talk about . . . . We must be silent about that . . . . Later on,
we'll see . . . another year, perhaps . . . . Later on . . . . Later on
. . . ."

She seemed shaken by terror, as by a gale which scourges the trees and
overwhelms all living things. And suddenly she fell on her knees upon
the rock and muttered a long prayer, bent in two, with her hands before
her face, so completely absorbed that Veronique asked her no more
questions.

At last she rose and, presently, said:

"Yes, this is all terrifying, but I don't see that it makes our duty any
different or that we can hesitate at all."

And, addressing Veronique, she said, gravely:

"You must come over there with me."

"Over there, to your island?" replied Veronique, without concealing her
reluctance.

Honorine again took her hands and continued, still in that same, rather
solemn tone which appeared to Veronique to be full of secret and
unspoken thoughts:

"Your name is truly Veronique d'Hergemont?"

"Yes."

"Who was your father?"

"Antoine d'Hergemont."

"You married a man called Vorski, who said he was a Pole?"

"Yes, Alexis Vorski."

"You married him after there was a scandal about his running off with
you and after a quarrel between you and your father?"

"Yes."

"You had a child by him?"

"Yes, a son, Francois."

"A son that you never knew, in a manner of speaking, because he was
kidnapped by your father?"

"Yes."

"And you lost sight of the two after a shipwreck?"

"Yes, they are both dead."

"How do you know?"

It did not occur to Veronique to be astonished at this question, and she
replied:

"My personal enquiries and the police enquiries were both based upon the
same indisputable evidence, that of the four sailors."

"Who's to say they weren't telling lies?"

"Why should they tell lies?" asked Veronique, in surprise.

"Their evidence may have been bought; they may have been told what to
say."

"By whom?"

"By your father."

"But what an idea! . . . Besides, my father was dead!"

"I say once more: how do you know that?"

This time Veronique appeared stupefied:

"What are you hinting?" she whispered.

"One minute. Do you know the names of those four sailors?"

"I did know them, but I don't remember them."

"You don't remember that they were Breton names?"

"Yes, I do. But I don't see that . . ."

"If you never came to Brittany, your father often did, because of the
books he used to write. He used to stay in Brittany during your mother's
lifetime. That being so, he must have had relations with the men of the
country. Suppose that he had known the four sailors a long time, that
these men were devoted to him or bribed by him and that he engaged them
specially for that adventure. Suppose that they began by landing your
father and your son at some little Italian port and that then, being
four good swimmers, they scuttled and sank their yacht in view of the
coast. Just suppose it."

"But the men are living!" cried Veronique, in growing excitement. "They
can be questioned."

"Two of them are dead; they died a natural death a few years ago. The
third is an old man called Maguennoc; you will find him at Sarek. As for
the fourth, you may have seen him just now. He used the money which he
made out of that business to buy a grocer's shop at Beg-Meil."

"Ah, we can speak to him at once!" cried Veronique, eagerly. "Let's go
and fetch him."

"Why should we? I know more than he does."

"You know? You know?"

"I know everything that you don't. I can answer all your questions. Ask
me what you like."

But Veronique dared not put the great question to her, the one which was
beginning to quiver in the darkness of her consciousness. She was afraid
of a truth which was perhaps not inconceivable, a truth of which she
seemed to catch a faint glimpse; and she stammered, in mournful accents:

"I don't understand, I don't understand . . . . Why should my father
have behaved like that? Why should he wish himself and my poor child to
be thought dead?"

"Your father had sworn to have his revenge."

"On Vorski, yes; but surely not on me, his daughter? . . . . And such a
revenge!"

"You loved your husband. Once you were in his power, instead of running
away from him, you consented to marry him. Besides, the insult was a
public one. And you know what your father was, with his violent,
vindictive temperament and his rather . . . his rather unbalanced
nature, to use his own expression."

"But since then?"

"Since then! Since then! He felt remorseful as he grew older, what with
his affection for the child . . . and he tried everywhere to find you.
The journeys I have taken, beginning with my journey to the Carmelites
at Chartres! But you had left long ago . . . and where for? Where were
you to be found?"

"You could have advertised in the newspapers."

"He did try advertising, once, very cautiously, because of the scandal.
There was a reply. Some one made an appointment and he kept it. Do you
know who came to meet him? Vorski, Vorski, who was looking for you too,
who still loved you . . . and hated you. Your father became frightened
and did not dare act openly."

Veronique did not speak. She felt very faint and sat down on the stone,
with her head bowed.

Then she murmured:

"You speak of my father as though he were still alive to-day."

"He is."

"And as though you saw him often."

"Daily."

"And on the other hand"--Veronique lowered her voice--"on the other hand
you do not say a word of my son. And that suggests a horrible thought:
perhaps he did not live? Perhaps he is dead since? Is that why you do
not mention him?"

She raised her head with an effort. Honorine was smiling.

"Oh, please, please," Veronique entreated, "tell me the truth! It is
terrible to hope more than one has a right to. Do tell me."

Honorine put her arm round Veronique's neck:

"Why, my poor, dear lady, would I have told you all this if my handsome
Francois had been dead?"

"He is alive, he is alive?" cried Veronique, wildly.

"Why, of course he is and in the best of health! Oh, he's a fine, sturdy
little chap, never fear, and so steady on his legs! And I have every
right to be proud of him, because it's I who brought him up, your little
Francois."

She felt Veronique, who was leaning on her shoulder, give way to
emotions which were too much for her and which certainly contained as
much suffering as joy; and she said:

"Cry, my dear lady, cry; it will do you good. It's a better sort of
crying than it was, eh? Cry, until you've forgotten all your old
troubles. I'm going back to the village. Have you a bag of any kind at
the inn? They know me there. I'll bring it back with me and we'll be
off."

When the Breton woman returned, half an hour later, she saw Veronique
standing and beckoning to her to hurry and heard her calling:

"Quick, quick! Heavens, what a time you've been! We have not a minute to
lose."

Honorine, however, did not hasten her pace and did not reply. Her rugged
face was without a smile.

"Well, are we going to start?" asked Veronique, running up to her.
"There's nothing to delay us, is there, no obstacle? What's the matter?
You seem quite changed."

"No, no."

"Then let's be quick."

Honorine, with her assistance, put the bag and the provisions on board.
Then, suddenly standing in front of Veronique, she said:

"You're quite sure, are you, that the woman on the cross, as she was
shown in the drawing, was yourself?"

"Absolutely. Besides, there were my initials above the head."

"That's a strange thing," muttered Honorine, "and it's enough to
frighten anybody."

"Why should it be? It must have been someone who used to know me and who
amused himself by . . . It's merely a coincidence, a chance fancy
reviving the past."

"Oh, it's not the past that's worrying me! It's the future."

"The future?"

"Remember the prophecy."

"I don't understand."

"Yes, yes, the prophecy made about you to Vorski."

"Ah, you know?"

"I know. And it is so horrible to think of that drawing and of other
much more dreadful things which you don't know of."

Veronique burst out laughing:

"What! Is that why you hesitate to take me with you, for, after all,
that's what we're concerned with?"

"Don't laugh. People don't laugh when they see the flames of hell before
them."

Honorine crossed herself, closing her eyes as she spoke. Then she
continued:

"Of course . . . you scoff at me . . . you think I'm a superstitious
Breton woman, who believes in ghosts and jack-o'-lanterns. I don't say
you're altogether wrong. But there, there! There are some truths that
blind one. You can talk it over with Maguennoc, if you get on the right
side of him."

"Maguennoc?"

"One of the four sailors. He's an old friend of your boy's. He too
helped to bring him up. Maguennoc knows more about it than the most
learned men, more than your father. And yet . . ."

"What?"

"And yet Maguennoc tried to tempt fate and to get past what men are
allowed to know."

"What did he do?"

"He tried to touch with his hand--you understand, with his own hand: he
confessed it to me himself--the very heart of the mystery."

"Well?" said Veronique, impressed in spite of herself.

"Well, his hand was burnt by the flames. He showed me a hideous sore: I
saw it with my eyes, something like the sore of a cancer; and he
suffered to that degree . . ."

"Yes?"

"That it forced him to take a hatchet in his left hand and cut off his
right hand himself."

Veronique was dumbfounded. She remembered the corpse at Le Faouet and
she stammered:

"His right hand? You say that Maguennoc cut off his right hand?"

"With a hatchet, ten days ago, two days before I left . . . . I dressed
the wound myself . . . . Why do you ask?"

"Because," said Veronique, in a husky voice, "because the dead man, the
old man whom I found in the deserted cabin and who afterwards
disappeared, had lately lost his right hand."

Honorine gave a start. She still wore the sort of scared expression and
betrayed the emotional disturbance which contrasted with her usually
calm attitude. And she rapped out:

"Are you sure? Yes, yes, you're right, it was he, Maguennoc . . . . He
had long white hair, hadn't he? And a spreading beard? . . . Oh, how
abominable!"

She restrained herself and looked around her, frightened at having
spoken so loud. She once more made the sign of the cross and said,
slowly, almost under her breath:

"He was the first of those who have got to die . . . he told me so
himself . . . and old Maguennoc had eyes that read the book of the
future as easily as the book of the past. He could see clearly where
another saw nothing at all. 'The first victim will be myself, Ma'me
Honorine. And, when the servant has gone, in a few days it will be the
master's turn.'"

"And the master was . . . ?" asked Veronique, in a whisper.

Honorine drew herself up and clenched her fists violently:

"I'll defend him! I will!" she declared. "I'll save him! Your father
shall not be the second victim. No, no, I shall arrive in time! Let me
go!"

"We are going together," said Veronique, firmly.

"Please," said Honorine, in a voice of entreaty, "please don't be
persistent. Let me have my way. I'll bring your father and your son to
you this very evening, before dinner."

"But why?"

"The danger is too great, over there, for your father . . . and
especially for you. Remember the four crosses! It's over there that they
are waiting . . . . Oh, you mustn't go there! . . . The island is under
a curse."

"And my son?"

"You shall see him to-day, in a few hours."

Veronique gave a short laugh:

"In a few hours! Woman, you must be mad! Here am I, after mourning my
son for fourteen years, suddenly hearing that he's alive; and you ask
me to wait before I take him in my arms! Not one hour! I would rather
risk death a thousand times than put off that moment."

Honorine looked at her and seemed to realize that Veronique's was one of
those resolves against which it is useless to fight, for she did not
insist. She crossed herself for the third time and said, simply:

"God's will be done."

They both took their seats among the parcels which encumbered the narrow
space. Honorine switched on the current, seized the tiller and skilfully
steered the boat through the rocks and sandbanks which rose level with
the water.




CHAPTER III

VORSKI'S SON


Veronique smiled as she sat to starboard on a packing-case, with her
face turned towards Honorine. Her smile was anxious still and undefined,
full of reticence and flickering as a sunbeam that tries to pierce the
last clouds of the storm; but it was nevertheless a happy smile.

And happiness seemed the right expression for that wonderful face,
stamped with dignity and with that particular modesty which gives to
some women, whether stricken by excessive misfortune or preserved by
love, the habit of gravity, combined with an absence of all feminine
affectation.

Her black hair, touched with grey at the temples, was knotted very low
down on the neck. She had the dead-white complexion of a southerner and
very light blue eyes, of which the white seemed almost of the same
colour, pale as a winter sky. She was tall, with broad shoulders and a
well-shaped bust.

Her musical and somewhat masculine voice became light and cheerful when
she spoke of the son whom she had found again. And Veronique could speak
of nothing else. In vain the Breton woman tried to speak of the problems
that harassed her and kept on interrupting Veronique:

"Look here, there are two things which I cannot understand. Who laid the
trail with the clues that brought you from Le Faouet to the exact spot
where I always land? It almost makes one believe that someone had been
from Le Faouet to the Isle of Sarek. And, on the other hand, how did old
Maguennoc come to leave the island? Was it of his own free will? Or was
it his dead body that they carried? If so, how?"

"Is it worth troubling about?" Veronique objected.

"Certainly it is. Just think! Besides me, who once a fortnight go either
to Beg-Meil or Pont-l'Abbe in my motor-boat for provisions, there are
only two fishing-boats, which always go much higher up the coast, to
Audierne, where they sell their catch. Then how did Maguennoc get
across? Then again, did he commit suicide? But, if so, how did his body
disappear?"

But Veronique protested:

"Please don't! It doesn't matter for the moment. It'll all be cleared
up. Tell me about Francois. You were saying that he came to Sarek . . ."

Honorine yielded to Veronique's entreaties:

"He arrived in poor Maguennoc's arms, a few days after he was taken from
you. Maguennoc, who had been taught his lesson by your father, said that
a strange lady had entrusted him with the child; and he had it nursed by
his daughter, who has since died. I was away, in a situation with a
Paris family. When I came home again, Francois had grown into a fine
little fellow, running about the moors and cliffs. It was then that I
took service with your father, who had settled in Sarek. When
Maguennoc's daughter died, we took the child to live with us."

"But under what name?"

"Francois, just Francois. M. d'Hergemont was known as Monsieur Antoine.
Francois called him grandfather. No one ever made any remark upon it."

"And his character?" asked Veronique, with some anxiety.

"Oh, as far as that's concerned, he's a blessing!" replied Honorine.
"Nothing of his father about him . . . nor of his grandfather either, as
M. d'Hergemont himself admits. A gentle, lovable, most willing child.
Never a sign of anger; always good-tempered. That's what got over his
grandfather and made M. d'Hergemont come round to you again, because his
grandson reminded him so of the daughter he had cast off. 'He's the very
image of his mother,' he used to say. 'Veronique was gentle and
affectionate like him, with the same fond and coaxing ways.' And then he
began his search for you, with me to help him; for he had come to
confide in me."

Veronique beamed with delight. Her son was like her! Her son was bright
and kind-hearted!

"But does he know about me?" she said. "Does he know that I'm alive?"

"I should think he did! M. d'Hergemont tried to keep it from him at
first. But I soon told him everything."

"Everything?"

"No. He believes that his father is dead and that, after the shipwreck
in which he, I mean Francois, and M. d'Hergemont disappeared, you became
a nun and have been lost sight of since. And he is so eager for news,
each time I come back from one of my trips! He too is so full of hope!
Oh, you can take my word for it, he adores his mother! And he's always
singing that song you heard just now, which his grandfather taught him."

"My Francois, my own little Francois!"

"Ah, yes, he loves you! There's Mother Honorine. But you're mother, just
that. And he's in a great hurry to grow up and finish his schooling, so
that he may go and look for you."

"His schooling? Does he have lessons?"

"Yes, with his grandfather and, since two years ago, with such a nice
fellow that I brought back from Paris, Stephane Maroux, a wounded
soldier covered with medals and restored to health after an internal
operation. Francois dotes on him."

The boat was running quickly over the smooth sea, in which it ploughed a
furrow of silvery foam. The clouds had dispersed on the horizon. The
evening boded fair and calm.

"More, tell me more!" said Veronique, listening greedily. "What does my
boy wear?"

"Knickerbockers and short socks, with his calves bare; a thick flannel
shirt with gilt buttons; and a flat knitted cap, like his big friend, M.
Stephane; only his is red and suits him to perfection."

"Has he any friends besides M. Maroux?"

"All the growing lads of the island, formerly. But with the exception of
three or four ship's boys, all the rest have left the island with their
mothers, now that their fathers are at the war, and are working on the
mainland, at Concarneau or Lorient, leaving the old people at Sarek by
themselves. We are not more than thirty on the island now."

"Whom does he play with? Whom does he go about with?"

"Oh, as for that, he has the best of companions!"

"Really? Who is it?"

"A little dog that Maguennoc gave him."

"A dog?"

"Yes; and the funniest dog you ever saw: an ugly ridiculous-looking
thing, a cross between a poodle and a fox-terrier, but so comical and
amusing! Oh, there's no one like Master All's Well!"

"All's Well?"

"That's what Francois calls him; and you couldn't have a better name for
him. He always looks happy and glad to be alive. He's independent, too,
and he disappears for hours and even days at a time; but he's always
there when he's wanted, if you're feeling sad, or if things aren't going
as you might like them to. All's Well hates to see any one crying or
scolding or quarrelling. The moment you cry, or pretend to cry, he comes
and squats on his haunches in front of you, sits up, shuts one eye,
half-opens the other and looks so exactly as if he was laughing that you
begin to laugh yourself. 'That's right, old chap,' says Francois,
'you're quite right: all's well. There's nothing to take on about, is
there?' And, when you're consoled, All's Well just trots away. His task
is done."

Veronique laughed and cried in one breath. Then she was silent for a
long time, feeling more and more gloomy and overcome by a despair which
overwhelmed all her gladness. She thought of all the happiness that she
had missed during the fourteen years of her childless motherhood,
wearing her mourning for a son who was alive. All the cares that a
mother lavishes upon the little creature new-born into the world, all
the pride that she feels at seeing him grow and hearing him speak, all
that delights a mother and uplifts her and makes her heart overflow with
daily renewed affection: all this she had never known.

"We are half-way across," said Honorine.

They were running in sight of the Glenans Islands. On their right, the
headland of Penmarch, whose coast-line they were following at a distance
of fifteen miles, marked a darker line which was not always
differentiated from the horizon.

And Veronique thought of her sad past, of her mother, whom she hardly
remembered, of her childhood spent with a selfish, disagreeable father,
of her marriage, ah, above all of her marriage! She recalled her first
meetings with Vorski, when she was only seventeen. How frightened she
had been from the very beginning of that strange and unusual man, whom
she dreaded while she submitted to his influence, as one does at that
age submit to the influence of anything mysterious and incomprehensible!

Next came the hateful day of the abduction and the other days, more
hateful still, that followed, the weeks during which he had kept her
imprisoned, threatening her and dominating her with all his evil
strength, and the promise of marriage which he had forced from her, a
pledge against which all the girl's instincts and all her will revolted,
but to which it seemed to her that she was bound to agree after so great
a scandal and also because her father was giving his consent.

Her brain rebelled against the memories of her years of married life.
Never that! Not even in the worst hours, when the nightmares of the past
haunt one like spectres, never did she consent to revive, in the
innermost recesses of her mind, that degrading past, with its
mortifications, wounds and betrayals, and the disgraceful life led by
her husband, who, shamelessly, with cynical pride, gradually revealed
himself as the man he was, drinking, cheating at cards, robbing his boon
companions, a swindler and blackmailer, giving his wife the impression,
which she still retained and which made her shudder, of a sort of evil
genius, cruel and unbalanced.

"Have done with dreams, Madame Veronique," said Honorine.

"It's not so much dreams and memories as remorse," she replied.

"Remorse, Madame Veronique? You, whose life has been one long
martyrdom?"

"A martyrdom that was a punishment."

"But all that is over and done with, Madame Veronique, seeing that you
are going to meet your son and your father again. Come, come, you must
think of nothing but being happy."

"Happy? Can I be happy again?"

"I should think so! You'll soon see! . . . Look, there's Sarek."

Honorine took from a locker under her seat a large shell which she used
as a trumpet, after the manner of the mariners of old, and, putting her
lips to the mouthpiece and puffing out her cheeks, she blew a few
powerful notes, which filled the air with a sound not unlike the lowing
of an ox.

Veronique gave her a questioning look.

"It's him I'm calling," said Honorine.

"Francois? You're calling Francois?"

"Yes, it's the same every time I come back. He comes scrambling from the
top of the cliffs where we live and runs down to the jetty."

"So I shall see him?" exclaimed Veronique, turning very pale.

"You will see him. Fold your veil double, so that he may not know you
from your photographs. I'll speak to you as I would to a stranger who
has come to look at Sarek."

They could see the island distinctly, but the foot of the cliffs was
hidden by a multitude of reefs.

"Ah, yes, there's no lack of rocks! They swarm like a shoal of herring!"
cried Honorine, who had been obliged to switch off the motor and was
using two short paddles. "You know how calm the sea was just now. It's
never calm here."

Thousands and thousands of little waves were dashing and clashing
against one another and waging an incessant and implacable war upon the
rocks. The boat seemed to be passing through the backwater of a torrent.
Nowhere was a strip of blue or green sea visible amid the bubbling foam.
There was nothing but white froth, whipped up by the indefatigable swirl
of the forces which desperately assailed the pointed teeth of the reefs.

"And it's like that all round the island," said Honorine, "so much so
that you may say that Sarek isn't accessible except in a small boat. Ah,
the Huns could never have established a submarine base on our island! To
make quite sure and remove all doubts, some officers came over from
Lorient, two years ago, because of a few caves on the west, which can
only be entered at low tide. It was waste of time. There was nothing
doing here. Just think, it's like a sprinkle of rocks all around; and
pointed rocks at that, which get at you treacherously from underneath.
And, though these are the most dangerous, perhaps it is the others that
are most to be feared, the big ones which you see and have got their
name and their history from all sorts of crimes and shipwrecks. Oh, as
to those! . . ."

Her voice grew hollow. With a hesitating hand, which seemed afraid of
the half-completed gesture, she pointed to some reefs which stood up in
powerful masses of different shapes, crouching animals, crenellated
keeps, colossal needles, sphynx-heads, jagged pyramids, all in black
granite stained with red, as though soaked in blood.

And she whispered:

"Oh, as to those, they have been guarding the island for centuries and
centuries, but like wild beasts that only care for doing harm and
killing. They . . . they . . . no, it's better never to speak about them
or even think of them. They are the thirty wild beasts. Yes, thirty,
Madame Veronique, there are thirty of them . . . ."

She made the sign of the cross and continued, more calmly:

"There are thirty of them. Your father says that Sarek is called the
island of the thirty coffins because the people instinctively ended in
this case by confusing the two words _ecueils_ and _cercueils_.[1]
Perhaps . . . . It's very likely . . . . But, all the same, they are
thirty real coffins, Madame Veronique; and, if we could open them, we
should be sure to find them full of bones and bones and bones. M.
d'Hergemont himself says that Sarek comes from the word Sarcophagus,
which, according to him, is the learned way of saying coffin. Besides,
there's more than that . . . ."

[Footnote 1: "Reefs" and "coffins."--_Translator's Note._]

Honorine broke off, as though she wanted to think of something else,
and, pointing to a reef of rocks, said:

"Look, Madame Veronique, past that big one right in our way there, you
will see, through an opening, our little harbour and, on the quay,
Francois in his red cap."

Veronique had been listening absent-mindedly to Honorine's explanations.
She leant her body farther out of the boat, in order to catch sight the
sooner of her son, while the Breton woman, once more a victim to her
obsession, continued, in spite of herself:

"There's more than that. The Isle of Sarek--and that is why your father
came to live here--contains a collection of dolmens which have nothing
remarkable about them, but which are peculiar for one reason, that they
are all nearly alike. Well, how many of them do you think there are?
Thirty! Thirty, like the principal reefs. And those thirty are
distributed round the islands, on the cliffs, exactly opposite the
thirty reefs; and each of them bears the same name as the reef that
corresponds to it: Dol-er-H'roeck, Dol-Kerlitu and so on. What do you
say to that?"

She had uttered these names in the same timid voice in which she spoke
of all these things, as if she feared to be heard by the things
themselves, to which she was attributing a formidable and sacred life.

"What do you say to that, Madame Veronique? Oh, there's plenty of
mystery about it all; and, once more, it's better to hold one's tongue!
I'll tell you about it when we've left here, right away from the island,
and when your little Francois is in your arms, between your father and
you."

Veronique sat silent, gazing into space at the spot to which Honorine
had pointed. With her back turned to her companion and her two hands
gripping the gunwale, she stared distractedly before her. It was there,
through that narrow opening, that she was to see her child, long lost
and now found; and she did not want to waste a single second after the
moment when she would be able to catch sight of him.

They reached the rock. One of Honorine's paddles grazed its side. They
skirted and came to the end of it.

"Oh," said Veronique, sorrowfully, "he is not there!"

"Francois not there? Impossible!" cried Honorine.

She in her turn saw, three or four hundred yards in front of them, the
few big rocks on the beach which served as a jetty. Three women, a
little girl and some old seafaring men were waiting for the boat, but no
boy, no red cap.

"That's strange," said Honorine, in a low voice. "It's the first time
that he's failed to answer my call."

"Perhaps he's ill?" Veronique suggested.

"No, Francois is never ill."

"What then?"

"I don't know."

"But aren't you afraid?" asked Veronique, who was already becoming
frightened.

"For him, no . . . but for your father. Maguennoc said that I oughtn't
to leave him. It's he who is threatened."

"But Francois is there to defend him; and so is M. Maroux, his tutor.
Come, answer me: what do you imagine?"

After a moment's pause, Honorine shrugged her shoulders.

"A pack of nonsense! I get absurd, yes, absurd things into my head.
Don't be angry with me. I can't help it: it's the Breton in me. Except
for a few years, I have spent all my life here, with legends and stories
in the very air I breathed. Don't let's talk about it."

The Isle of Sarek appears in the shape of a long and undulating
table-land, covered with ancient trees and standing on cliffs of medium
height than which nothing more jagged could be imagined. It is as though
the island were surrounded by a reef of uneven, diversified lacework,
incessantly wrought upon by the rain, the wind, the sun, the snow, the
frost, the mist and all the water that falls from the sky or oozes from
the earth.

The only accessible point is on the eastern side, at the bottom of a
depression where a few houses, mostly abandoned since the war,
constitute the village. A break in the cliffs opens here, protected by
the little jetty. The sea at this spot is perfectly calm.

Two boats lay moored to the quay.

Before landing, Honorine made a last effort:

"We're there, Madame Veronique, as you see. Now is it really worth your
while to get out? Why not stay where you are? I'll bring your father and
your son to you in two hours' time and we'll have dinner at Beg-Meil or
at Pont-l'Abbe. Will that do?"

Veronique rose to her feet and leapt on to the quay without replying.
Honorine joined her and insisted no longer:

"Well, children, where's young Francois? Hasn't he come?"

"He was here about twelve," said one of the women. "Only he didn't
expect you until to-morrow."

"That's true enough . . . but still he must have heard me blow my horn.
However, we shall see."

And, as the man helped her to unload the boat, she said:

"I shan't want all this taken up to the Priory. Nor the bags either.
Unless . . . Look here, if I am not back by five o'clock, send a
youngster after me with the bags."

"No, I'll come myself," said one of the seamen.

"As you please, Correjou. Oh, by the way, where's Maguennoc?"

"Maguennoc's gone. I took him across to Pont-l'Abbe myself."

"When was that, Correjou?"

"Why, the day after you went, Madame Honorine."

"What was he going over for?"

"He told us he was going . . . I don't know where . . . . It had to do
with the hand he lost . . . . a pilgrimage . . . ."

"A pilgrimage? To Le Faouet, perhaps? To St. Barbe's Chapel?"

"That's it . . . that's it exactly: St. Barbe's Chapel, that's what he
said."

Honorine asked no more. She could no longer doubt that Maguennoc was
dead. She moved away, accompanied by Veronique, who had lowered her
veil; and the two went along a rocky path, cut into steps, which ran
through the middle of an oak-wood towards the southernmost point of the
island.

"After all," said Honorine, "I am not sure--and I may as well say
so--that M. d'Hergemont will consent to leave. He treats all my stories
as crotchets, though there's plenty of things that astonish even him
. . . ."

"Does he live far from here?" asked Veronique.

"It's forty minutes' walk. As you will see, it's almost another island,
joined to the first. The Benedictines built an abbey there."

"But he's not alone there, is he, with Francois and M. Maroux?"

"Before the war, there were two men besides. Lately, Maguennoc and I
used to do pretty well all the work, with the cook, Marie Le Goff."

"She remained, of course, while you were away?"

"Yes."

They reached the top of the cliffs. The path, which followed the coast,
rose and fell in steep gradients. On every hand were old oaks with their
bunches of mistletoe, which showed among the as yet scanty leaves. The
sea, grey-green in the distance, girded the island with a white belt.

Veronique continued:

"What do you propose to do, Honorine?"

"I shall go in by myself and speak to your father. Then I shall come
back and fetch you at the garden-gate; and in Francois' eyes you will
pass for a friend of his mother's. He will guess the truth gradually."

"And you think that my father will give me a good welcome?"

"He will receive you with open arms, Madame Veronique," cried the Breton
woman, "and we shall all be happy, provided . . . provided nothing has
happened . . . It's so funny that Francois doesn't run out to meet me!
He can see our boat from every part of the island . . . as far off as
the Glenans almost."

She relapsed into what M. d'Hergemont called her crotchets; and they
pursued their road in silence. Veronique felt anxious and impatient.

Suddenly Honorine made the sign of the cross:

"You do as I'm doing, Madame Veronique," she said. "The monks have
consecrated the place, but there's lots of bad, unlucky things remaining
from the old days, especially in that wood, the wood of the Great Oak."

The old days no doubt meant the period of the Druids and their human
sacrifices; and the two women were now entering a wood in which the
oaks, each standing in isolation on a mound of moss-grown stones, had a
look of ancient gods, each with his own altar, his mysterious cult and
his formidable power.

Veronique, following Honorine's example, crossed herself and could not
help shuddering as she said:

"How melancholy it is! There's not a flower on this desolate plateau."

"They grow most wonderfully when one takes the trouble. You shall see
Maguennoc's, at the end of the island, to the right of the Fairies'
Dolmen . . . a place called the Calvary of the Flowers."

"Are they lovely?"

"Wonderful, I tell you. Only he goes himself to get the mould from
certain places. He prepares it. He works it up. He mixes it with some
special leaves of which he knows the effect." And she repeated, "You
shall see Maguennoc's flowers. There are no flowers like them in the
world. They are miraculous flowers . . . ."

After skirting a hill, the road descended a sudden declivity. A huge
gash divided the island into two parts, the second of which now
appeared, standing a little higher, but very much more limited in
extent.

"It's the Priory, that part," said Honorine.

The same jagged cliffs surrounded the smaller islet with an even steeper
rampart, which itself was hollowed out underneath like the hoop of a
crown. And this rampart was joined to the main island by a strip of
cliff fifty yards long and hardly thicker than a castle-wall, with a
thin, tapering crest which looked as sharp as the edge of an axe.

There was no thoroughfare possible along this ridge, inasmuch as it was
split in the middle with a wide fissure, for which reason the abutments
of a wooden bridge had been anchored to the two extremities. The bridge
started flat on the rock and subsequently spanned the intervening
crevice.

They crossed it separately, for it was not only very narrow but also
unstable, shaking under their feet and in the wind.

"Look, over there, at the extreme point of the island," said Honorine,
"you can see a corner of the Priory."

The path that led to it ran through fields planted with small fir-trees
arranged in quincunxes. Another path turned to the right and disappeared
from view in some dense thickets.

Veronique kept her eyes upon the Priory, whose low-storied front was
lengthening gradually, when Honorine, after a few minutes, stopped
short, with her face towards the thickets on the right, and called out:

"Monsieur Stephane!"

"Whom are you calling?" asked Veronique. "M. Maroux?"

"Yes, Francois' tutor. He was running towards the bridge: I caught sight
of him through a clearing . . . Monsieur Stephane! . . . But why doesn't
he answer? Did you see a man running?"

"No."

"I declare it was he, with his white cap. At any rate, we can see the
bridge behind us. Let us wait for him to cross."

"Why wait? If anything's the matter, if there's a danger of any kind,
it's at the Priory."

"You're right. Let's hurry."

They hastened their pace, overcome with forebodings; and then, for no
definite reason, broke into a run, so greatly did their fears increase
as they drew nearer to the reality.

The islet grew narrower again, barred by a low wall which marked the
boundaries of the Priory domain. At that moment, cries were heard,
coming from the house.

Honorine exclaimed:

"They're calling! Did you hear? A woman's cries! It's the cook! It's
Marie Le Goff! . . ."

She made a dash for the gate and grasped the key, but inserted it so
awkwardly that she jammed the lock and was unable to open it.

"Through the gap!" she ordered. "This way, on the right!"

They rushed along, scrambled through the wall and crossed a wide grassy
space filled with ruins, in which the winding and ill-marked path
disappeared at every moment under trailing creepers and moss.

"Here we are! Here we are!" shouted Honorine. "We're coming!"

And she muttered:

"The cries have stopped! It's dreadful! Oh, poor Marie Le Goff!"

She grasped Veronique's arm:

"Let's go round. The front of the house is on the other side. On this
side the doors are always locked and the window-shutters closed."

But Veronique caught her foot in some roots, stumbled and fell to her
knees. When she stood up again, the Breton woman had left her and was
hurrying round the left wing. Unconsciously, Veronique, instead of
following her, made straight for the house, climbed the step and was
brought up short by the door, at which she knocked again and again.

The idea of going round, as Honorine had done, seemed to her a waste of
time which nothing could ever make good. However, realising the
futility of her efforts, she was just deciding to go, when once more
cries sounded from inside the house and above her head.

It was a man's voice, which Veronique seemed to recognize as her
father's. She fell back a few steps. Suddenly one of the windows on the
first floor opened and she saw M. d'Hergemont, his features distorted
with inexpressible terror, gasping:

"Help! Help! Oh, the monster! Help!"

"Father! Father!" cried Veronique, in despair. "It's I!"

He lowered his head for an instant, appeared not to see his daughter and
made a quick attempt to climb over the balcony. But a shot rang out
behind him and one of the window-panes was blown into fragments.

"Murderer, murderer!" he shouted, turning back into the room.

Veronique, mad with fear and helplessness, looked around her. How could
she rescue her father? The wall was too high and offered nothing to
cling to. Suddenly, she saw a ladder, lying twenty yards away, beside
the wall of the house. With a prodigious effort of will and strength,
she managed to carry the ladder, heavy though it was, and to set it up
under the open window.

At the most tragic moment in life, when the mind is no more than a
seething confusion, when the whole body is shaken by the tremor of
anguish, a certain logic continues to connect our ideas: and Veronique
wondered why she had not heard Honorine's voice and what could have
delayed her coming.

She also thought of Francois. Where was Francois? Had he followed
Stephane Maroux in his inexplicable flight? Had he gone in search of
assistance? And who was it that M. d'Hergemont had apostrophized as a
monster and a murderer?

The ladder did not reach the window; and Veronique at once became aware
of the effort which would be necessary if she was to climb over the
balcony. Nevertheless she did not hesitate. They were fighting up there;
and the struggle was mingled with stifled shouts uttered by her father.
She went up the ladder. The most that she could do was to grasp the
bottom rail of the balcony. But a narrow ledge enabled her to hoist
herself on one knee, to put her head through and to witness the tragedy
that was being enacted in the room.

At that moment, M. d'Hergemont had once more retreated to the window and
even a little beyond it, so that she almost saw him face to face. He
stood without moving, haggard-eyed and with his arms hanging in an
undecided posture, as though waiting for something terrible to happen.
He stammered:

"Murderer! Murderer! . . . Is it really you? Oh, curse you! Francois!
Francois!"

He was no doubt calling upon his grandson for help; and Francois no
doubt was also exposed to some attack, was perhaps wounded, was possibly
dead!

Veronique summoned up all her strength and succeeded in setting foot on
the ledge.

"Here I am! Here I am!" she meant to cry.

But her voice died away in her throat. She had seen! She saw! Facing
her father, at a distance of five paces, against the opposite wall of
the room, stood some one pointing a revolver at M. d'Hergemont and
deliberately taking aim. And that some one was . . . oh, horror!
Veronique recognized the red cap of which Honorine had spoken, the
flannel shirt with the gilt buttons. And above all she beheld, in that
young face convulsed with hideous emotions, the very expression which
Vorski used to wear at times when his instincts, hatred and ferocity,
gained the upper hand.

The boy did not see her. His eyes were fixed on the mark which he
proposed to hit; and he seemed to take a sort of savage joy in
postponing the fatal act.

Veronique herself was silent. Words or cries could not possibly avert
the peril. What she had to do was to fling herself between her father
and her son. She clutched hold of the railings, clambered up and climbed
through the window.

It was too late. The shot was fired. M. d'Hergemont fell with a groan of
pain.

And, at the same time, at that very moment, while the boy still had his
arm outstretched and the old man was sinking into a huddled heap, a door
opened at the back. Honorine appeared; and the abominable sight struck
her, so to speak, full in the face.

"Francois!" she screamed. "You! You!"

The boy sprang at her. The woman tried to bar his way. There was not
even a struggle. The boy took a step back, quickly raised his weapon and
fired.

Honorine's knees gave way beneath her and she fell across the
threshold. And, as he jumped over her body and fled, she kept on
repeating:

"Francois . . . . Francois . . . . No, it's not true! . . . Oh, can it
be possible? . . . Francois . . . ."

There was a burst of laughter outside. Yes, the boy had laughed.
Veronique heard that horrible, infernal laugh, so like Vorski's laugh;
and it all agonized her with the same anguish which used to sear her in
Vorski's days!

She did not run after the murderer. She did not call out.

A faint voice beside her was murmuring her name:

"Veronique . . . . Veronique . . . ."

M. d'Hergemont lay on the ground, staring at her with glassy eyes which
were already filled with death.

She knelt down by his side; but, when she tried to unbutton his
waistcoat and his bloodstained shirt, in order to dress the wound of
which he was dying, he gently pushed her hand aside. She understood that
all aid was useless and that he wished to speak to her. She stooped
still lower.

"Veronique . . . forgive . . . Veronique . . . ."

It was the first utterance of his failing thoughts.

She kissed him on the forehead and wept:

"Hush, father . . . . Don't tire yourself . . . ."

But he had something else to say; and his mouth vainly emitted syllables
which did not form words and to which she listened in despair. His life
was ebbing away. His mind was fading into the darkness. Veronique glued
her ear to the lips which exhausted themselves in a supreme effort and
she caught the words:

"Beware . . . beware . . . the God-Stone . . . ."

Suddenly he half raised himself. His eyes flashed as though lit by the
last flicker of an expiring flame. Veronique received the impression
that her father, as he looked at her, now understood nothing but the
full significance of her presence and foresaw all the dangers that
threatened her; and, speaking in a hoarse and terrified but quite
distinct voice, he said:

"You mustn't stay . . . . It means death if you stay . . . . Escape this
island . . . . Go . . . Go . . . ."

His head fell back. He stammered a few more words which Veronique was
just able to grasp:

"Oh, the cross! . . . The four crosses of Sarek! . . . My daughter . . .
my daughter . . . crucified! . . ."

And that was all.

There was a great silence, a vast silence which Veronique felt weighing
upon her like a burden that grows heavier second after second.

"You must escape from this island," a voice repeated. "Go, quickly. Your
father bade you, Madame Veronique."

Honorine was beside her, livid in the face, with her two hands clasping
a napkin, rolled into a plug and red with blood, which she held to her
chest.

"But I must look after you first!" cried Veronique. "Wait a moment
. . . . Let me see . . . ."

"Later on . . . they'll attend to me presently," spluttered Honorine.
"Oh, the monster! . . . If I had only come in time! But the door below
was barricaded . . . ."

"Do let me see to your wound," Veronique implored. "Lie down."

"Presently . . . . First Marie Le Goff, the cook, at the top of the
staircase . . . . She's wounded too . . . mortally perhaps . . . . Go
and see."

Veronique went out by the door at the back, the one through which her
son had made his escape. There was a large landing here. On the top
steps, curled into a heap, lay Marie Le Goff, with the death-rattle in
her throat.

She died almost at once, without recovering consciousness, the third
victim of the incomprehensible tragedy. As foretold by old Maguennoc, M.
d'Hergemont had been the second victim.




CHAPTER IV

THE POOR PEOPLE OF SAREK


Honorine's wound was deep but did not seem likely to prove fatal. When
Veronique had dressed it and moved Marie Le Goff's body to the room
filled with books and furnished like a study in which her father was
lying, she closed M. d'Hergemont's eyes, covered him with a sheet and
knelt down to pray. But the words of prayer would not come to her lips
and her mind was incapable of dwelling on a single thought. She felt
stunned by the repeated blows of misfortune. She sat down in a chair,
holding her head in her hands. Thus she remained for nearly an hour,
while Honorine slept a feverish sleep.

With all her strength she rejected her son's image, even as she had
always rejected Vorski's. But the two images became mingled together,
whirling around her and dancing before her eyes like those lights which,
when we close our eyelids tightly, pass and pass again and multiply and
blend into one. And it was always one and the same face, cruel,
sardonic, hideously grinning.

She did not suffer, as a mother suffers when mourning the loss of a son.
Her son had been dead these fourteen years; and the one who had come to
life again, the one for whom all the wells of her maternal affection
were ready to gush forth, had suddenly become a stranger and even worse:
Vorski's son! How indeed could she have suffered?

But ah, what a wound inflicted in the depths of her being! What an
upheaval, like those cataclysms which shake the whole of a peaceful
country-side! What a hellish spectacle! What a vision of madness and
horror! What an ironical jest, a jest of the most hideous destiny! Her
son killing her father at the moment when, after all these years of
separation and sorrow, she was on the point of embracing them both and
living with them in sweet and homely intimacy! Her son a murderer! Her
son dispensing death and terror broadcast! Her son levelling that
ruthless weapon, slaying with all his heart and soul and taking a
perverse delight in it!

The motives which might explain these actions interested her not at all.
Why had her son done these things? Why had his tutor, Stephane Maroux,
doubtless an accomplice, possibly an instigator, fled before the
tragedy? These were questions which she did not seek to solve. She
thought only of the frightful scene of carnage and death. And she asked
herself if death was not for her the only refuge and the only ending.

"Madame Veronique," whispered Honorine.

"What is it?" asked Veronique, roused from her stupor.

"Don't you hear?"

"What?"

"A ring at the bell below. They must be bringing your luggage."

She sprang to her feet.

"But what am I to say? How can I explain? . . . If I accuse that boy
. . ."

"Not a word, please. Let me speak to them."

"You're very weak, my poor Honorine."

"No, no, I'm feeling better."

Veronique went downstairs, crossed a broad entrance-hall paved with
black and white flags and drew the bolts of a great door.

It was, as they expected, one of the sailors:

"I knocked at the kitchen-door first," said the man. "Isn't Marie Le
Goff there? And Madame Honorine?"

"Honorine is upstairs and would like to speak to you."

The sailor looked at her, seemed impressed by this young woman, who
looked so pale and serious, and followed her without a word.

Honorine was waiting on the first floor, standing in front of the open
door:

"Ah, it's you, Correjou? . . . Now listen to me . . . and no silly talk,
please."

"What's the matter, M'ame Honorine? Why, you're wounded! What is it?"

She stepped aside from the doorway and, pointing to the two bodies under
their winding-sheets, said simply:

"Monsieur Antoine and Marie Le Goff . . . both of them murdered."

The man's face became distorted. He stammered:

"Murdered . . . you don't say so . . . . Why?"

"I don't know; we arrived after it happened."

"But . . . young Francois? . . . Monsieur Stephane? . . ."

"Gone . . . . They must have been killed too."

"But . . . but . . . Maguennoc?"

"Maguennoc? Why do you speak of Maguennoc?"

"I speak of Maguennoc, I speak of Maguennoc . . . because, if he's alive
. . . this is a very different business. Maguennoc always said that he
would be the first. Maguennoc only says things of which he's certain.
Maguennoc understands these things thoroughly."

Honorine reflected and then said:

"Maguennoc has been killed."

This time Correjou lost all his composure: and his features expressed
that sort of insane terror which Veronique had repeatedly observed in
Honorine. He made the sign of the cross and said, in a low whisper:

"Then . . . then . . . it's happening, Ma'me Honorine? . . . Maguennoc
said it would . . . . Only the other day, in my boat, he was saying, 'It
won't be long now . . . . Everybody ought to get away.'"

And suddenly the sailor turned on his heel and made for the staircase.

"Stay where you are, Correjou," said Honorine, in a voice of command.

"We must get away. Maguennoc said so. Everybody has got to go."

"Stay where you are," Honorine repeated.

Correjou stopped, undecidedly. And Honorine continued:

"We are agreed. We must go. We shall start to-morrow, towards the
evening. But first we must attend to Monsieur Antoine and to Marie Le
Goff. Look here, you go to the sisters Archignat and send them to keep
watch by the dead. They are bad women, but they are used to doing that.
Say that two of the three must come. Each of them shall have double the
ordinary fee."

"And after that, Ma'me Honorine?"

"You and all the old men will see to the coffins; and at daybreak we
will bury the bodies in consecrated ground, in the cemetery of the
chapel."

"And after that, Ma'me Honorine?"

"After that, you will be free and the others too. You can pack up and be
off."

"But you, Ma'me Honorine?"

"I have the boat. That's enough talking. Are we agreed?"

"Yes, we're agreed. It means one more night to spend here. But I suppose
that nothing fresh will happen between this and to-morrow? . . ."

"Why no, why no . . . Go, Correjou. Hurry. And above all don't tell the
others that Maguennoc is dead . . . or we shall never keep them here."

"That's a promise, Ma'me Honorine."

The man hastened away.

An hour later, two of the sisters Archignat appeared, two skinny,
shrivelled old hags, looking like witches in their dirty, greasy caps
with the black-velvet bows. Honorine was taken to her own room on the
same floor, at the end of the left wing.

And the vigil of the dead began.

       *       *       *       *       *

Veronique spent the first part of the night beside her father's body and
then went and sat with Honorine, whose condition seemed to grow worse.
She ended by dozing off and was wakened by the Breton woman, who said to
her, in one of those accesses of fever in which the brain still retains
a certain lucidity:

"Francois must be hiding . . . and M. Stephane too . . . The island has
safe hiding-places, which Maguennoc showed them. We shan't see them,
therefore; and no one will know anything about them."

"Are you sure?"

"Quite. So listen to me. To-morrow, when everybody has left Sarek and
when we two are alone, I shall blow the signal with my horn and he will
come here."

Veronique was horrified:

"But I don't want to see him!" she exclaimed, indignantly. "I loathe
him! . . . Like my father, I curse him! . . . Have you forgotten? He
killed my father, before our eyes! He killed Marie Le Goff! He tried to
kill you! . . . No, what I feel for him is hatred and disgust! The
monster!"

The Breton woman took her hand, as she had formed a habit of doing, and
murmured:

"Don't condemn him yet . . . . He did not know what he was doing."

"What do you mean? He didn't know? Why, I saw his eyes, Vorski's eyes!"

"He did not know . . . he was mad."

"Mad? Nonsense!"

"Yes, Madame Veronique. I know the boy. He's the kindest creature on
earth. If he did all this, it was because he went mad suddenly . . . he
and M. Stephane. They must both be weeping in despair now."

"It's impossible. I can't believe it."

"You can't believe it because you know nothing of what is happening
. . . and of what is going to happen . . . . But, if you did know . . .
Oh, there are things . . . there are things!"

Her voice was no longer audible. She was silent, but her eyes remained
wide open and her lips moved without uttering a sound.

Nothing occurred until the morning. At five o'clock Veronique heard them
nailing down the coffins; and almost immediately afterwards the door of
the room in which she sat was opened and the sisters Archignat entered
like a whirlwind, both greatly excited.

They had heard the truth from Correjou, who, to give himself courage,
had taken a drop too much to drink and was talking at random:

"Maguennoc is dead!" they screamed. "Maguennoc is dead and you never
told us! Give us our money, quick! We're going!"

The moment they were paid, they ran away as fast as their legs would
carry them; and, an hour later, some other women, informed by them, came
hurrying to drag their men from their work. They all used the same
words:

"We must go! We must get ready to start! . . . It'll be too late
afterwards. The two boats can take us all."

Honorine had to intervene with all her authority and Veronique was
obliged to distribute money. And the funeral was hurriedly conducted.
Not far away was an old chapel, carefully restored by M. d'Hergemont,
where a priest came once a month from Pont-l'Abbe to say mass. Beside it
was the ancient cemetery of the abbots of Sarek. The two bodies were
buried here; and an old man, who in ordinary times acted as sacristan,
mumbled the blessing.

All the people seemed smitten with madness. Their voices and movements
were spasmodic. They were obsessed with the fixed idea of leaving the
island and paid no attention to Veronique, who knelt a little way off,
praying and weeping.

It was all over before eight o'clock. Men and women made their way down
across the island. Veronique, who felt as though she were living in a
nightmare world where events followed upon one another without logic and
with no connected sequence, went back to Honorine, whose feeble
condition had prevented her from attending her master's funeral.

"I'm feeling better," said the Breton woman. "We shall go to-day or
to-morrow and we shall go with Francois."

Veronique protested angrily; but Honorine repeated:

"With Francois, I tell you, and with M. Stephane. And as soon as
possible. I also want to go . . . and to take you with me . . . and
Francois too. There is death in the island. Death is the master here. We
must leave Sarek. We shall all go."

Veronique did not wish to thwart her. But at nine o'clock hurried steps
were heard outside. It was Correjou, coming from the village. On
reaching the door he shouted:

"They've stolen your motor-boat, Ma'me Honorine! She's disappeared!"

"Impossible!" said Honorine.

But the sailor, all out of breath, declared:

"She's disappeared. I suspected something this morning early. But I
expect I had had a glass too much; I did not give it another thought.
Others have since seen what I did. The painter has been cut . . . . It
happened during the night. And they've made off. No one saw or heard
them."

The two women exchanged glances; and the same thought occurred to both
of them: Francois and Stephane Maroux had taken to flight.

Honorine muttered between her teeth:

"Yes, yes, that's it: he understands how to work the boat."

Veronique perhaps felt a certain relief at knowing that the boy had gone
and that she would not see him again. But Honorine, seized with a
renewed fear, exclaimed:

"Then . . . then what are we to do?"

"You must leave at once, Ma'me Honorine. The boats are ready . . .
everybody's packing up. There'll be no one in the village by eleven
o'clock."

Veronique interposed:

"Honorine's not in a condition to travel."

"Yes, I am; I'm better," the Breton woman declared.

"No, it would be ridiculous. Let us wait a day or two . . . . Come back
in two days, Correjou."

She pushed the sailor towards the door. He, for that matter, was only
too anxious to go:

"Very well," he said, "that'll do: I'll come back the day after
to-morrow. Besides, we can't take everything with us. We shall have to
come back now and again to fetch our things . . . . Good-bye, Ma'me
Honorine; take care of yourself."

And he ran outside.

"Correjou! Correjou!"

Honorine was sitting up in bed and calling to him in despair:

"No, no, don't go away, Correjou! . . . Wait for me and carry me to your
boat."

She listened; and, as the man did not return, she tried to get up:

"I'm frightened," she said. "I don't want to be left alone."

Veronique held her down:

"You're not going to be left alone, Honorine. I shan't leave you."

There was an actual struggle between the two women; and Honorine, pushed
back on her bed by main force, moaned, helplessly:

"I'm frightened . . . . I'm frightened . . . . The island is accursed
. . . . It's tempting Providence to remain behind . . . . Maguennoc's
death was a warning . . . . I'm frightened . . . ."

She was more or less delirious, but still retained a half-lucidity which
enabled her to intersperse a few intelligible and reasonable remarks
among the incoherent phrases which revealed her superstitious Breton
soul.

She gripped Veronique by her two shoulders and declared:

"I tell you, the island's cursed. Maguennoc confessed as much himself
one day: 'Sarek is one of the gates of hell,' he said. 'The gate is
closed now, but, on the day when it opens, every misfortune you can
think of will be upon it like a squall.'"

She calmed herself a little, at Veronique's entreaty, and continued, in
a lower voice, which grew fainter as she spoke:

"He loved the island, though . . . as we all do. At such times he would
speak of it in a way which I did not understand: 'The gate is a double
one, Honorine, and it also opens on Paradise.' Yes, yes, the island was
good to live in . . . . We loved it . . . . Maguennoc made flowers grow
on it . . . . Oh, those flowers! They were enormous: three times as tall
. . . and as beautiful . . ."

The minutes passed slowly. The bedroom was at the extreme left of the
house, just above the rocks which overhung the sea and separated from
them only by the width of the road.

Veronique sat down at the window, with her eyes fixed on the white waves
which grew still more troubled as the wind blew more strongly. The sun
was rising. In the direction of the village she saw nothing except a
steep headland. But, beyond the belt of foam studded with the black
points of the reefs, the view embraced the deserted plains of the
Atlantic.

Honorine murmured, drowsily:

"They say that the gate is a stone . . . and that it comes from very far
away, from a foreign country. It's the God-Stone. They also say that
it's a precious stone . . . the colour of gold and silver mixed . . . .
The God-Stone . . . . The stone that gives life or death . . . .
Maguennoc saw it . . . . He opened the gate and put his arm through
. . . . And his hand . . . his hand was burnt to a cinder."

Veronique felt oppressed. Fear was gradually overcoming her also, like
the oozing and soaking of stagnant water. The horrible events of the
last few days, of which she had been a terrified witness, seemed to
evoke others yet more dreadful, which she anticipated like an inevitable
hurricane that is bound to carry off everything in its headlong course.

She expected them. She had no doubt that they would come, unloosed by
the fatal power which was multiplying its terrible assaults upon her.

"Don't you see the boats?" asked Honorine.

"No," she said, "you can't see them from here."

"Yes, you can: they are sure to come this way. They are heavy boats: and
there's a wider passage at the point."

The next moment, Veronique saw the bow of a boat project beyond the end
of the headland. The boat lay low in the water, being very heavily
laden, crammed with crates and parcels on which women and children were
seated. Four men were rowing lustily.

"That's Correjou's," said Honorine, who had left her bed, half-dressed.
"And there's the other: look."

The second boat came into view, equally burdened. Only three men were
rowing, with a woman to help them.

Both boats were too far away--perhaps seven or eight hundred yards--to
allow the faces of the occupants to be seen. And no sound of voices rose
from those heavy hulls with their cargoes of wretchedness, which were
fleeing from death.

"Oh dear, oh dear!" moaned Honorine. "If only they escape this hell!"

"What can you be afraid of, Honorine? They are in no danger."

"Yes, they are, as long as they have not left the island."

"But they have left it."

"It's still the island all around the island. It's there that the
coffins lurk and lie in wait."

"But the sea is not rough."

"There's more than the sea. It's not the sea that's the enemy."

"Then what is?"

"I don't know . . . . I don't know . . . ."

The two boats veered round at the southern point. Before them lay two
channels, which Honorine pointed out by the name of two reefs, the
Devil's Rock and the Sarek Tooth.

It at once became evident that Correjou had chosen the Devil's Channel.

"They're touching it," said Honorine. "They are there. Another hundred
yards and they are safe."

She almost gave a chuckle:

"Ah, all the devil's machinations will be thwarted, Madame Veronique! I
really believe that we shall be saved, you and I and all the people of
Sarek."

Veronique remained silent. Her depression continued and was all the more
overwhelming because she could attribute it only to vague presentiments
which she was powerless to fight against. She had drawn an imaginary
line up to which the danger threatened, would continue to threaten, and
where it still persisted; and this line Correjou had not yet reached.

Honorine was shivering with fever. She mumbled:

"I'm frightened . . . . I'm frightened . . . ."

"Nonsense," declared Veronique, pulling herself together, "It's absurd!
Where can the danger come from?"

"Oh," cried the Breton woman, "what's that? What does it mean?"

"What? What is it?"

They had both pressed their foreheads to the panes and were staring
wildly before them. Down below, something had so to speak shot out from
the Devil's Rock. And they at once recognized the motor-boat which they
had used the day before and which according to Correjou had disappeared.

"Francois! Francois!" cried Honorine, in stupefaction. "Francois and
Monsieur Stephane!"

Veronique recognized the boy. He was standing in the bow of the
motor-boat and making signs to the people in the two rowing-boats. The
men answered by waving their oars, while the women gesticulated. In
spite of Veronique's opposition, Honorine opened both halves of the
window; and they could hear the sound of voices above the throbbing of
the motor, though they could not catch a single word.

"What does it mean?" repeated Honorine. "Francois and M. Stephane! . . .
Why did they not make for the mainland?"

"Perhaps," Veronique explained, "they were afraid of being observed and
questioned on landing."

"No, they are known, especially Francois, who often used to go with me.
Besides, the identity-papers are in the boat. No, they were waiting
there, hidden behind the rock."

"But, Honorine, if they were hiding, why do they show themselves now?"

"Ah, that's just it, that's just it! . . . I don't understand . . . and
it strikes me as odd . . . . What must Correjou and the others think?"

The two boats, of which the second was now gliding in the wake of the
first, had almost stopped. All the passengers seemed to be looking round
at the motor-boat, which came rapidly in their direction and slackened
speed when she was level with the second boat. In this way, she
continued on a line parallel with that of the two boats and fifteen or
twenty yards away.

"I don't understand . . . . I don't understand," muttered Honorine.

The motor had been cut off and the motor-boat now very slowly reached
the space that separated the two fish-boats.

And suddenly the two women saw Francois stoop and then stand up again
and draw his right arm back, as though he were going to throw something.

And at the same time Stephane Maroux acted in the same way.

Then the unexpected, terrifying thing happened.

"Oh!" cried Veronique.

She hid her eyes for a second, but at once raised her head again and saw
the hideous sight in all its horror.

Two things had been thrown across the little space, one from the bow,
flung by Francois, the other from the stern, flung by Stephane Maroux.

And two bursts of fire at once shot up from the two boats, followed by
two whirls of smoke.

The explosions re-echoed. For a moment, nothing of what happened amid
that black cloud was visible. Then the curtain parted, blown aside by
the wind, and Veronique and Honorine saw the two boats swiftly sinking,
while their occupants jumped into the sea.

The sight, the infernal sight, did not last long. They saw, standing on
one of the buoys that marked the channel, a woman holding a child in her
arms, without moving: then some motionless bodies, no doubt killed by
the explosion; then two men fighting, mad perhaps. And all this went
down with the boats.

A few eddies, some black specks floating on the surface; and that was
all.

Honorine and Veronique, struck dumb with terror, had not uttered a
single word. The thing surpassed the worst that their anguished minds
could have conceived.

When it was all over, Honorine put her hand to her head and, in a hollow
voice which Veronique was never to forget, said:

"My head's bursting. Oh, the poor people of Sarek! They were my friends,
the friends of my childhood; and I shall never see them again . . . .
The sea never gives up its dead at Sarek: it keeps them. It has its
coffins all ready: thousands and thousands of hidden coffins . . . . Oh,
my head is bursting! . . . I shall go mad . . . mad like Francois, my
poor Francois!"

Veronique did not answer. She was grey in the face. With clutching
fingers she clung to the balcony, gazing downwards as one gazes into an
abyss into which one is about to fling oneself. What would her son do?
Would he save those people, whose shouts of distress now reached her
ears, would he save them without delay? One may have fits of madness;
but the attacks pass away at the sight of certain things.

The motor-boat had backed at first to avoid the eddies. Francois and
Stephane, whose red cap and white cap were still visible, were standing
in the same positions at the bow and the stern; and they held in their
hands . . . what? The two women could not see clearly, because of the
distance, what they held in their hands. It looked like two rather long
sticks.

"Poles, to help them," suggested Veronique.

"Or guns," said Honorine.

The black specks were still floating. There were nine of them, the nine
heads of the survivors, whose arms also the two women saw moving from
time to time and whose cries for help they heard.

Some were hurriedly moving away from the motor-boat, but four were
swimming towards it; and, of those four, two could not fail to reach it.

Suddenly Francois and Stephane made the same movement, the movement of
marksmen taking aim.

There were two flashes, followed by the sound of a single report.

The heads of the two swimmers disappeared.

"Oh, the monsters!" stammered Veronique, almost swooning and falling on
her knees.

Honorine, beside her, began screaming:

"Francois! Francois!"

Her voice did not carry, first because it was too weak and then the wind
was in her face. But she continued:

"Francois! Francois!"

She next stumbled across the room and into the corridor, in search of
something, and returned to the window, still shouting:

"Francois! Francois!"

She had ended by finding the shell which she used as a signal. But, on
lifting it to her mouth, she found that she could produce only dull and
indistinct sounds from it:

"Oh, curse the thing!" she cried, flinging the shell away. "I have no
strength left . . . . Francois! Francois!"

She was terrible to look at, with her hair all in disorder and her face
covered with the sweat of fever. Veronique implored her:

"Please, Honorine, please!"

"But look at them, look at them!"

The motor-boat was drifting forward down below, with the two marksmen at
their posts, holding their guns ready for murder.

The survivors fled. Two of them hung back in the rear.

These two were aimed at. Their heads disappeared from view.

"But look at them!" Honorine said, explosively, in a hoarse voice.
"They're hunting them down! They're killing them like game! . . . Oh,
the poor people of Sarek! . . ."

Another shot. Another black speck vanished.

Veronique was writhing in despair. She shook the rails of the balcony,
as she might have shaken the bars of a cage in which she was imprisoned.

"Vorski! Vorski!" she groaned, stricken by the recollection of her
husband. "He's Vorski's son!"

Suddenly she felt herself seized by the throat and saw, close to her own
face, the distorted face of the Breton woman.

"He's your son!" spluttered Honorine. "Curse you! You are the monster's
mother and you shall be punished for it!"

And she burst out laughing and stamping her feet, in an overpowering fit
of hilarity.

"The cross, yes, the cross! You shall be crucified, with nails through
your hands! . . . What a punishment, nails through your hands!"

She was mad.

Veronique released herself and tried to hold the other motionless: but
Honorine, filled with malicious rage, threw her off, making her lose
balance, and began to climb into the balcony.

She remained standing outside the window, lifting up her arms and once
more shouting:

"Francois! Francois!"

The first floor was not so high on this side of the house, owing to the
slope of the ground. Honorine jumped into the path below, crossed it,
pushed her way through the shrubs that lined it and ran to the ridge of
rocks which formed the cliff and overhung the sea.

She stopped for a moment, thrice called out the name of the child whom
she had reared and flung herself headlong into the deep.

In the distance, the man-hunt drew to a finish.

The heads sank one by one. The massacre was completed.

Then the motor-boat with Francois and Stephane on board fled towards the
coast of Brittany, towards the beaches of Beg-Meil and Concarneau.

Veronique was left alone on Coffin Island.




CHAPTER V

"FOUR WOMEN CRUCIFIED"


Veronique was left alone on Coffin Island. Until the sun sank among the
clouds that seemed, on the horizon, to rest upon the sea, she did not
move, but sat huddled against the window, with her head buried in her
two arms resting on the sill.

The dread reality passed through the darkness of her mind like pictures
which she strove not to see, but which at times became so clearly
defined that she imagined herself to be living through those atrocious
scenes again.

Still she sought no explanation of all this and formed no theories as to
all the motives which might have thrown a light upon the tragedy. She
admitted the madness of Francois and of Stephane Maroux, being unable to
suppose any other reasons for such actions as theirs. And, believing the
two murderers to be mad, she did not even try to attribute to them any
projects or definite wishes.

Moreover, Honorine's madness, of which she had, so to speak, observed
the outbreak, impelled her to look upon all that had happened as
provoked by a sort of mental upset to which all the people of Sarek had
fallen victims. She herself at moments felt that her brain was reeling,
that her ideas were fading away in a mist, that invisible ghosts were
hovering around her.

She dozed off into a sleep which was haunted by these images and in
which she felt so wretched that she began to sob. Also it seemed to her
that she could hear a slight noise which, in her benumbed wits, assumed
a hostile significance. Enemies were approaching. She opened her eyes.

A couple of yards in front of her, sitting upon its haunches, was a
queer animal, covered with long mud-coloured hair and holding its
fore-paws folded like a pair of arms.

It was a dog; and she at once remembered Francois' dog, of which
Honorine had spoken as a dear, devoted, comical creature. She even
remembered his name, All's-Well.

As she uttered this name in an undertone, she felt an angry impulse and
was almost driving away the animal endowed with such an ironical
nickname. All's-Well! And she thought of all the victims of the horrible
nightmare, of all the dead people of Sarek, of her murdered father, of
Honorine killing herself, of Francois going mad. All's-Well, forsooth!

Meanwhile the dog did not stir. He was sitting up as Honorine had
described, with his head a little on one side, one eye closed, the
corners of his mouth drawn back to his ears and his arms crossed in
front of him; and there was really something very like a smile flitting
over his face.

Veronique now remembered: this was the manner in which All's-Well
displayed his sympathy for those in trouble. All's-Well could not bear
the sight of tears. When people wept, he sat up until they in their turn
smiled and petted him.

Veronique did not smile, but she pressed him against her and said:

"No, my poor dog, all's not well; on the contrary, all's as bad as it
can be. No matter: we must live, mustn't we, and we mustn't go mad
ourselves like the others?"

The necessities of life obliged her to act. She went down to the
kitchen, found some food and gave the dog a good share of it. Then she
went upstairs again.

Night had fallen. She opened, on the first floor, the door of a bedroom
which at ordinary times must have been unoccupied. She was weighed down
with an immense fatigue, caused by all the efforts and violent emotions
which she had undergone. She fell asleep almost at once. All's Well lay
awake at the foot of her bed.

Next morning she woke late, with a curious feeling of peace and
security. It seemed to her that her present life was somehow connected
with her calm and placid life at Besancon. The few days of horror which
she had passed fell away from her like distant events whose return she
had no need to fear. The men and women who had gone under in the great
horror became to her mind almost like strangers whom one has met and
does not expect to see again. Her heart ceased bleeding. Her sorrow for
them did not reach the depths of her soul.

It was due to the unforeseen and undisturbed rest, the consoling
solitude. And all this seemed to her so pleasant that, when a steamer
came and anchored on the spot of the disaster, she made no signal. No
doubt yesterday, from the mainland, they had seen the flash of the
explosions and heard the report of the shots. Veronique remained
motionless.

She saw a boat put off from the steamer and supposed that they were
going to land and explore the village. But not only did she dread an
enquiry in which her son might be involved: she herself did not wish to
be found, to be questioned, to have her name, her identity, her story
discovered and to be brought back into the infernal circle from which
she had escaped. She preferred to wait a week or two, to wait until
chance brought within hailing-distance of the island some fishing-boat
which could pick her up.

But no one came to the Priory. The steamer put off; and nothing
disturbed her isolation.

And so she remained for three days. Fate seemed to have reconsidered its
intention of making fresh assaults upon her. She was alone and her own
mistress. All's Well, whose company had done her a world of good,
disappeared.

The Priory domain occupied the whole end of the island, on the site of a
Benedictine abbey, which had been abandoned in the fifteenth century and
gradually fallen into ruin and decay.

The house, built in the eighteenth century by a wealthy Breton
ship-owner out of the materials of the old abbey and the stones of the
chapel, was in no way interesting either outside or in. Veronique, for
that matter, did not dare to enter any of the rooms. The memory of her
father and son checked her before the closed doors.

But, on the second day, in the bright spring sunshine, she explored the
park. It extended to the point of the island and, like the sward in
front of the house, was studded with ruins and covered with ivy. She
noticed that all the paths ran towards a steep promontory crowned with a
clump of enormous oaks. When she reached the spot, she found that these
oaks stood round a crescent-shaped clearing which was open to the sea.

In the centre of the clearing was a cromlech with a rather short, oval
table upheld by two supports of rock, which were almost square. The spot
possessed an impressive magnificence and commanded a boundless view.

"The Fairies' Dolmen, of which Honorine spoke," thought Veronique. "I
cannot be far from the Calvary and Maguennoc's flowers."

She walked round the megalith. The inner surface of the two uprights
bore a few illegible engraved signs. But the two outer surfaces facing
the sea formed as it were two smooth slabs prepared to receive an
inscription; and here she saw something that caused her to shudder with
anguish. On the right, deeply encrusted, was an unskilful, primitive
drawing of four crosses with four female figures writhing upon them. On
the left was a column of lines of writing, whose characters,
inadequately carved in the stone, had been almost obliterated by the
weather, or perhaps even deliberately effaced by human hands. A few
words remained, however, the very words which Veronique had read on the
drawing which she found beside Maguennoc's corpse:

"Four women crucified . . . . Thirty coffins . . . . The God-Stone which
gives life or death."

Veronique moved away, staggering. The mystery was once more before her,
as everywhere in the island, and she was determined to escape from it
until the moment when she could leave Sarek altogether.

She took a path which started from the clearing and led past the last
oak on the right. This oak appeared to have been struck by lightning,
for all that remained of it was the trunk and a few dead branches.

Farther on, she went down some stone steps, crossed a little meadow in
which stood four rows of menhirs and stopped suddenly with a stifled
cry, a cry of admiration and amazement, before the sight that presented
itself to her eyes.

"Maguennoc's flowers," she whispered.

The last two menhirs of the central alley which she was following stood
like the posts of a door that opened upon the most glorious spectacle, a
rectangular space, fifty yards long at most, which was reached by a
short descending flight of steps and bordered by two rows of menhirs all
of the same height and placed at accurately measured intervals, like the
columns of a temple. The nave and side-aisles of this temple were paved
with wide, irregular, broken granite flag-stones, which the grass,
growing in the cracks, marked with patterns similar to those of the lead
which frames the pieces of a stained-glass window.

In the middle was a small bed of flowers thronging around an ancient
stone crucifix. But such flowers! Flowers which the wildest imagination
or fancy never conceived, dream-flowers, miraculous flowers, flowers out
of all proportion to ordinary flowers!

Veronique recognized all of them; and yet she stood dumbfounded at their
size and splendour. There were flowers of many varieties, but few of
each variety. It was like a nosegay made to contain every colour, every
perfume and every beauty that flowers can possess.

And the strangest thing was that these flowers, which do not usually
bloom at the same time and which open in successive months, were all
growing and blossoming together! On one and the same day, these flowers,
all perennial flowers whose time does not last much more than two or
three weeks, were blooming and multiplying, full and heavy, vivid,
sumptuous, proudly borne on their sturdy stems.

There were spiderworts, there were ranunculi, tiger-lilies, columbines,
blood-red potentillas, irises of a brighter violet than a bishop's
cassock. There were larkspurs, phlox, fuchsias, monk's-hoods,
montbretias. And, above all this, to Veronique's intense emotion, above
the dazzling flower-bed, standing a little higher in a narrow border
around the pedestal of the crucifix, with all their blue, white and
violet clusters seeming to lift themselves so as to touch the Saviour's
very form, were veronicas!

She was faint with emotion. As she came nearer, she had read on a little
label fastened to the pedestal these two words.

"Mother's flowers."

       *       *       *       *       *

Veronique did not believe in miracles. She was obliged to admit that the
flowers were wonderful, beyond all comparison with the flowers of our
climes. But she refused to think that this anomaly was not to be
explained except by supernatural causes or by magic recipes of which
Maguennoc held the secret. No, there was some reason, perhaps a very
simple one, of which events would afford a full explanation.

Meanwhile, amid the beautiful pagan setting, in the very centre of the
miracle which it seemed to have wrought by its presence, the figure of
Christ Crucified rose from the mass of flowers which offered Him their
colours and their perfumes. Veronique knelt and prayed.

Next day and the day after, she returned to the Calvary of the Flowers.
Here the mystery that surrounded her on every side had manifested itself
in the most charming fashion; and her son played a part in it that
enabled Veronique to think of him, before her own flowers, without
hatred or despair.

But, on the fifth day, she perceived that her provisions were becoming
exhausted; and in the middle of the afternoon she went down to the
village.

There she noticed that most of the houses had been left open, so certain
had their owners been, on leaving, of coming back again and taking what
they needed in a second trip.

Sick at heart, she dared not cross the thresholds. There were geraniums
on the window-ledges. Tall clocks with brass pendulums were ticking off
the time in the empty rooms. She moved away.

In a shed near the quay, however, she saw the sacks and boxes which
Honorine had brought with her in the motor-boat.

"Well," she thought, "I shan't starve. There's enough to last me for
weeks; and by that time . . ."

She filled a basket with chocolate, biscuits, a few tins of preserved
meat, rice and matches; and she was on the point of returning to the
Priory, when it occurred to her that she would continue her walk to the
other end of the island. She would fetch her basket on the way back.

A shady road climbed upwards on the right. The landscape seemed to be
the same: the same flat stretches of moorland, without ploughed fields
or pastures; the same clumps of ancient oaks. The island also became
narrower, with no obstacle to block the view of the sea on either side
or of the Penmarch headland in the distance.

There was also a hedge which ran from one cliff to the other and which
served to enclose a property, a shabby property, with a straggling,
dilapidated, tumbledown house upon it, some out-houses with patched
roofs and a dirty, badly-kept yard, full of scrap-iron and stacks of
firewood.

Veronique was already retracing her steps, when she stopped in alarm and
surprise. It seemed to her that she heard some one moan. She listened,
striving to plumb the vast silence, and once again the same sound, but
this time more distinctly, reached her ears; and there were others:
cries of pain, cries for help, women's cries. Then had not all the
inhabitants taken to flight? She had a feeling of joy mingled with some
sorrow, to know that she was not alone in Sarek, and of fear also, at
the thought that events would perhaps drag her back again into the fatal
cycle of death and horror.

So far as Veronique was able to judge, the noise came not from the
house, but from the buildings on the right of the yard. This yard was
closed with a simple gate which she had only to push and which opened
with the creaking sound of wood upon wood.

The cries in the out-house at once increased in number. The people
inside had no doubt heard Veronique approach. She hastened her steps.

Though the roof of the out-buildings was gone in places, the walls were
thick and solid, with old arched doors strengthened with iron bars.
There was a knocking against one of these doors from the inside, while
the cries became more urgent:

"Help! Help!"

But there was a dispute; and another, less strident voice grated:

"Be quiet, Clemence, can't you? It may be them!"

"No, no, Gertrude, it's not! I don't hear them! . . . Open the door,
will you? The key ought to be there."

Veronique, who was seeking for some means of entering, now saw a big key
in the lock. She turned it; and the door opened.

She at once recognized the sisters Archignat, half-dressed, gaunt,
evil-looking, witch-like. They were in a wash-house filled with
implements; and Veronique saw at the back, lying on some straw, a third
woman, who was bewailing her fate in an almost inaudible voice and who
was obviously the third sister.

At that moment, one of the first two collapsed from exhaustion; and the
other, whose eyes were bright with fever, seized Veronique by the arm
and began to gasp:

"Did you see them, tell me? . . . Are they there? . . . How is it they
didn't kill you? . . . They are the masters of Sarek since the others
went off . . . . And it's our turn next . . . . We've been locked in
here now for six days . . . . Listen, it was on the day when everybody
left. We three came here, to the wash-house, to fetch our linen, which
was drying. And then _they_ came . . . . We didn't hear them . . . . One
never does hear them . . . . And then, suddenly, the door was locked on
us . . . . A slam, a turn of the key . . . and the thing was done
. . . . We had bread, apples and best of all, brandy . . . . We didn't
do so badly . . . . Only, were they going to come back and kill us? Was
it our turn next? . . . Oh, my dear good lady, how we strained our ears!
And how we trembled with fear! . . . My eldest sister's gone crazy
. . . . Hark, you can hear her raving . . . . The other, Clemence, has
borne all she can . . . . And I . . . I . . . Gertrude . . ."

Gertrude had plenty of strength left, for she was twisting Veronique's
arm:

"And Correjou? He came back, didn't he, and went away again? Why didn't
anyone come to look for us? It would have been easy enough: everybody
knew where we were; and we called out at the least sound. So what does
it all mean?"

Veronique hesitated what to reply. Still, why should she conceal the
truth?

She replied:

"The two boats went down."

"What?"

"The two boats sank in view of Sarek. All on board were drowned. It was
opposite the Priory . . . after leaving the Devil's Passage."

Veronique said no more, so as to avoid mentioning the names of Francois
and his tutor or speaking of the part which these two had played. But
Clemence now sat up, with distorted features. She had been leaning
against the door and raised herself to her knees.

Gertrude murmured:

"And Honorine?"

"Honorine is dead."

"Dead!"

The two sisters both cried out at once. Then they were silent and looked
at each other. The same thought struck them both. They seemed to be
reflecting. Gertrude was moving her fingers as though counting. And the
terror on their two faces increased.

Speaking in a very low voice, as though choking with fear, Gertrude,
with her eyes fixed on Veronique, said:

"That's it . . . that's it . . . I've got the total . . . . Do you know
how many there were in the boats, without my sisters and me? Do you
know? Twenty . . . . Well, reckon it up: twenty . . . and Maguennoc, who
was the first to die . . . and M. Antoine, who died afterwards . . . and
little Francois and M. Stephane, who vanished, but who are dead too
. . . and Honorine and Marie Le Goff, both dead . . . . So reckon it up:
that makes twenty-six, twenty-six . . . The total's correct, isn't it?
. . . Now take twenty-six from thirty . . . . You understand, don't you?
The thirty coffins: they have to be filled . . . . So twenty-six from
thirty . . . leaves four, doesn't it?"

She could no longer speak; her tongue faltered. Nevertheless the
terrible syllables came from her mouth; and Veronique heard her
stammering:

"Eh? Do you understand? . . . That leaves four . . . us four . . . the
three sisters Archignat, who were kept behind and locked up . . . and
yourself . . . . So--do you follow me?--the three crosses--you know, the
'four women crucified'--the number's there . . . it's our four selves
. . . there's no one besides us on the island . . . four women . . . ."

Veronique had listened in silence. She broke out into a slight
perspiration.

She shrugged her shoulders, however:

"Well? And then? If there's no one except ourselves on the island, what
are you afraid of?"

"_Them_, of course! _Them!_"

Veronique lost her patience:

"But if everybody has gone!" she exclaimed.

Gertrude took fright:

"Speak low. Suppose they heard you!"

"But who?"

"_They_: the people of old."

"The people of old?"

"Yes, those who used to make sacrifices . . . the people who killed men
and women . . . to please their gods."

"But that's a thing of the past! The Druids: is that what you mean?
Come, come; there are no Druids nowadays."

"Speak quietly! Speak quietly! There are still . . . there are evil
spirits . . ."

"Then they're ghosts?" asked Veronique, horror-stricken by these
superstitions.

"Ghosts, yes, but ghosts of flesh and blood . . . with hands that lock
doors and keep you imprisoned . . . creatures that sink boats, the same,
I tell you, that killed M. Antoine, Marie Le Goff and the others . . .
that killed twenty-six of us . . . ."

Veronique did not reply. There was no reply to make. She knew, she knew
only too well who had killed M. d'Hergemont, Marie Le Goff and the
others and sunk the two boats.

"What time was it when the three of you were locked in?" she asked.

"Half-past ten . . . . We had arranged to meet Correjou in the village
at eleven."

Veronique reflected. It was hardly possible that Francois and Stephane
should have had time to be at half-past ten in this place and an hour
later to be behind the rock from which they had darted out upon the two
boats. Was it to be presumed that one or more of their accomplices were
left on the island?

"In any case," she said, "you must come to a decision. You can't remain
in this state. You must rest yourselves, eat something . . . ."

The second sister had risen to her feet. She said, in the same hollow
and violent tones as her sister:

"First of all, we must hide . . . and be able to defend ourselves
against _them_."

"What do you mean?" asked Veronique.

She too, in spite of herself, felt this need of a refuge against a
possible enemy.

"What do I mean? I'll tell you. The thing has been talked about a lot in
the island, especially this year; and Maguennoc decided that, at the
first attack, everybody should take shelter in the Priory."

"Why in the Priory?"

"Because we could defend ourselves there. The cliffs are perpendicular.
You're protected on every side."

"What about the bridge?"

"Maguennoc and Honorine thought of everything. There's a little hut
fifteen yards to the left of the bridge. That's the place they hit on to
keep their stock of petrol in. Empty three or four cans over the bridge,
strike a match . . . and the thing's done. You're just as in your own
home. You can't be got at and you can't be attacked."

"Then why didn't they come to the Priory instead of taking to flight in
the boats?"

"It was safer to escape in the boats. But we no longer have the choice."

"And when shall we start?"

"At once. It's daylight still; and that's better than the dark."

"But your sister, the one on her back?"

"We have a barrow. We've got to wheel her. There's a direct road to the
Priory, without passing through the village."

Veronique could not help looking with repugnance upon the prospect of
living in close intimacy with the sisters Archignat. She yielded,
however, swayed by a fear which she was unable to overcome:

"Very well," she said. "Let's go. I'll take you to the Priory and come
back to the village to fetch some provisions."

"Oh, you mustn't be away long!" protested one of the sisters. "As soon
as the bridge is cut, we'll light a bonfire on Fairies' Dolmen Hill and
they'll send a steamer from the mainland. To-day the fog is coming up;
but to-morrow . . ."

Veronique raised no objection. She now accepted the idea of leaving
Sarek, even at the cost of an enquiry which would reveal her name.

They started, after the two sisters had swallowed a glass of brandy. The
madwoman sat huddled in the wheel-barrow, laughing softly and uttering
little sentences which she addressed to Veronique as though she wanted
her to laugh too:

"We shan't meet them yet . . . . They're getting ready . . . ."

"Shut up, you old fool!" said Gertrude. "You'll bring us bad luck."

"Yes, yes, we shall see some sport . . . . It'll be great fun . . . . I
have a cross of gold hung round my neck . . . and another cut into the
skin of my head . . . . Look! . . . Crosses everywhere . . . . One ought
to be comfortable on the cross . . . . One ought to sleep well there
. . . ."

"Shut up, will you, you old fool?" repeated Gertrude, giving her a box
on the ear.

"All right, all right! . . . But it's they who'll hit you; I see them
hiding! . . ."

The path, which was pretty rough at first, reached the table-land formed
by the west cliffs, which were loftier, but less rugged and worn away
than the others. The woods were scarcer; and the oaks were all bent by
the wind from the sea.

"We are coming to the heath which they call the Black Heath," said
Clemence Archignat.

"_They_ live underneath."

Veronique once more shrugged her shoulders:

"How do you know?"

"We know more than other people," said Gertrude. "They call us witches;
and there's something in it. Maguennoc himself, who knew a great deal,
used to ask our advice about anything that had to do with healing, lucky
stones, the herbs you gather on St. John's Eve . . ."

"Mugwort and vervain," chuckled the madwoman. "They are picked at
sunset."

"Or tradition too," continued Gertrude. "We know what's been said in the
island for hundreds of years; and it's always been said that there was a
whole town underneath, with streets and all, in which _they_ used to
live of old. And there are some left still, I've seen them myself."

Veronique did not reply.

"Yes, my sister and I saw one. Twice, when the June moon was six days
old. He was dressed in white . . . and he was climbing the Great Oak to
gather the sacred mistletoe . . . with a golden sickle. The gold
glittered in the moonlight. I saw it, I tell you, and others saw it too
. . . . And he's not the only one. There are several of them left over
from the old days to guard the treasure . . . . Yes, as I say, the
treasure . . . . They say it's a stone which works miracles, which can
make you die if you touch it and which makes you live if you lie down on
it. That's all true, Maguennoc told us so, all perfectly true. _They_ of
old guard the stone, the God-Stone, and _they_ are to sacrifice all of
us this year . . . . yes, all of us, thirty dead people for the thirty
coffins . . . ."

"Four women crucified," crooned the madwoman.

"And it will be soon. The sixth day of the moon is near at hand. We must
be gone before _they_ climb the Great Oak to gather the mistletoe. Look,
you can see the Great Oak from here. It's in the wood on this side of
the bridge. It stands out above the others."

"_They_ are hiding behind it," said the madwoman, turning round in her
wheel-barrow. "_They_ are waiting for us."

"That'll do; and don't you stir . . . . As I was saying, you see the
Great Oak . . . over there . . . beyond the end of the heath. It is
. . . it is . . ."

She dropped the wheel-barrow, without finishing her sentence.

"Well?" asked Clemence. "What's the matter?"

"I've seen something," stammered Gertrude. "Something white, moving
about."

"Something? What do you mean? _They_ don't show themselves in broad
daylight! You've gone cross-eyed."

They both looked for a moment and then went on again. Soon the Great Oak
was out of sight.

The heath which they were now crossing was wild and rough, covered with
stones lying flat like tombstones and all pointing in the same
direction.

"It's _their_ burying-ground," whispered Gertrude.

They said nothing more. Gertrude repeatedly had to stop and rest.
Clemence had not the strength to push the wheel-barrow. They were both
of them tottering on their legs; and they gazed into the distance with
anxious eyes.

They went down a dip in the ground and up again. The path joined that
which Veronique had taken with Honorine on the first day; and they
entered the wood which preceded the bridge.

Presently the growing excitement of the sisters Archignat made
Veronique understand that they were approaching the Great Oak; and she
saw it standing on a mound of earth and roots, bigger than the others
and separated from them by wider intervals. She could not help thinking
that it was possible for several men to hide behind that massive trunk
and that perhaps several were hiding there now.

Notwithstanding their fears, the sisters had quickened their pace; and
they kept their eyes turned from the fatal tree.

They left it behind. Veronique breathed more freely. All danger was
passed; and she was just about to laugh at the sisters Archignat, when
one of them, Clemence, spun on her heels and dropped with a moan.

At the same time something fell to the ground, something that had struck
Clemence in the back. It was an axe, a stone axe.

"Oh, the thunder-stone, the thunder-stone!" cried Gertrude.

She looked up for a second, as if, in accordance with the inveterate
popular belief, she believed that the axe came from the sky and was an
emanation of the thunder.

But, at that moment, the madwoman, who had got out of her barrow, leapt
from the ground and fell head forward. Something else had whizzed
through the air. The madwoman was writhing with pain. Gertrude and
Veronique saw an arrow which had been driven through her shoulder and
was still vibrating.

Then Gertrude fled screaming.

Veronique hesitated. Clemence and the madwoman were rolling about on
the ground. The madwoman giggled:

"Behind the oak! They're hiding . . . I see them."

Clemence stammered:

"Help! . . . Lift me up . . . carry me . . . I'm terrified!"

But another arrow whizzed past them and fell some distance farther.

Veronique now also took to her heels, urged not so much by panic, though
this would have been excusable, as by the eager longing to find a weapon
and defend herself. She remembered that in her father's study there was
a glass case filled with guns and revolvers, all bearing the word
"loaded," no doubt as a warning to Francois; and it was one of these
that she wished to seize in order to face the enemy. She did not even
turn round. She was not interested to know whether she was being
pursued. She ran for the goal, the only profitable goal.

Being lighter and swifter of foot, she overtook Gertrude, who panted:

"The bridge . . . . We must burn it . . . . The petrol's there . . . ."

Veronique did not reply. Breaking down the bridge was a secondary matter
and would even have been an obstacle to her plan of taking a gun and
attacking the enemy.

But, when she reached the bridge, Gertrude whirled about in such a way
that she almost fell down the precipice. An arrow had struck her in the
back.

"Help! Help!" she screamed. "Don't leave me!"

"I'm coming back," replied Veronique, who had not seen the arrow and
thought that Gertrude had merely caught her foot in running. "I'm coming
back, with two guns. You join me."

She imagined in her mind that, once they were both armed, they would go
back to the wood and rescue the other sisters. Redoubling her efforts,
therefore, she reached the wall of the estate, ran across the grass and
went up to her father's study. Here she stopped to recover her breath;
and, after she had taken the two guns, her heart beat so fast that she
had to go back at a slower pace.

She was astonished at not meeting Gertrude, at not seeing her. She
called her. No reply. And it was not till then that the thought occurred
to her that Gertrude had been wounded like her sisters.

She once more broke into a run. But, when she came within sight of the
bridge, she heard shrill cries pierce through the buzzing in her ears
and, on coming into the open opposite the sharp ascent that led to the
wood of the Great Oak, she saw . . .

What she saw rivetted her to the entrance to the bridge. On the other
side, Gertrude was sprawling upon the ground, struggling, clutching at
the roots, digging her nails into the grass and slowly, slowly, with an
imperceptible and uninterrupted movement, moving along the slope.

And Veronique became aware that the unfortunate woman was fastened under
the arms and round the waist by a cord which was hoisting her up, like a
bound and helpless prey, and which was pulled by invisible hands above.

Veronique raised one of the guns to her shoulder. But at what enemy was
she to take aim? What enemy was she to fight? Who was hiding behind the
trees and stones that crowned the hill like a rampart?

Gertrude slipped between those stones, between those trees. She had
ceased screaming, no doubt she was exhausted and swooning. She
disappeared from sight.

Veronique had not moved. She realized the futility of any venture or
enterprise. By rushing into a contest in which she was beaten beforehand
she would not be able to rescue the sisters Archignat and would merely
offer herself to the conqueror as a new and final victim.

Besides, she was overcome with fear. Everything was happening in
accordance with the ruthless logic of facts of which she did not grasp
the meaning but which all seemed connected like the links of a chain.
She was afraid, afraid of those beings, afraid of those ghosts,
instinctively and unconsciously afraid, afraid like the sisters
Archignat, like Honorine, like all the victims of the terrible scourge.

She stooped, so as not to be seen from the Great Oak, and, bending
forward and taking the shelter offered by some bramble-bushes, she
reached the little hut of which the sisters Archignat had spoken, a sort
of summer-house with a pointed roof and coloured tiles. Half the
summer-house was filled with cans of petrol.

From here she overlooked the bridge, on which no one could step without
being seen by her. But no one came down from the wood.

Night fell, a night of thick fog silvered by the moon which just
allowed Veronique to see the opposite side.

After an hour, feeling a little reassured, she made a first trip with
two cans which she emptied on the outer beams of the bridge.

Ten times, with her ears pricked up, carrying her gun slung over her
shoulder and prepared at any moment to defend herself, she repeated the
journey. She poured the petrol a little at random, groping her way and
yet as far as possible selecting the places where her sense of touch
seemed to tell her that the wood was most rotten.

She had a box of matches, the only one that she had found in the house.
She took out a match and hesitated a moment, frightened at the thought
of the great light it would make:

"Even so," she reflected, "if it could be seen from the mainland . . .
But, with this fog . . ."

Suddenly she struck the match and at once lit a paper torch which she
had prepared by soaking it in petrol.

A great flame blazed and burnt her fingers. Then she threw the paper in
a pool of petrol which had formed in a hollow and fled back to the
summer-house.

The fire flared up immediately and, at one flash, spread over the whole
part which she had sprinkled. The cliffs on the two islands, the strip
of granite that united them, the big trees around, the hill, the wood of
the Great Oak and the sea at the bottom of the ravine: these were all
lit up.

"_They_ know where I am . . . . _They_ are looking at the summer-house
where I am hiding," thought Veronique, keeping her eyes fixed on the
Great Oak.

But not a shadow passed through the wood. Not a sound of voices reached
her ears. Those concealed above did not leave their impenetrable
retreat.

In a few minutes, half the bridge collapsed, with a great crash and a
gush of sparks. But the other half went on burning; and at every moment
a piece of timber tumbled into the precipice, lighting up the depths of
the night.

Each time that this happened, Veronique had a sense of relief and her
overstrung nerves grew relaxed. A feeling of security crept over her and
became more and more justified as the gulf between her and her enemies
widened. Nevertheless she remained inside the summer-house and resolved
to wait for the dawn in order to make sure that no communication was
henceforth possible.

The fog increased. Everything was shrouded in darkness. About the middle
of the night, she heard a sound on the other side, at the top of the
hill, so far as she could judge. It was the sound of wood-cutters
felling trees, the regular sound of an axe biting into branches which
were finally removed by breaking.

Veronique had an idea, absurd though she knew it to be, that they were
perhaps building a foot-bridge; and she clutched her gun resolutely.

About an hour later, she seemed to hear moans and even a stifled cry,
followed, for some time, by the rustle of leaves and the sound of steps
coming and going. This ceased. Once more there was a great silence which
seemed to absorb in space every stirring, every restless, every
quivering, every living thing.

The numbness produced by the fatigue and hunger from which she was
beginning to suffer left Veronique little power of thought. She
remembered above all that, having failed to bring any provisions from
the village, she had nothing to eat. She did not distress herself, for
she was determined, as soon as the fog lifted--and this was bound to
happen before long--to light bonfires with the cans of petrol. She
reflected that the best place would be at the end of the island, at the
spot where the dolmen stood.

But suddenly a dreadful thought struck her: had she not left her box of
matches on the bridge? She felt in her pockets but could not find it.
All search was in vain.

This also did not perturb her unduly. For the time being, the feeling
that she had escaped the attacks of the enemy filled her with such
delight that it seemed to her that all the difficulties would disappear
of their own accord.

The hours passed in this way, endlessly long hours, which the
penetrating fog and the cold made more painful as the morning
approached.

Then a faint gleam overspread the sky. Things emerged from the gloom and
assumed their actual forms. And Veronique now saw that the bridge had
collapsed throughout its length. An interval of fifty yards separated
the two islands, which were only joined below by the sharp, pointed,
inaccessible ridge of the cliff.

She was saved.

But, on raising her eyes to the hill opposite, she saw, right at the
top of the slope, a sight that made her utter a cry of horror. Three of
the nearest trees of those which crowned the hill and belonged to the
wood of the Great Oak had been stripped of their lower branches. And, on
the three bare trunks, with their arms strained backward, with their
legs bound, under the tatters of their skirts, and with ropes drawn
tight beneath their livid faces, half-hidden by the black bows of their
caps, hung the three sisters Archignat.

They were crucified.




CHAPTER VI

ALL'S WELL


Walking erect, with a stiff and mechanical gait, without turning round
to look at the abominable spectacle, without recking of what might
happen if she were seen, Veronique went back to the Priory.

A single aim, a single hope sustained her: that of leaving the Isle of
Sarek. She had had her fill of horror. Had she seen three corpses, three
women who had had their throats cut, or been shot, or even hanged, she
would not have felt, as she did now, that her whole being was in revolt.
But this, this torture, was too much. It involved an ignominy, it was an
act of sacrilege, a damnable performance which surpassed the bounds of
wickedness.

And then she was thinking of herself, the fourth and last victim. Fate
seemed to be leading her towards that catastrophe as a person condemned
to death is pushed on to the scaffold. How could she do other than
tremble with fear? How could she fail to read a warning in the choice of
the hill of the Great Oak for the torture of the three sisters
Archignat?

She tried to find comfort in words:

"Everything will be explained. At the bottom of these hideous mysteries
are quite simple causes, actions apparently fantastic but in reality
performed by beings of the same species as myself, who behave as they
do from criminal motives and in accordance with a determined plan. No
doubt all this is only possible because of the war; the war brings about
a peculiar state of affairs in which events of this kind are able to
take place. But, all the same, there is nothing miraculous about it nor
anything inconsistent with the rules of ordinary life."

Useless phrases! Vain attempts at argument which her brain found
difficulty in following! In reality, upset as she was by violent nervous
shocks, she came to think and feel like all those people of Sarek whose
death she had witnessed. She shared their weakness, she was shaken by
the same terrors, besieged by the same nightmares, unbalanced by the
persistence within her of the instincts of bygone ages and lingering
superstitions ever ready to rise to the surface.

Who were these invisible beings who persecuted her? Whose mission was it
to fill the thirty coffins of Sarek? Who was it that was wiping out all
the inhabitants of the luckless island? Who was it that lived in
caverns, gathering at the fateful hours the sacred mistletoe and the
herbs of St. John, using axes and arrows and crucifying women? And in
view of what horrible task, of what monstrous duty? In accordance with
what inconceivable plans? Were they spirits of darkness, malevolent
genii, priests of a dead religion, sacrificing men, women and children
to their blood-thirsty gods?

"Enough, enough, or I shall go mad!" she said, aloud. "I must go! That
must be my only thought: to get away from this hell!"

But it was as though destiny were taking special pains to torture her!
On beginning her search for a little food, she suddenly noticed, in her
father's study, at the back of a cupboard, a drawing pinned to the wall,
representing the same scene as the roll of paper which she had found
near Maguennoc's body in the deserted cabin.

A portfolio full of drawings lay on one of the shelves in the cupboard.
She opened it. It contained a number of sketches of the same scene,
likewise in red chalk. Each of them bore above the head of the first
woman the inscription, "V. d'H." One of them was signed, "Antoine
d'Hergemont."

So it was her father who had made the drawing on Maguennoc's paper! It
was her father who had tried in all these sketches to give the tortured
woman a closer and closer resemblance to his own daughter!

"Enough, enough!" repeated Veronique. "I won't think, I won't reflect!"

Feeling very faint, she pursued her search but found nothing with which
to stay her hunger.

Nor did she find anything that would allow her to light a fire at the
point of the island, though the fog had lifted and the signals would
certainly have been observed.

She tried rubbing two flints against each other, but she did not
understand how to go to work and she did not succeed.

For three days she kept herself alive with water and wild grapes
gathered among the ruins. Feverish and utterly exhausted, she had fits
of weeping which nearly every time produced the sudden appearance of
All's Well; and her physical suffering was such that she felt angry with
the poor dog for having that ridiculous name and drove him away. All's
Well, greatly surprised, squatted on his haunches farther off and began
to sit up again. She felt exasperated with him, as though he could help
being Francois' dog!

The least sound made her shake from head to foot and covered her with
perspiration. What were the creatures in the Great Oak doing? From which
side were they preparing to attack her? She hugged herself nervously,
shuddering at the thought of falling into those monsters' hands, and
could not keep herself from remembering that she was a beautiful woman
and that they might be tempted by her good looks and her youth.

But, on the fourth day, a great hope uplifted her. She had found in a
drawer a powerful reading-glass. Taking advantage of the bright
sunshine, she focussed the rays upon a piece of paper which ended by
catching fire and enabling her to light a candle.

She believed that she was saved. She had discovered quite a stock of
candles, which allowed her, to begin with, to keep the precious flame
alive until the evening. At eleven o'clock, she took a lantern and went
towards the summer-house, intending to set fire to it. It was a fine
night and the signal would be perceived from the coast.

Fearing to be seen with her light, fearing above all the tragic vision
of the sisters Archignat, whose tragic Calvary was flooded by the
moonlight, she took, on leaving the Priory, another road, more to the
left and bordered with thickets. She walked anxiously, taking care not
to rustle the leaves or stumble over the roots. When she reached open
country, not far from the summer-house, she felt so tired that she had
to sit down. Her head was buzzing. Her heart almost refused to beat.

She could not see the place of execution from here either. But, on
turning her eyes, despite herself, in the direction of the hill, she
received the impression that something resembling a white figure had
moved. It was in the very heart of the wood, at the end of an avenue
which intersected the thick mass of trees on that side.

The figure appeared again, in the full moonlight; and Veronique saw,
notwithstanding the considerable distance, that it was the figure of a
person clad in a robe and perched amid the branches of a tree which
stood alone and higher than the others.

She remembered what the sisters Archignat had said:

"The sixth day of the moon is near at hand. _They_ will climb the Great
Oak and gather the sacred mistletoe."

And she now remembered certain descriptions which she had read in books
and different stories which her father had told her; and she felt as if
she were present at one of those Druid ceremonies which had appealed to
her imagination as a child. But at the same time she felt so weak that
she was not convinced that she was awake or that the strange sight
before her eyes was real. Four other figures formed a group at the foot
of the tree and raised their arms as though to catch the bough ready to
fall. A light flashed above. The high-priest's golden sickle had cut off
the bunch of mistletoe.

Then the high-priest climbed down from the oak; and all five figures
glided along the avenue, skirted the wood and reached the top of the
knoll.

Veronique, who was unable to take her haggard eyes from those creatures,
bent forward and saw the three corpses hanging each from its tree of
torment. At the distance where she stood, the black bows of the caps
looked like crows. The figures stopped opposite the victims as though to
perform some incomprehensible rite. At last the high-priest separated
himself from the group and, holding the bunch of mistletoe in his hand,
came down the hill and went towards the spot where the first arch of the
bridge was anchored.

Veronique was almost fainting. Her wavering eyes, before which
everything seemed to dance, fastened on to the glittering sickle which
swung from side to side on the priest's chest, below his long white
beard. What was he going to do? Though the bridge no longer existed,
Veronique was convulsed with anguish. Her legs refused to carry her. She
lay down on the ground, keeping her eyes fixed upon the terrifying
sight.

On reaching the edge of the chasm, the priest again stopped for a few
seconds. Then he stretched out the arm in which he carried the mistletoe
and, preceded by the sacred plant as by a talisman which altered the
laws of nature in his favour, he took a step forward above the yawning
gulf.

And he walked thus in space, all white in the moonlight.

What happened Veronique did not know, nor was she quite sure what had
been happening, if she had not been the sport of an hallucination, nor
at what stage of the strange ceremony this hallucination had originated
in her enfeebled brain.

She waited with closed eyes for events which did not take place and
which, for that matter, she did not even try to foresee. But other, more
real things preoccupied her mind. Her candle was going out inside the
lantern. She was aware of this; and yet she had not the strength to pull
herself together and return to the Priory. And she said to herself that,
if the sun should not shine again within the next few days, she would
not be able to light the flame and that she was lost.

She resigned herself, weary of fighting and realizing that she was
defeated beforehand in this unequal contest. The only ending that was
not to be endured was that of being captured. But why not abandon
herself to the death that offered, death from starvation, from
exhaustion? If you suffer long enough, there must come a moment when the
suffering decreases and when you pass, almost unconsciously, from life,
which has grown too cruel, to death, which Veronique was gradually
beginning to desire.

"That's it, that's it," she murmured. "To go from Sarek or to die: it's
all the same. What I want is to get away."

A sound of leaves made her open her eyes. The flame of the candle was
expiring. But behind the lantern All's Well was sitting, beating the air
with his fore-paws.

And Veronique saw that he carried a packet of biscuits, fastened round
his neck by a string.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Tell me your story, you dear old All's Well," said Veronique, next
morning, after a good night's rest in her bedroom at the Priory. "For,
after all, I can't believe that you came to look for me and bring me
food of your own accord. It was an accident, wasn't it? You were
wandering in that direction, you heard me crying and you came to me. But
who tied that little box of biscuits round your neck? Does it mean that
we have a friend in the island, a friend who takes an interest in us?
Why doesn't he show himself? Speak and tell me, All's Well."

She kissed the dog and went on:

"And whom were those biscuits intended for? For your master, for
Francois? Or for Honorine? No? Then for Monsieur Stephane perhaps?"

The dog wagged his tail and moved towards the door. He really seemed to
understand. Veronique followed him to Stephane Maroux's room. All's Well
slipped under the tutor's bed. There were three more cardboard boxes of
biscuits, two packets of chocolate and two tins of preserved meat. And
each parcel was supplied with a string ending in a wide loop, from which
All's Well must have released his head.

"What does it mean?" asked Veronique, bewildered. "Did you put them under
there? But who gave them to you? Have we actually a friend in the
island, who knows us and knows Stephane Maroux? Can you take me to him?
He must live on this side of the island, because there is no means of
communicating with the other and you can't have been there."

Veronique stopped to think. But, in addition to the provisions stowed
away by All's Well, she also noticed a small canvas-covered satchel
under the bed; and she wondered why Stephane Maroux had hidden it. She
thought that she had the right to open it and to look for some clue to
the part played by the tutor, to his character, to his past perhaps, to
his relations with M. d'Hergemont and Francois:

"Yes," she said, "it is my right and even my duty."

Without hesitation, she took a pair of big scissors and forced the frail
lock.

The satchel contained nothing but a manuscript-book, with a rubber band
round it. But, the moment she opened the book, she stood amazed.

On the first page was her own portrait, her photograph as a girl, with
her signature in full and the inscription:

      "To my friend Stephane."

"I don't understand, I don't understand," she murmured. "I remember the
photograph: I must have been sixteen. But how did I come to give it to
him? I must have known him!"

Eager to learn more, she read the next page, a sort of preface worded as
follows:

      "Veronique, I wish to lead my life under your eyes. In
      undertaking the education of your son, of that son
      whom I ought to loathe, because he is the son of
      another, but whom I love because he is your son, my
      intention is that my life shall be in full harmony
      with the secret feeling that has swayed it so long.
      One day, I have no doubt, you will resume your place
      as Francois' mother. On that day you will be proud of
      him. I shall have effaced all that may survive in him
      of his father and I shall have exalted all the fine
      and noble qualities which he inherits from you. The
      aim is great enough for me to devote myself to it body
      and soul. I do so with gladness. Your smile shall be
      my reward."

Veronique's heart was flooded with a singular emotion. Her life was lit
with a calmer radiance; and this new mystery, which she was unable to
fathom any more than the others, was at least, like that of Maguennoc's
flowers, gentle and comforting.

As she continued to turn the pages, she followed her son's education
from day to day. She beheld the pupil's progress and the master's
methods. The pupil was engaging, intelligent, studious, zealous loving,
sensitive, impulsive and at the same time thoughtful. The master was
affectionate, patient and borne up by some profound feeling which showed
through every line of the manuscript.

And, little by little, there was a growing enthusiasm in the daily
confession, which expressed itself in terms less and less restrained:

      "Francois, my dearly-beloved son--for I may call you
      so, may I not?--Francois, your mother lives once again
      in you. Your eyes are pure and limpid as hers. Your
      soul is grave and simple as her soul. You are
      unacquainted with evil; and one might almost say that
      you are unacquainted with good, so closely is it
      blended with your beautiful nature."

Some of the child's exercises were copied into the book, exercises in
which he spoke of his mother with passionate affection and with the
persistent hope that he would soon see her again.

      "We shall see her again, Francois," Stephane added,
      "and you will then understand better what beauty means
      and light and the charm of life and the delight of
      beholding and admiring."

Next came anecdotes about Veronique, minor details which she herself did
not remember or which she thought that she alone knew:

      "One day, at the Tuileries--she was only sixteen--a
      circle was formed round her . . . by people who looked
      at her and wondered at her loveliness. Her girl
      friends laughed, happy at seeing her admired . . . .

      "Open her right hand, Francois. You will see a long,
      white scar in the middle of the palm. When she was
      quite a little girl, she ran the point of an iron
      railing into her hand . . . ."

But the last pages were not written for the boy and had certainly not
been read by him. The writer's love was no longer disguised beneath
admiring phrases. It displayed itself without reserve, ardent, exalted,
suffering, quivering with hope, though always respectful.

Veronique closed the book. She could read no more.

"Yes, I confess, All's Well," she said to the dog, who was already
sitting up, "my eyes are wet with tears. Devoid of feminine weaknesses
as I am, I will tell you what I would say to nobody else: that really
touches me. Yes, I must try to recall the unknown features of the man
who loves me like this . . . some friend of my childhood whose
affection I never suspected and whose name has not left even a trace in
my memory."

She drew the dog to her:

"Two kind hearts, are they not, All's Well? Neither the master nor the
pupil is capable of the crimes which I saw them commit. If they are the
accomplices of our enemies here, they are so in spite of themselves and
without knowing it. I cannot believe in philtres and incantations and
plants which deprive you of your reason. But, all the same, there is
something, isn't there, you dear little dog? The boy who planted
veronicas round the Calvary of Flowers and who wrote, 'Mother's
flowers,' is not guilty, is he? And Honorine was right, when she spoke
of a fit of madness, and he will come back to look for me, won't he?
Stephane and he are sure to come back."

The hours that went by were full of soothing quiet. Veronique was no
longer lonely. The present had no terrors for her; and she had faith in
the future.

Next morning, she said to All's Well, whom she had locked up to prevent
his running away:

"Will you take me there now my man? Where? Why, to the friend, of
course, who sent provisions to Stephane Maroux. Come along."

All's Well was only waiting for Veronique's permission. He dashed off in
the direction of the grassy sward that led to the dolmen; and he stopped
half way. Veronique came up with him. He turned to the right and took a
path which brought them to a huddle of ruins near the edge of the
cliffs. Then he stopped again.

"Is it here?" asked Veronique.

The dog lay down flat. In front of him, at the foot of two blocks of
stones leaning against each other and covered with the same growth of
ivy, was a tangle of brambles with under it a little passage like the
entrance to a rabbit-warren. All's Well slipped in, disappeared and then
returned in search of Veronique, who had to go back to the Priory and
fetch a bill-hook to cut down the brambles.

She managed in half an hour to uncover the top step of a staircase,
which she descended, feeling her way and preceded by All's Well, and
which took her to a long tunnel, cut in the body of the rock and lighted
on the left by little openings. She raised herself on tip-toe and saw
that these openings overlooked the sea.

She walked on the level for ten minutes and then went down some more
steps. The tunnel grew narrower. The openings, which all looked towards
the sky, no doubt so as not to be seen from below, now gave light from
both the right and the left. Veronique began to understand how All's
Well was able to communicate with the other part of the island. The
tunnel followed the narrow strip of cliff which joined the Priory estate
to Sarek. The waves lapped the rocks on either side.

They next climbed by steps under the knoll of the Great Oak. Two tunnels
opened at the top. All's Well chose the one on the left, which continued
to skirt the sea.

Then on the right there were two more passages, both quite dark. The
island appeared to be riddled in this way with invisible communications;
and Veronique felt something clutch at her heart as she reflected that
she was making for the part which the sisters Archignat had described as
the enemy's subterranean domains, under the Black Heath.

All's Well trotted in front of her, turning round from time to time to
see if she was following.

"Yes, yes, dear, I'm coming," she whispered, "and I am not a bit afraid:
I am sure that you are leading me to a friend . . . a friend who has
taken shelter down here. But why has he not left his shelter? Why did
you not show him the way?"

The passage had been chipped smooth throughout, with a rounded ceiling
and a very dry granite floor, which was amply ventilated by the
openings. There was not a mark, not a scratch of any kind on the walls.
Sometimes the point of a black flint projected.

"Is it here?" asked Veronique, when All's Well stopped.

The tunnel went no farther and widened into a chamber into which the
light filtered more thinly through a narrower window.

All's Well seemed undecided. He listened, with his ears pricked up,
standing on his hind-legs and resting his fore-paws against the end wall
of the tunnel.

Veronique noticed that the wall, at this spot, was not formed throughout
its length of the bare granite but consisted of an accumulation of
stones of unequal size set in cement. The work evidently belonged to a
different, doubtless more recent period.

A regular partition-wall had been built, closing the underground
passage, which was probably continued on the other side.

She repeated:

"It's here, isn't it?"

But she said nothing more. She had heard the stifled sound of a voice.

She went up to the wall and presently gave a start. The voice was raised
higher. The sounds became more distinct. Some one, a child, was singing,
and she caught the words:

    "And the mother said,
    Rocking her child abed:

    'Weep not. If you do,
    The Virgin Mary weeps with you.'"

Veronique murmured:

"The song . . . the song . . ."

It was the same that Honorine had hummed at Beg-Meil. Who could be
singing it now? A child, imprisoned in the island? A boy friend of
Francois'?

And the voice went on:

    "'Babes that laugh and sing
    Smiles to the Blessed Virgin bring.

    Fold your hands this way
    And to sweet Mary pray.'"

The last verse was followed by a silence that lasted for a few minutes.
All's Well appeared to be listening with increasing attention, as though
something, which he knew of, was about to take place.

Thereupon, just where he stood, there was a slight noise of stones
carefully moved. All's Well wagged his tail frantically and barked, so
to speak, in a whisper, like an animal that understands the danger of
breaking the silence. And suddenly, about his head, one of the stones
was drawn inward, leaving a fairly large aperture.

All's Well leapt into the hole at a bound, stretched himself out and,
helping himself with his hind-legs, twisting and crawling, disappeared
inside.

"Ah, there's Master All's Well!" said the young voice. "How are we,
Master All's Well? And why didn't we come and pay our master a visit
yesterday? Serious business, was it? A walk with Honorine? Oh, if you
could talk, my dear old chap, what stories you would have to tell! And,
first of all, look here . . ."

Veronique, thrilled with excitement, had knelt down against the wall.
Was it her son's voice that she heard? Was she to believe that he was
back and in hiding? She tried in vain to see. The wall was thick; and
there was a bend in the opening. But how clearly each syllable uttered,
how plainly each intonation reached her ears!

"Look here," repeated the boy, "why doesn't Honorine come to set me
free? Why don't you bring her here? You managed to find me all right.
And grandfather must be worried about me . . . . But _what_ an
adventure! . . . So you're still of the same mind, eh, old chap? All's
well, isn't it? All's as well as well can be!"

Veronique could not understand. Her son--for there was no doubt that it
was Francois--her son was speaking as if he knew nothing of what had
happened. Had he forgotten? Had his memory lost every trace of the deeds
done during his fit of madness?

"Yes, a fit of madness," thought Veronique, obstinately. "He was mad.
Honorine was quite right: he was undoubtedly mad. And his reason has
returned. Oh, Francois, Francois! . . ."

She listened, with all her tense being and all her trembling soul, to
the words that might bring her so much gladness or such an added load of
despair. Either the darkness would close in upon her more thickly and
heavily than ever, or daylight was to pierce that endless night in which
she had been struggling for fifteen years.

"Why, yes," continued the boy, "I agree with you, All's Well. But all
the same, I should be jolly glad if you could bring me some real proof
of it. On the one hand, there's no news of grandfather or Honorine,
though I've given you lots of messages for them; on the other hand,
there's no news of Stephane. And that's what alarms me. Where is he?
Where have they locked him up? Won't he be starving by now? Come, All's
Well, tell me: where did you take the biscuits yesterday? . . . But,
look here, what's the matter with you? You seem to have something on
your mind. What are you looking at over there? Do you want to go away?
No? Then what is it?"

The boy stopped. Then, after a moment, in a much lower voice:

"Did you come with some one?" he asked. "Is there anybody behind the
wall?"

The dog gave a dull bark. Then there was a long pause, during which
Francois also must have been listening.

Veronique's emotion was so great that it seemed to her that Francois
must hear the beating of her heart.

He whispered:

"Is that you, Honorine?"

There was a fresh pause; and he continued:

"Yes, I'm sure it's you . . . . I can hear you breathing . . . . Why
don't you answer?"

Veronique was carried away by a sudden impulse. Certain gleams of light
had flashed upon her mind since she had understood that Stephane was a
prisoner, no doubt like Francois, therefore a victim of the enemy; and
all sorts of vague suppositions flitted through her brain. Besides, how
could she resist the appeal of that voice? Her son was asking her a
question . . . her son!

"Francois . . . Francois!" she stammered.

"Ah," he said, "there's an answer! I knew it! Is it you, Honorine?"

"No, Francois," she said.

"Then who is it?"

"A friend of Honorine's."

"I don't know you, do I?"

"No . . . but I am your friend."

He hesitated. Was he on his guard?

"Why didn't Honorine come with you?"

Veronique was not prepared for this question, but she at once realized
that, if the involuntary suppositions that were forcing themselves upon
her were correct, the boy must not yet be told the truth.

She therefore said:

"Honorine came back from her journey, but has gone away again."

"Gone to look for me?"

"That's it, that's it," she said, quickly. "She thought that you had
been carried away from Sarek and your tutor with you."

"But grandfather?"

"He's gone too: so have all the inhabitants of the island."

"Ah! The old story of the coffins and the crosses, I suppose?"

"Just so. They thought that your disappearance meant the beginning of
the disasters; and their fear made them take to flight."

"But you, madame?"

"I have known Honorine for a long time. I came from Paris with her to
take a holiday at Sarek. I have no reason to go away. All these
superstitions have no terrors for me."

The child was silent. The improbability and inadequacy of the replies
must have been apparent to him: and his suspicions increased in
consequence. He confessed as much, frankly:

"Listen, madame, there's something I must tell you. It's ten days since
I was imprisoned in this cell. During the first part of that time, I saw
and heard nobody. But, since the day before yesterday, every morning a
little wicket opens in the middle of my door and a woman's hand comes
through and gives a fresh supply of water. A woman's hand . . . so . . .
you see?"

"So you want to know if that woman is myself?"

"Yes, I am obliged to ask you."

"Would you recognize that woman's hand?"

"Yes, it is lean and bony, with a yellow arm."

"Here's mine," said Veronique. "It can pass where All's Well did."

She pulled up her sleeve; and by flexing her bare arm she easily passed
it through.

"Oh," said Francois, at once, "that's not the hand I saw!"

And he added, in a lower voice:

"How pretty this one is!"

Suddenly Veronique felt him take it in his own with a quick movement;
and he exclaimed:

"Oh, it can't be true, it can't be true!"

He had turned her hand over and was separating the fingers so as to
uncover the palm entirely. And he whispered:

"The scar! . . . It's there! . . . The white scar! . . ."

Then Veronique became greatly agitated. She remembered Stephane Maroux's
diary and certain details set down by him which Francois must have
heard. One of these details was this scar, which recalled an old and
rather serious injury.

She felt the boy's lips pressed to her hand, first gently and then with
passionate ardour and a great flow of tears, and heard him stammering:

"Oh, mother, mother darling! . . . My dear, dear mother! . . ."




CHAPTER VII

FRANCOIS AND STEPHANE


Long the mother and son remained thus, kneeling against the wall that
divided them, yet as close together as though they were able to see each
other with their frenzied eyes and to mingle their tears and kisses.
They spoke both at once, asking each other questions and answering them
at random. They were in a transport of delight. The life of each flowed
over into the other's life and became swallowed up in it. No power on
earth could now dissolve their union or break the bonds of love and
confidence which unite mothers and sons.

"Yes, All's Well, old man," said Francois, "you may sit up as much and
as long as you like. We are really crying this time . . . and you will
be the first to get tired, for one doesn't mind shedding such tears as
these, does one, mother?"

As for Veronique, her mind retained not a vestige of the terrible
visions which had dismayed it. Her son a murderer, her son killing and
massacring people: she no longer admitted any of that. She did not even
admit the excuse of madness. Everything would be explained in some other
way which she was not even in a hurry to understand. She thought only of
her son. He was there. His eyes saw her through the wall. His heart beat
against hers. He lived; and he was the same gentle, affectionate, pure
and charming child that her maternal dreams had pictured.

"My son, my son!" she kept on repeating, as though she could not utter
those marvellous words often enough. "My son, it's you, it's you! I
believed you dead, a thousand times dead, more dead than it is possible
to be . . . . And you are alive! And you are here! And I am touching
you! O Heaven, can it be true! I have a son . . . and my son is alive!
. . ."

And he, on his side, took up the refrain with the same passionate
fervour:

"Mother! Mother! I have waited for you so long! . . . To me you were not
dead, but it was so sad to be a child and to have no mother . . . to see
the years go by and to waste them in waiting for you."

For an hour they talked at random, of the past, of the present, of a
hundred subjects which at first appeared to them the most interesting
things in the world and which they forthwith dropped to ask each other
more questions and to try to know each other a little better and to
enter more deeply into the secret of their lives and the privacy of
their souls.

It was Francois who first attempted to impart some little method to
their conversation:

"Listen, mother; we have so much to say to each other that we must give
up trying to say it all to-day and even for days and days. Let us speak
now of what is essential and in the fewest possible words, for we have
perhaps not much time before us."

"What do you mean?" said Veronique, instantly alarmed. "I have no
intention of leaving you!"

"But, mother, if we are not to leave each other, we must first be
united. Now there are many obstacles to be overcome, even if it were
only the wall that separates us. Besides, I am very closely watched; and
I may be obliged at any moment to send you away, as I do All's Well, at
the first sound of footsteps approaching."

"Watched by whom?"

"By those who fell upon Stephane and me on the day when we discovered
the entrance to these caves, under the heath on the table-land, the
Black Heath."

"Did you see them?"

"No, it was too dark."

"But who are they? Who are those enemies?"

"I don't know."

"You suspect, of course?"

"The Druids?" he said, laughing. "The people of old of whom the legends
speak? Rather not! Ghosts? Not that either. They were just simply
creatures of to-day, creatures of flesh and blood."

"They live down here, though?"

"Most likely."

"And you took them by surprise?"

"No, on the contrary. They seemed even to be expecting us and to be
lying in wait for us. We had gone down a stone staircase and a very long
passage, lined with perhaps eighty caves, or rather eighty cells. The
doors, which were of wood, were open; and the cells overlooked the sea.
It was on the way back, as we were going up the staircase again in the
dark, that we were seized from one side, knocked down, bound,
blindfolded and gagged. The whole thing did not take a minute. I
suspect that we were carried back to the end of the long passage. When
I succeeded in removing my bonds and my bandage, I found that I was
locked in one of the cells, probably the last in the passage; and I have
been here ten days."

"My poor darling, how you must have suffered!"

"No, mother, and in any case not from hunger. There was a whole stack of
provisions in one corner and a truss of straw in another to lie on. So I
waited quietly."

"For whom?"

"You promise not to laugh, mother?"

"Laugh at what, dear?"

"At what I'm going to tell you?"

"How can you think . . . ?"

"Well, I was waiting for some one who had heard of all the stories of
Sarek and who promised grandfather to come."

"But who was it?"

The boy hesitated:

"No, I am sure you will make fun of me, mother, I'll tell you later.
Besides, he never came . . . though I thought for a moment . . . Yes,
fancy, I had managed to remove two stones from the wall and to open this
hole of which my gaolers evidently didn't know. All of a sudden, I heard
a noise, someone scratching . . ."

"It was All's Well?"

"It was Master All's Well coming by the other road. You can imagine the
welcome he received! Only what astonished me was that nobody followed
him this way, neither Honorine nor grandfather. I had no pencil or paper
to write to them; but, after all, they had only to follow All's Well."

"That was impossible," said Veronique, "because they believed you to be
far away from Sarek, carried off no doubt, and because your grandfather
had left."

"Just so: why believe anything of the sort? Grandfather knew, from a
lately discovered document, where we were, for it was he who told us of
the possible entrance to the underground passage. Didn't he speak to you
about it?"

Veronique had been very happy in listening to her son's story. As he had
been carried off and imprisoned, he was not the atrocious monster who
had killed M. d'Hergemont, Marie Le Goff, Honorine and Correjou and his
companions. The truth which she had already vaguely surmised now assumed
a more definite form and, though still thickly shrouded, was visible in
its essential part. Francois was not guilty. Some one had put on his
clothes and impersonated him, even as some one else, in the semblance of
Stephane, had pretended to be Stephane. Ah, what did all the rest
matter, the improbabilities and inconsistencies, the proofs and
certainties! Veronique did not even think about it. The only thing that
counted was the innocence of her beloved son.

And so she still refused to tell him anything that would sadden him and
spoil his happiness; and she said:

"No, I have not seen your grandfather. Honorine wanted to prepare him
for my visit, but things happened so hurriedly . . ."

"And you were left alone on the island, poor mother? So you hoped to
find me here?"

"Yes," she said, after a moment's hesitation.

"Alone, but with All's Well, of course."

"Yes. I hardly paid any attention to him during the first days. It was
not until this morning that I thought of following him."

"And where does the road start from that brought you here?"

"It's an underground passage the outlet of which is concealed between
two stones near Maguennoc's garden."

"What! Then the two islands communicate?"

"Yes, by the cliff underneath the bridge."

"How strange! That's what neither Stephane not I guessed, nor anybody
else, for that matter . . . except our dear All's Well, when it came to
finding his master."

He interrupted himself and then whispered:

"Hark!"

But, the next moment, he said:

"No, it's not that yet. Still, we must hurry."

"What am I to do?"

"It's quite simple, mother. When I made this hole, I saw that it could
be widened easily enough, if it were possible also to take out the three
or four stones next to it. But these are firmly fixed; and we should
need an implement of some kind."

"Well, I'll go and . . ."

"Yes, do, mother. Go back to the Priory. To the left of the house, in a
basement, is a sort of workshop where Maguennoc kept his garden-tools.
You will find a small pick-axe there, with a very short handle. Bring it
me in the evening. I will work during the night; and to-morrow morning I
shall give you a kiss, mother."

"Oh, it sounds too good to be true!"

"I promise you I shall. Then all that we shall have to do will be to
release Stephane."

"Your tutor? Do you know where he is shut up?"

"I do almost know. According to the particulars which grandfather gave
us, the underground passages consist of two floors one above the other;
and the last cell of each is fitted as a prison. I occupy one of them.
Stephane should occupy the other, below mine. What worries me . . ."

"What is it?"

"Well, it's this: according to grandfather again, these two cells were
once torture-chambers . . . 'death chambers' was the word grandfather
used."

"Oh, but how alarming!"

"Why alarm yourself, mother? You see that they are not thinking of
torturing me. Only, on the off chance and not knowing what sort of fate
was in store for Stephane, I sent him something to eat by All's Well,
who is sure to have found a way of getting to him."

"No," she said, "All's Well did not understand."

"How do you know, mother?"

"He thought you were sending him to Stephane Maroux's room and he heaped
it all under the bed."

"Oh!" said the boy, anxiously. "What can have become of Stephane?" And
he at once added, "You see, mother, that we must hurry, if we would save
Stephane and save ourselves."

"What are you afraid of?"

"Nothing, if you act quickly."

"But still . . ."

"Nothing, I assure you. I feel certain that we shall get the better of
every obstacle."

"And, if any others present themselves . . . dangers which we cannot
foresee? . . ."

"It is then," said Francois, laughing, "that the man whom I am expecting
will come and protect us."

"You see, my darling, you yourself admit the need of assistance . . . ."

"Why, no, mother, I am trying to ease your mind, but nothing will
happen. Come, how would you have a son who has just found his mother
lose her again at once? It isn't possible. In real life, may be . . .
but we are not living in real life. We are absolutely living in a
romance; and in romances things always come right. You ask All's Well.
It's so, old chap, isn't it: we shall win and be united and live happy
ever after? That's what you think, All's Well? Then be off, old chap,
and take mother with you. I'm going to fill up the hole, in case they
come and inspect my cell. And be sure not to try and come in when the
hole is stopped, eh, All's Well? That's when the danger is. Go, mother,
and don't make a noise when you come back."

Veronique was not long away. She found the pick-axe; and, forty minutes
after, brought it and managed to slip it into the cell.

"No one has been yet," said Francois, "but they are certain to come soon
and you had better not stay. I may have a night's work before me,
especially as I shall have to stop because of likely visits. So I shall
expect you at seven o'clock to-morrow . . . . By the way, talking of
Stephane: I have been thinking it over. Some noises which I heard just
now confirmed my notion that he is shut up more or less underneath me.
The opening that lights my cell is too narrow for me to pass through.
Is there a fairly wide window at the place where you are now?"

"No, but it can be widened by removing the little stones round it."

"Capital. You will find in Maguennoc's workshop a bamboo ladder, with
iron hooks to it, which you can easily bring with you to-morrow morning.
Next, take some provisions and some rugs and leave them in a thicket at
the entrance to the tunnel."

"What for, darling?"

"You'll see. I have a plan. Good-bye, mother. Have a good night's rest
and pick up your strength. We may have a hard day before us."

Veronique followed her son's advice. The next morning, full of hope, she
once more took the road to the cell. This time, All's Well, reverting to
his instincts of independence, did not come with her.

"Keep quite still, mother," said Francois, in so low a whisper that she
could scarcely hear him. "I am very closely watched; and I think there's
some one walking up and down in the passage. However, my work is nearly
done; the stones are all loosened. I shall have finished in two hours.
Have you the ladder?"

"Yes."

"Remove the stones from the window . . . that will save time . . . for
really I am frightened about Stephane . . . . And be sure not to make a
noise . . . ."

Veronique moved away.

The window was not much more than three feet from the floor: and the
small stones, as she had supposed, were kept in place only by their own
weight and the way in which they were arranged. The opening which she
thus contrived to make was very wide; and she easily passed the ladder
which she had brought with her through and secured it by its iron hooks
to the lower ledge.

She was some hundred feet or so above the sea, which lay all white
before her, guarded by the thousand reefs of Sarek. But she could not
see the foot of the cliff, for there was under the window a slight
projection of granite which jutted forward and on which the ladder
rested instead of hanging perpendicularly.

"That will help Francois," she thought.

Nevertheless, the danger of the undertaking seemed great; and she
wondered whether she herself ought not to take the risk, instead of her
son, all the more so as Francois might be mistaken, as Stephane's cell
was perhaps not there at all and as perhaps there was no means of
entering it by a similar opening. If so, what a waste of time! And what
a useless danger for the boy to run!

At that moment she felt so great a need of self-devotion, so intense a
wish to prove her love for him by direct action, that she formed her
resolution without pausing to reflect, even as one performs immediately
a duty which there is no question of not performing. Nothing deterred
her: neither her inspection of the ladder, whose hooks were not wide
enough to grip the whole thickness of the ledge, nor the sight of the
precipice, which gave an impression that everything was about to fall
away from under her. She had to act; and she acted.

Pinning up her skirt, she stepped across the wall, turned round,
supported herself on the ledge, groped with her foot in space and found
one of the rungs. Her whole body was trembling. Her heart was beating
furiously, like the clapper of a bell. Nevertheless she had the mad
courage to catch hold of the two uprights and go down.

It did not take long. She knew that there were twenty rungs in all. She
counted them. When she reached the twentieth, she looked to the left and
murmured, with unspeakable joy:

"Oh, Francois . . . my darling!"

She had seen, three feet away at most, a recess, a hollow which appeared
to be the entrance to a cavity cut in the rock itself.

"Stephane . . . Stephane," she called, but in so faint a voice that
Stephane Maroux, if he were there, could not hear her.

She hesitated a few seconds, but her legs were giving way and she no
longer had the strength either to climb up again or to remain hanging
where she was. Taking advantage of a few irregularities in the rock and
thus shifting the ladder, at the risk of unhooking it, she succeeded, by
a sort of miracle of which she was quite aware, in catching hold of a
flint which projected from the granite and setting foot in the cave.
Then, with fierce energy, she made one supreme effort and, recovering
her balance with a jerk, she entered.

She at once saw some one, fastened with cords, lying on a truss of
straw.

The cave was small and not very deep, especially in the upper portion,
which pointed towards the sky rather than the sea and which must have
looked, from a distance, like a mere fold in the cliff. There was no
projection to bound it at the edge. The light entered freely.

Veronique went nearer. The man did not move. He was asleep.

She bent over him; though she did not recognize him for certain, it
seemed to her that a memory was emerging from that dim past in which all
the faces of our childhood gradually fade away. This one was surely not
unknown to her: a gentle visage, with regular features, fair hair flung
well back, a broad, white forehead and a slightly feminine countenance,
which reminded Veronique of the charming face of a convent friend who
had died before the war.

She deftly unfastened the bonds with which the wrists were fastened
together.

The man, without waking immediately, stretched his arms, as though
submitting himself to a familiar operation, not effected for the first
time, which did not necessarily interfere with his sleep. Presumably he
was released like this at intervals, perhaps in order to eat and at
night, for he ended by muttering:

"So early? . . . But I'm not hungry . . . and it's still light!"

This last reflection astonished the man himself. He opened his eyes and
at once sat up where he lay, so that he might see the person who was
standing in front of him, no doubt for the first time in broad daylight.

He was not greatly surprised, for the reason that the reality could not
have been manifest to him at once. He probably thought that he was the
sport of a dream or an hallucination; and he said, in an undertone:

"Veronique . . . Veronique . . ."

She felt a little embarrassed by his gaze, but finished releasing his
bonds; and, when he distinctly felt her hand on his own hands and on his
imprisoned limbs, he understood the wonderful event which her presence
implied and he said, in a faltering voice:

"You! You! . . . Can it be? . . . Oh, speak just one word, just one!
. . . Can it possibly be you?" He continued, almost to himself, "Yes, it
is she . . . it is certainly she . . . . She is here!" And, anxiously,
aloud, "You . . . at night . . . on the other nights . . . it wasn't you
who came then? It was another woman, wasn't it? An enemy? . . . Oh,
forgive me for asking you! . . . It's because . . . because I don't
understand . . . . How did you come here?"

"I came this way," she said, pointing to the sea.

"Oh," he said, "how wonderful!"

He stared at her with dazed eyes, as he might have stared at some vision
descended from Heaven; and the circumstances were so unusual that he did
not think of suppressing the eagerness of his gaze.

She repeated, utterly confused:

"Yes, this way . . . . Francois suggested it."

"I did not mention him," he said, "because, with you here, I felt sure
that he was free."

"Not yet," she said, "but he will be in an hour."

A long pause ensued. She interrupted it to conceal her agitation:

"He will be free . . . . You shall see him . . . . But we must not
frighten him: there are things which he doesn't know."

She perceived that he was listening not to the words uttered but to the
voice that uttered them and that this voice seemed to plunge him into a
sort of ecstasy, for he was silent and smiled. She thereupon smiled too
and questioned him, thus obliging him to answer:

"You called me by my name at once. So you knew me? I also seem to . . .
Yes, you remind me of a friend of mine who died."

"Madeleine Ferrand?"

"Yes, Madeleine Ferrand."

"Perhaps I also remind you of her brother, a shy schoolboy who used
often to visit the parlour at the convent and who used to look at you
from a distance."

"Yes, yes," she declared. "I remember. We even spoke to each other
sometimes; you used to blush. Yes, that's it: your name was Stephane.
But how do you come to be called Maroux?"

"Madeleine and I were not children of the same father."

"Ah," she said, "that was what misled me!"

She gave him her hand:

"Well, Stephane," she said, "as we are old friends and have renewed our
acquaintance, let us put off all our remembrances until later. For the
moment, the most urgent matter is to get away. Have you the strength?"

"The strength, yes: I have not had such a very bad time. But how are we
to go from here?"

"By the same road by which I came, a ladder communicating with the upper
passage of cells."

He was now standing up:

"You had the courage, the pluck?" he asked, at last realizing what she
had dared to do.

"Oh, it was not very difficult!" she declared. "Francois was so anxious!
He maintained that you were both occupying old torture-chambers . . .
death-chambers . . . ."

It was as though these words aroused him violently from a dream and made
him suddenly see that it was madness to converse in such circumstances.

"Go away!" he cried. "Francois is right! Oh, if you knew the risk you
are running. Please, please go!"

He was beside himself, as though convulsed by the thought of an
immediate peril. She tried to calm him, but he entreated her:

"Another second may be your undoing. Don't stay here . . . . I am
condemned to death and to the most terrible death. Look at the ground on
which we are standing, this sort of floor . . . . But it's no use
talking about it. Oh, please do go!"

"With you," she said.

"Yes, with me. But save yourself first."

She resisted and said, firmly:

"For us both to be saved, Stephane, we must above all things remain
calm. What I did just now we can do again only by calculating all our
actions and controlling our excitement. Are you ready?"

"Yes," he said, overcome by her magnificent confidence.

"Then follow me."

She stepped to the very edge of the precipice and leant forward:

"Give me your hand," she said, "to help me keep my balance."

She turned round, flattened herself against the cliff and felt the
surface with her free hand.

Not finding the ladder, she leant outward slightly.

The ladder had become displaced. No doubt, when Veronique, perhaps with
too abrupt a movement, had set foot in the cave, the iron hook of the
right-hand upright had slipped and the ladder, hanging only by the other
hook, had swung like a pendulum.

The bottom rungs were now out of reach.




CHAPTER VIII

ANGUISH


Had Veronique been alone, she would have yielded to one of those moods
of despondency which her nature, brave though it was, could not escape
in the face of the unrelenting animosity of fate. But in the presence of
Stephane, who she felt to be the weaker and who was certainly exhausted
by his captivity, she had the strength to restrain herself and announce,
as though mentioning quite an ordinary incident:

"The ladder has swung out of our reach."

Stephane looked at her in dismay:

"Then . . . then we are lost!"

"Why should we be lost?" she asked, with a smile.

"There is no longer any hope of getting away."

"What do you mean? Of course there is. What about Francois?"

"Francois?"

"Certainly. In an hour at most, Francois will have made his escape; and,
when he sees the ladder and the way I came, he will call to us. We shall
hear him easily. We have only to be patient."

"To be patient!" he said, in terror. "To wait for an hour! But they are
sure to be here in less than that. They keep a constant watch."

"Well, we will manage somehow."

He pointed to the wicket in the door:

"Do you see that wicket?" he said. "They open it each time. They will
see us through the grating."

"There's a shutter to it. Let's close it."

"They will come in."

"Then we won't close it and we'll keep up our confidence, Stephane."

"I'm frightened for you, not for myself."

"You mustn't be frightened either for me or for yourself . . . . If the
worst comes to the worst, we are able to defend ourselves," she added,
showing him a revolver which she had taken from her father's rack of
arms and carried on her ever since.

"Ah," he said, "what I fear is that we shall not even be called upon to
defend ourselves! They have other means."

"What means?"

He did not answer. He had flung a quick glance at the floor; and
Veronique for a moment examined its curious structure.

All around, following the circumference of the walls, was the granite
itself, rugged and uneven. But outlined in the granite was a large
square. They could see, on each of the four sides, the deep crevice that
divided it from the rest. The timbers of which it consisted were worn
and grooved, full of cracks and gashes, but nevertheless massive and
powerful. The fourth side almost skirted the edge of the precipice, from
which it was divided by eight inches at most.

"A trap-door?" she asked, with a shudder.

"No, not that," he said. "It would be too heavy."

"Then what?"

"I don't know. Very likely it is nothing but a remnant of some past
contrivance which no longer works. Still . . ."

"Still what?"

"Last night . . . or rather this morning there was a creaking sound down
below there. It seemed to suggest attempts, but they stopped at once
. . . it's such a long time since! . . . No, the thing no longer works
and they can't make use of it."

"Who's _they_?"

Without waiting for his answer, she continued:

"Listen, Stephane, we have a few minutes before us, perhaps fewer than
we think. Francois will be free at any moment now and will come to our
rescue. Let us make the most of the interval and tell each other the
things which both of us ought to know. Let us discuss matters quietly.
We are threatened with no immediate danger; and the time will be well
employed."

Veronique was pretending a sense of security which she did not feel.
That Francois would make his escape she refused to doubt; but who could
tell that the boy would go to the window and notice the hook of the
hanging ladder? On failing to see his mother, would he not rather think
of following the underground tunnel and running to the Priory?

However, she mastered herself, feeling the need of the explanation for
which she had asked, and, sitting down on a granite projection which
formed a sort of bench, she at once began to tell Stephane the events
which she had witnessed and in which she had played a leading part, from
the moment when her investigations led her to the deserted cabin
containing Maguennoc's dead body.

Stephane listened to the terrifying narrative without attempting to
interrupt her but with an alarm marked by his gestures of abhorrence and
the despairing expression of his face. M. d'Hergemont's death in
particular seemed to crush him, as did Honorine's. He had been greatly
attached to both of them.

"There, Stephane," said Veronique, when she had described the anguish
which she suffered after the execution of the sisters Archignat, the
discovery of the underground passage and her interview with Francois.
"That is all that I need absolutely tell you. I thought that you ought
to know what I have kept from Francois, so that we may fight our enemies
together."

He shook his head:

"Which enemies?" he said. "I, too, in spite of your explanations, am
asking the very question which you asked me. I have a feeling that we
are flung into the midst of a great tragedy which has continued for
years, for centuries, and in which we have begun to play our parts only
at the moment of the crisis, at the moment of the terrific cataclysm
prepared by generations of men. I may be wrong. Perhaps there is nothing
more than a disconnected series of sinister, weird and horrible
coincidences amid which we are tossed from side to side, without being
able to appeal to any other reasons than the whim of chance. In reality
I know no more than you do. I am surrounded by the same obscurity,
stricken by the same sorrows and the same losses. It's all just
insanity, extravagant convulsions, unprecedent shocks, the crimes of
savages, the fury of the barbaric ages."

Veronique agreed:

"Yes, of the barbaric ages; and that is what baffles me most and
impresses me so much! What is the connection between the present and the
past, between our persecutors of to-day and the men who lived in these
caves in days of old and whose actions are prolonged into our own time,
in a manner so impossible to understand? To what do they all refer,
those legends of which I know nothing except from Honorine's delirium
and the distress of the sisters Archignat?"

They spoke low, with their ears always on the alert. Stephane listened
for sounds in the corridor, Veronique concentrated her attention on the
cliff, in the hope of hearing Francois' signal.

"They are very complicated legends," said Stephane, "very obscure
traditions in which we must abandon any attempt to distinguish between
what is superstition and what might be truth. Out of this jumble of old
wives' tales, the very most that we can disentangle is two sets of
ideas, those referring to the prophecy of the thirty coffins and those
relating to the existence of a treasure, or rather of a miraculous
stone."

"Then they take as a prophecy," said Veronique, "the words which I read
on Maguennoc's drawing and again on the Fairies' Dolmen?"

"Yes, a prophecy which dates back to an indeterminate period and which
for centuries has governed the whole history and the whole life of
Sarek. The belief has always prevailed that a day would come when,
within a space of twelve months, the thirty principal reefs which
surround the island and which are called the thirty coffins would
receive their thirty victims, who were to die a violent death, and that
those thirty victims would include four women who were to die crucified.
It is an established and undisputed tradition, handed down from father
to son: and everybody believes in it. It is expressed in the line and
part of a line inscribed on the Fairies' Dolmen: 'Four women crucified,'
and 'For thirty coffins victims thirty times!'"

"Very well; but people have gone on living all the same, normally and
peaceably. Why did the outburst of terror suddenly take place this
year?"

"Maguennoc was largely responsible. Maguennoc was a fantastic and rather
mysterious person, a mixture of the wizard and the bone-setter, the
healer and the charlatan, who had studied the stars in their courses and
whom people liked to consult about the most remote events of the past as
well as the future. Now Maguennoc announced not long ago that 1917 would
be the fateful year."

"Why?"

"Intuition perhaps, presentiment, divination, or subconscious knowledge:
you can choose any explanation that you please. As for Maguennoc, who
did not despise the practices of the most antiquated magic, _he_ would
tell you that he knew it from the flight of a bird or the entrails of a
fowl. However, his prophecy was based on something more serious. He
pretended, quoting evidence collected in his childhood among the old
people of Sarek, that, at the beginning of the last century, the first
line of the inscription on the Fairies' Dolmen was not yet obliterated
and that it formed this, which would rhyme with 'Four women shall be
crucified on tree:' 'In Sarek's isle, in year fourteen and three.' The
year fourteen and three is the year seventeen; and the prediction became
more impressive for Maguennoc and his friends of late years, because the
total number was divided into two numbers and the war broke out in 1914.
From that day, Maguennoc grew more and more important and more and more
sure of the truth of his previsions. For that matter, he also grew more
and more anxious; and he even announced that his death, followed by the
death of M. d'Hergemont, would give the signal for the catastrophe. Then
the year 1917 arrived and produced a genuine terror in the island. The
events were close at hand."

"And still," said Veronique, "and still it was all absurd."

"Absurd, yes; but it all acquired a curiously disturbing significance on
the day when Maguennoc was able to compare the scraps of prophecy
engraved on the dolmen with the complete prophecy."

"Then he succeeded in doing so?"

"Yes. He discovered under the abbey ruins, in a heap of stones which had
formed a sort of protecting chamber round it, an old worn and tattered
missal, which had a few of its pages in good condition, however, and one
in particular, the one which you saw, or rather of which you saw a copy
in the deserted cabin."

"A copy made by my father?"

"By your father, as were all those in the cupboard in his study. M.
d'Hergemont, you must remember, was fond of drawing, of painting
water-colours. He copied the illuminated page, but of the prophecy that
accompanied the drawing he reproduced only the words inscribed on the
Fairies' Dolmen."

"How do you account for the resemblance between the crucified woman and
myself?"

"I never saw the original, which Maguennoc gave to M. d'Hergemont and
which your father kept jealously in his room. But M. d'Hergemont
maintained that the resemblance was there. In any case, he accentuated
it in his drawing, in spite of himself, remembering all that you had
suffered . . . and through his fault, he said."

"Perhaps," murmured Veronique, "he was also thinking of the other
prophecy that was once made to Vorski: 'You will perish by the hand of a
friend and your wife will be crucified.' So I suppose the strange
coincidence struck him . . . and even made him write the initials of my
maiden name, 'V. d'H.', at the top." And she added, "And all this
happened in accordance with the wording of the inscription . . . ."

They were both silent. How could they do other than think of that
inscription, of the words written ages ago on the pages of the missal
and on the stone of the dolmen? If destiny had as yet provided only
twenty-seven victims for the thirty coffins of Sarek, were the last
three not there, ready to complete the sacrifice, all three imprisoned,
all three captive and in the power of the sacrificial murderers? And if,
at the top of the knoll, near the Grand Oak, there were as yet but three
crosses, would the fourth not soon be prepared, to receive a fourth
victim?

"Francois is a very long time," said Veronique, presently.

She went to the edge and looked over. The ladder had not moved and was
still out of reach.

"The others will soon be coming to my door," said Stephane. "I am
surprised that they haven't been yet."

But they did not wish to confess their mutual anxiety; and Veronique put
a further question, in a calm voice:

"And the treasure? The God-Stone?"

"That riddle is hardly less obscure," said Stephane, "and also depends
entirely on the last line of the inscription: 'The God-Stone which gives
life or death.' What is this God-Stone? Tradition says that it is a
miraculous stone; and, according to M. d'Hergemont, this belief dates
back to the remotest periods. People at Sarek have always had faith in
the existence of a stone capable of working wonders. In the middle ages
they used to bring puny and deformed children and lay them on the stone
for days and nights together, after which the children got up strong and
healthy. Barren women resorted to this remedy with good results, as did
old men, wounded men and all sorts of degenerates. Only it came about
that the place of pilgrimage underwent changes, the stone, still
according to tradition, having been moved and even, according to some,
having disappeared. In the eighteenth century, people venerated the
Fairies' Dolmen and used still sometimes to expose scrofulous children
there."

"But," said Veronique, "the stone also had harmful properties, for it
gave death as well as life?"

"Yes, if you touched it without the knowledge of those whose business it
was to guard it and keep it sacred. But in this respect the mystery
becomes still more complicated, for there is the question also of a
precious stone, a sort of fantastic gem which shoots out flames, burns
those who wear it and makes them suffer the tortures of the damned."

"That's what happened to Maguennoc, by Honorine's account," said
Veronique.

"Yes," replied Stephane, "but here we are entering upon the present. So
far I have been speaking of the fabled past, the two legends, the
prophecy and the God-Stone. Maguennoc's adventure opens up the period of
the present day, which for that matter is hardly less obscure than the
ancient period. What happened to Maguennoc? We shall probably never
know. He had been keeping in the background for a week, gloomy and doing
no work, when suddenly he burst into M. d'Hergemont's study roaring,
'I've touched it! I'm done for! I've touched it! . . . I took it in my
hand . . . . It burnt me like fire, but I wanted to keep it . . . . Oh,
it's been gnawing into my bones for days! It's hell, it's hell!' And he
showed us the palm of his hand. It was all burnt, as though eaten up
with cancer. We tried to dress it for him, but he seemed quite mad and
kept rambling on, 'I'm the first victim . . . . the fire will go to my
heart . . . . And after me the others' turn will come . . . .' That same
evening, he cut off his hand with a hatchet. And a week later, after
infecting the whole island with terror, he went away."

"Where did he go to?"

"To the village of Le Faouet, on a pilgrimage to the Chapel of St.
Barbe, near the place where you found his dead body."

"Who killed him, do you think?"

"Undoubtedly one of the creatures who used to correspond by means of
signs written along the road, one of the creatures who live hidden in
the cells and who are pursuing some purpose which I don't understand."

"Those who attacked you and Francois, therefore?"

"Yes; and immediately afterwards, having stolen and put on our clothes,
played the parts of Francois and myself."

"With what object?"

"To enter the Priory more easily and then, if their attempt failed, to
balk enquiry."

"But haven't you seen them since they have kept you here?"

"I have seen only a woman, or rather caught a glimpse of her. She comes
at night. She brings me food and drink, unties my hands, loosens the
fastenings round my legs a little and comes back two hours after."

"Has she spoken to you?"

"Once only, on the first night, in a low voice, to tell me that, if I
called out or uttered a sound or tried to escape, Francois would pay the
penalty."

"But, when they attacked you, couldn't you then make out . . . ?"

"No, I saw no more than Francois did."

"And the attack was quite unexpected?"

"Yes, quite. M. d'Hergemont had that morning received two important
letters on the subject of the investigation which he was making into all
these facts. One of the letters, written by an old Breton nobleman
well-known for his royalist leanings, was accompanied by a curious
document which he had found among his great-grandfather's papers, a plan
of some underground cells which the Chouans used to occupy in Sarek. It
was evidently the same Druid dwellings of which the legends tell us. The
plan showed the entrance on the Black Heath and marked two stories, each
ending in a torture-chamber. Francois and I went out exploring together;
and we were attacked on our way back."

"And you have made no discovery since?"

"No, none at all."

"But Francois spoke of a rescue which he was expecting, some one who had
promised his assistance."

"Oh, a piece of boyish nonsense, an idea of Francois', which, as it
happened, was connected with the second letter which M. d'Hergemont
received that morning!"

"And what was it about?"

Stephane did not reply at once. Something made him think that they were
being spied on through the door. But, on going to the wicket, he saw no
one in the passage outside.

"Ah," he said, "if we are to be rescued, the sooner it happens the
better. _They_ may come at any moment now."

"Is any help really possible?" asked Veronique.

"Well," Stephane answered, "we must not attach too much importance to
it, but it's rather curious all the same. You know, Sarek has often been
visited by officers or inspectors with a view to exploring the rocks and
beaches around the island, which were quite capable of concealing a
submarine base. Last time, the special delegate sent from Paris, a
wounded officer, Captain Patrice Belval,[2] became friendly with M.
d'Hergemont, who told him the legend of Sarek and the apprehension which
we were beginning to feel in spite of everything; it was the day after
Maguennoc went away. The story interested Captain Belval so much that he
promised to speak of it to one of his friends in Paris, a Spanish or
Portuguese nobleman, Don Luis Perenna,[2] an extraordinary person, it
would seem, capable of solving the most complicated mysteries and of
succeeding in the most reckless enterprises. A few days after Captain
Belval's departure, M. d'Hergemont received from Don Luis Perenna the
letter of which I spoke to you and of which he read us only the
beginning. 'Sir,' it said, 'I look upon the Maguennoc incident as more
than a little serious; and I beg you, at the least fresh alarm, to
telegraph to Patrice Belval. If I can rely upon certain indications, you
are standing on the brink of an abyss. But, even if you were at the
bottom of that abyss, you would have nothing to fear, if only I hear
from you in time. From that moment, I make myself responsible, whatever
happens, even though everything may seem lost and though everything may
be lost. As for the riddle of the God-Stone, it is simply childish and I
am astonished that, with the very ample data which you gave Belval, it
should for an instant be regarded as impossible of explanation. I will
tell you in a few words what has puzzled so many generations of mankind
. . . .'"

[Footnote 2: See _The Golden Triangle_, by Maurice Leblanc.]

"Well?" said Veronique, eager to know more.

"As I said, M. d'Hergemont did not tell us the end of the letter. He
read it in front of us, saying, with an air of amazement, 'Can that be
it? . . . Why, of course, of course it is . . . . How wonderful!' And,
when we asked him, he said, 'I'll tell you all about it this evening,
when you come back from the Black Heath. Meanwhile you may like to know
that this most extraordinary man--it's the only word for him--discloses
to me, without more ado or further particulars, the secret of the
God-Stone and the exact spot where it is to be found. And he does it so
logically as to leave no room for doubt.'"

"And in the evening?"

"In the evening, Francois and I were carried off and M. d'Hergemont was
murdered."

Veronique paused to think:

"I should not be surprised," she said, "if they wanted to steal that
important letter from him. For, after all, the theft of the God-Stone
seems to me the only motive that can explain all the machinations of
which we are the victims."

"I think so too: but M. d'Hergemont, on Don Luis Perenna's
recommendation, tore up the letter before our eyes."

"So, after all, Don Luis Perenna has not been informed?"

"No."

"Yet Francois . . ."

"Francois does not know of his grandfather's death and does not suspect
that M. d'Hergemont never heard of our disappearance and therefore never
sent a message to Don Luis Perenna. If he had done so, Don Luis, to
Francois' mind, must be on his way. Besides, Francois has another
reason for expecting something . . . ."

"A serious reason?"

"No. Francois is still very much of a child. He has read a lot of books
of adventure, which have worked upon his imagination. Now Captain Belval
told him such fantastic stories about his friend Perenna and painted
Perenna in such strange colours that Francois firmly believes Perenna to
be none other than Arsene Lupin. Hence his absolute confidence and his
certainty that, in case of danger, the miraculous intervention will take
place at the very minute when it becomes necessary."

Veronique could not help smiling:

"He is a child, of course; but children sometimes have intuitions which
we have to take into account. Besides, it keeps up his courage and his
spirits. How could he have endured this ordeal, at his age, if he had
not had that hope?"

Her anguish returned. In a very low voice, she said:

"No matter where the rescue comes from, so long as it comes in time and
so long as my son is not the victim of those dreadful creatures!"

They were silent for a long time. The enemy, present, though invisible,
oppressed them with his formidable weight. He was everywhere; he was
master of the island, master of the subterranean dwellings, master of
the heaths and woods, master of the sea around them, master of the
dolmens and the coffins. He linked together the monstrous ages of the
past and the no less monstrous hours of the present. He was continuing
history according to the ancient rites and striking blows which had
been foretold a thousand times.

"But why? With what object? What does it all mean?" asked Veronique, in
a disheartened tone. "What connection can there be between the people of
to-day and those of long ago? What is the explanation of the work
resumed by such barbarous methods?"

And, after a further pause, she said, for in her heart of hearts, behind
every question and reply and every insoluble problem, the obsession
never ceased to torment her:

"Ah, if Francois were here! If we were all three fighting together! What
has happened to him? What keeps him in his cell? Some obstacle which he
did not foresee?"

It was Stephane's turn to comfort her:

"An obstacle? Why should you suppose so? There is no obstacle. But it's
a long job . . . ."

"Yes, yes, you are right; a long, difficult job. Oh, I'm sure that he
won't lose heart! He has such high spirits! And such confidence! 'A
mother and son who have been brought together cannot be parted again,'
he said. 'They may still persecute us, but separate us, never! We shall
win in the end.' He was speaking truly, wasn't he, Stephane? I've not
found my son again, have I, only to lose him? No, no, it would be too
unjust and it would be impossible . . ."

Stephane looked at her, surprised to hear her interrupt herself.
Veronique was listening to something.

"What is it?" asked Stephane.

"I hear sounds," she said.

He also listened:

"Yes, yes, you're right."

"Perhaps it's Francois," she said. "Perhaps it's up there."

She moved to rise. He held her back:

"No, it's the sound of footsteps in the passage."

"In that case . . . in that case . . . ?" said Veronique.

They exchanged distraught glances, forming no decision, not knowing what
to do.

The sound came nearer. The enemy could not be suspecting anything, for
the steps were those of one who is not afraid of being heard.

Stephane said, slowly:

"They must not see me standing up. I will go back to my place. You must
fasten me again as best you can."

They remained hesitating, as though cherishing the absurd hope that the
danger would pass of its own accord. Then, suddenly, releasing herself
from the sort of stupor that seemed to paralyse her, Veronique made up
her mind:

"Quick! . . . Here they come! . . . Lie down!"

He obeyed. In a few seconds, she had replaced the cords on and around
him as she had found them, but without tying them.

"Turn your face to the rock," she said. "Hide your hands. Your hands
might betray you."

"And you?"

"I shall be all right."

She stooped and stretched herself at full length against the door, in
which the spy-hole, barred with strips of iron, projected inwardly in
such a way as to hide her from sight.

At the same moment, the enemy stopped outside. Notwithstanding the
thickness of the door, Veronique heard the rustle of a dress.

And, above her, some one looked in.

It was a terrible moment. The least indication would give the alarm.

"Oh, why does she stay?" thought Veronique. "Is there anything to betray
my presence? My clothes? . . ."

She thought that it was more likely Stephane, whose attitude did not
appear natural and whose bonds did not wear their usual aspect.

Suddenly there was a movement outside, followed by a whistle and a
second whistle.

Then from the far end of the passage came another sound of steps, which
increased in the solemn silence and stopped, like the first, behind the
door. Words were spoken. Those outside seemed to be concerting measures.

Veronique managed to reach her pocket. She took out her revolver and put
her finger on the trigger. If any one entered, she would stand up and
fire shot after shot, without hesitating. Would not the least hesitation
have meant Francois' death?




CHAPTER IX

THE DEATH-CHAMBER


Veronique's estimate was correct, provided that the door opened outwards
and that her enemies were at once revealed to view. She therefore
examined the door and suddenly observed that, against all logical
expectation, it had a large strong bolt at the bottom. Should she make
use of it?

She had no time to weigh the advantages or drawbacks of this plan. She
had heard a jingle of keys and, almost at the same time, the sound of a
key grating in the lock.

Veronique received a very clear vision of what was likely to happen.
When the assailants burst in, she would be thrust aside, she would be
hampered in her movements, her aim would be inaccurate and her shots
would miss, whereupon _they_ would shut the door again and promptly
hurry off to Francois' cell. The thought of it made her lose her head;
and her action was instinctive and immediate. First, she pushed the bolt
at the foot of the door. Next, half rising, she slammed the iron shutter
over the wicket. A latch clicked. It was no longer possible either to
enter or to look in.

Then at once she realized the absurdity of her action, which had not
opposed any obstacle to the menace of the enemy. Stephane, leaping to
her side, said:

"Good heavens, what have you done? Why, they saw that I was not moving
and they now know that I am not alone!"

"Exactly," she answered, striving to defend herself. "They will try to
break down the door, which will give us the time we want."

"The time we want for what?"

"To make our escape."

"Which way?"

"Francois will call out to us. Francois will . . ."

She did not complete her sentence. They now heard the sound of footsteps
moving swiftly down the passage. There was no doubt about it; the enemy,
without troubling about Stephane, whose flight appeared impossible, was
making for the upper floor of cells. Moreover, might he not suppose that
the two friends were acting in agreement and that it was the boy who was
in Stephane's cell and who had barred the door?

Veronique therefore had precipitated events and given them a turn which
she had so many reasons to dread; and Francois, up above, would be
caught at the very moment when he was preparing to escape.

She was utterly overwhelmed:

"Why did I come here?" she muttered. "It would have been so simple to
wait! The two of us would have saved you to a certainty."

One idea flashed through the confusion of her mind: had she not sought
to hasten Stephane's release because of what she knew of this man's love
for her? And was it not an unworthy curiosity that had prompted her to
make the attempt? A horrible idea, which she at once rejected, saying:

"No, I had to come. It is fate which is persecuting us."

"Don't believe it," said Stephane. "Everything will come right."

"Too late!" said she, shaking her head.

"Why? How do we know that Francois has not left his cell? You yourself
thought so just now . . . ."

She did not reply. Her face became drawn and very pale. By virtue of her
sufferings she had acquired a kind of intuition of the evil that
threatened her. This evil now surrounded her on every hand. A second
series of ordeals was before her, more terrible than the first.

"There's death all about us," she said.

He tried to smile:

"You are talking like the people of Sarek. You have the same fears . . ."

"They were right to be afraid. And you yourself feel the horror of it
all."

She rushed to the door, drew the bolt, tried to open it; but what could
she do against that massive, iron-clad door?

Stephane seized her by the arm:

"One moment . . . . Listen . . . . It sounds as if . . ."

"Yes," she said, "it's up there that they are knocking . . . above our
heads . . . in Francois' cell . . . ."

"Not at all, not at all: listen . . . ."

There was a long silence; and then blows were heard in the thickness of
the cliff. The sound came from below them.

"The same blows that I heard this morning," said Stephane, in dismay.
"The same attempt of which I spoke to you . . . . Ah, I understand!
. . ."

"What? What do you mean?"

The blows were repeated, at regular intervals, and then ceased, to be
followed by a dull, continuous sound, pierced by shriller creakings and
sudden cracks, like the straining of machinery newly started, or of one
of those capstans which are used for hoisting boats up a beach.

Veronique listened, desperately expectant of what was coming, trying to
guess, seeking to find some clue in Stephane's eyes. He stood in front
of her, looking at her as a man, in the hour of danger, looks at the
woman he loves.

And suddenly she staggered and had to press her hand against the wall.
It was as though the cave and indeed the whole cliff were bodily moving
from its place.

"Oh," she murmured, "is it I who am trembling like this? Is it from fear
that I am shaking from head to foot?"

Seizing Stephane's hands, she said:

"Tell me! I want to know! . . ."

He did not answer. There was no fear in his eyes bedewed with tears,
there was nothing but immense love and unbounded despair. He was
thinking only of her.

Besides, was it necessary for him to explain what was happening? Did not
the reality itself become more and more apparent as the seconds passed?
A strange reality indeed, having no connection with commonplace facts, a
reality quite beyond anything that the imagination might invent in the
domain of evil, a strange reality which Veronique, who was beginning to
grasp its indication, still refused to believe.

Acting like a trap-door, but like a trap-door working the reverse way,
the square of enormous joists which was set in the middle of the cave
rose, pivoting on the fixed axis by which it was hinged parallel with
the cliff. The almost imperceptible movement was that of an enormous lid
opening; and the thing already formed a sort of spring-board reaching
from the edge to the back of the cave, a spring-board with as yet a very
slight slope, on which it was easy enough to keep one's balance.

At the first moment, Veronique thought that the enemy's object was to
crush them between the implacable floor and the granite of the ceiling.
But, almost immediately afterwards, she understood that the hateful
mechanism, by standing erect like a draw-bridge when hoisted up, was
intended to hurl them over the precipice. And it would carry out that
intention inexorably. The result was fatal and inevitable. Whatever they
might try, whatever efforts they might make to hold on, a minute would
come when the floor of that draw-bridge would be absolutely vertical,
forming an integral part of the perpendicular cliff.

"It's horrible, it's horrible," she muttered.

Their hands were still clasped. Stephane was weeping silent tears.

Presently she moaned:

"There's nothing to be done, is there?"

"Nothing," he replied.

"Still, there is room beyond that wooden floor. The cave is round. We
might . . ."

"The space is too small. If we tried to stand between the sides of the
square and the wall, we should be crushed to death. That has all been
planned. I have often thought about it."

"Then . . . ?"

"We must wait."

"For what? For whom?"

"For Francois."

"Oh, Francois!" she said, with a sob. "Perhaps he too is doomed . . . .
Or perhaps he is looking for us and will fall into some trap. In any
case, I shall not see him . . . . And he will know nothing . . . . And
he will not even have seen his mother before dying . . . ."

She pressed Stephane's hands and said:

"Stephane, if one of us escapes death--and I hope it may be you . . ."

"It will be you," he said, in a tone of conviction. "I am even surprised
that the enemy should condemn you to the same torture as myself. But no
doubt he doesn't know that it's you who are here with me."

"It surprises me too!" said Veronique. "A different torture is set aside
for me. But what does it matter, if I am not to see my son again! . . .
Stephane, I can safely leave him in your charge, can't I? I know all
that you have already done for him."

The floor continued to rise very slowly, with an uneven vibration and
sudden jerks. The slope became more accentuated. A few minutes more and
they would no longer be able to speak freely and quietly.

Stephane replied:

"If I survive, I swear to fulfil my task to the end. I swear it in
memory . . ."

"In memory of me," she said, in a firm voice, "in memory of the
Veronique whom you knew . . . and loved."

He looked at her passionately:

"So you know?"

"Yes; and I tell you frankly, I have read your diary. I know your love
for me . . . and I accept it." She gave a sad smile. "That poor love
which you offered to the woman who was absent . . . and which you are
now offering to the woman who is about to die."

"No, no," he said, eagerly, "don't believe that . . . . Salvation may be
near at hand . . . . I feel it. My love does not belong to the past but
to the future."

He stooped to put his lips to her hands.

"Kiss me," she said, offering him her forehead.

Each of them had been obliged to place one foot on the brink of the
precipice, on the straight edge of granite which ran parallel with the
fourth side of the spring-board.

They kissed gravely.

"Hold me firmly," said Veronique.

She leant back as far as she could, raising her head, and called in a
muffled voice:

"Francois . . . . Francois . . . ."

But there was no one at the upper opening, from which the ladder was
still hanging by one of its hooks, well out of reach.

Veronique bent over the sea. At this spot, the swell of the cliff did
not project as much as elsewhere; and she saw, in between the
foam-topped reefs, a little pool of still water, very calm and so deep
that she could not see the bottom. She thought that death would be
gentler there than on the sharp-pointed rocks and, yielding to a sudden
longing to have done with it all and to avoid a lingering agony, she
said to Stephane:

"Why wait for the end? Better die than suffer this torture."

"No, no!" he exclaimed, horrified at the thought that Veronique might
disappear from his sight.

"Then you are still hoping?"

"Until the last second, since it's your life that's at stake."

"I have no longer any hope."

Nor was he borne up by hope; but he would have given anything to lull
Veronique's sufferings and to bear the whole weight of the supreme
ordeal himself.

The floor continued to rise. The vibration had ceased and the slope
became much more marked, already reaching the bottom of the wicket, half
way up the door. Then there was a sound like a sudden stoppage of
machinery, followed by a violent jolt, and the whole wicket was covered.
It was becoming impossible for them to stand erect.

They lay down on the slanting floor, bracing their feet against the
granite edge.

Two more jerks occurred, each time pushing the upper end still higher.
The top of the inner wall was reached; and the enormous mechanism moved
slowly forward, along the ceiling, towards the opening of the cave. They
could see very plainly that it would fit this opening exactly and close
it hermetically, like a draw-bridge. The rock had been hewn in such a
way that the deadly task might be accomplished without leaving any
loophole for chance.

They did not utter a word. With hands tight-clasped, they resigned
themselves to the inevitable. Their death was assuming the aspect of an
event decreed by destiny. The machine had been constructed far back in
the centuries and had no doubt been reconstructed, repaired and put in
order at a more recent date; and during those centuries, worked by
invisible executioners, it had caused the death of culprits, of guilty
men and innocent, of men of Armorica, Gaul, France or foreign lands.
Prisoners of war, sacrilegious monks, persecuted peasants, renegade
Chouans and soldiers of the Revolution; one by one the monster had
hurled them over the cliff.

To-day it was their turn.

They had not even the bitter solace of rage and hatred. Whom were they
to hate? They were dying in the deepest obscurity, with no hostile face
emerging from that implacable night. They were dying in the
accomplishment of a task unknown to themselves, to make up a total, so
to speak, and for the fulfilment of absurd prophecies, of imbecile
intentions, such as the orders given by the barbarian gods and
formulated by fanatical priests. They were--it was a thing unheard
of--the victims of some expiatory sacrifice, of some holocaust offered
to the divinities of a blood-thirsty creed!

The wall stood behind them. In a few more minutes it would be
perpendicular. The end was approaching.

Time after time Stephane had to hold Veronique back. An increasing
terror distracted her mind. She yearned to fling herself down.

"Please, please," she stammered, "do let me . . . . I am suffering more
than I can bear."

Had she not found her son again, she would have retained her
self-control to the end. But the thought of Francois was unsettling her.
The boy must also be a prisoner, they must be torturing him too and
immolating him, like his mother, on the altars of the execrable gods.

"No, no, he will come," Stephane declared. "You will be saved . . . . I
will have it so . . . . I know it."

She replied, wildly:

"He is imprisoned as we are . . . . They are burning him with torches,
driving arrows into him, tearing his flesh . . . . Oh, my poor little
son! . . ."

"He will come, dear, he told you he would. Nothing can separate a mother
and son who have been brought together again."

"We have found each other in death; we shall be united in death. I wish
it might be at once! I don't want him to suffer!"

The agony was too great. With an effort she released her hands from
Stephane's and made a movement to fling herself down. But she
immediately threw herself back against the draw-bridge, with a cry of
amazement which was echoed by Stephane.

Something had passed before their eyes and disappeared again. It came
from the left.

"The ladder!" exclaimed Stephane. "It's the ladder, isn't it?"

"Yes, it's Francois," said Veronique, catching her breath with joy and
hope. "He is saved. He is coming to rescue us."

At that moment, the wall of torment was almost upright, vibrating
implacably beneath their shoulders. The cave no longer existed behind
them. The depths had already claimed them; at most they were clinging to
a narrow ledge.

Veronique leant outwards again. The ladder swung back and then became
stationary, fixed by its two hooks.

Above them, at the opening in the cliff, was a boy's face; and the boy
was smiling and making gestures:

"Mother, mother . . . quick!"

The call was eager and urgent. The two arms were outstretched towards
the pair below. Veronique moaned:

"Oh, it's you, it's you, my darling!"

"Quick, mother, I'm holding the ladder! . . . Quick! . . . It's quite
safe!"

"I'm coming, darling, I'm coming."

She had seized the nearest upright. This time, with Stephane's
assistance, she had no difficulty in placing her foot on the bottom
rung. But she said:

"And you, Stephane? You're coming with me, aren't you?"

"I have plenty of time," he said. "Hurry."

"No, you must promise."

"I swear. Hurry."

She climbed four rungs and stopped:

"Are you coming, Stephane?"

He had already turned towards the cliff and slipped his left hand into a
narrow fissure which remained between the draw-bridge and the rock. His
right hand reached the ladder and he was able to set foot on the lowest
rung. He too was saved.

With what delight Veronique covered the rest of the distance! What
mattered the void below her, now that her son was there, waiting for her
to clasp him to her breast at last!

"Here I am, here I am," she said. "Here I am, my darling."

She swiftly put her head and shoulders in the window. He pulled her
through; and she climbed over the ledge. At last she was with her son.

They flung themselves into each other's arms:

"Oh, mother, mother, is it really true? Mother!"

But she had no sooner closed her arms about him than she drew back a
little, she did not know why. An inexplicable discomfort checked her
first outburst.

"Come here," she said, dragging him to the light of the window. "Come
and let me look at you."

The boy did as she wished. She examined him for two or three seconds, no
longer, and suddenly, giving a start of terror, ejaculated:

"Then it's you? It's you, the murderer?"

Oh, horror! She was once more looking on the face of the monster who had
killed her father and Honorine before her eyes!

"So you know me?" he chuckled.

Veronique realised her mistake from the boy's very tone. This was not
Francois but the other, the one who had played his devilish part in the
clothes which Francois usually wore.

He gave another chuckle:

"Ah, you're beginning to see things as they are, ma'am! You know me now,
don't you?"

The hateful face contracted, became wicked and cruel, animated by the
vilest expression.

"Vorski! Vorski!" stammered Veronique. "It's Vorski I recognise in you."

He burst out laughing:

"Why not? Do you think I'm going to disown my father as you did?"

"Vorski's son! His son!" Veronique repeated.

"Lord bless me, yes, his son: why shouldn't I be? Surely the good fellow
had the right to have two sons! Me first and dear Francois next!"

"Vorski's son!" Veronique exclaimed once more.

"And one of the best, I tell you, ma'am, a worthy son of his father and
brought up on the highest principles. I've shown you as much already,
haven't I? But it's not finished, we're only at the beginning . . . .
Here, would you like me to give you a fresh proof? Just take a squint at
that stick-in-the-mud of a tutor! . . . No, but look how things go when
I take a hand in them."

He sprang to the window. Stephane's head appeared. The boy picked up a
stone and struck with all his might, throwing him backwards.

Veronique, who at the first moment had hesitated, not realising the
danger, now rushed and seized the boy's arm. It was too late. The head
vanished. The hooks of the ladder slipped off the ledge. There was a
loud cry, followed by the sound of a body falling into the water below.

Veronique ran to the window. The ladder was floating on the part of the
little pool which she was able to see, lying motionless in its frame of
rocks. There was nothing to point to the place where Stephane had
fallen, not an eddy, not a ripple.

She called out:

"Stephane! Stephane! . . ."

No reply, nothing but the great silence of space in which the winds are
still and the sea asleep.

"You villain, what have you done?" she cried.

"Don't take on, missus," he said. "Master Stephane brought up your kid
to be a duffer. Come it's a laughing matter, it is, really. Give us a
kiss, won't you, daddy's missus? But, I say, what a face you're pulling!
Surely you don't hate me as much as all that?"

He went up to her, with his arms outstretched. Veronique swiftly covered
him with her revolver:

"Be off, be off, or I'll kill you as I would a mad dog! Be off!"

The boy's face became more inhuman than ever. He fell back step by step,
snarling:

"Oh, I'll make you pay for this, my pretty lady! . . . What do you mean
by it? I come up to give you a kiss . . . I'm full of kindly feelings
. . . and you want to shoot me! You shall pay for it in blood . . . in
nice red flowing blood . . . blood . . . blood . . . ."

He seemed to love the sound of the word. He repeated it time after time,
then once more gave a burst of evil laughter and fled down the tunnel
which led to the Priory, shouting:

"The blood of your son, Mother Veronique! . . . The blood of your
darling Francois!"




CHAPTER X

THE ESCAPE


Shuddering, uncertain how to act next, Veronique listened till she no
longer heard the sound of his footsteps. What should she do? The murder
of Stephane had for a moment turned her thoughts from Francois; but she
now once more fell a prey to anguish. What had become of her son? Should
she go to him at the Priory and defend him against the dangers that
threatened him?

"Come, come," she said, "I'm losing my head . . . . Let me think things
out . . . . A few hours ago, Francois was speaking to me through the
wall of his prison . . . for it was certainly he then, it was certainly
Francois who yesterday took my hand and covered it with his kisses
. . . . A mother cannot be deceived; and I was quivering with love and
tenderness . . . . But since . . . since this morning has he not left
his prison?"

She stopped to think and then said, slowly:

"That's it . . . that's what happened . . . . Stephane and I were
discovered below, on the floor underneath. The alarm was given at once.
The monster, Vorski's son, had gone up expressly to watch Francois. He
found the cell empty and, seeing the opening which had been made,
crawled out here. Yes, that's it . . . . If not, by what way did he
come? . . . When he got here, it occurred to him to run to the window,
knowing that it overlooked the sea and suspecting that Francois had
chosen it to make his escape. He at once saw the hooks of the ladder.
Then, on leaning over, he saw me, knew who I was and called out to me
. . . . And now . . . now he is on his way to the Priory, where he is
bound to meet Francois . . . ."

Nevertheless Veronique did not stir. She had an instinct that the danger
lay not at the Priory but here, by the cells. And she wondered whether
Francois had really succeeded in escaping and whether, before his task
was done, he had not been surprised by the other and attacked by him.

It was a horrible doubt! She stooped quickly and, perceiving that the
hole had been widened, tried to pass through it herself. But the outlet,
at most large enough for a child, was too narrow for her; and her
shoulders became fixed. She persisted in the attempt, however, tearing
her bodice and bruising her skin against the rock, and at last, by dint
of patience and wriggling, succeeded in slipping through.

The cell was empty. But the door was open on the passages facing her;
and Veronique had an impression--merely an impression, for the window
admitted only a faint light--that some one was just leaving the cell
through the open door. And from this confused impression of something
that she had not absolutely seen she retained the certainty that it was
a woman who was hiding there, in the passage, a woman surprised by her
unexpected entrance.

"It's their accomplice," thought Veronique. "She came up with the boy
who killed Stephane, and she has no doubt taken Francois away . . . .
Perhaps Francois is even there still, quite near me, while she's
watching me . . . ."

Meanwhile Veronique's eyes were growing accustomed to the semidarkness
and she distinctly saw a woman's hand upon the door, which opened
inwardly. The hand was slowly pulling.

"Why doesn't she shut it at once," Veronique wondered, "since she
obviously wants to put a barrier between us?"

Veronique received her answer when she heard a pebble grating under the
door and interfering with its movement. If the pebble were not there,
the door would be closed. Without hesitating, Veronique went up, took
hold of a great iron handle and pulled it towards her. The hand
disappeared, but the opposition continued. There was evidently a handle
on the other side as well.

Suddenly she heard a whistle. The woman was summoning assistance. And
almost at the same time, in the passage, at some distance from the
woman, there was a cry:

"Mother! Mother!"

Ah, with what deep emotion Veronique heard that cry! Her son, her real
son was calling to her, her son, still a captive but alive! Oh, the
superhuman delight of it!

"I'm here, darling!"

"Quick, mother! I'm tied up; and the whistle is their signal . . .
they'll be coming."

"I'm here . . . . I shall save you before they come!"

She had no doubt of the result. It seemed to her as though her strength
knew no limits and as though nothing could resist the exasperated
tension of her whole being.

Her adversary was in fact weakening and giving ground by inches. The
opening became wider; and suddenly the contest was over. Veronique
walked through.

The woman had already fled down the passage and was dragging the boy by
a rope in order to make him walk despite the cords with which he was
bound. It was a vain attempt and she abandoned it forthwith. Veronique
was close to her, with her revolver in her hand.

The woman let go the boy and stood up in the light from the open cells.
She was dressed in white serge, with a knotted girdle round her waist.
Her arms were half bare. Her face was still young, but faded, thin and
wrinkled. Her hair was fair, interspersed with strands of white. Her
eyes gleamed with a feverish hatred.

The two women looked at each other without a word, like two adversaries
who have met before and are about to fight again. Veronique almost
smiled, with a smile of mingled triumph and defiance. In the end she
said:

"If you dare to lay a finger on my child, I'll kill you. Go! Be off!"

The woman was not frightened. She seemed to be reflecting and to be
listening in the expectation of assistance. None come. Then she lowered
her eyes to Francois and made a movement as though to seize upon her
prey again.

"Don't touch him!" Veronique exclaimed, violently. "Don't touch him, or
I fire!"

The woman shrugged her shoulders and said, in measured accents:

"No threats, please! If I had wanted to kill that child of yours, I
should have done so by now. But his hour has not come; and it is not by
my hand that he is to die."

Veronique, trembling all over, could not help asking:

"By whose hand is he to die?"

"By my son's: you know . . . the one you've seen."

"Is he your son, the murderer, the monster?"

"He's the son of . . ."

"Silence! Silence!" Veronique commanded. She understood that the woman
had been Vorski's mistress and feared that she would make some
disclosure in Francois' presence. "Silence: that name is not to be
spoken."

"It will be when it has to be," said the woman. "Ah, I've suffered
enough through you, Veronique: it's your turn now; and you're only at
the beginning of it!"

"Go!" cried Veronique, pointing her revolver.

"Once more, no threats, please."

"Go, or I fire! I swear it on the head of my son."

The woman retreated, betraying a certain anxiety in spite of herself.
But she was seized with a fresh access of rage. Impotently she raised
her clenched fists and shouted, in a raucous, broken voice:

"I will be revenged . . . You shall see. Veronique . . . . The cross--do
you understand?--the cross is ready . . . . You are the fourth . . . .
What, oh, what a revenge!"

She shook her gnarled, bony fists. And she continued:

"Oh, how I hate you! Fifteen years of hatred! But the cross will avenge
me . . . . I shall string you up on it myself . . . . The cross is ready
. . . you'll see . . . the cross is ready for you! . . ."

She walked away slowly, holding herself erect under the threat of the
revolver.

"Don't kill her, mother, will you?" whispered Francois, suspecting the
contest in his mother's mind.

Veronique seemed to wake from a dream:

"No, no," she replied, "don't be afraid . . . . And yet perhaps I ought
to . . ."

"Oh, please let her be, mother, and let us go away."

She lifted him in her arms, even before the woman was out of sight,
pressed him to her and carried him to the cell as though he weighed no
more than a little child.

"Mother, mother," he said.

"Yes, darling, your own mother; and no one shall take you from me again,
that I swear to you."

Without troubling about the wounds inflicted by the stone she slipped,
this time almost at the first attempt, through the gap made by Francois,
drew him after her and then, but not before, released him from his
bonds.

"There is no danger here," she said, "at least for the moment, because
they can hardly get at us except by the cell and I shall be able to
defend the entrance."

Mother and son exchanged the fondest of embraces. There was now no
barrier to part their lips and their arms. They could see each other,
could gaze into each other's eyes.

"How handsome you are, my darling!" said Veronique.

She saw no resemblance between him and the boy murderer and was
astonished that Honorine could have taken one for the other. And she
felt as if she would never weary of admiring the breeding, the frankness
and the sweetness which she read in his face.

"And you, mother," he said, "do you think that I ever pictured a mother
as beautiful as you? No, not even in my dreams, when you seemed as
lovely as a fairy. And yet Stephane often used to tell me . . ."

She interrupted him:

"We must hurry, dearest, and take refuge from their pursuit. We must
go."

"Yes," he said, "and above all we must leave Sarek. I have invented a
plan of escape which is bound to succeed. But, first of all, Stephane:
what has become of him? I heard the sound of which I spoke to you
underneath my cell and I fear . . ."

She dragged him along by the hand, without answering his question:

"I have many things to tell you, darling, painful things which I must no
longer keep from you. But presently will do . . . . For the moment we
must take refuge in the Priory. That woman will go in search of help and
come after us."

"But she was not alone, mother, when she entered my cell suddenly and
caught me in the act of digging at the wall. There was some one with
her."

"A boy, wasn't it? A boy of your own size?"

"I could hardly see. He and the woman fell upon me, bound me and carried
me into the passage. Then the woman left me for a moment and he went
back to the cell. He therefore knows about this tunnel by now and about
the exit in the Priory grounds."

"Yes, I know. But we shall easily get the better of him; and we'll block
up the exit."

"But there remains the bridge which joins the two islands," Francois
objected.

"No," she said, "I burnt it down and the Priory is absolutely cut off."

They were walking very quickly, Veronique pressing her pace, Francois a
little anxious at the words spoken by his mother.

"Yes, yes," he said, "I see that there is a good deal which I don't know
and which you have kept from me, mother, in order not to frighten me.
For instance, when you burnt down the bridge . . . . It was with the
petrol set aside for the purpose, wasn't it, and as arranged with
Maguennoc in case of danger? So you were threatened too; and the first
attack was made on you, mother? . . . And then there was something that
woman said with such a hateful look on her face! . . . And then . . .
and then, above all, what has become of Stephane? They were whispering
about him just now in my cell . . . . All this worries me . . . . Then
again I don't see the ladder which you brought . . . ."

"Please, dearest, don't let us wait a moment. The woman will have found
assistance . . . ."

The boy stopped short:

"Mother."

"What? Do you hear anything?"

"Some one walking."

"Are you sure?"

"Some one coming this way."

"Oh," she said, in a hollow voice, "it's the murderer coming back from
the Priory!"

She felt her revolver and prepared herself for anything that might
happen. But suddenly she pushed Francois towards a dark corner on her
left, formed by the entry to one of those tunnels, probably blocked,
which she had noticed when she came.

"Get in there," she said. "We shall be all right here: he will not see
us."

The sound approached.

"Stand well back," she said, "and don't stir."

The boy whispered:

"What's that in your hand? A revolver? Mother, you're not going to
fire?"

"I ought to, I ought to," said Veronique. "He's such a monster! . . .
It's as with his mother . . . I ought to have . . . we shall perhaps
regret it." And she added, almost unconsciously, "He killed your
grandfather."

"Oh, mother, mother!"

She supported him, to prevent his falling, and amid the silence she
heard the boy sobbing on her breast and stammering:

"Never mind . . . don't fire, mother . . . ."

"Here he comes, darling, here he comes; look at him."

The other passed. He was walking slowly, a little bent, listening for
the least sound. He appeared to Veronique to be the exact same size as
her son; and this time, when she looked at him with more attention, she
was not so much surprised that Honorine and M. d'Hergemont had been
taken in, for there were really some points of resemblance, which would
have been accentuated by the fact that he was wearing the red cap stolen
from Francois.

He walked on.

"Do you know him?" asked Veronique.

"No, mother."

"Are you sure that you never saw him?"

"Sure."

"And it was he who fell upon you, with the woman, in your cell?"

"I haven't a doubt of it, mother. He even hit me in the face, for no
reason, with absolute hatred."

"Oh," she said, "this is all incomprehensible! When shall we escape this
awful nightmare?"

"Quick, mother, the road's clear. Let's make the most of it."

On returning to the light, she saw that he was very pale and felt his
hand in hers like a lump of ice. Nevertheless he looked up at her with a
smile of happiness.

They set out again; and soon, after passing the strip of cliff that
joined the two islands and climbing the staircases, they emerged in the
open air, to the right of Maguennoc's garden. The daylight was beginning
to wane.

"We are saved," said Veronique.

"Yes," replied the boy, "but only on condition that they cannot reach us
by the same road. We shall have to bar it, therefore."

"How?"

"Wait for me here; I'll go and fetch some tools at the Priory."

"Oh, don't let us leave each other, Francois!"

"You can come with me, mother."

"And suppose the enemy arrives in the meantime? No, we must defend this
outlet."

"Then help me, mother."

A rapid inspection showed them that one of the two stones which formed a
roof above the entrance was not very firmly rooted in its place. They
found no difficulty in first shifting and then clearing it. The stone
fell across the staircase and was at once covered by an avalanche of
earth and pebbles which made the passage, if not impracticable, at least
very hard to manage.

"All the more so," said Francois, "as we shall stay here until we are
able to carry out my plan. And be easy, mother; it's a sound scheme and
we have nearly managed it."

For that matter, they recognized above all, that rest was essential.
They were both of them worn out.

"Lie down, mother . . . look, just here: there's a bed of moss under
this overhanging rock which makes a regular nest. You'll be as cosy as a
queen there and sheltered from the cold."

"Oh, my darling, my darling!" murmured Veronique, overcome with
happiness.

It was now the time for explanations; and Veronique did not hesitate to
give them. The boy's grief at hearing of the death of all those whom he
had known would be mitigated by the great joy which he felt at
recovering his mother. She therefore spoke without reserve, cradling him
in her lap, wiping away his tears, feeling plainly that she was enough
to make up for all the lost affections and friendships. He was
particularly afflicted by Stephane's death.

"But is it quite certain?" he asked. "For, after all, there is nothing
to tell us that he is drowned. Stephane is a perfect swimmer; and so
. . . Yes, yes, mother, we must not despair . . . on the contrary
. . . . Look, here's a friend who always comes at the worst times, to
declare that everything is not lost."

All's Well came trotting along. The sight of his master did not appear
to surprise him. Nothing unduly surprised All's Well. Events, to his
mind, always followed one another in a natural order which did not
disturb either his habits or his occupations. Tears alone seemed to him
worthy of special attention. And Veronique and Francois were not crying.

"You see, mother? All's Well agrees with me; nothing is lost . . . .
But, upon my word, All's Well, you're a sharp little fellow! What would
you have said, eh, if we'd left the island without you?"

Veronique looked at her son:

"Left the island?"

"Certainly: and the sooner the better. That's my plan. What do you say
to it?"

"But how are we to get away?"

"In a boat."

"Is there one here?"

"Yes, mine."

"Where?"

"Close by, at Sarek Point."

"But how are we to get down? The cliff is perpendicular."

"She's at the very place where the cliff is steepest, a place known as
the Postern. The name puzzled Stephane and myself. A postern suggests an
entrance, a gate. Well, we ended by learning that, in the middle ages,
at the time of the monks, the little isle on which the Priory stands was
surrounded by ramparts. It was therefore to be presumed that there was a
postern here which commanded an outlet on the sea. And in fact, after
hunting about with Maguennoc, we discovered, on the flat top of the
cliff, a sort of gully, a sandy depression reinforced at intervals by
regular walls made of big building-stones. A path winds down the middle,
with steps and windows on the side of the sea, and leads to a little
bay. That is the Postern outlet. We repaired it: and my boat is hanging
at the foot of the cliff."

Veronique's features underwent a transformation:

"Then we're safe now!"

"There's no doubt of that."

"And the enemy can't get there?"

"How could he?"

"He has the motor-boat at his disposal."

"He has never been there, because he doesn't know of the bay nor of the
way down to it either: you can't see them from the open sea. Besides,
they are protected by a thousand sharp-pointed rocks."

"And what's to prevent us from leaving at once?"

"The darkness, mother. I'm a good mariner and accustomed to navigate
all the channels that lead away from Sarek, but I should not be at all
sure of not striking some reef or other. No, we must wait for daylight."

"It seems so long!"

"A few hours' patience, mother. And we are together, you and I! At break
of dawn, we'll take the boat and begin by hugging the foot of the cliff
till we are underneath the cells. Then we'll pick up Stephane, who of
course will be waiting for us on some strip of beach, and we'll all be
off, won't we, All's Well? We'll land at Pont-l'Abbe at twelve o'clock
or so. That's my plan."

Veronique could not contain her delight and admiration. She was
astonished to find so young a boy giving proofs of such self-possession.

"It's splendid, darling, and you're right in everything. Luck is
decidedly coming our way."

The evening passed without incidents. An alarm, however, a noise under
the rubbish which blocked the underground passage and a ray of light
trickling through a slit obliged them to mount guard until the minute of
their departure. But it did not affect their spirits.

"Why, of course I'm easy in my mind," said Francois. "From the moment
when I found you again, I felt that it was for good. Besides, if the
worst came to the worst, have we not a last hope left? Stephane spoke to
you about it, I expect. And it makes you laugh, my confidence in a
rescuer whom I have never seen . . . . Well, I tell you, mother, if I
were to see a dagger about to strike me, I should be certain, absolutely
certain, mind you, that a hand would come and ward off the blow."

"Alas," she said, "that providential hand did not prevent all the
misfortunes of which I told you!"

"It will keep off those which threaten my mother," declared the boy.

"How? This unknown friend has not been warned."

"He will come all the same. He doesn't need to be warned to know how
great the danger is. He will come. And, mother, promise me one thing:
whatever happens, you must have confidence."

"I will have confidence, darling, I promise you."

"And you will be right," he said, laughing, "for I shall be the leader.
And what a leader, eh, mother? Why, yesterday evening I foresaw that, to
carry the enterprise through successfully and so that my mother should
be neither cold nor hungry, in case we were not able to take the boat
this afternoon, we must have food and rugs! Well, they will be of use to
us to-night, seeing that for prudence's sake we mustn't abandon our post
here and sleep at the Priory. Where did you put the parcel, mother?"

They ate gaily and with a good appetite. Then Francois wrapped his
mother up and tucked her in: and they both fell asleep, lying close
together, happy and unafraid.

When the keen air of the morning woke Veronique, a belt of rosy light
streaked the sky. Francois was sleeping the peaceful sleep of a child
that feels itself protected and is untroubled by dreams. For a long time
she just sat gazing at him without wearying: and she was still looking
at him when the sun was high above the horizon.

"To work, mother," he said, after he had opened his eyes and given her a
kiss. "No one in the tunnel? No. Then we have plenty of time to go on
board."

They took the rugs and provisions and, with brisk steps, went towards
the descent leading to the Postern, at the extreme end of the island.
Beyond this point the rocks were heaped up in formidable confusion: and
the sea, though calm, lapped against them noisily.

"I hope your boat's there still!" said Veronique.

"Lean over a little, mother. You can see her down there, hanging in that
crevice. We have only to work the pulley to get her afloat. Oh, it's all
very well thought out, mother darling! We have nothing to fear . . . .
Only . . . only . . ."

He had interrupted himself and was thinking.

"What? What is it?" asked Veronique.

"Oh, nothing! A slight delay."

"But . . ."

He began to laugh:

"Really, for the leader of an expedition, it's rather humiliating, I
admit. Just fancy, I've forgotten one thing: the oars. They are at the
Priory."

"But this is terrible!" cried Veronique.

"Why? I'll run to the Priory and I shall be back in ten minutes."

All Veronique's apprehensions returned:

"And suppose they make their way out of the tunnel meanwhile?"

"Come, come, mother," he laughed, "you promised to have confidence. To
get out of the tunnel would take them an hour's hard work; and we
should hear them. Besides, what's the use of talking, mother? I'll be
back at once."

He ran off.

"Francois! Francois!"

He did not reply.

"Oh," she thought, once more assailed by forebodings. "I had sworn not
to leave him for a second!"

She followed him at a distance and stopped on a hillock between the
Fairies' Dolmen and the Calvary of the Flowers. From here she could see
the entrance to the tunnel and also saw her son jogging along the grass.

He first went into the basement of the Priory. But the oars seemed not
to be there, for he came out almost at once and went to the main door,
which he opened and disappeared from sight.

"One minute ought to be plenty for him," said Veronique to herself. "The
oars must be in the hall . . . or at any rate on the ground-floor
. . . . Say two minutes, at the outside."

She counted the seconds while watching the entrance to the tunnel.

But three minutes, four minutes, five minutes passed: and the front-door
did not open again.

All Veronique's confidence vanished. She thought that it was mad of her
not to have gone with her son and that she ought never to have submitted
to a child's will. Without troubling about the tunnel or the dangers
from that side, she began to walk towards the Priory. But she had the
horrible feeling which people sometimes experience in dreams, when
their legs seem paralysed and when they are unable to move, while the
enemy advances to attack them.

And suddenly, on reaching the Dolmen, she beheld a sight the meaning of
which was immediately clear to her. The ground at the foot of the oaks
round the right-hand part of the semi-circle was littered with lately
cut branches, which still bore their green leaves.

She raised her eyes and stood stupefied and dismayed.

One oak alone had been stripped. And on the huge trunk, bare to a height
of twelve or fifteen feet, there was a paper, transfixed by an arrow and
bearing the inscription, "V. d'H."

"The fourth cross," Veronique faltered, "the cross marked with my name!"

She supposed that, as her father was dead, the initials of her maiden
name must have been written by one of her enemies, the chief of them, no
doubt; and for the first time, under the influence of recent events,
remembering the woman and the boy who were persecuting her, she
involuntarily attributed a definite set of features to that enemy.

It was a fleeting impression, an improbable theory, of which she was not
even conscious. She was overwhelmed by something much more terrible. She
suddenly understood that the monsters, those creatures of the heath and
the cells, the accomplices of the woman and the boy, must have been
there, since the cross was prepared. No doubt they had built a
foot-bridge and thrown it over the chasm to take the place of the bridge
to which she had set fire. They were masters of the Priory. And
Francois was once more in their hands!

Then she rushed straight along, collecting all her strength. She in her
turn ran over the turf, dotted with ruins, that sloped towards the front
of the house.

"Francois! Francois! Francois!"

She called his name in a piercing voice. She announced her coming with
loud cries. Thus did she reach the Priory.

One half of the door stood ajar. She pushed it and darted into the hall,
crying:

"Francois! Francois!"

The call rang from floor to attic and throughout the house, but remained
unanswered:

"Francois! Francois!"

She went upstairs, opening doors at random, running into her son's room,
into Stephane's, into Honorine's. She found nobody.

"Francois! Francois! . . . Don't you hear me? Are they hurting you?
. . . Oh, Francois, do answer!"

She went back to the landing. Opposite her was M. d'Hergemont's study.
She flung herself upon the door and at once recoiled, as though stricken
by a vision from hell.

A man was standing there, with arms crossed and apparently waiting for
her. And it was the man whom she had pictured for an instant when
thinking of the woman and the boy. It was the third monster!

She said, simply, but in a voice filled with inexpressible horror:

"Vorski! . . . Vorski! . . ."




CHAPTER XI

THE SCOURGE OF GOD


Vorski! Vorski! The unspeakable creature, the thought of whom filled her
with shame and horror, the monstrous Vorski, was not dead! The murder of
the spy by one of his colleagues, his burial in the cemetery at
Fontainebleau; all this was a fable, a delusion! The only real fact was
that Vorski was alive!

Of all the visions that could have haunted Veronique's brain, there was
none so abominable as the sight before her; Vorski standing erect, with
his arms crossed and his head up, alive! Vorski alive!

She would have accepted anything with her usual courage, but not this.
She had felt strong enough to face and defy no matter what enemy, but
not this one. Vorski stood for ignominious disgrace, for insatiable
wickedness, for boundless ferocity, for method mingled with madness in
crime.

And this man loved her.

She suddenly blushed. Vorski was staring with greedy eyes at the bare
flesh of her shoulders and arms, which showed through her tattered
bodice, and looking upon this bare flesh as upon a prey which nothing
could snatch from him. Nevertheless Veronique did not budge. She had no
covering within reach. She pulled herself together under the insult of
the man's desire and defied him with such a glance that he was
embarrassed and for a moment turned away his eyes.

Then she cried, with an uncontrollable outburst of feeling:

"My son! Where's Francois? I want to see him."

"_Our_ son is sacred, madame," he replied. "He has nothing to fear from
his father."

"I want to see him."

He lifted his hand as one taking an oath:

"You shall see him, I swear."

"Dead, perhaps!" she said, in a hollow voice.

"As much alive as you and I, madame."

There was a fresh pause. Vorski was obviously seeking his words and
preparing the speech with which the implacable conflict between them was
to open.

He was a man of athletic stature, with a powerful frame, legs slightly
bowed, an enormous neck swollen by great bundles of muscles and a head
unduly small, with fair hair plastered down and parted in the middle.
That in him which at one time produced an impression of brute strength,
combined with a certain distinction, had become with age the massive and
vulgar aspect of a professional wrestler posturing on the hustings at a
fair. The disquieting charm which once attracted the women had vanished;
and all that remained was a harsh and cruel expression of which he tried
to correct the hardness by means of an impassive smile.

He unfolded his arms, drew up a chair and, bowing to Veronique, said:

"Our conversation, madame, will be long and at times painful. Won't you
sit down?"

He waited for a moment and, receiving no reply, without allowing himself
to be disconcerted, continued:

"Perhaps you would rather first take some refreshment at the sideboard.
Would you care for a biscuit and a thimbleful of old claret or a glass
of champagne?"

He affected an exaggerated politeness, the essentially Teutonic
politeness of the semibarbarians who are anxious to prove that they are
familiar with all the niceties of civilization and that they have been
initiated into every refinement of courtesy, even towards a woman whom
the right of conquest would permit them to treat more cavalierly. This
was one of the points of detail which in the past had most vividly
enlightened Veronique as to her husband's probable origin.

She shrugged her shoulders and remained silent.

"Very well," he said, "but you must then authorize me to stand, as
behooves a man of breeding who prides himself on possessing a certain
amount of _savoir faire_. Also pray excuse me for appearing in your
presence in this more than careless attire. Internment-camps and the
caves of Sarek are hardly places in which it is easy to renew one's
wardrobe."

He was in fact wearing a pair of old patched trousers and a torn
red-flannel waistcoat. But over these he had donned a white linen robe
which was half-closed by a knotted girdle. It was a carefully studied
costume; and he accentuated its eccentricity by adopting theatrical
attitudes and an air of satisfied negligence.

Pleased with his preamble, he began to walk up and down, with his hands
behind his back, like a man who is in no hurry and who is taking time
for reflection in very serious circumstances. Then he stopped and, in a
leisurely tone:

"I think, madame, that we shall gain time in the end by devoting a few
indispensable minutes to a brief account of our past life together.
Don't you agree?"

Veronique did not reply. He therefore began, in the same deliberate
tone:

"In the days when you loved me . . ."

She made a gesture of revolt. He insisted:

"Nevertheless, Veronique . . ."

"Oh," she said, in an accent of disgust, "I forbid you! . . . That name
from your lips! . . . I will not allow it . . . ."

He smiled and continued, in a tone of condescension:

"Don't be annoyed with me, madame. Whatever formula I employ, you may be
assured of my respect. I therefore resume my remarks. In the days when
you loved me, I was, I must admit, a heartless libertine, a debauchee,
not perhaps without a certain style and charm, for I always made the
most of my advantages, but possessing none of the qualities of a married
man. These qualities I should easily have acquired under your influence,
for I loved you to distraction. You had about you a purity that
enraptured me, a charm and a simplicity which I have never met with in
any woman. A little patience on your part, an effort of kindness would
have been enough to transform me. Unfortunately, from the very first
moment, after a rather melancholy engagement, during which you thought
of nothing but your father's grief and anger, from the first moment of
our marriage there was a complete and irretrievable lack of harmony
between us. You had accepted in spite of yourself the bridegroom who had
thrust himself upon you. You entertained for your husband no feeling
save hatred and repulsion. These are things which a man like Vorski does
not forgive. So many women and among them some of the proudest had given
me proof of my perfect delicacy that I had no cause to reproach myself.
That the little middle-class person that you were chose to be offended
was not my business. Vorski is one of those who obey their instincts and
their passions. Those instincts and passions failed to meet with your
approval. That, madame, was your affair; it was purely a matter of
taste. I was free; I resumed my own life. Only . . ."

He interrupted himself for a few seconds and then went on:

"Only, I loved you. And, when, a year later, certain events followed
close upon one another, when the loss of your son drove you into a
convent, I was left with my love unassuaged, burning and torturing me.
What my existence was you can guess for yourself; a series of orgies and
violent adventures in which I vainly strove to forget you, followed by
sudden fits of hope, clues which were suggested to me, in the pursuit of
which I flung myself headlong, only to relapse into everlasting
discouragement and loneliness. That was how I discovered the whereabouts
of your father and your son, that was how I came to know their retreat
here, to watch them, to spy upon them, either personally or with the aid
of people who were entirely devoted to me. In this way I was hoping to
reach yourself, the sole object of my efforts and the ruling motive of
all my actions, when war was declared. A week later, having failed in an
attempt to cross the frontier, I was imprisoned in an internment-camp."

He stopped. His face became still harder; and he growled:

"Oh, the hell that I went through there! Vorski! Vorski, the son of a
king, mixed up with all the waiters and pickpockets of the Fatherland!
Vorski a prisoner, scoffed at and loathed by all! Vorski unwashed and
eaten up with vermin! My God, how I suffered! . . . But let us pass on.
What I did, to escape from death, I was entitled to do. If some one else
was stabbed in my stead, if some one else was buried in my name in a
corner of France, I do not regret it. The choice lay between him and
myself; I made my choice. And it was perhaps not only my persistent love
of life that inspired my action; it was also--and this above all is a
new thing--an unexpected dawn which broke in the darkness and which was
already dazzling me with its glory. But this is my secret. We will speak
of it later, if you force me to. For the moment . . ."

In the face of all this rhetoric delivered with the emphasis of an actor
rejoicing in his eloquence and applauding his own periods, Veronique had
retained her impassive attitude. Not one of those lying declarations was
able to touch her. She seemed to be thinking of other things.

He went up to her and, to compel her attention, continued, in a more
aggressive tone:

"You do not appear to suspect, madame, that my words are extremely
serious. They are, however, and they will become even more so. But,
before approaching more formidable matters and in the hope of avoiding
them altogether, I should like to make an appeal, not to your spirit of
conciliation, for there is no conciliation possible with you, but to
your reason, to your sense of reality. After all, you cannot be ignorant
of your present position, of the position of your son . . . ."

She was not listening, he was absolutely convinced of it. Doubtless
absorbed by the thought of her son, she read not the least meaning into
the words that reached her ears. Nevertheless, irritated and unable to
conceal his impatience, he continued:

"My offer is a simple one; and I hope and trust that you will not reject
it. In Francois' name and because of my feelings of humanity and
compassion, I ask you to link the present to the past of which I have
sketched the main features. From the social point of view, the bond that
unites us has never been shattered. You are still in name and in the
eyes of the law . . ."

He ceased, stared at Veronique and then, clapping his hand violently on
her shoulder, shouted:

"Listen, you baggage, can't you! It's Vorski speaking!"

Veronique lost her balance, saved herself by catching at the back of a
chair and once more stood erect before her adversary, with her arms
folded and her eyes full of scorn.

This time Vorski again succeeded in controlling himself. He had acted
under impulse and against his will. His voice retained an imperious and
malevolent intonation:

"I repeat that the past still exists. Whether you like it or not,
madame, you are Vorski's wife. And it is because of this undeniable
fact that I am asking you, if you please, to consider yourself so
to-day. Let us understand each other; if I do not aim at obtaining your
love or even your friendship, I will not accept either that we should
return to our former hostile relations. I do not want the scornful and
distant wife that you have been. I want . . . I want a woman . . . a
woman who will submit herself . . . who will be the devoted, attentive,
faithful companion . . ."

"The slave," murmured Veronique.

"Yes," he exclaimed, "the slave; you have said it. I don't shrink from
words any more than I do from deeds. The slave; and why not? A slave
understands her duty, which is blindly to obey, bound hand and foot,
_perinde ac cadaver_; does the part appeal to you? Will you belong to me
body and soul? As for your soul, I don't care a fig about that. What I
want . . . what I want . . . you know well enough, don't you? What I
want is what I have never had. Your husband? Ha, ha, have I ever been
your husband? Look back into my life as I will, amid all my seething
emotions and delights, I do not find a single memory to remind me that
there was ever between us anything but the pitiless struggle of two
enemies. When I look at you, I see a stranger, a stranger in the past as
in the present. Well, since my luck has turned, since I once more have
you in my clutches, it shall not be so in the future. It shall not be so
to-morrow, nor even to-night, Veronique. I am the master; you must
accept the inevitable. Do you accept?"

He did not wait for her answer and, raising his voice still higher,
roared:

"Do you accept? No subterfuges or false promises. Do you accept? If so,
go on your knees, make the sign of the cross and say, in a firm voice,
'I accept. I will be a consenting wife. I will submit to all your orders
and to all your whims. You are the master.'"

She shrugged her shoulders and made no reply. Vorski gave a start. The
veins in his forehead swelled up. However, he still contained himself:

"Very well. For that matter, I was expecting this. But the consequences
of your refusal will be so serious for you that I propose to make one
last attempt. Perhaps, after all, your refusal is addressed to the
fugitive that I am, to the poor beggar that I seem to be; and perhaps
the truth will alter your ideas. That truth is dazzling and wonderful.
As I told you, an unforeseen dawn has broken through my darkness; and
Vorski, son of a king, is bathed in radiant light."

He had a trick of speaking of himself in the third person which
Veronique knew of old and which was the sign of his insupportable
vanity. She also observed and recognized in his eyes a peculiar gleam
which was always there at moments of exaltation, a gleam which was
obviously due to his drinking habits but in which she seemed to see
besides a sign of temporary aberration. Was he not indeed a sort of
madman and had his madness not increased as the years passed?

He continued, and this time Veronique listened.

"I had therefore left here, at the time when the war broke out, a person
who is attached to me and who continued the work of watching your father
which I had begun. An accident revealed to us the existence of the
caves dug under the heath and also one of the entrances to the caves. It
was in this safe retreat that I took refuge after my last escape; and it
was here that I learnt, through some intercepted letters, of your
father's investigations into the secret of Sarek and the discoveries
which he had made. You can understand how my vigilance was redoubled!
Particularly because I found in all this story, as it became more and
more clear to me, the strangest coincidences and an evident connection
with certain details in my own life. Presently doubt was no longer
possible. Fate had sent me here to accomplish a task which I alone was
able to fulfil . . . and more, a task in which I alone had the right to
assist. Do you understand what I mean? Long centuries ago, Vorski was
predestined. Vorski was the man appointed by fate, Vorski's name was
written in the book of time. Vorski had the necessary qualities, the
indispensable means, the requisite titles . . . . I was ready, I set to
work without delay, conforming ruthlessly to the decrees of destiny.
There was no hesitation as to the road to be followed to the end; the
beacon was lighted. I therefore followed the path marked out for me.
Vorski has now only to gather the reward of his efforts. Vorski has only
to put out his hand. Within reach of his hand fortune, glory, unlimited
power. In a few hours, Vorski, son of a king, will be king of the world.
It is this kingdom that he offers you."

He was becoming more and more declamatory, more and more of the emphatic
and pompous play-actor.

He bent towards Veronique:

"Will you be a queen, an empress, and soar above other women even as
Vorski will dominate other men? Queen by right of gold and power even as
you are already queen by right of beauty? Will you? . . . Vorski's
slave, but mistress of all those over whom Vorski holds sway? Will you?
. . . Understand me clearly; it is not a question of your making a
single decision; you have to choose between two. There is, mark you, the
alternative to your refusal. Either the kingdom which I am offering, or
else . . ."

He paused and then, in a grating tone, completed his sentence:

"Or else the cross!"

Veronique shuddered. The dreadful word, the dreadful thing appeared once
more. And she now knew the name of the unknown executioner!

"The cross!" he repeated, with an atrocious smile of content. "It is for
you to choose. On the one hand all the joys and honours of life. On the
other hand, death by the most barbarous torture. Choose. There is
nothing between the two alternatives. You must select one or the other.
And observe that there is no unnecessary cruelty on my part, no vain
ostentation of authority. I am only the instrument. The order comes from
a higher power than mine, it comes from destiny. For the divine will to
be accomplished, Veronique d'Hergemont must die and die on the cross.
This is explicitly stated. There is no remedy against fate. There is no
remedy unless one is Vorski and, like Vorski, is capable of every
audacity, of every form of cunning. If Vorski was able, in the forest of
Fontainebleau, to substitute a sham Vorski for the real one, if Vorski
thus succeeded in escaping the fate which condemned him, from his
childhood, to die by the knife of a friend, he can certainly discover
some stratagem by which the divine will is accomplished, while the woman
he loves is left alive. But in that case she will have to submit. I
offer safety to my bride or death to my foe. Which are you, my foe or my
bride? Which do you choose? Life by my side, with all the joys and
honours of life . . . or death?"

"Death," Veronique replied, simply.

He made a threatening gesture:

"It is more than death. It is torture. Which do you choose?"

"Torture."

He insisted, malevolently:

"But you are not alone! Pause to reflect! There is your son. When you
are gone, he will remain. In dying, you leave an orphan behind you.
Worse than that; in dying, you bequeath him to me. I am his father. I
possess full rights. Which do you choose?"

"Death," she said, once more.

He became incensed:

"Death for you, very well. But suppose it means death for him? Suppose I
bring him here, before you, your Francois, and put the knife to his
throat and ask you for the last time, what will your answer be?"

Veronique closed her eyes. Never before had she suffered so intensely,
and Vorski had certainly found the vulnerable spot. Nevertheless she
murmured:

"I wish to die."

Vorski flew into a rage, and, resorting straightway to insults,
throwing politeness and courtesy to the winds, he shouted:

"Oh, the hussy, how she must hate me! Anything, anything, she accepts
anything, even the death of her beloved son, rather than yield to me! A
mother killing her son! For that's what it is; you're killing your son,
so as not to belong to me. You are depriving him of his life, so as not
to sacrifice yours to me. Oh, what hatred! No, no, it is impossible. I
don't believe in such hatred. Hatred has its limits. A mother like you!
No, no, there's something else . . . some love-affair, perhaps? No, no,
Veronique's not in love . . . What then? My pity, a weakness on my part?
Oh, how little you know me! Vorski show pity! Vorski show weakness! Why,
you've seen me at work! Did I flinch in the performance of my terrible
mission? Was Sarek not devastated as it was written? Were the boats not
sunk and the people not drowned? Were the sisters Archignat not nailed
to the ancient oak-trees? I, I flinch! Listen, when I was a child, with
these two hands of mine I wrung the necks of dogs and birds, with these
two hands I flayed goats alive and plucked the live chickens in the
poultry-yard. Pity indeed! Do you know what my mother called me? Attila!
And, when she was mystically inspired and read the future in these hands
of mine or on the tarot-cards, 'Attila Vorski,' that great seer would
say, 'you shall be the instrument of Providence. You shall be the sharp
edge of the blade, the point of the dagger, the bullet in the rifle, the
noose in the rope. Scourge of God! Scourge of God, your name is written
at full length in the books of time! It blazes among the stars that
shone at your birth. Scourge of God! Scourge of God!' And you, you hope
that my eyes will be wet with tears? Nonsense! Does the hangman weep? It
is the weak who weep, those who fear lest they be punished, lest their
crimes be turned against themselves. But I, I! Our ancestors feared but
one thing, that the sky should fall upon their heads. What have _I_ to
fear? I am God's accomplice! He has chosen me among all men. It is God
that has inspired me, the God of the fatherland, the old German God, for
whom good and evil do not count where the greatness of his sons is at
stake. The spirit of evil is within me. I love evil, I thirst after
evil. So you shall die, Veronique, and I shall laugh when I see you
suffering on the cross!"

He was already laughing. He walked with great strides, stamping noisily
on the floor. He lifted his arms to the ceiling; and Veronique,
quivering with anguish, saw the red frenzy in his bloodshot eyes.

He took a few more steps and then came up to her and, in a restrained
voice, snarling with menace:

"On your knees, Veronique, and beseech my love! It alone can save you.
Vorski knows neither pity nor fear. But he loves you; and his love will
stop at nothing. Take advantage of it, Veronique. Appeal to the past.
Become the child that you once were; and perhaps one day I shall drag
myself at your feet. Veronique, do not repel me; a man like me is not to
be repelled. One who loves as I love you, Veronique, as I love you, is
not to be defied."

She suppressed a cry. She felt his hated hands on her bare arms. She
tried to release herself; but he, much stronger than she, did not let
go and continued, in a panting voice:

"Do not repel me . . . it is absurd . . . it is madness . . . . You must
know that I am capable of anything . . . Well? . . . The cross is
horrible . . . . To see your son dying before your eyes; is that what
you want? . . . Accept the inevitable. Vorski will save you. Vorski will
give you the most beautiful life . . . . Oh, how you hate me! But no
matter: I accept your hatred, I love your hatred, I love your disdainful
mouth . . . . I love it more than if it offered itself of its own accord
. . . ."

He ceased speaking. An implacable struggle took place between them.
Veronique's arms vainly resisted his closer and closer grip. Her
strength was failing her; she felt helpless, doomed to defeat. Her knees
gave way beneath her. Opposite her and quite close, Vorski's eyes seemed
filled with blood; and she was breathing the monster's breath.

Then, in her terror, she bit him with all her might; and, profiting by a
second of discomfiture, she released herself with one great effort,
leapt back, drew her revolver, and fired once and again.

The two bullets whistled past Vorski's ears and sent fragments flying
from the wall behind him. She had fired too quickly, at random.

"Oh, the jade!" he roared. "She nearly did for me."

In a second he had his arms round her body and, with an irresistible
effort, bent her backwards, turned her round and laid her on a sofa.
Then he took a cord from his pocket and bound her firmly and brutally.

There was a moment's respite and silence. Vorski wiped the perspiration
from his forehead, filled himself a tumbler of wine and drank it down at
a gulp.

"That's better," he said, placing his foot on his victim, "and confess
that this is best all round. Each one in his place, my beauty; you
trussed like a fowl and I treading on you at my pleasure. Aha, we're no
longer enjoying ourselves so much! We're beginning to understand that
it's a serious matter. Ah, you needn't be afraid, you baggage: Vorski's
not the man to take advantage of a woman! No, no, that would be to play
with fire and to burn with a longing which this time would kill me. I'm
not such a fool as that. How should I forget you afterwards? One thing
only can make me forget and give me my peace of mind; your death. And,
since we understand each other on that subject, all's well. For it's
settled, isn't it; you want to die?"

"Yes," she said, as firmly as before.

"And you want your son to die?"

"Yes," she said.

He rubbed his hands:

"Excellent! We are agreed; and the time is past for words that mean
nothing. The real words remain to be spoken, those which count; for you
admit that, so far, all that I have said is mere verbiage, what? Just as
all the first part of the adventure, all that you saw happening at
Sarek, is only child's play. The real tragedy is beginning, since you
are involved in it body and soul; and that's the most terrifying part,
my pretty one. Your beautiful eyes have wept, but it is tears of blood
that are wanted, you poor darling! But what would you have? Once again,
Vorski is not cruel. He obeys a higher power; and destiny is against
you. Your tears? Nonsense! You've got to shed a thousand times as many
as another. Your death? Fudge! You've got to die a thousand deaths
before you die for good. Your poor heart must bleed as never woman's and
mother's poor heart bled before. Are you ready, Veronique? You shall
hear really cruel words, to be followed perhaps by words more cruel
still. Oh, fate is not spoiling you, my pretty one! . . ."

He poured himself out a second glass of wine and emptied it in the same
gluttonous fashion; then he sat down beside her and, stooping, said,
almost in her ear:

"Listen, dearest, I have a confession to make to you. I was already
married when I met you. Oh, don't be upset! There are greater
catastrophes for a wife and greater crimes for a husband than bigamy.
Well, by my first wife I had a son . . . whom I think you know; you
exchanged a few amicable remarks with him in the passage of the cells
. . . . Between ourselves, he's a regular bad lot, that excellent
Raynold, a rascal of the worst, in whom I enjoy the pride of
discovering, raised to their highest degree, some of my best instincts
and some of my chief qualities. He is a second edition to myself, but he
already outstrips me and now and then alarms me. Whew, what a devil! At
his age, a little over fifteen, I was an angel compared with him. Now it
so happens that this fine fellow has to take the field against my other
son, against our dear Francois. Yes, such is the whim of destiny, which,
once again, gives orders and of which, once again, I am the
clear-sighted and subtle interpreter. Of course it is not a question of
a protracted and daily struggle. On the contrary, something short,
violent and decisive: a duel, for instance. That's it, a duel; you
understand, a serious duel. Not a turn with the fists, ending in a few
bruises; no, what you call a duel to the death, because one of the two
adversaries must be left, on the ground, because there must be a victor
and a victim, in short, a living combatant and a dead one."

Veronique had turned her head a little and she saw that he was smiling.
Never before had she so plainly perceived the madness of that man, who
smiled at the thought of a mortal contest between two children both of
whom were his sons. The whole thing was so extravagant that Veronique,
so to speak, did not suffer. It was all outside the limits of suffering.

"There is something better, Veronique," he said, gloating over every
syllable. "There's something better. Yes, destiny has devised a
refinement which I dislike, but to which, as a faithful servant, I have
to give effect. It has devised that you should be present at the duel.
Capital; you, Francois' mother, must see him fight. And, upon my word, I
wonder whether that apparent malevolence is not a mercy in disguise. Let
us say that you owe it to me, shall we, and that I myself am granting
you this unexpected, I will even say, this unjust favour? For, when all
is said, though Raynold is more powerful and experienced than Francois
and though, logically, Francois ought to be beaten, how it must add to
his courage and strength to know that he is fighting before his mother's
eyes! He will feel like a knight errant who stakes all his pride on
winning. He will be a son whose victory will save his mother . . . at
least, so he will think. Really the advantage is too great; and you can
thank me, Veronique, if this duel, as I am sure it will, does not--and I
am sure that it will not--make your heart beat a little faster . . . .
Unless . . . unless I carry out the infernal programme to the end
. . . . Ah, in that case, you poor little thing! . . ."

He gripped her once more and, lifting her to her feet in front of him,
pressing his face against hers, he said, in a sudden fit of rage:

"So you won't give in?"

"No, no!" she cried.

"You will never give in?"

"Never! Never! Never!" she repeated, with increasing vehemence.

"You hate me more than everything?"

"I hate you more than I love my son."

"You lie, you lie!" he snarled. "You lie! Nothing comes above your son!"

"Yes, my hatred for you."

All Veronique's passion of revolt, all the detestation which she had
succeeded in restraining now burst forth; and, indifferent to what might
come of it, she flung the words of hatred full in his face:

"I hate you! I hate you! I would have my son die before my eyes, I would
witness his agony, anything rather than the horror of your sight and
presence. I hate you! You killed my father! You are an unclean murderer,
a halfwitted, savage idiot, a criminal lunatic! I hate you!"

He lifted her with an effort, carried her to the window and threw her on
the ground, spluttering:

"On your knees! On your knees! The punishment is beginning. You would
scoff at me, you hussy, would you? Well, you shall see!"

He forced her to her knees and then, pushing her against the lower wall
and opening the window, he fastened her head to the rail of the balcony
by means of a cord round her neck and under her arms. He ended by
gagging her with a scarf:

"And now look!" he cried. "The curtain's going up! Boy Francois doing
his exercises! . . . Oh, you hate me, do you? Oh, you would rather have
hell than a kiss from Vorski? Well, my darling, you shall have hell; and
I'm arranging a little performance for you, one of my own composing and
a highly original one at that! . . . Also, I may tell you, it's too late
now to change your mind. The thing's irrevocable. You may beg and
entreat for mercy as much as you like; it's too late! The duel, followed
by the cross; that's the programme. Say your prayers, Veronique, and
call on Heaven. Shout for assistance if it amuses you . . . . Listen, I
know that your brat is expecting a rescuer, a professor of clap-trap, a
Don Quixote of adventure. Let him come! Vorski will give him the
reception he deserves! The more the merrier! We shall see some fun!
. . . And, if the very gods join in the game and take up your defence, I
shan't care! It's no longer their business, it's my business. It's no
longer a question of Sarek and the treasure and the great secret and all
the humbug of the God-Stone! It's a question of yourself! You have spat
in Vorski's face and Vorski is taking his revenge. He is taking his
revenge! It is the glorious hour. What exquisite joy! . . . To do evil
as others do good, lavishly and profusely! To do evil! To kill,
torture, break, ruin and destroy! . . . Oh, the fierce delight of being
a Vorski!"

He stamped across the room, striking the floor at each step and hustling
the furniture. His haggard eyes roamed in all directions. He would have
liked to begin his work of destruction at once, strangling some victim,
giving work to his greedy fingers, executing the incoherent orders of
his insane imagination.

Suddenly, he drew a revolver and, brutishly, stupidly, fired bullets
into the mirrors, the pictures, the window-panes.

And, still gesticulating, still capering about, an ominous and sinister
figure, he opened the door, bellowing:

"Vorski's having his revenge! Vorski's having his revenge!"




CHAPTER XII

THE ASCENT OF GOLGOTHA


Twenty or thirty minutes elapsed. Veronique was still alone. The cords
cut into her flesh; and the rails of the balcony bruised her forehead.
The gag choked her. Her knees, bent in two and doubled up beneath her,
carried the whole weight of her body. It was an intolerable position, an
unceasing torture . . . . Still, though she suffered, she was not very
clearly aware of it. She was unconscious of her physical suffering; and
she had already undergone such mental suffering that this supreme ordeal
did not awaken her drowsing senses.

She hardly thought. Sometimes she said to herself that she was about to
die; and she already felt the repose of the after-life, as one
sometimes, amidst a storm, feels in advance the wide peace of the
harbour. Hideous things were sure to happen between the present moment
and the conclusion which would set her free; but her brain refused to
dwell on them; and her son's fate in particular elicited only momentary
thoughts, which were immediately dispersed.

At heart, as there was nothing to enlighten her as to her frame of mind,
she was hoping for a miracle. Would the miracle occur in Vorski?
Incapable of generosity though he was, would not the monster hesitate
none the less in the presence of an utterly unnecessary crime? A father
does not kill his son, or at least the act must be brought about by
imperative reasons; and Vorski had no such reasons to allege against a
mere child whom he did not know and whom he could not hate except with
an artificial hatred.

Her torpor was lulled by this hope of a miracle. All the sounds which
reechoed through the house, sounds of discussions, sounds of hurrying
footsteps, seemed to her to indicate not so much the preparations for
the events foretold as the sign of interruptions which would ruin all
Vorski's plans. Had not her dear Francois said that nothing could any
longer separate them from each other and that, at the moment when
everything might seem lost and even when everything would be really
lost, they must keep their faith intact?

"My Francois," she repeated, "my darling Francois, you shall not die
. . . we shall see each other again . . . you promised me!"

Out of doors, a blue sky, flecked with a few menacing clouds, hung
outspread above the tall oaks. In front of her, beyond that same window
at which her father had appeared to her, in the middle of the grass
which she had crossed with Honorine on the day of her arrival, a site
had been recently cleared and covered with sand, like an arena. Was it
here that her son was to fight? She received the sudden intuition that
it must be; and her heart contracted.

"Francois," she said, "Francois, have no fear . . . . I shall save you
. . . . Oh, forgive me, Francois darling, forgive me! . . . All this is
a punishment for the wrong I once did . . . . It is the atonement
. . . . The son is atoning for the mother . . . . Forgive me, forgive
me! . . ."

At that moment a door opened on the ground-floor and voices ascended
from the doorstep. She recognized Vorski's voice among them.

"So it's understood," he said. "We shall each go our own way; you two on
the left, I on the right. You'll take this kid with you, I'll take the
other and we'll meet in the lists. You'll be the seconds, so to speak,
of yours and I'll be the second of mine, so that all the rules will be
observed."

Veronique shut her eyes, for she did not wish to see her son, who would
no doubt be maltreated, led out to fight like a slave. She could hear
the creaking of two sets of footsteps following the two circular paths.
Vorski was laughing and speechifying.

The groups turned and advanced in opposite directions.

"Don't come any nearer," Vorski ordered. "Let the two adversaries take
their places. Halt, both of you. Good. And not a word, do you hear? If
either of you speaks, I shall cut him down without mercy. Are you ready?
Begin!"

So the terrible thing was commencing. In accordance with Vorski's will,
the duel was about to take place before the mother, the son was about to
fight before her face. How could she do other than look? She opened her
eyes.

She at once saw the two come to grips and hold each other off. But she
did not at once understand what she saw, or at least she failed to
understand its exact meaning. She saw the two boys, it was true; but
which of them was Francois and which was Raynold?

"Oh," she stammered, "it's horrible! . . . And yet . . . no, I must be
mistaken . . . . It's not possible . . ."

She was not mistaken. The two boys were dressed alike, in the same
velvet knickerbockers, the same white-flannel shirts, the same leather
belts. But each had his head wrapped in a red-silk scarf, with two holes
for the eyes, as in a highwayman's mask.

Which was Francois? Which was Raynold?

Now she remembered Vorski's inexplicable threat. This was what he meant
by the programme drawn up by himself, this was to what he alluded when
he spoke of a little play of his composing. Not only was the son
fighting before the mother, but she did not know which was her son.

It was an infernal refinement of cruelty; Vorski himself had said so. No
agony could add to Veronique's agony.

The miracle which she had hoped for lay chiefly in herself and in the
love which she bore her son. Because her son was fighting before her
eyes, she felt certain that her son could not die. She would protect him
against the blows and against the ruses of the foe. She would make the
dagger swerve, she would ward off death from the head which she adored.
She would inspire her boy with dauntless energy, with the will to
attack, with indefatigable strength, with the spirit that foretells and
seizes the propitious moment. But now that both of them were veiled, on
which was she to exercise her good influence, for which to pray, against
which to rebel?

She knew nothing. There was no clue to enlighten her. One of them was
taller, slimmer and lither in his movements. Was this Francois? The
other was more thick-set, stronger and stouter in appearance. Was this
Raynold? She could not tell. Nothing but a glimpse of a face, or even a
fleeting expression, could have revealed the truth to her. But how was
she to pierce the impenetrable mask?

And the fight continued, more terrible for her than if she had seen her
son with his face uncovered.

"Bravo!" cried Vorski, applauding an attack.

He seemed to be following the duel like a connoisseur, with the
affectation of impartiality displayed by a good judge of fighting who
above all things wants the best man to win. And yet it was one of his
sons that he had condemned to death.

Facing her stood the two accomplices, both of them men with brutal
faces, pointed skulls and big noses with spectacles. One of them was
extremely thin; the other was also thin, but with a swollen paunch like
a leather bottle. These two did not applaud and remained indifferent, or
perhaps even hostile, to the sight before them.

"Capital!" cried Vorski, approvingly. "Well parried! Oh, you're a couple
of sturdy fellows and I'm wondering to whom to award the palm."

He pranced around the adversaries, urging them on in a hoarse voice in
which Veronique, remembering certain scenes in the past, seemed to
recognize the effects of drink. Nevertheless the poor thing made an
effort to stretch out her bound hands towards him; and she moaned under
her gag:

"Mercy! Mercy! I can't bear it. Have pity!"

It was impossible for her martyrdom to last. Her heart was beating so
violently that it shook her from head to foot; and she was on the point
of fainting when an incident occurred that gave her fresh life. One of
the boys, after a fairly stubborn tussle, had jumped back and was
swiftly bandaging his right wrist, from which a few drops of blood were
trickling. Veronique seemed to remember seeing in her son's hand the
small blue-and-white handkerchief which the boy was using.

She was immediately and irresistibly convinced. The boy--it was the more
slender and agile of the two--had more grace than the other, more
distinction, greater elegance of movement.

"It's Francois," she murmured. "Yes, yes, it's he . . . . It's you,
isn't it, my darling? I recognize you now . . . . The other is common
and heavy . . . . It's you, my darling! . . . Oh, my Francois, my
dearest Francois!"

In fact, though both were fighting with equal fierceness, this one
displayed less savage fury and blind rage in his efforts. It was as
though he were trying not so much to kill his adversary as to wound him
and as though his attacks were directed rather to preserving himself
from the death that lay in wait for him. Veronique felt alarmed and
stammered, as though he could hear her:

"Don't spare him, my darling! He's a monster, too! . . . Oh, dear, if
you're generous, you're lost! . . . Francois, Francois, mind what you're
doing!"

The blade of the dagger had flashed over the head of the one whom she
called her son; and she had cried out, under her gag, to warn him.
Francois having avoided the blow, she felt persuaded that her cry had
reached his ears; and she continued instinctively to put him on his
guard and advise him:

"Take a rest . . . . Get your breath . . . . Whatever you do, keep your
eyes on him . . . . He's getting ready to do something . . . . He's
going to rush at you . . . . Here he comes! Oh, my darling, another inch
and he would have stabbed you in the neck! . . . Be careful, darling,
he's treacherous . . . there's no trick too mean for him to play
. . . ."

But the unhappy mother felt, however reluctant she might yet be to admit
it, that the one whom she called her son was beginning to lose strength.
Certain signs proclaimed a reduced power of resistance, while the other,
on the contrary, was gaining in eagerness and vigour. Francois retreated
until he reached the edge of the arena.

"Hi, you, boy!" grinned Vorski. "You're not thinking of running away,
are you? Keep your nerve, damn it! Show some pluck! Remember the
conditions!"

The boy rushed forward with renewed zest; and it was the other's turn to
fall back. Vorski clapped his hands, while Veronique murmured:

"It's for me that he's risking his life. The monster must have told him,
'Your mother's fate depends on you. If you win, she's saved.' And he has
sworn to win. He knows that I am watching him. He guesses that I am
here. He hears me. Bless you, my darling!"

It was the last phase of the duel. Veronique trembled all over,
exhausted by her emotion and by the too violent alternation of hope and
anguish. Once again her son lost ground and once again he leapt
forward. But, in the final struggle that followed, he lost his balance
and fell on his back, with his right arm caught under his body.

His adversary at once stooped, pressed his knee on the other's chest and
raised his arm. The dagger gleamed in the air.

"Help! Help!" Veronique gasped, choking under her gag.

She flattened her breast against the wall, without thinking of the cords
which tortured her. Her forehead was bleeding, cut by the sharp corner
of the rail, and she felt that she was about to die of the death of her
son. Vorski had approached and stood without moving, with a merciless
look on his face.

Twenty seconds, thirty seconds passed. With his outstretched left hand,
Francois checked his adversary's attempt. But the victorious arm sank
lower and lower, the dagger descended, the point was only an inch or two
from the neck.

Vorski stooped. Just then, he was behind Raynold, so that neither
Raynold nor Francois could see him; and he was watching most
attentively, as though intending to intervene at some given moment. But
in whose favor would he intervene? Was it his plan to save Francois?

Veronique no longer breathed; her eyes were enormously dilated; she hung
between life and death.

The point of the dagger touched the neck and must have pricked the
flesh, but only very slightly, for it was still held back by Francois'
resistance.

Vorski bent lower. He stood over the fighters and did not take his eyes
from the deadly point. Suddenly he took a pen-knife from his pocket,
opened it and waited. A few more seconds elapsed. The dagger continued
to descend. Then quickly he gashed Raynold's shoulder with the blade of
his knife.

The boy uttered a cry of pain. His grip at once became relaxed; and, at
the same time, Francois, set free, his right arm released, half rose,
resumed the offensive and, without seeing Vorski or understanding what
had happened, in an instinctive impulse of his whole being escaped from
death and revolting against his adversary, struck him full in the face.
Raynold in his turn fell like a log.

All this had certainly lasted no longer than ten seconds. But the
incident was so unexpected and took Veronique so greatly aback that, not
realizing, not knowing that she ought to rejoice, believing rather that
she was mistaken and that the real Francois was dead, murdered by
Vorski, the poor thing sank into a huddled heap and lost consciousness.

       *       *       *       *       *

A long, long time elapsed. Then, gradually, Veronique became aware of
certain sensations. She heard the clock strike four; and she said:

"It's two hours since Francois died. For it was he who died."

She had not a doubt that the duel had ended in this way. Vorski would
never have allowed Francois to be the victor and his other son to be
killed. And so it was against her own child that she had sent up wishes
and for the monster that she had prayed!

"Francois is dead," she repeated. "Vorski has killed him."

The door opened and she heard Vorski's voice. He entered, with an
unsteady gait:

"A thousand pardons, dear lady, but I think Vorski must have fallen
asleep. It's your father's fault, Veronique! He had hidden away in his
cellar some confounded Saumur which Conrad and Otto discovered and which
has fuddled me a bit! But don't cry; we shall make up for lost time
. . . . Besides everything must be settled by midnight. So . . ."

He had come nearer; and he now exclaimed:

"What! Did that rascal of a Vorski leave you tied up? What a brute that
Vorski is! And how uncomfortable you must be! . . . Hang it all, how
pale you are! I say, look here, you're not dead, are you? That would be
a nasty trick to play us!"

He took Veronique's hand, which she promptly snatched away.

"Capital! We still loathe our little Vorski! Then that's all right and
there's plenty of reserve strength. You'll hold out to the end,
Veronique."

He listened:

"What is it? Who's calling me? Is it you, Otto? Come up . . . . Well,
Otto, what news? I've been asleep, you know. That damned Saumur wine!
. . ."

Otto, one of the two accomplices, entered the room at a run. He was the
one whose paunch bulged so oddly.

"What news?" he exclaimed. "Why, this: I've seen some one on the
island!"

Vorski began to laugh:

"You're drunk, Otto. That damned Saumur wine . . ."

"I'm not drunk. I saw . . . and so did Conrad . . ."

"Oho," said Vorski, more seriously, "if Conrad was with you! Well, what
did you see?"

"A white figure, which hid when we came along."

"Where?"

"Between the village and the heath, in a little wood of chestnut trees."

"On the other side of the island then?"

"Yes."

"All right. We'll take our precautions."

"How? There may be several of them."

"I don't care if there are ten of them; it would make no difference.
Where's Conrad?"

"By the foot-bridge which we put in the place of the bridge that was
burnt down. He's keeping watch from there."

"Conrad is a clever one. When the bridge was burnt, we were kept on the
other side; if the foot-bridge is burnt, it'll produce the same
hindrance. Veronique, I really believe they're coming to rescue you.
It's the miracle you expected, the assistance you hoped for. But it's
too late, my beauty."

He untied the bonds that fastened her to the balcony, carried her to the
sofa and loosened the gag slightly:

"Sleep, my wench," he said. "Get what rest you can. You're only half-way
to Golgotha yet; and the last bit of the ascent will be the hardest."

He went away jesting; and Veronique heard the two men exchange a few
sentences which proved to her that Otto and Conrad were only supers who
knew nothing of the business in hand:

"Who's this wretched woman whom you're persecuting?" asked Otto.

"That doesn't concern you."

"Still, Conrad and I would like to know something about it."

"Lord, why?"

"Oh, just because!"

"Conrad and you are a pair of fools," replied Vorski. "When I took you
into my service and helped you to escape with me, I told you all I could
of my plans. You accepted my conditions. It was your look-out. You've
got to see this thing through now."

"And if we don't?"

"If you don't, beware of the consequences. I don't like shirkers
. . . ."

More hours passed. Nothing, it seemed to Veronique, could any longer
save her from the end for which she craved with all her heart. She no
longer hoped for the intervention of which Otto had spoken. In reality
she was not thinking at all. Her son was dead; and she had no other wish
than to join him without delay, even at the cost of the most dreadful
suffering. What did that suffering matter to her? There are limits to
the strength of those who are tortured; and she was so near to reaching
those limits that her agony would not last long.

She began to pray. Once more the memory of the past forced itself on her
mind; and the fault which she had committed seemed to her the cause of
all the misfortunes heaped upon her.

And, while praying, exhausted, harassed, in a state of nervous
extenuation which left her indifferent to anything that might happen,
she fell asleep.

Vorski's return did not even rouse her. He had to shake her:

"The hour is at hand, my girl. Say your prayers."

He spoke low, so that his assistants might not hear what he said; and,
whispering in her ear, he told her things of long ago, insignificant
trifles which he dribbled out in a thick tone. At last he called out:

"It's still too light, Otto. Go and see what you can find in the larder,
will you? I'm hungry."

They sat down to table, but Vorski stood up again at once:

"Don't look at me, my girl. Your eyes worry me. What do you expect? My
conscience doesn't worry me when I'm alone, but it gets worked up when a
fine pair of eyes like yours go right through me. Lower your lids, my
pretty one."

He bound Veronique's eyes with a handkerchief which he knotted behind
her head. But this did not satisfy him; and he unhooked a muslin curtain
from the window, wrapped her whole head in it and wound it round her
neck. Then he sat down again to eat and drink.

The three of them hardly spoke and said not a word of their trip across
the island, nor of the duel of the afternoon. In any case, these were
details which did not interest Veronique and which, even if she had paid
attention to them, would not have aroused her. Everything had become
indifferent to her. The words reached her ears but assumed no definite
meaning. She thought of nothing but dying.

When it was dark, Vorski gave the signal for departure.

"Then you're still determined?" asked Otto, in a voice betraying a
certain hostility.

"More so than ever. What's your reason for asking?"

"Nothing . . . . But, all the same . . ."

"All the same what?"

"Well, I may as well out with it, we only half like the job."

"You don't mean to say so! And you only discover it now, my man, after
stringing up the sisters Archignat and treating it as a lark!"

"I was drunk that day. You made us drink."

"Well, get boozed if you want to, old cock. Here, take the
brandy-bottle. Fill your flask and shut up . . . . Conrad, is the
stretcher ready?"

He turned to his victim:

"A polite attention for you, my dear . . . . Two old stilts of your
brat's, fastened together with straps . . . . It's very practical and
comfortable."

At half-past eight, the grim procession set out, with Vorski at the
head, carrying a lantern. The accomplices followed with the litter.

The clouds which had been threatening all the afternoon had now gathered
and were rolling, thick and black, over the island. The night was
falling swiftly. A stormy wind was blowing and made the candle flicker
in the lantern.

"Brrrr!" muttered Vorski. "Dismal work! A regular Golgotha evening."

He swerved and grunted at the sight of a little black shape bounding
along by his side:

"What's that? Look. It's a dog, isn't it?"

"It's the boy's mongrel," said Otto.

"Oh, of course, the famous All's Well! The brute's come in the nick of
time. Everything's going jolly well! Just wait a bit, you mangy beast!"

He aimed a kick at the dog. All's Well avoided it and keeping out of
reach, continued to accompany the procession, giving a muffled bark at
intervals.

It was a rough ascent; and every moment one of the three men, leaving
the invisible path that skirted the grass in front of the house and led
to the open space by the Fairies' Dolmen, tripped in the brambles or in
the runners of ivy.

"Halt!" Vorski commanded. "Stop and take breath, my lads. Otto, hand us
your flask. My heart's turning upside down."

He took a long pull:

"Your turn, Otto . . . . What, don't you want to? What's the matter with
you?"

"I'm thinking that there are people on the island who are looking for
us."

"Let them look!"

"And suppose they come by boat and climb that path in the cliffs which
the woman and the boy were trying to escape by this morning, the path we
found?"

"What we have to fear is an attack by land, not by sea. Well, the
foot-bridge is burnt. There's no means of communication."

"Unless they find the entrance to the cells, on the Black Heath, and
follow the tunnel to this place."

"Have they found the entrance?"

"I don't know."

"Well, granting that they do find it, haven't we just blocked the exit
on this side, broken down the staircase, thrown everything topsy-turvy?
To clear it will take them half a day and more. Whereas at midnight the
thing'll be done and by daybreak we shall be far away from Sarek."

"It'll be done, it'll be done; that is to say, we shall have one more
murder on our conscience. But . . ."

"But what?"

"What about the treasure?"

"Ah, the treasure! You've got it out at last! Well, make your mind easy:
your shares of it are as good as in your pockets."

"Are you sure of that?"

"Rather! Do you imagine that I'm staying here and doing all this dirty
work for fun?"

They resumed their progress. After a quarter of an hour, a few drops of
rain began to fall. There was a clap of thunder. The storm still
appeared to be some distance away.

They had difficulty in completing the rough ascent: and Vorski had to
help his companions.

"At last!" he said. "We're there. Otto, hand me the flask. That's it.
Thanks."

They had laid their victim at the foot of the oak which had had its
lower branches removed. A flash of light revealed the inscription,
"V. d'H." Vorski picked up a rope, which had been left there in
readiness, and set a ladder against the trunk of the tree:

"We'll do as we did with the sisters Archignat," he said. "I'll pass the
cord over the big branch which we left intact. That will serve as a
pulley."

He interrupted himself and jumped to one side. Something extraordinary
had just happened.

"What's that?" he whispered. "What was it? Did you hear that whistling
sound?"

"Yes," said Conrad, "it grazed my ear. One would have said it was a
bullet."

"You're mad."

"I heard it too," said Otto, "and it seems to me that it hit the tree."

"What tree?"

"The oak, of course! It was as though somebody had fired at us."

"There was no report."

"A stone, then; a stone that must have hit the oak."

"We'll soon see," said Vorski.

He turned his lantern and at once let fly an oath:

"Damn it! Look, there, under the lettering."

They looked. An arrow was fixed at the spot to which he pointed. Its
feathered end was still quivering.

"An arrow!" gasped Conrad. "How is it possible? An arrow!"

And Otto spluttered:

"We're done for! It's us they were aiming at!"

"The man who took aim at us can't be far off," Vorski observed. "Keep
your eyes open. We'll have a look."

He swung the light in a circle which penetrated the surrounding
darkness.

"Stop," said Conrad, eagerly. "A little more to the right. Do you see?"

"Yes, yes, I see."

Thirty yards from where they stood, in the direction of the Calvary of
the Flowers, just beyond the blasted oak, they saw something white, a
figure which was trying, at least so it seemed, to hide behind a clump
of bushes.

"Not a word, not a movement," Vorski ordered. "Do nothing to let him
think that we've discovered him. Conrad, come with me. You, Otto, stay
here, with your revolver in your hand, and keep a good watch. If they
try to come near and to release her ladyship, fire two shots and we'll
run back at once. Is that understood?"

"Quite."

Vorski bent over Veronique and loosened the veil slightly. Her eyes and
mouth were still concealed by their bandages. She was breathing with
difficulty; the pulse was weak and slow.

"We have time," he muttered, "but we must hurry if we want her to die
according to plan. In any case she doesn't seem to be in pain. She has
lost all consciousness."

He put down the lantern and then softly, followed by his assistant,
stole towards the white figure, both of them choosing the places where
the shadow was densest.

But he soon became aware, on the one hand, that the figure, which had
seemed stationary, was moving as he himself moved forward, so that the
space between them remained the same, and, on the other hand, that it
was escorted by a small black figure frisking by its side.

"It's that filthy mongrel!" growled Vorski.

He quickened his pace: the distance did not decrease. He ran: the figure
in front of him ran likewise. And the strangest part of it was that they
heard no sound of leaves disturbed or of ground trampled by the
mysterious person running ahead of them.

"Damn it!" swore Vorski. "He's laughing at us. Suppose we fired at him,
Conrad?"

"He's too far. The bullets wouldn't reach him."

"All the same, we're not going to . . ."

The unknown individual led them to the end of the island and then down
to the entrance of the tunnel, passed close to the Priory, skirted the
west cliff and reached the foot-bridge, some of the planks of which were
still smouldering. Then he branched off, passed back by the other side
of the house and went up the grassy slope.

From time to time the dog barked gaily.

Vorski could not control his rage. However hard he tried, he was unable
to gain an inch of ground: and the pursuit had lasted fifteen minutes.
He ended by vituperating the enemy:

"Stop, can't you? Show yourself a man! . . . What are you trying to do?
Lead us into a trap? What for? . . . Is it her ladyship you're trying to
save? It's not worth while, in the state she's in. Oh, you damned, smart
bounder, if I could only get hold of you!"

Suddenly Conrad seized him by the skirt of his robe.

"What is it, Conrad?"

"Look. He seems to be stopping."

As Conrad suggested, the white figure for the first time was becoming
more and more clearly visible in the darkness and they were able to
distinguish, through the leaves of a thicket, its present attitude, with
the arms slightly opened, the back bowed, the legs bent and apparently
crossed on the ground.

"He must have fallen," said Conrad.

Vorski, after running forward, shouted:

"Am I to shoot, you scum? I've got the drop on you. Hands up, or I
fire."

Nothing stirred.

"It's your own look-out! If you show fight, you're a dead man. I shall
count three and fire."

He walked to twenty yards of the figure and counted, with outstretched
arm:

"One . . . two . . . . Are you ready, Conrad? Fire!"

The two bullets were discharged at the same time.

There was a cry of distress. The figure seemed to collapse. The two men
rushed forward:

"Ah, now you've got it, you rascal! I'll show you the stuff that
Vorski's made of! You've given me a pretty run, you oaf! Well, your
account's settled!"

After the first few steps, he slackened his speed, for fear of a
surprise. The figure did not move; and Vorski, on coming close, saw that
it had the limp and misshapen look of a dead man, of a corpse. Nothing
remained but to fall upon it. This was what Vorski did, laughing and
jesting:

"A good bag, Conrad! Let's pick up the game."

But he was greatly surprised, on picking up the game, to feel in his
hands nothing but an almost impalpable quarry, consisting, to tell the
truth, of just a white robe, with no one inside it, the owner of the
robe having taken flight in good time, after hooking it to the thorns of
a thicket. As for the dog, he had disappeared.

"Damn and blast it!" roared Vorski. "He's cheated us, the ruffian! But
why, hang it, why?"

Venting his rage in the stupid fashion that was his habit, he was
stamping on the piece of stuff, when a thought struck him:

"Why? Because, damn it, as I said just now, it's a trap: a trap to get
us away from her ladyship while his friends went for Otto! Oh, what an
ass I've been!"

He started to go back in the dark and, as soon as he was able to see the
dolmen, he called out:

"Otto! Otto!"

"Halt! Who goes there?" answered Otto, in a scared voice.

"It's me . . . . Damn you, don't fire!"

"Who's there? You?"

"Yes, yes, you fool."

"But the two shots?"

"Nothing . . . . A mistake . . . . We'll tell you about it . . . ."

He was now close to the oak and, at once, taking up the lantern, turned
its rays upon his victim. She had not moved and lay stretched at the
foot of the tree, with her head wrapped in the veil.

"Ah!" he said. "I breathe again! Hang it, how frightened I was!"

"Frightened of what?"

"Of their taking her from us, of course!"

"Well, wasn't I here?"

"Oh, you! You've got no more pluck than a louse . . . and, if they had
gone for you . . ."

"I should have fired, at any rate. You'd have heard the signal."

"May be. Well, did nothing happen?"

"Nothing at all."

"Her ladyship didn't carry on too much?"

"She did at first. She moaned and groaned under her hood, until I lost
all patience."

"And then?"

"Oh, then! It didn't last long: I stunned her with a good blow of my
fist."

"You brute!" exclaimed Vorski. "If you've killed her, you're a dead
man."

He plumped down and glued his ear to his unfortunate victim's breast.

"No," he said, presently, "her heart is still beating. But that may not
last long. To work, lads. It must all be over in ten minutes."




CHAPTER XIII

"ELOI, ELOI, LAMA SABACHTHANI!"


The preparations were soon made; and Vorski himself took an active part
in them. Resting the ladder against the trunk of the tree, he passed one
end of the rope round his victim and the other over one of the upper
branches. Then, standing on the bottom rung, he instructed his
accomplices:

"Here, all you've got to do now is to pull. Get her on her feet first
and one of you keep her from falling."

He waited a moment. But Otto and Conrad were whispering to each other;
and he exclaimed:

"Look here, hurry up, will you? . . . Remember I'm making a pretty easy
target, if they took it into their heads to send a bullet or an arrow at
me. Are you ready?"

The two assistants did not reply.

"Well, this is a bit thick! What's the matter with you? Otto! Conrad!"

He leapt to the ground and shook them:

"You're a pair of nice ones, you are! At this rate, we should still be
at it to-morrow morning . . . and the whole thing will miscarry . . . .
Answer me, Otto, can't you?" He turned the light full on Otto's face.
"Look here, what's all this about? Are you wriggling out of it? If so,
you'd better say so! And you, Conrad? Are you both going on strike?"

Otto wagged his head:

"On strike . . . that's saying a lot. But Conrad and I would like a word
or two of explanation?"

"Explanation? What about, you pudding-head? About the lady we're
executing? About either of the two brats? It's no use taking that line,
my man. I said to you, when I first mentioned the business, 'Will you go
to work blindfold? There'll be a tough job and plenty of bloodshed. But
there's big money at the end of it.'"

"That's the whole question," said Otto.

"Say what you mean, you jackass!"

"It's for you to say and repeat the terms of our agreement. What are
they?"

"You know as well as I do."

"Exactly, it's to remind you of them that I'm asking you to repeat
them."

"I remember them exactly. I get the treasure; and out of the treasure I
pay you two hundred thousand francs between the two of you."

"That's so and it's not quite so. We'll come back to that. Let's begin
by talking of this famous treasure. Here have we been grinding away for
weeks, wallowing in blood, living in a nightmare of every sort of crime
. . . and not a thing in sight!"

Vorski shrugged his shoulders:

"You're getting denser and denser, my poor Otto! You know there were
certain things to be done first. They're all done, except one. In a few
minutes, this will be finished too and the treasure will be ours!"

"How do we know?"

"Do you think I'd have done all that I have done, if I wasn't sure of
the result . . . as sure as I am that I'm alive? Everything has happened
in a certain given order. It was all predetermined. The last thing will
come at the hour foretold and will open the gate for me."

"The gate of hell," sneered Otto, "as I heard Maguennoc call it."

"Call it by that name or another, it opens on the treasure which I shall
have won."

"Very well," said Otto, impressed by Vorski's tone of conviction, "very
well. I'm willing to believe you're right. But what's to tell us that we
shall have our share?"

"You shall have your share for the simple reason that the possession of
the treasure will provide me with such indescribable wealth that I'm not
likely to risk having trouble with you two fellows for the sake of a
couple of hundred thousand francs."

"So we have your word?"

"Of course."

"Your word that all the clauses of our agreement shall be respected."

"Of course. What are you driving at?"

"This, that you've begun to trick us in the meanest way by breaking one
of the clauses of the agreement."

"What's that? What are you talking about? Do you realize whom you're
speaking to?"

"I'm speaking to you, Vorski."

Vorski laid violent hands on his accomplice:

"What's this? You dare to insult me? To call me by my name, me, me?"

"What of it, seeing that you've robbed me of what's mine by rights?"

Vorski controlled himself and, in a voice trembling with anger:

"Say what you have to say and be careful, my man, for you're playing a
dangerous game. Speak out."

"It's this," said Otto. "Apart from the treasure, apart from the two
hundred thousand francs, it was arranged between us--you held up your
hand and took your oath on it--that any loose cash found by either of us
in the course of the business would be divided in equal shares: half for
you, half for Conrad and myself. Is that so?"

"That's so."

"Then pay up," said Otto, holding out his hand.

"Pay up what? I haven't found anything."

"That's a lie. While we were settling the sisters Archignat, you
discovered on one of them, tucked away in her bodice, the hoard which we
couldn't find in their house."

"Well, that's a likely story!" said Vorski, in a tone which betrayed his
embarrassment.

"It's absolutely the truth."

"Prove it."

"Just fish out that little parcel, tied up with string, which you've got
pinned inside your shirt, just there," said Otto, touching Vorski's
chest with his finger. "Fish it out and let's have a look at those fifty
thousand-franc notes."

Vorski made no reply. He was dazed, like a man who does not understand
what is happening to him and who is trying to guess how his adversary
procured a weapon against him.

"Do you admit it?" asked Otto.

"Why not?" he rejoined. "I meant to square up later, in the lump."

"Square up now. We'd rather have it that way."

"And suppose I refuse?"

"You won't refuse."

"Suppose I do?"

"In that case, look out for yourself!"

"I have nothing to fear. There's only two of you."

"There's three of us, at least."

"Where's the third?"

"The third is a gentleman who seems cleverer than most, from what Conrad
tells me: brrr! . . . The one who fooled you just now, the one with the
arrow and the white robe!"

"You propose to call him?"

"Rather!"

Vorski felt that the game was not equal. The two assistants were
standing on either side of him and pressing him hard. He had to yield:

"Here, you thief! Here, you robber!" he shouted, taking out the parcel
and unfolding the notes.

"It's not worth while counting," said Otto, snatching the bundle from
him unawares.

"Hi! . . ."

"We'll do it this way: half for Conrad, half for me."

"Oh, you blackguard! Oh, you double-dyed thief! I'll make you pay for
this. I don't care a button about the money. But to rob me as though
you'd decoyed me into a wood, so to speak! I shouldn't like to be in
your skin, my lad!"

He continued to insult the other and then, suddenly, burst into a laugh,
a forced, malicious laugh:

"After all, Otto, upon my word, well played! But where and how did you
come to know it? You'll tell me that, won't you? . . . Meanwhile, we've
not a minute to lose. We're agreed all round, aren't we? And you'll get
on with the work?"

"Willingly, since you're taking the thing so well," said Otto. And he
added, obsequiously, "After all . . . you have a style about you, sir!
You're a fine gentleman, you are!"

"And you, you're a varlet whom I pay. You've had your money, so hurry
up. The business is urgent."

       *       *       *       *       *

The "business," as the frightful creatures called it, was soon done.
Climbing on his ladder, Vorski repeated his orders, which were executed
in docile fashion by Conrad and Otto.

They raised the victim to her feet and then, keeping her upright, hauled
at the rope. Vorski seized the poor woman and, as her knees were bent,
violently forced them straight. Thus flattened against the trunk of the
tree, with her skirt tightened round her legs, her arms hanging to right
and left at no great distance from her body, she was bound round the
waist and under the arms.

She seemed not to have recovered from her blow and uttered no sound of
complaint. Vorski tried to speak a few words, but spluttered them,
incapable of utterance. Then he tried to raise her head, but abandoned
the attempt, lacking the courage to touch her who was about to die: and
the head dropped low on the breast.

He at once got down and stammered:

"The brandy, Otto. Have you the flask? Oh, damn it, what a beastly
business!"

"There's time yet," Conrad suggested.

Vorski took a few sips and cried:

"Time . . . for what? To let her off? Listen to me, Conrad. Rather than
let her off, I'd sooner . . . yes, I'd sooner die in her stead. Give up
my task? Ah, you don't know what my task or what my object is! Besides
. . ."

He drank some more:

"It's excellent brandy, but, to settle my heart, I'd rather have rum.
Have you any, Conrad?"

"A drain at the bottom of a flask."

"Hand it over."

They had screened the lantern lest they should be seen; and they sat
close up to the tree, determined to keep silence. But this fresh drink
went to their heads. Vorski began to hold forth very excitedly:

"You've no need of any explanations. The woman who's dying up there,
it's no use your knowing her name. It's enough if you know that she's
the fourth of the women who were to die on the cross and was specially
appointed by fate. But there's one thing I can say to you, now that
Vorski's triumph is about to shine forth before your eyes. In fact I
take a certain pride in telling you, for, while all that's happened so
far has depended on me and my will, the thing that's going to happen
directly depends on the mightiest of will, wills working for Vorski!"

He repeated several times, as though smacking his lips over the name:

"For Vorski . . . For Vorski!"

And he stood up, impelled by the exuberance of his thoughts to walk up
and down and wave his arms:

"Vorski, son of a king, Vorski, the elect of destiny, prepare yourself!
Your time has come! Either you are the lowest of adventurers and the
guiltiest of all the great criminals dyed in the blood of their
fellow-men, or else you are really the inspired prophet whom the gods
crown with glory. A superman or a highwayman: that is fate's decree. The
last heart-beats of the sacred victim sacrificed to the gods are marking
the supreme seconds. Listen to them, you two!"

Climbing the ladder, he tried to hear those poor beats of an exhausted
heart. But the head, drooping to the left, prevented him from putting
his ear to the breast; and he dared not touch it. The silence was broken
only by a hoarse and irregular breath.

He said, in a low whisper:

"Veronique, do you hear me? Veronique . . . . Veronique . . . ."

After a moment's hesitation:

"I want you to know it . . . yes, I myself am terrified at what I'm
doing. But it's fate . . . . You remember the prophecy? 'Your wife shall
die on the cross.' Why, your very name, Veronique, demands it! . . .
Remember St. Veronica wiping Christ's face with a handkerchief and the
Saviour's sacred image remaining on the handkerchief . . . . Veronique,
you can hear me, surely? Veronique . . ."

He ran down hurriedly, snatched the flask of rum from Conrad's hands and
emptied it at a draught.

He was now seized with a sort of delirium which made him rave for a few
moments in a language which his accomplices did not understand. Then he
began to challenge the invisible enemy, to challenge the gods, to hurl
forth imprecations and blasphemies:

"Vorski is the mightiest of all men, Vorski governs fate. The elements
and the mysterious powers of nature are compelled to obey him.
Everything will fall out as he has determined; and the great secret will
be declared to him in the mystic forms and according to the rules of the
Kabala. Vorski is awaited as the prophet. Vorski will be welcomed with
cries of joy and ecstasy; and one whom I know not, one whom I can only
half see, will come to meet him with palms and benedictions. Let the
unknown make ready! Let him arise from the darkness and ascend from
hell! Here stands Vorski. To the sound of bells, to the singing of
alleluias, let the fateful sign be revealed upon the face of the
heavens, while the earth opens and sends forth whirling flames!"

He fell silent, as though he had descried in the air the signs which he
foretold. The hopeless death-rattle of the dying woman sounded from
overhead. The storm growled in the distance; and the black clouds were
rent by lightning. All nature seemed to be responding to the ruffian's
appeal.

His grandiloquent speech and his play-acting made a great impression on
the two accomplices.

"He frightens me," Otto muttered.

"It's the rum," Conrad replied. "But all the same he's foretelling
terrible things."

"Things which prowl round us," shouted Vorski, whose ears noticed the
least sound, "things which make part of the present moment and have been
bequeathed to us by the pageant of the centuries. It's like a
prodigious childbirth. And I tell the two of you, you will be the amazed
witnesses of these things! Otto and Conrad, be prepared as I am: the
earth will shake; and, at the very spot where Vorski is to win the
God-Stone, a column of fire will rise up to the sky."

"He doesn't know what he's saying," mumbled Conrad.

"And there he is on the ladder again," whispered Otto. "It'll serve him
right if he gets an arrow through him."

But Vorski's exaltation knew no bounds. The end was at hand. Extenuated
by pain, the victim was in her death-agony.

Beginning very low, so as to be heard by none save her, but raising his
voice gradually, Vorski said:

"Veronique . . . . Veronique . . . . You are fulfilling your mission
. . . . You are nearing the top of the ascent . . . . All honour to you!
You deserve a share in my triumph . . . . All honour to you! Listen! You
hear it already, don't you? The artillery of the heavens is drawing
near. My enemies are vanquished; you can no longer hope for rescue! Here
is the last beat of your heart . . . . Here is your last cry: '_Eloi,
Eloi, lama sabachthani?_ My God, my God, why hast Thou forsaken me?'"

He screamed with laughter, like a man laughing at the most riotous
adventure. Then came silence. The roars of thunder ceased. Vorski bent
forward and suddenly, from the top of the ladder, shouted:

"_Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani!_ The gods have forsaken her. Death has
done its work. The last of the four women is dead. Veronique is dead!"

He was silent once again and then roared twice over:

"Veronique is dead! Veronique is dead!"

Once again there was a great, deep silence.

And all of a sudden the earth shook, not with a vibration produced by
the thunder, but with a deep inner convulsion, which came from the very
bowels of the earth and was repeated several times, like a noise
reechoing through the woods and hills.

And almost at the same time, close by, at the other end of the
semicircle of oaks, a fountain of fire shot forth and rose to the sky,
in a whirl of smoke in which flared red, yellow and violet flames.

Vorski did not speak a word. His companions stood aghast. One of them
stammered:

"It's the old rotten oak, the one which has already been struck by
lightning."

Though the fire had disappeared almost instantly, the three men retained
the fantastic vision of the old oak, all aglow, vomiting flames and
smoke of many colours.

"This is the entrance leading to the God-Stone," said Vorski, solemnly.
"Destiny has spoken, as I said it would: and it has spoken at the
bidding of me who was once its servant and who am now its master."

He advanced, carrying the lantern. They were surprised to see that the
tree showed no trace of fire and that the mass of dry leaves, held as in
a bowl where a few lower branches were outspread, had not caught fire.

"Yet another miracle," said Vorski. "It is all an inconceivable
miracle."

"What are we going to do?" asked Conrad.

"Go in by the entrance revealed to us . . . . Take the ladder, Conrad,
and feel with your hand in that heap of leaves. The tree is hollow and
we shall soon see . . ."

"A tree can be as hollow as you please," said Otto, "but there are
always roots to it; and I can hardly believe in a passage through the
roots."

"I repeat, we shall see. Move the leaves, Conrad, clear them away."

"No, I won't," said Conrad, bluntly.

"What do you mean, you won't? Why not?"

"Have you forgotten Maguennoc? Have you forgotten that he tried to touch
the God-Stone and had to cut his hand off?"

"But this isn't the God-Stone!" Vorski snarled.

"How do you know? Maguennoc was always speaking of the gate of hell.
Isn't this what he meant when he talked like that?"

Vorski shrugged his shoulders:

"And you, Otto, are you afraid too?"

Otto did not reply: and Vorski himself did not seem eager to risk the
attempt, for he ended by saying:

"After all, there's no hurry. Let's wait till daylight comes. We will
cut down the tree with an axe: and that will show us better than
anything how things stand and how to go to work."

They agreed accordingly. But, as the signal had been seen by others
besides themselves and as they must not allow themselves to be
forestalled, they resolved to sit down opposite the tree, under the
shelter offered by the huge table of the Fairies' Dolmen.

"Otto," said Vorski, "go to the Priory, fetch us something to drink and
also bring an axe, some ropes and anything else that we're likely to
want."

The rain was beginning to pour in torrents. They settled themselves
under the dolmen and each in turn kept watch while the other slept.

Nothing happened during the night. The storm was very violent. They
could hear the waves roaring. Then gradually everything grew quiet.

At daybreak they attacked the oak-tree, which they soon overthrew by
pulling upon the ropes.

They now saw that, inside the tree itself, amid the rubbish and the dry
rot, a sort of trench had been dug, which extended through the mass of
sand and stones packed about the roots.

They cleared the ground with a pick-axe. Some steps at once came into
sight: there was a sudden drop of earth: and they saw a staircase which
followed a perpendicular wall and led down into the darkness. They threw
the light of their lantern before them. A cavern opened beneath their
feet.

Vorski was the first to venture down. The others followed him
cautiously.

The steps, which at first consisted of earthen stairs reinforced by
flints, were presently hewn out of the rock. The cave which they entered
was in no way peculiar and seemed rather to be a vestibule. It
communicated, in fact, with a sort of crypt, which had a vaulted ceiling
and walls of rough masonry of unmortared stones.

All around, like shapeless statues, stood twelve small menhirs, each of
which was surmounted by a horse's skull. Vorski touched one of these
skulls; it crumbled into dust.

"No one has been to this crypt," he said, "for twenty centuries. We are
the first men to tread the floor of it, the first to behold the traces
of the past which it contains."

He added, with increasing emphasis:

"It is the mortuary-chamber of a great chieftain. They used to bury his
favourite horses with him . . . and his weapons too. Look, here are axes
. . . and a flint knife; and we also find the remains of certain funeral
rites, as this piece of charcoal shows and, over there, those charred
bones . . . ."

His voice was husky with emotion. He muttered: "I am the first to enter
here. I was expected. A whole world awakens at my coming."

Conrad interrupted him:

"There are other doorways, another passage; and there's a sort of light
showing in the distance."

A narrow corridor brought them to a second chamber, through which they
reached yet a third. The three crypts were exactly alike, with the same
masonry, the same upright stones, the same horses' skulls.

"The tombs of three great chieftains," said Vorski. "They evidently lead
to the tomb of a king; and the chieftains must have been the king's
guards, after being his companions during his lifetime. No doubt it's
the next crypt."

He hesitated to go farther, not from fear, but from excessive excitement
and a sense of inflamed vanity which he was enjoying to the full:

"I am on the verge of knowledge," he declaimed, in dramatic tones.
"Vorski is approaching the goal and has only to put out his hand to be
regally rewarded for his labours and his struggles. The God-Stone is
there. For ages and ages men have sought to fathom the secret of the
island and not one has succeeded. Vorski came and the God-Stone is his.
So let it show itself to me and give me the promised power. There is
nothing between it and Vorski, nothing but my will. And I declare my
will! The prophet has risen out of the night. He is here. If there be,
in this kingdom of the dead, a shade whose duty it is to lead me to the
divine stone and place the golden crown upon my head, let that shade
arise! Here stands Vorski."

He went in.

The fourth room was much larger and shaped like a dome with a slightly
flattened summit. In the middle of the flattened part was a round hole,
no wider than the hole left by a very small flue; and from it there fell
a shaft of half-veiled light which formed a very plainly-defined disk on
the floor.

The centre of this disk was occupied by a little block of stones set
together. And on this block, as though purposely displayed, lay a metal
rod.

In other respects, this crypt did not differ from the first three. Like
them it was adorned with menhirs and horses' heads, like them it
contained traces of sacrifices.

Vorski did not take his eyes off the metal rod. Strange to say, the
metal gleamed as though no dust had ever covered it. He put out his
hand.

"No, no," said Conrad, quickly.

"Why not?"

"It may be the one Maguennoc touched and burnt his hand with."

"You're mad."

"Still . . ."

"Oh, I'm not afraid of anything!" Vorski declared taking hold of the
rod.

It was a leaden sceptre, very clumsily made, but nevertheless revealing
a certain artistic intention. Round the handle was a snake, here
encrusted in the lead, there standing out in relief. Its huge,
disproportionate head formed the pommel and was studded with silver
nails and little green pebbles transparent as emeralds.

"Is it the God-Stone?" Vorski muttered.

He handled the thing and examined it all over with respectful awe; and
he soon observed that the pommel shifted almost loose. He fingered it,
turned it to the left, to the right, until at length it gave a click and
the snake's head became unfastened.

There was a space inside, containing a stone, a tiny, pale-red stone,
with yellow streaks that looked like veins of gold.

"It's the God-Stone, it's the God-Stone!" said Vorski, greatly agitated.

"Don't touch it!" Conrad repeated, filled with alarm.

"What burnt Maguennoc will not burn me," replied Vorski, solemnly.

And, in bravado, swelling with pride and delight, he kept the mysterious
stone in the hollow of his hand, which he clenched with all his
strength:

"Let it burn me! I will let it! Let it sear my flesh! I shall be glad if
it will!"

Conrad made a sign to him and put his finger to his lips.

"What's the matter?" asked Vorski. "Do you hear anything?"

"Yes," said the other.

"So do I," said Otto.

What they heard was a rhythmical, measured sound, which rose and fell
and made a sort of irregular music.

"Why, it's close by!" mumbled Vorski. "It sounds as if it were in the
room."

It was in the room, as they soon learnt for certain; and there was no
doubt that the sound was very like a snore.

Conrad, who had ventured on this suggestion, was the first to laugh at
it; but Vorski said:

"Upon my word, I'm inclined to think you're right. It _is_ a snore
. . . . There must be some one here then?"

"It comes from over there," said Otto, "from that corner in the dark."

The light did not extend beyond the menhirs. Behind each of them opened
a small, shadowy chapel. Vorski turned his lantern into one of these and
at once uttered a cry of amazement:

"Some one . . . yes . . . there is some one . . . . Look . . . ."

The two accomplices came forward. On a heap of rubble, piled up in an
angle of the wall, a man lay sleeping, an old man with a white beard and
long white hair. A thousand wrinkles furrowed the skin of his face and
hands. There were blue rings round his closed eyelids. At least a
century must have passed over his head.

He was dressed in a patched and torn linen robe, which came down to his
feet. Round his neck and hanging over his chest was a string of those
sacred beads which the Gauls called serpents' eggs and which are
actually sea-eggs or sea-urchins. Within reach of his hand was a
handsome jadeite axe, covered with illegible symbols. On the ground, in
a row, lay sharp-edged flints, some large, flat rings, two ear-drops of
green jasper and two necklaces of fluted blue enamel.

The old man went on snoring.

Vorski muttered:

"The miracle continues . . . . It's a priest . . . a priest like those
of the olden time . . . of the time of the Druids."

"And then?" asked Otto.

"Why, then he's waiting for me!"

Conrad expressed his brutal opinion:

"I suggest we break his head with his axe."

But Vorski flew into a rage:

"If you touch a single hair of his head, you're a dead man!"

"Still . . ."

"Still what?"

"He may be an enemy . . . he may be the one whom we were pursuing last
night . . . . Remember . . . the white robe."

"You're the biggest fool I ever met! Do you think that, at his age, he
could have kept us on the run like that?"

He bent over and took the old man gently by the arm, saying:

"Wake up! . . . It's I!"

There was no answer. The man did not wake up.

Vorski insisted.

The man moved on his bed of stones, mumbled a few words and went to
sleep again.

Vorski, growing a little impatient, renewed his attempts, but more
vigorously, and raised his voice:

"I say, what about it? We can't hang about all day, you know. Come on!"

He shook the old man more roughly. The man made a movement of
irritation, pushed away his importunate visitor, clung to sleep a few
seconds longer and, in the end, turned round wearily and, in an angry
voice, growled:

"Oh, rats!"




CHAPTER XIV

THE ANCIENT DRUID


The three accomplices, who were perfectly acquainted with all the
niceties of the French language and familiar with every slang phrase,
did not for a moment mistake the true sense of that unexpected
exclamation. They were astounded.

Vorski put the question to Conrad and Otto.

"Eh? What does he say?"

"What you heard . . . . That's right," said Otto.

Vorski ended by making a fresh attack on the shoulder of the stranger,
who turned on his couch, stretched himself, yawned, seemed to fall
asleep again, and, suddenly admitting himself defeated, half sat up and
shouted:

"When you've quite finished, please! Can't a man have a quiet snooze
these days, in this beastly hole?"

A ray of light blinded his eyes: and he spluttered, in alarm:

"What is it? What do you want with me?"

Vorski put down his lantern on a projection in the wall; and the face
now stood clearly revealed. The old man, who had continued to vent his
ill temper in incoherent complaints, looked at his visitor, became
gradually calmer, even assumed an amiable and almost smiling expression
and, holding out his hand, exclaimed:

"Well, I never! Why, it's you, Vorski! How are you, old bean?"

Vorski gave a start. That the old man should know him and call him by
his name did not astonish him immensely, since he had the half-mystic
conviction that he was expected as a prophet might be. But to a prophet,
to a missionary clad in light and glory, entering the presence of a
stranger crowned with the double majesty of age and sacerdotal rank, it
was painful to be hailed by the name of "old bean!"

Hesitating, ill at ease, not knowing with whom he was dealing, he asked:

"Who are you? What are you here for? How did you get here?"

And, when the other stared at him with a look of surprise, he repeated,
in a louder voice:

"Answer me, can't you? Who are you?"

"Who am I?" replied the old man, in a husky and bleating voice. "Who am
I? By Teutates, god of the Gauls, is it you who ask me that question?
Then you don't know me? Come, try and remember . . . . Good old
Segenax--eh, do you get me now--Velleda's father, good old Segenax, the
law-giver venerated by the Rhedons of whom Chateaubriand speaks in the
first volume of his _Martyrs_? . . . Ah, I see your memory's reviving!"

"What are you gassing about!" cried Vorski.

"I'm not gassing. I'm explaining my presence here and the regrettable
events which brought me here long ago. Disgusted by the scandalous
behaviour of Velleda, who had gone wrong with that dismal blighter
Eudorus, I became what we should call a Trappist nowadays, that is to
say, I passed a brilliant exam, as a bachelor of Druid laws. Since that
time, in consequence of a few sprees--oh, nothing to speak of: three or
four jaunts to Paris, where I was attracted by Mabille and afterwards by
the Moulin Rouge--I was obliged to accept the little berth which I fill
here, a cushy job, as you see: guardian of the God-Stone, a shirker's
job, what!"

Vorski's amazement and uneasiness increased at each word. He consulted
his companions.

"Break his head," Conrad repeated. "That's what I say: and I stick to
it."

"And you, Otto?"

"I think we ought to be on our guard."

"Of course we must be on our guard."

But the old Druid caught the word. Leaning on a staff, he helped himself
up and exclaimed:

"What's the meaning of this? Be on your guard . . . against me! That's
really a bit thick! Treat me as a fake! Why, haven't you seen my axe,
with the pattern of the swastika? The swastika, the leading cabalistic
symbol, eh, what? . . . And this? What do you call this?" He lifted his
string of beads. "What do you call it? Horse-chestnuts? You've got some
cheek, you have, to give a name like that to serpents' eggs, 'eggs which
they form out of slaver and the froth of their bodies mingled and which
they cast into the air, hissing the while.' It's Pliny's own words I'm
quoting! You're not going to treat Pliny also as a fake, I hope! . . .
You're a pretty customer! Putting yourself on your guard against me,
when I have all my degrees as an ancient Druid, all my diplomas, all my
patents, all my certificates signed by Pliny and Chateaubriand! The
cheek of you! . . . Upon my word, you won't find many ancient Druids of
my sort, genuine, of the period, with the bloom of age upon them and a
beard of centuries! I a fake, I, who boast every tradition and who
juggle with the customs of antiquity! . . . Shall I dance the ancient
Druid dance for you, as I did before Julius Caesar? Would you like me
to?"

And, without waiting for a reply, the old man, flinging aside his staff,
began to cut the most extravagant capers and to execute the wildest of
jigs with perfectly astounding agility. And it was the most laughable
sight to see him jumping and twisting about, with his back bent, his
arms outstretched, his legs shooting to right and left from under his
robe, his beard following the evolutions of his frisking body, while the
bleating voice announced the successive changes in the performance:

"The ancient Druids' dance, or Caesar's delight! Hi-tiddly, hi-tiddly,
hi-ti, hi! . . . The mistletoe dance, vulgarly known as the tickletoe!
. . . The serpents' egg waltz, music by Pliny! Hullo there! Begone, dull
care! . . . The Vorska, or the tango of the thirty coffins! . . . The
hymn of the Red Prophet! Hallelujah! Hallelujah! Glory be to the
prophet!"

He continued his furious jig a little longer and then suddenly halted
before Vorski and, in a solemn tone, said:

"Enough of this prattle! Let us talk seriously, I am commissioned to
hand you the God-Stone. Now that you are here, are you ready to take
delivery of the goods?"

The three accomplices were absolutely flabbergasted. Vorski did not know
what to do, was unable to make out who the infernal fellow was:

"Oh, shut up!" he shouted, angrily. "What do you want? What's your
object?"

"What do you mean, my object? I've just told you; to hand you the
God-Stone!"

"But by what right? In what capacity?"

The ancient Druid nodded his head:

"Yes, I see what you're after. Things are not happening in the least as
you thought they would. Of course, you came here feeling jolly spry,
glad and proud of the work you had done. Just think; furnishings for
thirty coffins, four women crucified, shipwrecks, hands steeped in
blood, murders galore. Those things are no small beer; and you were
expecting an imposing reception, with an official ceremony, solemn pomp
and state, antique choirs, processions of bards and minstrels, human
sacrifices and what not; the whole Gallic bag of tricks! Instead of
which, a poor beggar of a Druid, snoozing in a corner, who just simply
offers you the goods. What a come down, my lords! Can't be helped,
Vorski; we do what we can and every man acts according to the means at
his disposal. I'm not a millionaire, you know; and I've already advanced
you, in addition to the washing of a few white robes, some thirty francs
forty for Bengal lights, fountains of fire and a nocturnal earthquake."

Vorski started, suddenly understanding and beside himself with rage:

"What! So it was . . ."

"Of course it was me! Who did you think it was? St. Augustine? Unless
you believed in an intervention of the gods and supposed that they took
the trouble last night to send an archangel to the island, arrayed in a
white robe, to lead you to the hollow oak! . . . Really, you're asking
too much!"

Vorski clenched his fists. So the man in white whom he had pursued the
night before was no other than this impostor!

"Oh," he growled, "I'm not fond of having my leg pulled!"

"Having your leg pulled!" cried the old man. "You've got a cheek, old
chap! Who hunted me like a wild beast, till I was quite out of breath?
And who drove bullets through my best Sunday robe? I never knew such a
fellow! It'll teach me to put my back into a job again!"

"That'll do!" roared Vorski. "That'll do. Once more and for the last
time . . . what do you want with me?"

"I'm sick of telling you. I am commissioned to hand you the God-Stone."

"Commissioned by whom?"

"Oh, hanged if I know! I've always been brought up to believe that some
day a prince of Almain would appear at Sarek, one Vorski, who would slay
his thirty victims and to whom I was to make an agreed signal when his
thirtieth victim had breathed her last. Therefore, as I'm a slave to
orders, I got together my little parcel, bought two Bengal lights at
three francs seventy-five apiece at a hardware shop in Brest, _plus_ a
few choice crackers, and, at the appointed hour, took up my perch in my
observatory, taper in hand, all ready for work. When you started
howling, in the top of the tree, 'She's dead! She's dead!' I thought
that was the right moment, set fire to the lights and with my crackers
shook the bowels of the earth. There! Now you know all about it."

Vorski stepped forward, with his fists raised to strike. That torrent of
words, that imperturbable composure, that calm, bantering voice put him
beside himself.

"Another word and I'll knock you down!" he cried. "I've had enough of
it."

"Is your name Vorski?"

"Yes; and then?"

"Are you a prince of Almain?"

"Yes, yes; and then?"

"Have you slain your thirty victims?"

"Yes, yes, yes!"

"Well, then you're my man. I have a God-Stone to hand you and I mean to
hand it you, come what may. That's the sort of hairpin I am. You've got
to pocket it, your miracle-stone."

"But I don't care a hang for the God-Stone!" roared Vorski, stamping his
foot. "And I don't care a hang for you! I want nobody. The God-Stone!
Why, I've got it, it's mine. I've got it on me."

"Let's have a look."

"What do you call that?" said Vorski, taking from his pocket the little
stone disk which he had found in the pommel of the sceptre.

"That?" asked the old man, with an air of surprise. "Where did you get
that from?"

"From the pommel of this sceptre, when I unfastened it."

"And what do you call it?"

"It's a piece of the God-Stone."

"You're mad."

"Then what do you say it is?"

"That's a trouser-button."

"A what?"

"A trouser-button."

"How do you make that out?"

"A trouser-button with the shaft broken off, a button of the sort which
the niggers in the Sahara wear. I've a whole set of them."

"Prove it, damn you!"

"I put it there."

"What for?"

"To take the place of the precious stone which Maguennoc sneaked, the
one which burnt him and obliged him to cut off his hand."

Vorski was silent. He was nonplussed. He had no notion what to do next
or how to behave towards this strange adversary.

The ancient Druid went up to him and, gently, in a fatherly voice:

"No, my lad," he said, "you can't do without me, you see. I alone hold
the key of the safe and the secret of the casket. Why do you hesitate?"

"I don't know you."

"You baby! If I were suggesting something indelicate and incompatible
with your honour, I could understand your scruples. But my offer is one
of those which can't offend the nicest conscience. Well, is it a
bargain? No? Not yet? But, by Teutates, what more do you want, you
unbelieving Vorski? A miracle perhaps? Lord, why didn't you say so
before? Miracles, forsooth: I turn 'em out thirteen to the dozen. I work
a little miracle before breakfast every morning. Just think, a Druid!
Miracles? Why, I've got my shop full of 'em! I can't find room to sit
down for them. Where will you try first? Resurrection department?
Hair-restoring department? Revelation of the future department? You can
choose where you like. Look here, at what time did your thirtieth victim
breathe her last?"

"How should I know?"

"Eleven fifty-two. Your excitement was so great that it stopped your
watch. Look and see."

It was ridiculous. The shock produced by excitement has no effect on the
watch of the man who experiences the excitement. Nevertheless, Vorski
involuntarily took out his watch: it marked eight minutes to twelve. He
tried to wind it up: it was broken.

The ancient Druid, without giving him time to recover his breath and
reply, went on:

"That staggers you, eh? And yet there's nothing simpler for a Druid who
knows his business. A Druid sees the invisible. He does more: he makes
anyone else see it if he wants to. Vorski, would you like to see
something that doesn't exist? What's your name? I'm not speaking of your
name Vorski, but of your real name, your governor's name."

"Silence on that subject!" Vorski commanded. "It's a secret I've
revealed to nobody."

"Then why do you write it down?"

"I've never written it down."

"Vorski, your father's name is written in red pencil on the fourteenth
page of the little note-book you carry on you. Look and see."

Acting mechanically, like an automaton whose movements are controlled
by an alien will, Vorski took from his inside pocket a case containing a
small note-book. He turned the pages till he came to the fourteenth,
when he muttered, with indescribable dismay:

"Impossible! Who wrote this? And you know what's written here?"

"Do you want me to prove it to you?"

"Once more, silence! I forbid you . . ."

"As you please, old chap! All that I do is meant for your edification.
And it's no trouble to me! Once I start working miracles, I simply can't
stop. Here's another funny little trick. You carry a locket hanging from
a silver chain round your shirt, don't you?"

"Yes," said Vorski, his eyes blazing with fever.

"The locket consists of a frame, without the photograph which used to be
set in it."

"Yes, yes, a portrait of . . ."

"Of your mother, I know: and you lost it."

"Yes, I lost it last year."

"You mean you _think_ you've lost the portrait."

"Nonsense, the locket is empty."

"You _think_ the locket's empty. It's not. Look and see."

Still moving mechanically, with his eyes starting from his head, Vorski
unfastened the button of his shirt and pulled out the chain. The locket
appeared. There was the portrait of a woman in a round gold frame.

"It's she, it's she," he muttered, completely taken aback.

"Quite sure?"

"Yes."

"Then what do you say to it all, eh? There's no fake about it, no
deception. The ancient Druid's a smart chap and you're coming with him,
aren't you?"

"Yes."

Vorski was beaten. The man had subjugated him. His superstitious
instincts, his inherited belief in the mysterious powers, his restless
and unbalanced nature, all imposed absolute submission on him. His
suspicion persisted, but did not prevent him from obeying.

"Is it far?" he asked.

"Next door, in the great hall."

Otto and Conrad had been the astounded witnesses of this dialogue.
Conrad tried to protest. But Vorski silenced him:

"If you're afraid, go away. Besides," he added, with an affectation of
assurance, "besides, we shall walk with our revolvers ready. At the
slightest alarm, fire."

"Fire on me?" chuckled the ancient Druid.

"Fire on any enemy, no matter who it may be."

"Well, you go first, Vorski . . . . What, won't you?"

He had brought them to the very end of the crypt, in the darkest shadow,
where the lantern showed them a recess hollowed at the foot of the wall
and plunging into the rocks in a downward direction.

Vorski hesitated and then entered. He had to crawl on his hands and
knees in this narrow, winding passage, from which he emerged, a minute
later, on the threshold of a large hall.

The others joined him.

"The hall of the God-Stone," the ancient Druid declared, solemnly.

It was lofty and imposing, similar in shape and size to the broad walk
under which it lay. The same number of upright stones, which seemed to
be the columns of an immense temple, stood in the same place and formed
the same rows as the menhirs on the walk overhead: stones hewn in the
same uncouth way, with no regard for art or symmetry. The floor was
composed of huge irregular flagstones, intersected with a network of
gutters and covered with round patches of dazzling light, falling from
above at some distance one from the other.

In the centre, under Maguennoc's garden, rose a platform of unmortared
stones, fourteen or fifteen feet high, with sides about twenty yards
long. On the top was a dolmen with two sturdy supports and a long, oval
granite table.

"Is that it?" asked Vorski, in a husky voice.

Without giving a direct answer, the ancient Druid said:

"What do you think of it? They were dabs at building, those ancestors of
ours! And what ingenuity they displayed! What precautions against prying
eyes and profane enquiries! Do you know where the light comes from? For
we are in the bowels of the island and there are no windows opening on
to the sky. The light comes from the upper menhirs. They are pierced
from the top to bottom with a channel which widens as it goes down and
which sheds floods of light below. In the middle of the day, when the
sun is shining, it's like fairyland. You, who are an artist, would shout
with admiration."

"Then that's _it_?" Vorski repeated.

"At any rate, it's a sacred stone," declared the ancient Druid,
impassively, "since it used to overlook the place of the underground
sacrifices, which were the most important of all. But there is another
one underneath, which is protected by the dolmen and which you can't see
from here; and that is the one on which the selected victims were
offered up. The blood used to flow from the platform and along all these
gutters to the cliffs and down to the sea."

Vorski muttered, more and more excited:

"Then that's it? If so, let's go on."

"No need to stir," said the old man, with exasperating coolness. "It's
not that one either. There's a third; and to see that one you have only
to lift your head a little."

"Where? Are you sure?"

"Of course! Take a good look . . . above the upper table, yes, in the
very vault which forms the ceiling and which is like a mosaic made of
great flagstones . . . . You can twig it from here, can't you? A
flagstone forming a separate oblong, long and narrow like the lower
table and shaped like it . . . . They might be two sisters . . . . But
there's only one good one, stamped with the trademark . . . ."

Vorski was disappointed. He had expected a more elaborate introduction
to a more mysterious hiding-place.

"Is that the God-Stone?" he asked. "Why, it has nothing particular about
it."

"From a distance, no; but wait till you see it close by. There are
coloured veins in it, glittering lodes, a special grain: in short, the
God-Stone. Besides, it's remarkable not so much for its substance as for
its miraculous properties."

"What are the miracles in question?" asked Vorski.

"It gives life and death, as you know, and it gives a lot of other
things."

"What sort of things?"

"Oh, hang it, you're asking me too much! I don't know anything about
it."

"How do you mean, you don't know?"

The ancient Druid leant over and, in a confidential tone:

"Listen, Vorski," he said, "I confess that I have been boasting a bit
and that my function, though of the greatest importance--keeper of the
God-Stone, you know, a first-class berth--is limited by a power which in
a manner of speaking is higher than my own."

"What power?"

"Velleda's."

Vorski eyed him with renewed uneasiness:

"Velleda?"

"Yes, or at least the woman whom I call Velleda, the last of the
Druidesses: I don't know her real name."

"Where is she?"

"Here."

"Here?"

"Yes, on the sacrificial stone. She's asleep."

"What, she's asleep?"

"She's been sleeping for centuries, since all time. I've never seen her
other than sleeping: a chaste and peaceful slumber. Like the Sleeping
Beauty, Velleda is waiting for him whom the gods have appointed to
awake her; and that is . . ."

"Who?"

"You, Vorski, you."

Vorski knitted his brows. What was the meaning of this improbable story
and what was his impenetrable interlocutor driving at?

The ancient Druid continued:

"That seems to ruffle you! Come, there's no reason, just because your
hands are red with blood and because you have thirty coffins on your
mind, why you shouldn't have the right to act as Prince Charming. You're
too modest, my young friend. Look here, Velleda is marvellously
beautiful: I tell you, hers is a superhuman beauty. Ah, my fine fellow,
you're getting excited! What? Not yet?"

Vorski hesitated. Really he was feeling the danger increase around him
and rise like a swelling wave that is about to break. But the old man
would not leave him alone:

"One last word, Vorski; and I'm speaking low so that your friends shan't
hear me. When you wrapped your mother in her shroud, you left on her
fore-finger, in obedience to her formal wish, a ring which she had
always worn, a magic ring made of a large turquoise surrounded by a
circle of smaller turquoises set in gold. Am I right?"

"Yes," gasped Vorski, taken aback, "yes, you're right: but I was alone
and it is a secret which nobody knew."

"Vorski, if that ring is on Velleda's finger, will you trust me and will
you believe that your mother, in her grave, appointed Velleda to
receive you, that she herself might hand you the miraculous stone?"

Vorski was already walking towards the tumulus. He quickly climbed the
first few steps. His head passed the level of the platform.

"Oh," he said, staggering back, "the ring . . . the ring is on her
finger!"

Between the two supports of the dolmen, stretched on the sacrificial
table and clad in a spotless gown that came down to her feet, lay the
Druidess. Her body and face were turned the other way; and a veil
hanging over her forehead hid her hair. Almost bare, her shapely arm lay
along the table. On the forefinger was a turquoise ring.

"Is that your mother's ring all right?" asked the ancient Druid.

"Yes, there's no doubt about it."

Vorski had hurried across the space between himself and the dolmen and,
stooping, almost kneeling, was examining the turquoises.

"The number is complete," he whispered. "One of them is cracked. Another
is half covered by the gold setting which has worked down over it."

"You needn't be so cautious," said the old man. "She won't hear you; and
your voice can't wake her. What you had better do is to stand up and
pass your hand lightly over her forehead. That is the magic caress which
will rouse her from her slumber."

Vorski stood up. Nevertheless he hesitated to approach the woman, who
inspired him with ungovernable fear and respect.

"Don't come any nearer, you two," said the ancient Druid, addressing
Otto and Conrad. "When Velleda's eyes open, they must rest on no one
but Vorski and behold no other sight. Well, Vorski, are you afraid?"

"No, I'm not afraid."

"Only you're not feeling comfortable. It's easier to murder people than
to bring them to life, what? Come, show yourself a man! Put aside her
veil and touch her forehead. The God-Stone is within your reach. Act and
you will be the master of the world."

Vorski acted. Standing against the sacrificial altar, he looked down
upon the Druidess. He bent over the motionless bust. The white gown rose
and fell to the regular rhythm of the breathing. With an undecided hand
he drew back the veil and then stooped lower, so that his other hand
might touch the uncovered forehead.

But at that moment his action remained, so to speak, suspended and he
stood without moving, like a man who does not understand but is vainly
trying to understand.

"Well, what's up, old chap?" exclaimed the Druid. "You look petrified.
Another squabble? Something gone wrong? Must I come and help you?"

Vorski did not answer. He was staring wildly, with an expression of
stupefaction and affright which gradually changed into one of mad
terror. Drops of perspiration trickled over his face. His haggard eyes
seemed to be gazing upon the most horrible vision.

The old man burst out laughing:

"Lord love us, how ugly you are! I hope the last of the Druidesses won't
raise her divine eyelids and see that hideous mug of yours! Sleep,
Velleda, sleep your pure and dreamless sleep."

Vorski stood muttering between his teeth incoherent words which conveyed
the menace of an increasing anger. The truth became partly revealed to
him in a series of flashes. A word rose to his lips which he refused to
utter, as though, in uttering it, he feared lest he should give life to
a being who was no more, to that woman who was dead, yes, dead though
she lay breathing before him: she could not but be dead, because he had
killed her. However, in the end and in spite of himself, he spoke; and
every syllable cost him intolerable suffering:

"Veronique . . . . Veronique . . . ."

"So you think she's like her?" chuckled the ancient Druid. "Upon my
word, may be you are right: there is a sort of family resemblance
. . . . I dare say, if you hadn't crucified the other with your own
hands and if you hadn't yourself received her last breath, you would be
ready to swear that the two women are one and the same person . . . and
that Veronique d'Hergemont is alive and that she's not even wounded
. . . not even a scar . . . not so much as the mark of the cords round
her wrists . . . . But just look, Vorski, what a peaceful face, what
comforting serenity! Upon my word, I'm beginning to believe that you
made a mistake and that it was another woman you crucified! Just think a
bit! . . . Hullo, you're going to go for me now! Come to my rescue, O
Teutates! The prophet wants to have my blood!"

Vorski had drawn himself up and was now facing the ancient Druid. His
features, fashioned for hatred and fury, had surely never expressed
more of either than at this moment. The ancient Druid was not merely the
man who for an hour had been toying with him as with a child. He was the
man who had performed the most extraordinary feat and who suddenly
appeared to him as the most ruthless and dangerous foe. A man like that
must be got rid of on the spot, since the opportunity presented itself.

"I'm done!" said the old man. "He's going to eat me up! Crikey, what an
ogre! . . . Help! Murder! Help! . . . Oh, look at his iron fingers! He's
going to strangle me! . . . Unless he uses a dagger . . . or a rope
. . . . No, a revolver! I prefer that, it's neater . . . . Fire away,
Alexis. Two of the seven bullets have already made holes in my best
Sunday robe. That leaves five. Fire away, Alexis."

Each word aggravated Vorski's fury. He was eager to get the work over
and he shouted:

"Otto . . . Conrad . . . are you ready?"

He raised his arm. The two assistants likewise took aim. Four paces in
front of them stood the old man, laughingly pleading for mercy:

"Please, kind gentlemen, have pity on a poor beggar . . . . I won't do
it again . . . . I'll be a good boy . . . . Kind gentlemen, please
. . . ."

Vorski repeated:

"Otto . . . Conrad . . . attention! . . . I'm counting three: one . . .
two . . . three . . . fire!"

The three shots rang out together. The Druid whirled round with one leg
in the air, then drew himself up straight, opposite his adversaries, and
cried, in a tragic voice:

"A hit, a palpable hit! Shot through the body! Dead, for a ducat! . . .
The ancient Druid's _kaput_! . . . A tragic development! Oh, the poor
old Druid, who was so fond of his joke!"

"Fire!" roared Vorski. "Shoot, can't you, you idiots? Fire!"

"Fire! Fire!" repeated the Druid. "Bang! Bang! A bull's eye! . . . Two!
. . . Three bull's eyes! . . . Your shot, Conrad: bang! . . . Yours,
Otto: bang!"

The shots rattled and echoed through the great resounding hall. The
bewildered and furious accomplices were gesticulating before their
target, while the invulnerable old man danced and kicked, now almost
squatting on his heels, now leaping up with astounding agility:

"Lord, what fun one can have in a cave! And what a fool you are, Vorski,
my own! You blooming old prophet! . . . What a mug! But, I say, however
could you take it all in? The Bengal lights! The crackers! And the
trouser-button! And your old mother's ring! . . . You silly juggins!
What a spoof!"

Vorski stopped. He realized that the three revolvers had been made
harmless, but how? By what unprecedented marvel? What was at the bottom
of all this fantastic adventure? Who was that demon standing in front of
him?

He flung away his useless weapon and looked at the old man. Was he
thinking of seizing him in his arms and crushing the life out of him? He
also looked at the woman and seemed ready to fall upon her. But he
obviously no longer felt equal to facing those two strange creatures,
who appeared to him to be remote from the world and from actuality.

Then, quickly, he turned on his heel and, calling to his accomplices,
made for the crypts, followed by the ancient Druid's jeers:

"Look at that now! He's slinging his hook! And the God-Stone, what about
it? What do you want me to do with it? . . . I say, isn't he showing a
clean pair of heels! . . . Hi! Are your trousers on fire? Yoicks,
tally-ho, tally-ho! Proph--et Proph--et! . . ."




CHAPTER XV

THE HALL OF THE UNDERGROUND SACRIFICES


Vorski had never known fear and he was perhaps not yielding to an actual
sense of fear in taking to flight now. But he no longer knew what he was
doing. His bewildered brain was filled with a whirl of contradictory and
incoherent ideas in which the intuition of an irretrievable and to some
extent supernatural defeat held the first place.

Believing as he did in witchcraft and wonders, he had an impression that
Vorski, the man of destiny, had fallen from his mission and been
replaced by another chosen favourite of destiny. There were two
miraculous forces opposed to each other, one emanating from him, Vorski,
the other from the ancient Druid; and the second was absorbing the
first. Veronique's resurrection, the ancient Druid's personality, the
speeches, the jokes, the leaps and bounds, the actions, the
invulnerability of that spring-heeled individual, all this seemed to him
magical and fabulous; and it created, in these caves of the barbaric
ages, a peculiar atmosphere which stifled and demoralized him.

He was eager to return to the surface of the earth. He wanted to breathe
and see. And what he wanted above all to see was the tree stripped of
its branches to which he had tied Veronique and on which Veronique had
expired.

"For she _is_ dead," he snarled, as he crawled through the narrow
passage which communicated with the third and largest of the crypts.
"She _is_ dead. I know what death means. I have often held it in my
hands and I make no mistakes. Then how did that demon manage to bring
her to life again?"

He stopped abruptly near the block on which he had picked up the
sceptre:

"Unless . . ." he said.

Conrad, following him, cried:

"Hurry up, instead of chattering."

Vorski allowed himself to be pulled along; but, as he went, he
continued:

"Shall I tell you what I think, Conrad? Well, the woman he showed us,
the one asleep, wasn't that one at all. Was she even alive? Oh, the old
wizard is capable of anything! He'll have modelled a figure, a wax doll,
and given it her likeness."

"You're mad. Get on!"

"I'm not mad. That woman was not alive. The one who died on the tree is
properly dead. And you'll find her again up there, I warrant you.
Miracles, yes, but not such a miracle as that!"

Having left their lantern behind them, the three accomplices kept
bumping against the wall and the upright stones. Their footsteps echoed
from vault to vault. Conrad never ceased grumbling:

"I warned you . . . . We ought to have broken his head."

Otto, out of breath with walking, said nothing.

Thus, groping their way, they reached the lobby which preceded the
entrance-crypt; and they were not a little surprised to find that this
first hall was dark, though the passage which they had dug in the upper
part, under the roots of the dead oak, ought to have given a certain
amount of light.

"That's funny," said Conrad.

"Pooh!" said Otto. "We've only got to find the ladder hooked to the
wall. Here, I have it . . . here's a step . . . and the next . . . ."

He climbed the rungs, but was pulled up almost at once:

"Can't get any farther . . . . It's as if there had been a fall of
earth."

"Impossible!" Vorski protested. "However, wait a bit, I was forgetting:
I have my pocket-lighter."

He struck a light; and the same cry of anger escaped all three of them:
the whole of the top of the staircase and half the room was buried under
a heap of stones and sand, with the trunk of the dead oak fallen in the
middle. Not a chance of escape remained.

Vorski gave way to a fit of despair and collapsed on the stairs:

"We're tricked. It's that old brute who has played us this trick . . .
which shows that he's not alone."

He bewailed his fate, raving, lacking the strength to continue the
unequal struggle. But Conrad grew angry:

"I say, Vorski, this isn't like you, you know."

"There's nothing to be done against that fellow."

"Nothing to be done! In the first place, there's this, as I've told you
twenty times: wring his neck. Oh, why did I restrain myself?"

"You couldn't even have laid a hand on him. Did any of our bullets touch
him?"

"Our bullets . . . our bullets," muttered Conrad. "All this strikes me
as mighty queer. Hand me your lighter. I have another revolver, which
comes from the Priory: and I loaded it myself yesterday morning. I'll
soon see."

He examined the weapon and was not long in discovering that the seven
cartridges which he had put in the cylinder had been replaced by seven
cartridges from which the bullets had been extracted and which could
therefore fire nothing except blank shots.

"That explains it," he said, "and your ancient Druid is no more of a
wizard than I am. If our revolvers had been really loaded, we'd have
shot him down like a dog."

But the explanation only increased Vorski's alarm:

"And how did he unload them? At what moment did he manage to take our
revolvers from our pockets and put them back after drawing the charges?
I did not leave go of mine for an instant."

"No more did I," Conrad admitted.

"And I defy any one to touch it without my knowing. So what then?
Doesn't it prove that that demon has a special power? After all, we must
look at things as they are. He's a man who possesses secrets of his own
. . . and who has means at his disposal, means which . . ."

Conrad shrugged his shoulders:

"Vorski, this business has shattered you. You were within reach of the
goal and yet you let go at the first obstacle. You're turned into a
dish-cloth. Well, I don't bow my head like you. Tricked? Why so? If he
comes after us, there are three of us."

"He won't come. He'll leave us here shut up in a burrow with no way out
of it."

"Then, if he doesn't come, I'll go back there, I will! I've got my
knife; that's enough for me."

"You're wrong, Conrad."

"How am I wrong? I'm a match for any man, especially for that old
blighter; and he's only got a sleeping woman to help him."

"Conrad, he's not a man and she's not a woman. Be careful."

"I'm careful and I'm going."

"You're going, you're going; but what's your plan?"

"I've no plan. Or rather, if I have, it's to out that beggar."

"All the same, mind what you're doing. Don't go for him bull-headed; try
to take him by surprise."

"Well, of course!" said Conrad, moving away. "I'm not ass enough to risk
his attacks. Be easy, I've got the bounder!"

Conrad's daring comforted Vorski.

"After all," he said, when his accomplice was gone, "he's right. If that
old Druid didn't come after us, it's because he's got other ideas in his
head. He certainly doesn't expect us to return on the offensive; and
Conrad can very well take him by surprise. What do you say, Otto?"

Otto shared his opinion:

"He has only to bide his time," he replied.

Fifteen minutes passed. Vorski gradually recovered his assurance. He had
yielded to the reaction, after an excess of hope followed by
disappointment too great for him to bear and also because of the
weariness and depression produced by his drinking-bout. But the fighting
spirit stimulated him once more; and he was anxious to have done with
his adversary.

"I shouldn't be surprised," he said, "if Conrad had finished him off by
now."

By this time he had acquired an exaggerated confidence which proved his
unbalanced state of mind; and he wanted to go back again at once.

"Come along, Otto, it's the last trip. An old beggar to get rid of; and
the thing's done. You've got your dagger? Besides, it won't be wanted.
My two hands will do the trick."

"And suppose that blasted Druid has friends?"

"We'll see."

He once more went towards the crypts, moving cautiously and watching the
opening of the passages which led from one to the other. No sound
reached their ears. The light in the third crypt showed them the way.

"Conrad must have succeeded," Vorski observed. "If not, he would have
shirked the fight and come back to us."

Otto agreed.

"It's a good sign, of course, that we don't see him. The ancient Druid
must have had a bad time of it. Conrad is a scorcher."

They entered the third crypt. Things were in the places where they had
left them: the sceptre on the block and the pommel, which Vorski had
unfastened, a little way off, on the ground. But, when he cast his eyes
towards the shadowy recess where the ancient Druid was sleeping when
they first arrived, he was astounded to see the old fellow, not exactly
at the same place, but between the recess and the exit to the passage.

"Hang it, what's he doing?" he stammered, at once upset by that
unexpected presence. "One would think he was asleep!"

The ancient Druid, in fact, appeared to be asleep. Only, why on earth
was he sleeping in that attitude, flat on his stomach, with his arms
stretched out on either side and his face to the floor? No man on his
guard, or at least aware that he was in some sort of danger, would
expose himself in this way to the enemy's attack. Moreover--Vorski's
eyes were gradually growing accustomed to the half-darkness of the end
crypt--moreover the white robe was marked with stains which looked red,
which undoubtedly were red. What did it mean?

Otto said, in a low voice:

"He's lying in a queer attitude."

Vorski was thinking the same thing and put it more plainly:

"Yes, the attitude of a corpse."

"The attitude of a corpse," Otto agreed. "That's it, exactly."

Vorski presently fell back a step:

"Oh," he exclaimed, "can it be?"

"What?" asked the other.

"Between the two shoulders . . . . Look."

"Well?"

"The knife."

"What knife?"

"Conrad's," Vorski declared. "Conrad's dagger. I recognise it. Driven in
between the shoulders." And he added, with a shudder, "That's where the
red stains come from . . . . It's blood . . . blood flowing from the
wound."

"In that case," Otto remarked, "he is dead?"

"He's dead, yes, the ancient Druid is dead . . . . Conrad must have
surprised him and killed him . . . . The ancient Druid is dead."

Vorski remained undecided for a while, ready to fall upon the lifeless
body and to stab it in his turn. But he dared no more touch it now that
it was dead than when it was alive; and all that he had the courage to
do was to run and wrench the dagger from the wound.

"Ah," he cried, "you scoundrel, you've got what you deserve! And Conrad
is a champion. I shan't forget you, Conrad, be sure of that."

"Where can Conrad be?"

"In the hall of the God-Stone. Ah, Otto, I'm itching to get back to the
woman whom the ancient Druid put there and to settle her hash too!"

"Then you believe that she's a live woman?" chuckled Otto.

"And very much alive at that . . . like the ancient Druid! That wizard
was only a fake, with a few tricks of his own, perhaps, but no real
power. There's the proof!"

"A fake, if you like," the accomplice objected. "But, all the same, he
showed you by his signals the way to enter these caves. Now what was his
object in that? And what was he doing here? Did he really know the
secret of the God-Stone, the way to get possession of it and exactly
where it is?"

"You're right. It's all so many riddles," said Vorski, who preferred not
to examine the details of the adventure too closely. "But it's so many
riddles which'll answer themselves and which I'm not troubling about for
the moment, because it's no longer that creepy individual who's putting
them to me."

For the third time they went through the narrow communicating passage.
Vorski entered the great hall like a conqueror, with his head high and a
confident glance. There was no longer any obstacle, no longer any enemy
to overcome. Whether the God-Stone was suspended between the stones of
the ceiling, or whether the God-Stone was elsewhere, he was sure to
discover it. There remained the mysterious woman who looked like
Veronique, but who could not be Veronique and whose real identity he was
about to unmask.

"Always presuming that she's still there," he muttered. "And I very much
suspect that she's gone. She played her part in the ancient Druid's
obscure schemes: and the ancient Druid, thinking me out of the way
. . ."

He stepped forward and climbed a few steps.

The woman was there. She was there, lying on the lower table of the
dolmen, shrouded in veils as before. The arm no longer hung towards the
ground. There was only the hand emerging from the veils. The turquoise
ring was on the finger.

"She hasn't moved," said Otto. "She's still asleep."

"Perhaps she is asleep," said Vorski. "I'll watch her. Leave me alone."

He went nearer. He still had Conrad's dagger in his hand: and perhaps it
was this that suggested killing to him, for his eyes fell upon the
weapon and it was not till then that he seemed to realise that he was
carrying it and that he might make use of it.

He was not more than three paces from the woman, when he perceived that
the wrist which was uncovered was all bruised and as it were mottled
with black patches, which evidently came from the cords with which she
had been bound. Now the ancient Druid had remarked, an hour ago, that
the wrists showed no signs of a bruise!

This detail confounded him anew, first, because it proved to him that
this was really the woman whom he had crucified, who had been taken down
and who was now before his eyes and, secondly, because he was suddenly
reentering the domain of miracles; and Veronique's arm appeared to him,
alternately, under two different aspects, as the arm of a living,
uninjured woman and as the arm of a lifeless, tortured victim.

His trembling hand clutched the dagger, clinging to it, in a manner of
speaking, as the only instrument of salvation. Once more in his confused
brain the idea arose of striking, not to kill, because the woman must be
dead, but of striking the invisible enemy who persisted in thwarting him
and of conjuring all the evil spells at one blow.

He raised his arm. He chose the spot. His face assumed an expression of
extreme savagery, lit up with the joy of murder. And suddenly he swooped
down, striking, like a madman, at random, ten times, twenty times, with
a frenzied unbridling of all his instincts.

"Take that and die!" he spluttered. "Another! . . . Die! . . . And let's
have an end of this . . . . You are the evil genius that's been
resisting me . . . and now I'm killing you . . . . Die and leave me
free! . . . Die so that I shall be the only master!"

He stopped to take breath. He was exhausted. And while his haggard eyes
stared blindly at the horrible spectacle of the lacerated corpse, he
received the strange impression that a shadow was placing itself between
him and the sunlight which came through the opening overhead.

"Do you know what you remind me of?" said a voice.

He was dumbfounded. The voice was not Otto's voice. And the voice
continued, while he stood with his head lowered and stupidly holding his
dagger planted in the dead woman's body:

"Do you know what you remind me of, Vorski? You remind me of the bulls
of my country. Let me tell you that I am a Spaniard and a great
frequenter of the bull-ring. Well, when our bulls have gored some poor
old cab-horse that is only fit for the knacker's yard, they go back to
the body, from time to time, turn it over, gore it again, keep on
killing it and killing it. You're like them, Vorski. You're seeing red.
In order to defend yourself against the living enemy, you fall
desperately on the enemy who is no longer alive; and it is death itself
that you are trying to kill. What a silly beast you're making of
yourself!"

Vorski raised his head. A man was standing in front of him, leaning
against one of the uprights of the dolmen. The man was of the average
height, with a slender, well-built figure, and seemed to be still young,
notwithstanding his hair, which was turning grey at the temples. He wore
a blue-serge jacket with brass buttons and a yachting-cap with a black
peak.

"Don't trouble to rack your brains," he said. "You don't know me. Let me
introduce myself: Don Luis Perenna, grandee of Spain, a noble of many
countries and Prince of Sarek. Yes, don't be surprised: I've taken the
title of Prince of Sarek, having a certain right to it."

Vorski looked at him without understanding. The man continued:

"You don't seem very familiar with the Spanish nobility. Still, just
test your memory: I am the gentleman who was to come to the rescue of
the d'Hergemont family and the people of Sarek, the one whom your son
Francois was expecting with such simple faith . . . . Well, are you
there? . . . Look, your companion, the trusty Otto, he seems to
remember! . . . But perhaps my other name will convey more to you? It is
well and favourably known. Lupin . . . . Arsene Lupin . . . ."

Vorski watched him with increasing terror and with a misgiving which
became more accentuated at each word and movement of this new adversary.
Though he recognized neither the man nor the man's voice, he felt
himself dominated by a will of which he had already felt the power and
lashed by the same sort of implacable irony. But was it possible?

"Everything is possible," Don Luis Perenna went on, "including even what
you think. But I repeat, what a silly beast you're making of yourself!
Here are you playing the bold highwayman, the dashing adventurer; and
you're frightened the moment you set eyes on one of your crimes! As long
as it was just a matter of happy-go-lucky killing, you went straight
ahead. But the first little jolt throws you off the track. Vorski kills;
but whom has he killed? He has no idea. Is Veronique d'Hergemont dead or
alive? Is she fastened to the oak on which you crucified her? Or is she
lying here, on the sacrificial table? Did you kill her up there or down
here? You can't tell. You never even thought, before you stabbed, of
looking to see what you were stabbing. The great thing for you is to
slash away with all your might, to intoxicate yourself with the sight
and smell of blood and to turn live flesh into a hideous pulp. But look,
can't you, you idiot? When a man kills, he's not afraid of killing and
he doesn't hide the face of his victim. Look, you idiot!"

He himself stopped over the corpse and unwrapped the veil around the
head.

Vorski had closed his eyes. Kneeling, with his chest pressed against the
dead woman's legs, he remained without moving and kept his eyes
obstinately shut.

"Are you there now?" chuckled Don Luis. "If you daren't look, it's
because you've guessed or because you're on the point of guessing, you
wretch: am I right? Your idiot brain is working it out: am I right?
There were two women in the Isle of Sarek and two only, Veronique and
the other . . . the other whose name was Elfride, I understand: am I
right? Elfride and Veronique, your two wives, one the mother of
Raynold, the other the mother of Francois. So, if it's not Francois'
mother whom you tied on the cross and whom you've just stabbed, then
it's Raynold's mother. If the woman lying here, with her wrists bruised
by the torture, is not Veronique, then she's Elfride. There's no mistake
possible: Elfride, your wife and your accomplice; Elfride, your willing
and subservient tool. And you know it so well that you would rather take
my word for it than risk a glance and see the livid face of that dead
woman, of your obedient accomplice tortured by yourself. You miserable
poltroon!"

Vorski had hidden his head in his folded arms. He was not weeping.
Vorski could not weep. Nevertheless, his shoulders were jerking
convulsively; and his whole attitude expressed the wildest despair.

This lasted for some time. Then the shaking of the shoulders ceased.
Still Vorski did not stir.

"Upon my word, you move me to pity, you poor old buffer!" said Don Luis.
"Were you so fond of your Elfride as all that? She had become a habit,
what? A mascot? Well, what can I say? People as a rule aren't such fools
as you! They know what they're doing. They look before they leap! Hang
it all, they stop to think! Whereas you go floundering about in crime
like a new-born babe struggling in the water! No wonder you sink and go
to the bottom . . . . The ancient Druid, for instance: is he dead or
alive? Did Conrad stick a dagger into his back, or was I playing the
part of that diabolical personage? In short, are there an ancient Druid
and a Spanish grandee, or are the two individuals one and the same?
This is all a sealed book to you, my poor fellow. And yet you'll want an
explanation. Shall I help you?"

If Vorski had acted without thinking, it was easy to see, when he raised
his head, that on this occasion he had taken time to reflect; that he
knew very well the desperate resolve which circumstances called upon him
to take. He was certainly ready for an explanation, as Don Luis
suggested, but he wanted it dagger in hand, with the implacable
intention of using it. Slowly, with his eyes fixed on Don Luis and
without concealing his purpose, he had freed his weapon and was rising
to his feet.

"Take care," said Don Luis. "Your knife is faked as your revolver was.
It's made of tin-foil."

Useless pleasantry! Nothing could either hasten or delay the methodical
impulse which urged Vorski to the supreme contest. He walked round the
sacred table and took up his stand in front of Don Luis.

"You're sure it's you who have been thwarting all my plans these last
few days?"

"The last twenty-four hours, no longer. I arrived at Sarek twenty-four
hours ago."

"And you're determined to go on to the end?"

"Yes; and farther still, if possible."

"Why? And in what capacity?"

"As a sportsman; and because you fill me with disgust."

"So there's no arrangement to be made?"

"No."

"Would you refuse to go shares with me?"

"Ah, now you're talking!"

"You can have half, if you like."

"I'd rather have the lot."

"Meaning that the God-Stone . . ."

"The God-Stone belongs to me."

Further speech was idle. An adversary of that quality has to be made
away with; if not, he makes away with you. Vorski had to choose between
the two endings; there was not a third.

Don Luis remained impassive, leaning against the pillar. Vorski towered
a head above him: and at the same time Vorski had the profound
impression that he was equally Don Luis' superior in every other
respect, in strength, muscular power and weight. In these conditions,
there was no need to hesitate. Moreover, it seemed out of the question
that Don Luis could even attempt to defend himself or to evade the blow
before the dagger fell. His parry was bound to come late unless he moved
at once. And he did not move. Vorski therefore struck his blow with all
certainty, as one strikes a quarry that is doomed beforehand.

And yet--it all happened so quickly and so inexplicably that he could
not tell what occurred to bring about his defeat--and yet, three or four
seconds later, he was lying on the ground, disarmed, defeated, with his
two legs feeling as though they had been broken with a stick and his
right arm hanging limp and paining him till he cried out.

Don Luis did not even trouble to bind him. With one foot on the big,
helpless body, half-bending over his adversary, he said:

"For the moment, no speeches. I'm keeping one in reserve for you. It'll
strike you as a bit long, but it'll show you that I understand the whole
business from start to finish, that is to say, much better than you do.
There's one doubtful point: and you're going to clear it up. Where's
your son Francois d'Hergemont?"

Receiving no reply, he repeated:

"Where's Francois d'Hergemont?"

Vorski no doubt considered that chance had placed an unexpected trump in
his hands and that the game was perhaps not absolutely lost, for he
maintained an obstinate silence.

"You refuse to answer?" asked Don Luis. "One . . . two . . . three
times: do you refuse? . . . Very well!"

He gave a low whistle.

Four men appeared from a corner of the hall, four men with swarthy
faces, resembling Moors. Like Don Luis, they wore jackets and sailor's
caps with shiny peaks.

A fifth person arrived almost immediately afterwards, a wounded French
officer, who had lost his right leg and wore a wooden leg in its place.

"Ah, is that you, Patrice?" said Don Luis.

He introduced him formally:

"Captain Patrice Belval, my greatest friend; Mr. Vorski, a Hun."

Then he asked:

"No news, captain? You haven't found Francois?"

"No."

"We shall have found him in an hour and then we'll be off. Are all our
men on board?"

"Yes."

"Everything all right there?"

"Quite."

He turned to the three Moors:

"Pick up the Hun," he ordered, "and carry him up to the dolmen outside.
You needn't bind him: he couldn't move a limb if he tried. Oh, one
minute!"

He leant over Vorski's ear:

"Before you start, have a good look at the God-Stone, between the flags
in the ceiling. The ancient Druid wasn't lying to you. It _is_ the
miraculous stone which people have been seeking for centuries . . . and
which I discovered from a distance . . . by correspondence. Say good-bye
to it, Vorski! You will never see it again, if indeed you are ever to
see anything in this world."

He made a sign with his hand.

The four Moors briskly took up Vorski and carried him to the back of the
hall, on the side opposite the communicating passage.

Turning to Otto, who had stood throughout this scene without moving:

"I see that you're a reasonable fellow, Otto, and that you understand
the position. You won't get up to any tricks?"

"No."

"Then we shan't touch you. You can come along without fear."

He slipped his arm through Belval's and the two walked away, talking.

They left the hall of the God-Stone through a series of three crypts,
each of which was on a higher level than the one before. The last of
them also led to a vestibule. At the far side of the vestibule, a ladder
stood against a lightly-built wall in which an opening had been newly
made. Through this they emerged into the open air, in the middle of a
steep path, cut into steps, which wound about as it climbed upwards in
the rock and which brought them to that part of the cliff to which
Francois had taken Veronique on the previous morning. It was the Postern
path. From above they saw, hanging from two iron davits, the boat in
which Veronique and her son had intended to take flight. Not far away,
in a little bay, was the long, tapering outline of a submarine.

Turning their backs to the sea, Don Luis and Patrice Belval continued on
their way towards the semicircle of oaks and stopped near the Fairies'
Dolmen, where the Moors were waiting for them. They had set Vorski down
at the foot of the tree on which his last victim had died. Nothing
remained on the tree to bear witness to the abominable torture except
the inscription, "V. d'H."

"Not too tired, Vorski?" asked Don Luis. "Legs feeling better?"

Vorski gave a contemptuous shrug of the shoulders.

"Yes, I know," said Don Luis. "You're pinning your faith to your last
card. Still, I would have you know that I also hold a few trumps and
that I have a rather artistic way of playing them. The tree behind you
should be more than enough to tell you so. Would you like another
instance? While you're getting muddled with all your murders and are no
longer sure of the number of your victims, I bring them to life again.
Look at that man coming from the Priory. Do you see him? He's wearing a
blue reefer with brass buttons, like myself. He's one of your dead men,
isn't he? You locked him up in one of the torture-chambers, intending
to cast him into the sea; and it was your sweet cherub of a Raynold who
hurled him down before Veronique's eyes. Do you remember? Stephane
Maroux his name was. He's dead, isn't he? No, not a bit of it! A wave of
my magic wand; and he's alive again. Here he is. I take him by the hand.
I speak to him."

Going up to the newcomer, he shook hands with him and said:

"You see, Stephane? I told you that it would be all over at twelve
o'clock precisely and that we should meet at the dolmen. Well, it is
twelve o'clock precisely."

Stephane seemed in excellent health. He showed not a sign of a wound.
Vorski looked at him in dismay and stammered:

"The tutor . . . . Stephane Maroux . . . ."

"The man himself," said Don Luis. "What did you expect? Here again you
behaved like an idiot. The adorable Raynold and you throw a man into the
sea and don't even think of leaning over to see what becomes of him. I
pick him up . . . . And don't be too badly staggered, old chap. It's
only the beginning; and I have a few more tricks in my bag. Remember,
I'm a pupil of the ancient Druid's! . . . Well, Stephane, where do we
stand? What's the result of your search?"

"Nothing."

"Francois?"

"Not to be found."

"And All's Well? Did you send him on his master's tracks, as we
arranged?"

"Yes, but he simply took me down the Postern path to Francois' boat."

"There's no hiding-place on that side?"

"Not one."

Don Luis was silent and began to pace up and down before the dolmen. He
seemed to be hesitating at the last moment, before beginning the series
of actions upon which he had resolved. At last, addressing Vorski, he
said:

"I have no time to waste. I must leave the island in two hours. What's
your price for setting Francois free at once?"

"Francois fought a duel with Raynold," Vorski replied, "and was beaten."

"You lie. Francois won."

"How do you know? Did you see them fight?"

"No, or I should have interfered. But I know who was the victor."

"No one knows except myself. They were masked."

"Then, if Francois is dead, it's all up with you."

Vorski took time to think. The argument allowed of no debate. He put a
question in his turn:

"Well, what do you offer me?"

"Your liberty."

"And with it?"

"Nothing."

"Yes, the God-Stone."

"_Never!_"

Don Luis shouted the word, accompanying it with a vehement gesture of
the hand, and he explained:

"Never! Your liberty, yes, if the worst comes to the worst and because I
know you and know that, denuded of all resources, you will simply go and
get yourself hanged somewhere else. But the God-Stone would spell
safety, wealth, the power to do evil . . ."

"That's exactly why I want it," said Vorski; "and, by telling me what
it's worth, you make me all the more difficult in the matter of
Francois."

"I shall find Francois all right. It's only a question of patience; and
I shall stay two or three days longer, if necessary."

"You will not find him; and, if you do, it will be too late."

"Why?"

"Because he has had nothing to eat since yesterday."

This was said coldly and maliciously. There was a silence; and Don Luis
retorted:

"In that case, speak, if you don't want him to die."

"What do I care? Anything rather than fail in my task and stop midway
when I've got so far. The end is within sight: those who get in my way
must look out for themselves."

"You lie. You won't let that boy die."

"I let the other die right enough!"

Patrice and Stephane made a movement of horror, while Don Luis laughed
frankly:

"Capital! There's no hypocrisy about you. Plain and convincing
arguments. By Jingo, how beautiful to see a Hun laying bare his soul!
What a glorious mixture of vanity and cruelty, of cynicism and
mysticism! A Hun has always a mission to fulfil, even when he's
satisfied with plundering and murdering. Well, you're better than a Hun:
you're a Superhun!"

And he added, still laughing:

"So I propose to treat you as Superhun. Once more, will you tell me
where Francois is?"

"No."

"All right."

He turned to the four Moors and said, very calmly:

"Go ahead, lads."

It was a matter of a second. With really extraordinary precision of
gesture and as though the act had been separated into a certain number
of movements, learnt and rehearsed beforehand like a military drill,
they picked up Vorski, fastened him to the rope which hung to the tree,
hoisted him up without paying attention to his cries, his threats or his
shouts and bound him firmly, as he had bound his victim.

"Howl away, old chap," said Don Luis, serenely, "howl as much as you
like! You can only wake the sisters Archignat and the others in the
thirty coffins! Howl away, my lad! But, good Lord, how ugly you are!
What a face!"

He took a few steps back, to appreciate the sight better:

"Excellent! You look very well there; it couldn't be better. Even the
inscription fits: 'V. d'H.,' Vorski de Hohenzollern! For I presume that,
as the son of a king, you are allied to that noble house. And now,
Vorski, all you have to do is to lend me an attentive ear: I'm going to
make you the little speech I promised you."

Vorski was wriggling on the tree and trying to burst his bonds. But,
since every effort merely served to increase his suffering, he kept
still and, to vent his fury, began to swear and blaspheme most hideously
and to inveigh against Don Luis:

"Robber! Murderer! It's you that are the murderer, it's you that are
condemning Francois to death! Francois was wounded by his brother; it's
a bad wound and may be poisoned . . . ."

Stephane and Patrice pleaded with Don Luis. Stephane expressed his
alarm:

"You can never tell," he said. "With a monster like that, anything is
possible. And suppose the boy's ill?"

"It's bunkum and blackmail!" Don Luis declared. "The boy's quite well."

"Are you sure?"

"Well enough, in any case, to wait an hour. In an hour the Superhun will
have spoken. He won't hold out any longer. Hanging loosens the tongue."

"And suppose he doesn't hold out at all?"

"What do you mean?"

"Suppose he himself expires, from too violent an effort, heart-failure,
a clot of blood to the head?"

"Well?"

"Well, his death would destroy the only hope we have of learning where
Francois is hidden, his death would be Francois' undoing!"

But Don Luis was inflexible:

"He won't die!" he cried. "Vorski's sort doesn't die of a stroke! No,
no, he'll talk, he'll talk within an hour. Just time enough to deliver
my lecture."

Patrice Belval began to laugh in spite of himself:

"Have you a lecture to deliver?"

"Rather! And such a lecture!" exclaimed Don Luis. "The whole adventure
of the God-Stone! An historical treatise, a comprehensive view extending
from prehistoric times to the thirty murders committed by the Superhun!
By Jove, it's not every day that one has the opportunity of reading a
paper like that; and I wouldn't miss it for a kingdom! Mount the
platform, Don Luis, and fire away with your speech!"

He took his stand opposite Vorski:

"You lucky dog, you! You're in the front seats and you won't lose a
word. I expect you're glad, eh, to have a little light thrown upon your
darkness? We've been floundering about so long that it's time we had a
definite lead. I assure you I'm beginning not to know where I am. Just
think, a riddle which has lasted for centuries and centuries and which
you've merely muddled still further."

"Thief! Robber!" snarled Vorski.

"Insults? Why? If you're not comfortable, let's talk about Francois."

"Never! He shall die."

"Not at all, you'll talk. I give you leave to interrupt me. When you
want me to stop, all you've got to do is to whistle a tune: '_En
r'venant de la r'vue_,' or _Tipperary_. I'll at once send to see; and,
if you've told the truth, we'll leave you here quietly, Otto will untie
you and you can be off in Francois' boat. Is it agreed?"

He turned to Stephane and Patrice Belval:

"Sit down, my friends," he said, "for it will take rather long. But, if
I am to be eloquent, I need an audience . . . and an audience who will
also act as judges."

"We're only two," said Patrice.

"You're three."

"With whom?"

"Here's your third."

It was All's Well. He came trotting along, without hurrying more than
usual. He frisked round Stephane, wagged his tail to Don Luis, as though
to say, "I know you: you and I are pals," and squatted on his
hind-quarters, with the air of one who does not wish to disturb people.

"That's right, All's Well!" cried Don Luis. "You also want to hear all
about the adventure. Your curiosity does you honour; and I won't
disappoint you."

Don Luis appeared to be delighted. He had an audience, a full bench of
judges. Vorski was writhing on his tree. It was an exquisite moment.

He cut a sort of caper which must have reminded Vorski of the ancient
Druid's pirouettes and, drawing himself up, bowed, imitated a lecturer
taking a sip of water from a tumbler, rested his hands on an imaginary
table and at last began, in a deliberate voice:

"Ladies and Gentlemen:

"On the twenty-fifth of July, in the year seven hundred and thirty-two
B. C. . . ."




CHAPTER XVI

THE HALL OF THE KINGS OF BOHEMIA


Don Luis interrupted himself after delivering his opening sentence and
stood enjoying the effect produced. Captain Belval, who knew his friend,
was laughing heartily. Stephane continued to look anxious. All's Well
had not budged.

Don Luis continued:

"Let me begin by confessing, ladies and gentlemen, that my object in
fixing my date so precisely was to some extent to stagger you. In
reality I could not tell you within a few centuries the exact date of
the scene which I shall have the honour of describing to you. But what I
can guarantee is that it is laid in that country of Europe which to-day
we call Bohemia and at the spot where the little industrial town of
Joachimsthal now stands. That, I hope, is fairly circumstantial. Well,
on the morning of the day when my story begins, there was great
excitement among one of those Celtic tribes which had settled a century
or two earlier between the banks of the Danube and the sources of the
Elbe, amidst the Hyrcanian forests. The warriors, assisted by their
wives, were striking their tents, collecting the sacred axes, the bows
and arrows, gathering up the pottery, the bronze and tin implements,
loading the horses and the oxen.

"The chiefs were here, there and everywhere, attending to the smallest
details. There was neither tumult nor disorder. They started early in
the direction of a tributary of the Elbe, the Eger, which they reached
towards the end of the day. Here boats were waiting, guarded by a
hundred of the picked warriors who had been sent ahead. One of these
boats was conspicuous for its size and the richness of its decoration. A
long yellow cloth was stretched from side to side. The chief of chiefs,
the King, if you prefer, climbed on the stern thwart and made a speech
which I will spare you, because I do not wish to shorten my own, but
which may be summed up as follows: the tribe was emigrating to escape
the cupidity of the neighbouring populations. It is always sad to leave
the places where one has dwelt. But it made no difference to the men of
the tribe, because they were carrying with them their most valuable
possession, the sacred inheritance of their ancestors, the divinity that
protected them and made them formidable and great among the greatest, in
short, the stone that covered the tomb of their kings.

"And the chief of chiefs, with a solemn gesture, drew the yellow cloth
and revealed a block of granite in the shape of a slab about two yards
by one, granular in appearance and dark in colour, with a few glittering
scales gleaming in its substance.

"There was a single shout raised by the crowd of men and women; and all,
with outstretched arms, fell flat on their faces in the dust.

"Then the chief of chiefs took up a metal sceptre with a jewelled
handle, which lay on the block of granite, brandished it on high and
spoke:

"'The all-powerful staff shall not leave my hand until the miraculous
stone is in a place of safety. The all-powerful staff is born of the
miraculous stone. It also contains the fire of heaven, which gives life
or death. While the miraculous stone was the tomb of my forefathers, the
all-powerful staff never left their hands on days of disaster or of
victory. May the fire of heaven lead us! May the Sun-god light our way!'

"He spoke: and the whole tribe set out upon its journey."

Don Luis struck an attitude and repeated, in a self-satisfied tone:

"He spoke: and the whole tribe set out upon its journey."

Patrice Belval was greatly amused; and Stephane, infected by his
hilarity, began to feel more cheerful. But Don Luis now addressed his
remarks to them:

"There's nothing to laugh at! All this is very serious. It's not a story
for children who believe in conjuring tricks and sleight of hand, but a
real history, all the details of which will, as you shall see, give rise
to precise, natural and, in a sense, scientific explanations. Yes,
ladies and gentlemen, scientific: I am not afraid of the word. We are
here on scientific ground; and Vorski himself will regret his cynical
merriment."

Don Luis took a second sip of water and continued:

"For weeks and months the tribe followed the course of the Elbe; and one
evening, on the stroke of half-past nine, reached the sea-board, in the
country which afterwards became the country of the Frisians. It
remained there for weeks and months, without finding the requisite
security. It therefore determined upon a fresh exodus.

"This time it was a naval exodus. Thirty boats put out to sea--observe
this number thirty, which was that of the families composing the
tribe--and for weeks and months they wandered from shore to shore,
settling first in Scandinavia, next among the Saxons, driven off,
putting to sea again and continuing their voyage. And I assure you it
was really a strange, moving, impressive sight to see this vagrant tribe
dragging in its wake the tombstone of its kings and seeking a safe,
inaccessible and final refuge in which to conceal its idol, protect it
from the attack of its enemies, celebrate its worship and employ it to
consolidate the tribal power.

"The last stage was Ireland; and it was here that, one day, after they
had dwelt in the green isle for half a century or perhaps a century,
after their manners had acquired a certain softening by contact with
nations which were already less barbarous, the grandson or
great-grandson of the great chief, himself a great chief, received one
of the emissaries whom he maintained in the neighbouring countries. This
one came from the continent. He had discovered the miraculous refuge. It
was an almost unapproachable island, protected by thirty rocks and
having thirty granite monuments to guard it.

"Thirty! The fateful number! It was an obvious summons and command from
the mysterious deities. The thirty galleys were launched once more and
the expedition set forth.

"It succeeded. They took the island by assault. The natives they simply
exterminated. The tribe settled down; and the tombstone of the Kings of
Bohemia was installed . . . in the very place which it occupies to-day
and which I showed to our friend Vorski. Here I must interpolate a few
historical data of the greatest significance. I will be brief."

Adopting a professorial tone, Don Luis explained:

"The island of Sarek, like all France and all the western part of
Europe, had been inhabited for thousands of years by a race known as the
Liguri, the direct descendants of the cave-dwellers part of whose
manners and customs they had retained. They were mighty builders, those
Liguri, who, in the neolithic period, perhaps under the influence of the
great civilizations of the east, had erected their huge blocks of
granite and built their colossal funeral chambers.

"It was here that our tribe found and made great use of a system of
caves and natural crypts adapted by the patient hand of man and of a
cluster of enormous monuments which struck the mystic and superstitious
imagination of the Celts.

"We find therefore that, after the first or wandering phase, there
begins for the God-Stone a period of rest and worship which we will call
the Druidical period. It lasted for a thousand or fifteen hundred years.
The tribe became mingled with the neighbouring tribes and probably lived
under the protection of some Breton king. But, little by little, the
ascendancy had passed from the chiefs to the priests; and these priests,
that is to say, the Druids, assumed an authority which increased in the
course of the generations that followed.

"They owed this authority, beyond all doubt, to the miraculous stone.
True, they were the priests of a religion accepted by all and also the
instructors of Gallic childhood (it seems certain, incidentally, that
the cells under the Black Heath were those of a Druid convent, or rather
a sort of university); true, in obedience to the practices of the time,
they presided over human sacrifices and ordained the gathering of the
mistletoe, the vervain and all the magic herbs; but, before all, in the
island of Sarek, they were the guardians and the possessors of the stone
which gave life or death. Placed above the hall of the underground
sacrifices, it was at that time undoubtedly visible in the open air; and
I have every reason to believe that the Fairies' Dolmen, which we now
see here, then stood in the place known as the Calvary of the Flowers
and sheltered the God-Stone. It was there that ailing and crippled
persons and sickly children were laid to recover their health and
strength. It was on the sacred slab that barren women became fruitful,
on the sacred slab that old men felt their energies revive.

"In my eyes it dominates the whole of the legendary and fabled past of
Brittany. It is the radiating centre of all the superstitions, all the
beliefs, all the fears and hopes of the country. By virtue of the stone
or of the magic sceptre which the archdruid wielded and with which he
burnt men's flesh or healed their sores at will, we see the beautiful
tales of romance springing spontaneously into being, tales of the
knights of the Round Table, tales of Merlin the wizard. The stone is at
the bottom of every mystery, at the heart of every symbol. It is
darkness and light in one, the great riddle and the great explanation."

Don Luis uttered these last words with a certain exaltation. He smiled:

"Don't let yourself be carried away, Vorski. We'll keep our enthusiasm
for the narrative of your crimes. For the moment, we are at the climax
of the Druidical period, a period which lasted far beyond the Druids
through long centuries during which, after the Druids had gone, the
miraculous stone was exploited by the sorcerers and soothsayers. And
thus we come gradually to the third period, the religious period, that
is to say, actually to the progressive decline of all that constituted
the glory of Sarek: pilgrimages, commemorative festivals and so forth.

"The Church in fact was unable to put up with that crude fetish-worship.
As soon as she was strong enough, she was bound to fight against the
block of granite which attracted so many believers and perpetuated so
hateful a religion. The fight was an unequal one; and the past
succumbed. The dolmen was moved to where we stand, the slab of the kings
of Bohemia was buried under a layer of earth and a Calvary rose at the
very spot where the sacrilegious miracles were once wrought.

"And, over and above that, there was the great oblivion!

"Let me explain. The practices were forgotten. The rites were forgotten
and all that constituted the history of a vanished cult. But the
God-Stone was not forgotten. Men no longer knew where it was. In time
they even no longer knew what it was. But they never ceased to speak of
and believe in the existence of something which they called the
God-Stone. From mouth to mouth, from generation to generation, they
handed down on to one another fabulous and terrible stories, which
became farther and farther removed from reality, which formed a more and
more vague and, for that matter, a more and more frightful legend, but
which kept alive in their imaginations the recollection of the God-Stone
and, above all, its name.

"This persistence of an idea in men's memories, this survival of a fact
in the annals of a country had the logical result that, from time to
time, some enquiring person would try to reconstruct the prodigious
truth. Two of these enquiring persons, Brother Thomas, a member of the
Benedictine Order, who lived in the middle of the fifteenth century, and
the man Maguennoc, in our own time, played an important part. Brother
Thomas was a poet and an illuminator about whom we possess not many
details, a very bad poet, to judge by his verses, but as an illuminator
ingenuous and not devoid of talent. He left a sort of missal in which he
related his life at Sarek Abbey and drew the thirty dolmens of the
island, the whole accompanied by instances, religious quotations and
predictions after the manner of Nostradamus. It was this missal,
discovered by Maguennoc aforesaid, that contained the famous page with
the crucified women and the prophecy relating to Sarek; it was this
missal that I myself found and consulted last night in Maguennoc's
bedroom.

"He was an odd person, this Maguennoc, a belated descendant of the
sorcerers of old; and I strongly suspect him of playing the ghost on
more than one occasion. You may be sure that the white-robed,
white-bearded Druid whom people declared that they had seen on the sixth
day of the moon, gathering the mistletoe, was none other than Maguennoc.
He too knew all about the good old recipes, the healing herbs, the way
to work up the soil so as to make it yield enormous flowers. One thing
is certain, that he explored the mortuary crypts and the hall of the
sacrifices, that it was he who purloined the magic stone contained in
the knob of the sceptre and that he used to enter these crypts by the
opening through which we have just come, in the middle of the Postern
path, of which he was obliged each time to replace the screen of stones
and pebbles. It was he also who gave M. d'Hergemont the page from the
missal. Whether he confided the result of his last explorations to him
and how much exactly M. d'Hergemont knew does not matter now. Another
figure looms into sight, one who is henceforth the embodiment of the
whole affair and claims all our attention, an emissary dispatched by
fate to solve the riddle of the centuries, to carry out the orders of
the mysterious powers and to pocket the God-Stone. I am speaking of
Vorski."

Don Luis swallowed his third glass of water and, beckoning to the
accomplice, said:

"Otto, you had better give him a drink, if he's thirsty. Are you
thirsty, Vorski?"

Vorski on his tree seemed exhausted, incapable of further effort or
resistance. Stephane and Patrice once more intervened on his behalf,
fearing an immediate consummation.

"Not at all, not at all!" cried Don Luis. "He's all right and he'll hold
out until I've finished my speech, if it were only because he wants to
know. You're tremendously interested, aren't you, Vorski?"

"Robber! Murderer!" spluttered the wretched man.

"Splendid! So you still refuse to tell us where Francois is hidden?"

"Murderer! Highwayman!"

"Then stay where you are, old chap. As you please. There's nothing
better for the health than a little suffering. Besides, you have caused
so much suffering to others, you dirty scum!"

Don Luis uttered these words harshly and in accents of anger which one
would hardly have expected from a man who had already beheld so many
crimes and battled with so many criminals. But then this last one was
out of all proportion.

Don Luis continued:

"About thirty-five years ago, a very beautiful woman, who came from
Bohemia but who was of Hungarian descent, visited the watering-places
that swarm around the Bavarian lakes and soon achieved a great
reputation as a fortune-teller palmist, seer and medium. She attracted
the attention of King Louis II, Wagner's friend, the man who built
Bayreuth, the crowned mad-man famed for his extravagant fancies. The
intimacy between the king and the clairvoyant lasted for some years. It
was a violent, restless intimacy, interrupted by the frequent whims of
the king; and it ended tragically on the mysterious evening when Louis
of Bavaria threw himself out of his boat into the Starnbergersee. Was it
really, as the official version stated, suicide following on a fit of
madness? Or was it a case of murder, as some have held? Why suicide?
Why murder? These are questions that have never been answered. But one
fact remains: the Bohemian woman was in the boat with Louis II and next
day was escorted to the frontier and expelled from the country after her
money and jewellery had been taken from her.

"She brought back with her from this adventure a young monster, four
years old, Alex Vorski by name, which young monster lived with his
mother near the village of Joachimsthal in Bohemia. Here, in course of
time, she instructed him in all the practices of hypnotic suggestion,
extralucidity and trickery. Endowed with a character of unexampled
violence but a very weak intellect, a prey to hallucinations and
nightmares, believing in spells, in predictions, in dreams, in occult
powers, he took legends for history and falsehoods for reality. One of
the numerous legends of the mountains in particular had impressed his
imagination: it was the one that describes the fabulous power of a stone
which, in the dim recesses of the past, was carried away by evil genii
and which was one day to be brought back by the son of a king. The
peasants still show the cavity left by the stone in the side of a hill.

"'The king's son is yourself,' his mother used to say. 'And, if you find
the missing stone, you will escape the dagger that threatens you and
will yourself become a king.'

"This ridiculous prophecy and another, no less fantastic, in which the
Bohemian woman announced that her son's wife would perish on the cross
and that he himself would die by the hand of a friend, were among those
which exercised the most direct influence on Vorski when the fateful
hour struck. And I will go straight on to this fateful hour, without
saying any more of what our conversations of yesterday and last night
revealed to the three of us or of what we have been able to reconstruct.
There is no reason to repeat in full the story which you, Stephane, told
Veronique d'Hergemont in your cell. There is no need to inform you,
Patrice, you, Vorski, or you, All's Well, of events with which you are
familiar, such as your marriage, Vorski, or rather your two marriages,
first with Elfride and next with Veronique d'Hergemont, the kidnapping
of Francois by his grandfather, the disappearance of Veronique, the
searches which you set on foot to find her, your conduct at the outbreak
of the war and your life in the internment-camps. These are mere trifles
besides the events which are on the point of taking place. We have
cleared up the history of the God-Stone. It is the modern adventure,
which you, Vorski, have woven around the God-Stone, that we are now
about to unravel.

"In the beginning it appears like this: Vorski is imprisoned in an
internment-camp near Pontivy in Brittany. He no longer calls himself
Vorski, but Lauterbach. Fifteen months before, after a first escape and
at the moment when the court martial was about to sentence him to death
as a spy, he escaped again, spent some time in the Forest of
Fontainebleau, there found one of his former servants, a man called
Lauterbach, a German like himself and like himself an escaped prisoner,
killed him, dressed the body in his clothes and made the face up in such
a way as to give him the appearance of his murderer, Vorski. The
military police were taken in and had the sham Vorski buried at
Fontainebleau. As for the real Vorski, he had the bad luck to be
arrested once more, under his new name of Lauterbach, and to be interned
in the camp at Pontivy.

"So much for Vorski. On the other hand, Elfride, his first wife, the
formidable accomplice in all his crimes and herself a German--I have
some particulars about her and their past life in common which are of no
importance and need not be mentioned here--Elfride, I was saying, his
accomplice, was hidden with their son Raynold in the cells of Sarek. He
had left her there to spy on M. d'Hergemont and through him to ascertain
Veronique d'Hergemont's whereabouts. The reasons which prompted the
wretched woman's actions I do not know. It may have been blind devotion,
fear of Vorski, an instinctive love of evil-doing, hatred of the rival
who supplanted her. It doesn't matter. She has suffered the most
terrible punishment. Let us speak only of the part she played, without
seeking to understand how she had the courage to live for three years
underground, never going out except at night, stealing food for herself
and her son and patiently awaiting the day when she could serve and save
her lord and master.

"I am also ignorant of the series of events that enabled her to take
action, nor do I know how Vorski and Elfride managed to communicate. But
what I know most positively is that Vorski's escape was long and
carefully prepared by his first wife. Every detail arranged. Every
precaution was taken. On the fourteenth of September of last year,
Vorski escaped, taking with him the two accomplices with whom he had
made friends during his captivity and whom he had, so to speak,
enrolled: the Otto and Conrad whom you know of.

"It was an easy journey. At every cross-roads, an arrow, accompanied by
a number, one of a series, and surmounted by the initials 'V. d'H.,'
which initials were evidently selected by Vorski, pointed out the road
which he was to follow. At intervals, in a deserted cabin, some
provisions were hidden under a stone or in a truss of hay. The way led
through Guemene, Le Faouet and Rosporden and ended on the beach at
Beg-Meil.

"Here Elfride and Raynold came by night to fetch the three fugitives in
Honorine's motor-boat and to land them near the Druid cells under the
Black Heath. They clambered up. Their lodgings were ready for them and,
as you have seen, were fairly comfortable. The winter passed; and
Vorski's plan, which as yet was very vague, became more precisely
outlined from day to day.

"Strange to say, at the time of his first visit to Sarek, before the
war, he had not heard of the secret of the island. It was Elfride who
told him the legend of the God-Stone in the letters which she wrote to
him at Pontivy. You can imagine the effect produced by this revelation
on a man like Vorski. The God-Stone was bound to be the miraculous stone
wrested from the soil of his native land, the stone which was to be
discovered by the son of a king and which, from that time onward, would
give him power and royalty. Everything that he learnt later confirmed
his conviction. But the great fact that dominates his subterranean life
at Sarek was the discovery of Brother Thomas' prophecy in the course of
the last month. Fragments of this prophecy were lingering on every hand,
which he was able to pick up by listening to the conversations of the
fisherfolk in the evenings, lurking under the windows of the cottages or
on the roofs of the barns. Within mortal memory, the people of Sarek
have always feared some terrible events, connected with the discovery
and the disappearance of the invisible stone. There was likewise always
a question of wrecks and of women crucified. Besides, Vorski was
acquainted with the inscription on the Fairies' Dolmen, about the thirty
victims destined for the thirty coffins, the martyrdom of the four
women, the God-Stone which gives life or death. What a number of
disturbing coincidences for a mind as weak as his!

"But the prophecy itself, found by Maguennoc in the illuminated missal,
constitutes the essential factor of the whole story. Remember that
Maguennoc had torn out the famous page and that M. d'Hergemont, who was
fond of drawing, had copied it several times and had unconsciously given
to the principal woman the features of his daughter Veronique. Vorski
became aware of the existence of the original and of one of the copies
when he saw Maguennoc one night looking at them by the light of his
lamp. Immediately, in the darkness, he contrived somehow to pencil in
his note-book the fifteen lines of this precious document. He now knew
and understood everything. He was dazzled by a blinding light. All the
scattered elements were gathered into a whole, forming a compact and
solid truth. There was no doubt possible: the prophecy concerned _him_!
And it was _his_ mission to realize it!

"This, I repeat, is the essence of the whole matter. From that moment,
Vorski's path was lighted by a beacon. He held in his hand Ariadne's
clue of thread. The prophecy represented to him an unimpeachable text.
It was one of the Tables of the Law. It was the Bible. And yet think of
the stupidity, of the unspeakable silliness of those fifteen lines
scribbled at a venture, with no other motive than rhyme! Not a phrase
showing a sign of inspiration! Not a spark, not a gleam! Not a trace of
the sacred madness that uplifted the Delphian pythoness or provoked the
delirious visions of a Jeremiah or an Ezekiel! Nothing! Syllables,
rhymes! Nothing! Less than nothing! But quite enough to enlighten the
gentle Vorski and to make him burn with all the enthusiasm of a
neophyte!

"Stephane, Patrice, listen to the prophecy of Brother Thomas. The
Superhun wrote it down on ten different pages of his note-book, so that
he might wear it ten times next to his skin and engrave it in the very
substance of his being. Here's one of the pages. Stephane, Patrice,
listen! Listen, O faithful Otto! And you yourself, Vorski, for the last
time listen to the doggerel of Brother Thomas! Listen as I read!

    "In Sarek's isle, in year fourteen and three,
    There will be shipwrecks, terrors, grief and crimes,
    Death-chambers, arrows, poison there will be
    And woe, four women crucified on tree!
    For thirty coffins victims thirty times.

    "Before his mother's eyes, Abel kills Cain.
    The father then, coming forth of Almain,
    A cruel prince, obeying destiny,
    By thousand deaths and lingering agony,
    His wedded wife one night of June hath slain.

    "Fire and loud noise will issue from the earth
    In secrecy where the great treasure lies
    And man again will on the stone set eyes
    Once stolen from wild men in byegone days
    O'er the sea; the God-Stone which gives life or death."

Don Luis Perenna had begun to read in emphatic tones, bringing out the
imbecility of the words and the triteness of the rhythm. He ended in a
hollow voice, without resonance, which died away in an anguished
silence. The whole adventure appeared in all its horror.

He continued:

"You understand how the facts are linked together, don't you Stephane,
you who were one of the victims and who knew or know the others? So do
you, Patrice, don't you? In the fifteenth century, a poor monk, with a
disordered imagination and a brain haunted by infernal visions,
expresses his dreams in a prophecy which we will describe as bogus,
which rests on no serious data, which consists of details depending on
the exigencies of the rhyme or rhythm and which certainly, both in the
poet's mind and from the standpoint of originality, possesses no more
value than if the poet had drawn the words at random out of a bag. The
story of the God-Stone, the legends and traditions, none of all this
provides him with the least element of prophecy. The worthy man evolved
the prophecy from his own consciousness, not intending any harm and
simply to add a text of some sort to the margin of the devilish drawing
which he had so painstakingly illuminated. And he is so pleased with it
that he takes the trouble to take a pointed implement and engrave a few
lines of it on one of the stones of the Fairies' Dolmen.

"Well, four or five centuries later, the prophetic page falls into the
hands of a Superhun, a criminal lunatic, a madman eaten up with vanity.
What does the Superhun see in it? A diverting puerile fantasy? A
meaningless caprice? Not a bit of it! He regards it as a document of the
highest interest, one of those documents which the most Superhunnish of
his fellowcountrymen love to pore over, with this difference, that the
document to his mind possesses a miraculous origin. He looks upon it as
the Old and New Testament, the Scriptures which explain and expound the
Sarek law, the very gospel of the God-Stone. And this gospel designates
him, Vorski, him, the Superhun, as the Messiah appointed to execute the
decrees of Providence.

"To Vorski, there is no possibility of mistake. No doubt he enjoys the
business, because it is a matter of stealing wealth and power. But this
question occupies a secondary position. He is above all obeying the
mystic impulse of a race which believes itself to be marked out by
destiny and which flatters itself that it is always fulfilling missions,
a mission of regeneration as well as a mission of pillage, arson and
murder. And Vorski reads his mission set out in full in Brother Thomas'
prophecy. Brother Thomas says explicitly what has to be done and names
him, Vorski, in the plainest terms, as the man of destiny. Is he not a
king's son, in other words a 'prince of Almain?' Does he not come from
the country where the stone was stolen from the 'wild men o'er the sea?'
Has he not also a wife who is doomed, in the seer's prophecies, to the
torture of the cross? Has he not two sons, one gentle and gracious as
Abel, and the other wicked and uncontrolled as Cain?

"These proofs are enough for him. He now has his mobilization-papers,
his marching-orders in his pocket. The gods have indicated the objective
upon which he is to march; and he marches. True, there are a few living
people in his path. So much the better; it is all part of the programme.
For it is after all these living people have been killed and, moreover,
killed in the manner announced by Brother Thomas that the task will be
done, the God-Stone released and Vorski, the instrument of destiny,
crowned king. Therefore, let's turn up our sleeves, take our trusty
butcher's knife in hand, and get to work! Vorski will translate Brother
Thomas' nightmare into real life!"




CHAPTER XVII

"CRUEL PRINCE, OBEYING DESTINY"


Don Luis once more addressed himself to Vorski:

"We're agreed, aren't we, Kamerad? All that I'm saying exactly expresses
the truth?"

Vorski had closed his eyes, his head was drooping, and the veins on his
temple were immoderately swollen. To prevent any interference by
Stephane, Don Luis exclaimed:

"You will speak, my fine fellow! Ah, the pain is beginning to grow
serious, is it? The brain is giving way? . . . Remember, just one
whistle, a bar or two of _Tipperary_ and I interrupt my speech . . . .
You won't? You're not ripe yet? So much the worse for you! . . . And
you, Stephane, have no fear for Francois. I answer for everything. But
no pity for this monster, please! No, no and again no! Don't forget that
he prepared and contrived everything of his own free will! Don't forget
. . . But I'm getting angry. What's the use?"

Don Luis unfolded the page of the note-book on which Vorski had written
down the prophecy and, holding it under his eyes, continued:

"What remains to be said is not so important, once the general
explanation is accepted. Nevertheless, we must go into detail to some
slight extent, show the mechanism of the affair imagined and built up
by Vorski and lastly come to the part played by our attractive ancient
Druid . . . . So we are now in the month of June. This is the season
fixed for the execution of the thirty victims. It was evidently
appointed by Brother Thomas because the rhythm of his verse called for a
month in one syllable, just as the year fourteen and three was selected
because three rhymes with be and tree and just as Brother Thomas decided
upon the number of thirty victims because thirty is the number of the
Sarek reefs and coffins. But Vorski takes it as a definite command.
Thirty victims are needed in June '17. They will be provided. They will
be provided on condition that the twenty-nine inhabitants of Sarek--we
shall see presently that Vorski has his thirtieth victim handy--consent
to stay on the island and await their destruction. Well, Vorski suddenly
hears of the departure of Honorine and Maguennoc. Honorine will come
back in time. But how about Maguennoc? Vorski does not hesitate: he
sends Elfride and Conrad on his tracks, with instructions to kill him
and to wait. He hesitates the less because he believes, from certain
words which he has overheard, that Maguennoc has taken with him the
precious stone, the miraculous gem which must not be touched but which
must be left in its leaden sheath (this is the actual phrase used by
Maguennoc)!

"Elfride and Conrad therefore set out. One morning, at an inn, Elfride
mixes poison with the coffee which Maguennoc is drinking (the prophecy
has stated that there will be poison). Maguennoc continues his journey.
But in an hour or two he is seized with intolerable pain and dies,
almost immediately, on the bank by the road-side. Elfride and Conrad
come up and go through his pockets. They find nothing, no gem, no
precious stone. Vorski's hopes have not been realized. All the same, the
corpse is there. What are they to do with it? For the time being, they
fling it into a half-demolished hut, which Vorski and his accomplices
had visited some months before. Here Veronique d'Hergemont discovers the
body . . . and an hour later fails to find it there. Elfride and Conrad,
keeping watch close at hand, have taken it away and hidden it, still for
the time being, in the cellars of a little empty country-house.

"There's one victim accounted for. We may observe, in passing, that
Maguennoc's predictions relating to the order in which the thirty
victims are to be executed--beginning with himself--have no basis. The
prophecy doesn't mention such a thing. In any case, Vorski goes to work
at random. At Sarek he carries off Francois and Stephane Maroux and
then, both as a measure of precaution and in order to cross the island
without attracting attention and to enter the Priory more easily, he
dresses himself in Stephane's clothes, while Raynold puts on Francois'.
The job before them is an easy one. The only people in the house are an
old man, M. d'Hergemont, and a woman, Marie Le Goff. As soon as these
are got rid of, the rooms and Maguennoc's in particular will be
searched. Vorski, as yet unaware of the result of Elfride's expedition,
would not be surprised if Maguennoc had left the miraculous jewel at the
Priory.

"The first to fall is the cook, Marie Le Goff, whom Vorski takes by the
throat and stabs with a knife. But it so happens that the ruffian's
face gets covered with blood; and, seized with one of those fits of
cowardice to which he is subject, he runs away, after loosing Raynold
upon M. d'Hergemont.

"The fight between the boy and the old man is a long one. It is
continued through the house and, by a tragic chance, ends before
Veronique d'Hergemont's eyes. M. d'Hergemont is killed. Honorine arrives
at the same moment. She drops, making the fourth victim.

"Matters now begin to go quickly. Panic sets in during the night. The
people of Sarek, frightened out of their wits, seeing that Maguennoc's
predictions are being fulfilled and that the hour of the disaster which
has so long threatened their island is about to strike, make up their
minds to go. This is what Vorski and his son are waiting for. Taking up
their position in the motor-boat which they have stolen, they rush after
the runaways and the abominable hunt begins, the great disaster foretold
by Brother Thomas:

"'There will be shipwrecks, terrors, grief and crimes.'

"Honorine, who witnesses the scene and whose brain is already greatly
upset, goes mad and throws herself from the cliff.

"Thereupon we have a lull of a few days, during which Veronique
d'Hergemont explores the Priory and the island without being disturbed.
As a matter of fact, after their successful hunt, leaving only Otto, who
spends his time drinking in the cells, the father and son have gone off
in the boat to fetch Elfride and Conrad and to bring back Maguennoc's
body and fling it in the water within sight of Sarek, since Maguennoc
of necessity has one of the thirty coffins earmarked for his reception.

"At that moment, that is when he returns to Sarek, Vorski's bag numbers
twenty-four victims. Stephane and Francois are prisoners, guarded by
Otto. The rest consists of four women reserved for crucifixion,
including the three sisters Archignat, all locked up in their
wash-house. It is their turn next. Veronique d'Hergemont tries to
release them, but it is too late. Waylaid by the band, shot at by
Raynold, who is an expert archer, the sisters Archignat are wounded by
arrows (for arrows, see the prophecy) and fall into the enemy's hands.
That same evening they are strung up on the three oaks, after Vorski has
first relieved them of the fifty thousand-franc notes which they carried
concealed on their persons. Total: twenty-nine victims. Who will be the
thirtieth? Who will be the fourth woman?"

Don Luis paused and continued:

"As to this, the prophecy speaks very plainly in two places, each of
which complements the other:

"'Before his mother's eyes, Abel kills Cain.'

"And, a few lines lower down:

"'His wedded wife one night in June hath slain.'

"Vorski, from the moment when he became aware of this document, had
interpreted the two lines in his own fashion. Being, in fact, unable at
that time to dispose of Veronique, for whom he has vainly been hunting
all over France, he temporizes with the decrees of destiny. The fourth
woman to be tortured shall be a wife, but she shall be his first wife,
Elfride. And this will not be absolutely contrary to the prophecy,
which, if need be, can apply to the mother of Cain just as well as to
the mother of Abel. And observe that the other prophecy, that which was
communicated to him by word of mouth in the old days, also failed to
specify the woman who was to die:

"'Vorski's wife shall perish on the cross.'

"Which wife? Elfride.

"So his dear, devoted accomplice is to perish. It's terrible for Vorski;
it breaks his heart. But the god Moloch must be obeyed; and, considering
that Vorski, to accomplish his task, decided to sacrifice his son
Raynold, it would be inexcusable if he refused to sacrifice his wife
Elfride. So all will be well.

"But, suddenly, a dramatic incident occurs. While pursuing the sisters
Archignat, he sees and recognizes Veronique d'Hergemont!

"A man like Vorski could not fail to behold in this yet another favour
vouchsafed by the powers above. The woman whom he has never forgotten is
sent to him at the very moment when she is to take her place in the
great adventure. She is given to him as a miraculous victim which he can
destroy . . . or conquer. What a prospect! And how the heavens brighten
with unexpected light! Vorski loses his head. He becomes more and more
convinced that he is the Messiah, the chosen one, the apostle,
missionary, the man who is 'obeying destiny.' He is linked up with the
line of the high-priests, the guardians of the God-Stone. He is a Druid,
an arch-druid; and, as such, on the night when Veronique d'Hergemont
burns the bridge, on the sixth night after the moon, he goes and cuts
the sacred mistletoe with a golden sickle!

"And the siege of the Priory begins. I will not linger over this.
Veronique d'Hergemont has told you the whole story, Stephane, and we
know her sufferings, the part played by the delightful All's Well, the
discovery of the underground passage and the cells, the fight for
Francois, the fight for you, Stephane, whom Vorski imprisoned in one of
the torture-cells called 'death-chambers' in the prophecy. Here you are
surprised with Madame d'Hergemont. The young monster, Raynold, hurls you
into the sea. Francois and his mother escape. Unfortunately, Vorski and
his band succeed in reaching the Priory. Francois is captured. His
mother joins him. And then . . . and then the most tragic scenes ensue,
scenes upon which I will not enlarge: the interview between Vorski and
Veronique d'Hergemont, the duel between the two brothers, between Cain
and Abel, before Veronique d'Hergemont's very eyes. For the prophecy
insists upon it:

"'Before his mother's eyes, Abel kills Cain.'

"And the prophecy likewise demands that she shall suffer beyond
expression and that Vorski shall be subtle in doing evil. 'A cruel
prince,' he puts marks on the two combatants; and, when Abel is on the
point of being defeated, he himself wounds Cain so that Cain may be
killed.

"The monster is mad. He's mad and drunk. The climax is close at hand. He
drinks and drinks; for Veronique d'Hergemont's martyrdom is to take
place that evening:

    "'By thousand deaths and lingering agony,
    His wedded wife one night of June hath slain.'

"The thousand deaths Veronique has already undergone; and the agony will
be lingering. The hour comes. Supper, funeral procession, preparations,
the setting up of the ladder, the binding of the victim and then . . .
and then the ancient Druid!"

Don Luis gave a hearty laugh as he uttered the last words:

"Here, upon my word, things begin to get amusing! From this moment
onward, tragedy goes hand in hand with comedy, the gruesome with the
burlesque. Oh, that ancient Druid, what a caution! To you, Stephane, and
you, Patrice, who were behind the scenes, the story is devoid of
interest. But to you, Vorski, what exciting revelations! . . . I say,
Otto, just put the ladder against the trunk of the tree, so that your
employer can rest his feet on the top rung. Is that easier for you,
Vorski? Mark you, my little attention does not come from any ridiculous
feeling of pity. Oh, dear, no! But I'm afraid that you might go phut;
and besides I want you to be in a comfortable position to listen to the
ancient Druid's confession."

He had another burst of laughter. There was no doubt about it: the
ancient Druid was a great source of entertainment to Don Luis.

"The ancient Druid's arrival," he said, "introduces order and reason
into the adventure. What was loose and vague becomes more compact.
Incoherent crime turns into logical punishment. We have no longer blind
obedience to Brother Thomas' doggerel, but the submission to common
sense, the rigorous method of a man who knows what he wants and who has
no time to lose. Really, the ancient Druid deserves all our admiration.

"The ancient Druid, whom we may call either Don Luis Perenna or Arsene
Lupin--you suspect that, don't you?--knew very little of the story when
the periscope of his submarine, the _Crystal Stopper_, emerged in sight
of the coast of Sarek at mid-day yesterday."

"Very little?" Stephane Maroux cried, in spite of himself.

"One might say, nothing," Don Luis declared.

"What! All those facts about Vorski's past, all those precise details
about what he did at Sarek, about his plans and the part played by
Elfride and the poisoning of Maguennoc?"

"I learnt all that here, yesterday," said Don Luis.

"But from whom? We never left one another?"

"Believe me when I say that the ancient Druid, when he landed yesterday
on the coast of Sarek, knew nothing at all. But the ancient Druid lays
claim to be at least as great a favourite of the gods as you are,
Vorski. And in fact he at once had the luck to see, on a lonely little
beach, our friend Stephane, who himself had had the luck to fall into a
pretty deep pool of water and thus to escape the fate which you and your
son had prepared for him. Rescue-work, conversation. In half an hour,
the ancient Druid had the facts. Forthwith, investigations. He ended by
reaching the cells, where he found in yours, Vorski, a white robe which
he needed for his own use and a scrap of paper with a copy of the
prophecy written by yourself. Excellent. The ancient Druid knows the
enemy's plans.

"He begins by following the tunnel down which Francois and his mother
fled, but is unable to pass because of the subsidence which has been
produced. He retraces his steps and comes out on the Black Heath.
Exploration of the island. Meeting with Otto and Conrad. The enemy burns
the foot-bridge. It is six o'clock in the evening. Query: how to get to
the Priory? Stephane suggests, by the Postern path. The ancient Druid
returns to the _Crystal Stopper_. They circumnavigate the island under
the direction of Stephane, who knows all the channels--and besides, my
dear Vorski, the _Crystal Stopper_ is a very docile submarine. She can
slip in anywhere; the ancient Druid had her built to his own
designs--and at last they land at the spot where Francois' boat is
hanging. Here, meeting with All's Well, who is sleeping under the boat,
the ancient Druid introduces himself. Immediate display of sympathy.
They make a start. But, half-way up the ascent, All's Well branches off.
At this place the wall is the cliff is, so to speak, patched with
movable blocks of stone. In the middle of these stones is an opening, an
opening made by Maguennoc, as the ancient Druid discovered later, in
order to enter the hall of sacrifices and the mortuary crypts. Thus, the
ancient Druid finds himself in the thick of the plot, master above
ground and below. Only, it is eight o'clock in the evening.

"As regards Francois, there is no immediate anxiety. The prophecy says,
'Abel kills Cain.' But Veronique d'Hergemont was to perish 'one night of
June.' Had she undergone the horrible martyrdom? Was it too late to
rescue her?"

Don Luis turned to Stephane:

"You remember, Stephane, the agony through which you and the ancient
Druid passed and your relief at discovering the tree prepared with the
inscription, 'V. d'H.' The tree has no victim on it yet. Veronique will
be saved; and in fact we hear a sound of voices coming from the Priory.
It is the grim procession. It slowly climbs the grassy slope amid the
thickening darkness. The lantern is waved. A halt is called. Vorski
spouts and holds forth. The last scene is at hand. Soon we shall rush to
the assault and Veronique will be delivered.

"But here an incident occurs which will amuse you, Vorski. Yes, we make
a strange discovery, my friends and I: we find a woman prowling round
the dolmen, who hides as we come up. We seize her. Stephane recognizes
her by the light of an electric torch. Do you know who it was, Vorski? I
give you a hundred guesses. Elfride! Yes, Elfride, your accomplice, the
one whom you meant to crucify at first! Curious, wasn't it? In an
extreme state of excitement, half crazy, she tells us that she consented
to the duel between the two boys on your promise that her son would be
the victor and kill Veronique's son. But you had locked her up, in the
morning; and, in the evening, when she succeeded in making her escape,
it was Raynold's dead body that she found. She has now come to be
present at the torture of the rival whom she detests and then to avenge
herself on you and kill you, my poor old chap.

"A capital idea! The ancient Druid approves; and, while you go up to the
dolmen and Stephane keeps an eye on you, he continues to question
Elfride. But, lo and behold, Vorski, at the sound of your voice, the
jade begins to kick! She veers round unexpectedly. Her master's voice
stimulates her to an unparalleled display of ardour. She wants to see
you, to warn you of your danger, to save you; and suddenly she makes a
rush at the ancient Druid with a dagger in her hand. The ancient Druid
is obliged, in self-defence, to knock her down, half-stunning her; and
the sight of this moribund woman at once suggests to him a means of
turning the incident to good account. The wretched creature is tied up
in the twinkling of an eye. The ancient Druid intends you yourself to
punish her, Vorski, and make her undergo the fate which you had reserved
for her before. So he slips his robe on Stephane, gives him his
instructions, shoots an arrow in your direction the moment you come up
and, while you go running in pursuit of a white robe, does a
conjuring-trick and substitutes Elfride for Veronique, the first wife
for the second. How? That's my business. All you need know is that the
trick was played and succeeded to perfection!" Don Luis stopped to draw
breath. One would really have thought, from his familiar and
confidential tone, that he was telling Vorski an amusing story, a good
joke, which Vorski ought to be the first to laugh at.

"That's not all," he continued. "Patrice Belval and some of my
Moors--you may as well know that we have eighteen of them on board--have
been working in the underground rooms. There's no getting away from the
prophecy. The moment the wife has expired

    "'Fire and loud noise will issue from the earth.
    In secrecy where the great treasure lies.'

"Of course, Brother Thomas never knew where the great treasure lay, nor
did any one else. But the ancient Druid has guessed; and he wants Vorski
to receive his signal and to drop ready-roasted into his mouth. For this
he needs an outlet issuing near the Fairies' Dolmen. Captain Belval
looks for one and finds it. They clear an old stairway. They clear the
inside of the dead tree. They take from the submarine some
dynamite-cartridges and signal-rockets and place them in position. And,
when you, Vorski, from your perch, start proclaiming like a herald,
'She's dead! The fourth woman has died upon the cross!' bang, bang,
bang! Thunder, flame, uproar, the whole bag of tricks. That does it: you
are more and more the darling of the gods, the pet of destiny; and you
burn with the noble longing to fling yourself down the chimney and
gobble up the God-Stone. Next day, therefore, after sleeping off your
brandy and your rum, you start to work again, smiling. You killed your
thirty victims, according to the rites prescribed by Brother Thomas. You
have surmounted every obstacle. The prophecy is fulfilled.

    "'And man again will on the stone set eyes
    Once stolen from wild men in bye-gone days
    O'er sea: the God-stone which gives life or death.'

"The ancient Druid has no choice but to give in and to hand you the key
of Paradise. But first, of course, a little interlude, a few capers and
wizard's tricks, just for a bit of fun. And then hey for the God-Stone
guarded by the Sleeping Beauty!"

Don Luis nimbly cut a few of those capers of which he seemed so fond.
Then he said to Vorski:

"Well, old chap, I have a vague impression that you've had enough of my
speech and that you would prefer to reveal Francois' hiding-place to me
at once, rather then stay here any longer. I'm awfully sorry, but you
really must learn how the matter stands with the Sleeping Beauty and the
unexpected presence of Veronique d'Hergemont. However, two minutes will
be sufficient. Pardon me."

Dropping the character of the ancient Druid and speaking in his own
name, Don Luis continued:

"What you want to know is why I took Veronique d'Hergemont to that place
after snatching her from your clutches. The answer is very simple. Where
would you have me take her? To the submarine? An absurd suggestion! The
sea was rough that night and Veronique needed rest. To the Priory?
Never! That would have been too far from the scene of operations and I
should have had no peace of mind. In reality there was only one place
sheltered from the storm and sheltered from attack; and that was the
hall of sacrifices. That was why I took her there and why she was
sleeping there, quietly, under the influence of a strong narcotic, when
you saw her. I confess that the pleasure of treating you to this
spectacle counted for something in my decision. And how splendidly I was
rewarded! Oh, if you could have seen the face you pulled! Such a ghastly
sight! Veronique raised from the dead! Veronique brought back to life!
So horrible was the vision that you ran away helter-skelter.

"But to cut a long story short: you find the exit blocked. Thereupon you
change your mind. Conrad returns to the offensive. He attacks me by
stealth while I am preparing to move Veronique d'Hergemont to the
submarine. Conrad receives a mortal blow from one of the Moors. Second
comic interlude. Conrad, dressed up in the ancient Druid's robe, is laid
on the floor in one of the crypts; and of course your first thought is
to leap on him and wreak your vengeance on him. And, when you see
Elfride's body, which has taken the place of Veronique d'Hergemont in
the sacred table, whoosh . . . you jump on that too and reduce the woman
whom you have already crucified to a bleeding pulp! Blunder upon
blunder! And the end of the whole story likewise strikes a comic note.
You are strung up on the pillory while I deliver straight at you a
speech which does for you and which proves that, if you have won the
God-Stone by virtue of your thirty coffins, I am taking possession of it
by my own intrinsic virtue. There's the whole adventure for you, my dear
Vorski. Except for a few secondary incidents, or some others, of greater
importance, which there is no need for you to know, you know as much as
I do. You've been quite comfortable and have had lots of time to think.
So I am confidently expecting your answer about Francois. Come, out with
your little song:

    "'It's a long, long way to Tipperary.
    It's a long way to go . . . .'

"Well? Are you feeling in a chatty mood?"

Don Luis had climbed a few rungs. Stephane and Patrice had come near and
were anxiously listening. It was evident that Vorski meant to speak.

He had opened his eyes and was staring at Don Luis with a look of
mingled hatred and fear. This extraordinary man must have appeared to
him as one of those persons against whom it is absolutely useless to
fight and to whom it is equally useless to appeal for compassion. Don
Luis represented the conqueror; and, in the presence of one stronger
than yourself, there is nothing for it but to yield in all humility.
Besides, Vorski was incapable of further resistance. The torture was
becoming intolerable.

He spoke a few words in an unintelligible voice.

"A little louder, please," said Don Luis. "I can't hear. Where's
Francois?"

He climbed the ladder. Vorski stammered:

"Shall I be free?"

"On my word of honour. We shall all leave this place, except Otto, who
will release you."

"At once?"

"At once."

"Then . . ."

"Then what?"

"Well, Francois is alive."

"You mutton-head. I know that. But where is he?"

"Tied into the boat."

"The one hanging at the foot of the cliff?"

"Yes."

Don Luis struck his forehead with his hand:

"Idiot! Idiot! Idiot! . . . Don't mind: I'm speaking of myself. Yes, I
ought to have guessed that! Why, All's Well was sleeping under the boat,
peacefully, like a good dog sleeping beside his master! Why, when we
sent All's Well on Francois' trail, he led Stephane straight to the
boat. It's true enough, there are times when the cleverest of us behave
like simpletons! But you, Vorski, did you know that there was a way down
there and a boat?"

"I knew it since yesterday."

"And, you artful dog, you intended to skedaddle in her?"

"Yes."

"Well, Vorski, you shall skedaddle in her, with Otto. I'll leave her for
you. Stephane!"

But Stephane Maroux was already running towards the cliff, escorted by
All's Well.

"Release him, Stephane," cried Don Luis.

And he added, addressing the Moors:

"Help him, you others. And get the submarine under way. We shall sail in
ten minutes."

He turned to Vorski:

"Good-bye, my dear chap . . . . Oh, just one more word! Every
well-regulated adventure contains a love-story. Ours appears to be
without one, for I should never dare to allude to the feelings that
urged you towards the sainted woman who bore your name. And yet I must
tell you of a very pure and noble affection. Did you notice the
eagerness with which Stephane flew to Francois' assistance? Obviously he
loves his young pupil, but he loves the mother still more. And, since
everything that pleases Veronique d'Hergemont is bound to please you, I
wish to admit that he is not indifferent to her, that his wonderful love
has touched her heart, that it was with real joy that she saw him
restored to her this morning and that this will all end in a wedding
. . . as soon as she's a widow, of course. You follow me, don't you? The
only obstacle to their happiness is yourself. Therefore, as you are a
perfect little gentleman, you will not like to . . . But I need not go
on. I rely on your good manners to die as soon as you can. Good-bye, old
fellow, I won't offer you my hand, but my heart's with you. Otto, in ten
minutes, unless you hear to the contrary, release your employer. You'll
find the boat at the bottom of the cliff. Good luck, my friends!"

It was finished. The battle between Don Luis and Vorski was ended: and
the issue had not been in doubt for a single instant. From the first
minute, one of the two adversaries had so consistently dominated the
other, that the latter, in spite of all his daring and his training as a
criminal, had been nothing more than a grotesque, absurd, disjointed
puppet in his opponent's hands. After succeeding in the entire execution
of his plan, after attaining and surpassing his object, he, the master
of events, in the moment of victory, found himself suddenly strung up on
the tree of torture; and there he remained, gasping and captive like an
insect pinned to a strip of cork.

Without troubling any further about his victims, Don Luis went off with
Patrice Belval, who could not help saying to him:

"All the same, you're letting those vile scoundrels down very lightly!"

"Pooh, it won't be long before they get themselves nabbed elsewhere,"
said Don Luis, chuckling. "What do you expect them to do?"

"Well, first of all, to take the God-Stone."

"Out of the question! It would need twenty men to do that, with a
scaffolding and machinery. I myself am giving up the idea for the
present. I shall come back after the war."

"But, look here, Don Luis, what is this miraculous stone?"

"Ah, now you're asking something!" said Don Luis, without making further
reply.

They set out; and Don Luis, rubbing his hands, said:

"I worked the thing well. It's not much over twenty-four hours since we
landed at Sarek. And the riddle had lasted twenty-four centuries. One
century an hour. My congratulations, Lupin."

"I should be glad to offer you mine, Don Luis," said Patrice Belval,
"but they are not worth as much as those of an expert like yourself."

When they reached the sands of the little beach, Francois' boat had
already been lowered and was empty. Farther away, on the right, the
_Crystal Stopper_ was floating on the calm sea. Francois came running up
to them, stopped a few yards from Don Luis and looked at him with
wide-open eyes:

"I say," he murmured, "then it's you? It's you I was expecting?"

"Faith," said Don Luis, laughing. "I don't know if you were expecting me
. . . but I'm sure it's me!"

"You . . . you . . . Don Luis Perenna! . . . That is to say . . ."

"Hush, no other names! Perenna's enough for me . . . . Besides, we won't
talk about me, if you don't mind. I was just a chance, a gentleman who
happened to drop in at the right moment. Whereas you . . . by Jove,
youngster, but you've done jolly well! . . . So you spent the night in
the boat?"

"Yes, under the tarpaulin, lashed to the bottom and tightly gagged."

"Uncomfortable?"

"Not at all. I hadn't been there ten minutes when All's Well appeared.
So . . ."

"But the man, the scoundrel: what had he threatened to do to you?"

"Nothing. After the duel, while the others were attending to my
opponent, he brought me down here, pretending that he was going to take
me to mother and put us both on board the boat. Then, when we got to the
boat, he laid hold of me without a word."

"Do you know the man? Do you know his name?"

"I know nothing about him. All I can say is that he was persecuting us,
mother and me."

"For reasons which I shall explain to you, Francois. In any case, you
have nothing to fear from him now."

"Oh, but you haven't killed him?"

"No, but I have put it out of his power to do any more harm. This will
all be explained to you; but I think that, for the moment, the most
urgent thing is that we should go to your mother."

"Stephane told me that she was resting over there, in the submarine, and
that you had saved her too. Does she expect me?"

"Yes; we had a talk last night, she and I, and I promised to find you. I
felt that she trusted me. All the same, Stephane, you had better go
ahead and prepare her."

The _Crystal Stopper_ lay at the end of a reef of rocks which formed a
sort of natural jetty. Some ten or twelve Moors were running to and fro.
Two had drawn apart and were whispering together. Two of them were
holding a gangway which Don Luis and Francois crossed a minute later.

In one of the cabins, arranged as a drawing-room, Veronique lay
stretched on a couch. Her pale face bore the marks of the unspeakable
suffering which she had undergone. She seemed very weak, very weary. But
her eyes, full of tears, were bright with happiness.

Francois rushed into her arms. She burst into sobs, without speaking a
word.

Opposite them, All's Well, seated on his haunches, beat the air with his
fore-paws and looked at them, with his head a little on one side:

"Mother," said Francois, "Don Luis is here."

She took Don Luis' hand and pressed a long kiss upon it, while Francois
murmured:

"You saved mother . . . . You saved us both . . . ."

Don Luis interrupted him:

"Will you give me pleasure, Francois? Well, don't thank me. If you
really want to thank somebody, there, thank your friend All's Well. He
does not look as if he had played a very important part in the piece.
And yet, compared with the scoundrel who persecuted you, he was the good
genius, always discreet, intelligent, modest and silent."

"So are you!"

"Oh, I am neither modest nor silent; and that's why I admire All's Well.
Here, All's Well, come along with me and, for goodness' sake, stop
sitting up! You might have to do it all night, for they will be shedding
tears together for hours, the mother and son . . . ."




CHAPTER XVIII

THE GOD-STONE


The _Crystal Stopper_ was running on the surface of the water. Don Luis
sat talking, with Stephane, Patrice and All's Well, who were gathered
round him:

"What a swine that Vorski is!" he said. "I've seen that breed of monster
before, but never one of his calibre."

"Then, in that case . . ." Patrice Belval objected.

"In that case?" echoed Don Luis.

"I repeat what I've said already. You hold a monster in your hands and
you let him go free! To say nothing of its being highly immoral, think
of all the harm that he can do, that he inevitably will do! It's a heavy
responsibility to take upon yourself, that of the crimes which he will
still commit."

"Do you think so too, Stephane?" asked Don Luis.

"I'm not quite sure what I think," replied Stephane, "because, to save
Francois, I was prepared to make any concession. But, all the same
. . ."

"All the same, you would rather have had another solution?"

"Frankly, yes. So long as that man is alive and free, Madame d'Hergemont
and her son will have everything to fear from him."

"But what other solution was there? I promised him his liberty in return
for Francois' immediate safety. Ought I to have promised him only his
life and handed him over to the police?"

"Perhaps," said Captain Belval.

"Very well. But, in that case, the police would institute enquiries, and
by discovering the fellow's real identity bring back to life the husband
of Veronique d'Hergemont and the father of Francois. Is that what you
want?"

"No, no!" cried Stephane, eagerly.

"No, indeed," confessed Patrice Belval, a little uneasily. "No, that
solution is no better; but what astonishes me is that you, Don Luis, did
not hit upon the right one, the one which would have satisfied us all."

"There was only one solution," Don Luis Perenna said, plainly. "There
was only one."

"Which was that?"

"Death."

There was a pause. Then Don Luis resumed:

"My friends, I did not form you into a court simply as a joke; and you
must not think that your parts as judges are played because the trial
seems to you to be over. It is still going on; and the court has not
risen. That is why I want you to answer me honestly: do you consider
that Vorski deserves to die?"

"Yes," declared Patrice.

And Stephane approved:

"Yes, beyond a doubt."

"My friends," Don Luis continued, "your verdict is not sufficiently
solemn. I beseech you to utter it formally and conscientiously, as
though you were in the presence of the culprit. I ask you once more:
what penalty did Vorski deserve?"

They raised their hands and, one after the other, answered:

"Death."

Don Luis whistled. One of the Moors ran up.

"Two pairs of binoculars, Hadji."

The man brought the glasses and Don Luis handed them to Stephane and
Patrice:

"We are only a mile from Sarek," he said. "Look towards the point: the
boat should have started."

"Yes," said Patrice, presently.

"Do you see her, Stephane?"

"Yes, only . . ."

"Only what?"

"There's only one passenger."

"Yes," said Patrice, "only one passenger."

They put down their binoculars and one of them said:

"Only one has got away: Vorski evidently. He must have killed Otto, his
accomplice."

"Unless Otto, his accomplice, has killed him," chuckled Don Luis.

"What makes you say that?"

"Why, remember the prophecy made to Vorski in his youth: 'Your wife will
die on the cross and you will be killed by a friend.'"

"I doubt if a prediction is enough."

"I have other proofs, though."

"What proofs?"

"They, my friends, form part of the last problem we shall have to
elucidate together. For instance, what is your idea of the manner in
which I substituted Elfride Vorski for Madame d'Hergemont?"

Stephane shook his head:

"I confess that I never understood."

"And yet it's so simple! When a gentleman in a drawing-room, in a white
tie and a tail-coat, performs conjuring-tricks or guesses your thoughts,
you say to yourself, don't you, that there must be some artifice beneath
it all, the assistance of a confederate? Well, you need seek no farther
where I'm concerned."

"What, you had a confederate?"

"Yes, certainly."

"But who was he?"

"Otto."

"Otto? But you never left us! You never spoke to him, surely?"

"How could I have succeeded without his help? In reality, I had two
confederates in this business, Elfride and Otto, both of whom betrayed
Vorski, either out of revenge or out of greed. While you, Stephane, were
luring Vorski past the Fairies' Dolmen, I accosted Otto. We soon struck
a bargain, at the cost of a few bank-notes and in return for a promise
that he would come out of the adventure safe and sound. Moreover I
informed him that Vorski had pouched the sisters Archignat's fifty
thousand francs."

"How did you know that?" asked Stephane.

"Through my confederate number one, through Elfride, whom I continued to
question in a whisper while you were looking out for Vorski's coming and
who also, in a few brief words, told me what she knew of Vorski's
past."

"When all is said, you only saw Otto that once."

"Two hours later, after Elfride's death and after the fireworks in the
hollow oak, we had a second interview, under the Fairies' Dolmen. Vorski
was asleep, stupefied with drink, and Otto was mounting guard. You can
imagine that I seized the opportunity to obtain particulars of the
business and to complete my information about Vorski with the details
which Otto for two years had been secretly collecting about a chief whom
he detested. Then he unloaded Vorski's and Conrad's revolvers, or rather
he removed the bullets, while leaving the cartridges. Then he handed me
Vorski's watch and note-book, as well as an empty locket and a
photograph of Vorski's mother which Otto had stolen from him some months
before, things which helped me next day to play the wizard with the
aforesaid Vorski in the crypt where he found me. That is how Otto and I
collaborated."

"Very well," said Patrice, "but still you didn't ask him to kill
Vorski?"

"Certainly not."

"In that case, how are we to know that . . ."

"Do you think that Vorski did not end by discovering our collaboration,
which is one of the obvious causes of his defeat? And do you imagine
that Master Otto did not foresee this contingency? You may be sure that
there was no doubt of this: Vorski, once unfastened from his tree, would
have made away with his accomplice, both from motives of revenge and in
order to recover the sisters Archignat's fifty thousand francs. Otto got
the start of him. Vorski was there, helpless, lifeless, an easy prey. He
struck him a blow. I will go farther and say that Otto, who is a
coward, did not even strike him a blow. He will simply have left Vorski
on his tree. And so the punishment is complete. Are you appeased now, my
friends? Is your craving for justice satisfied?"

Patrice and Stephane were silent, impressed by the terrible vision which
Don Luis was conjuring up before their eyes.

"There," he said, laughing, "I was right not to make you pronounce
sentence over there, when we were standing at the foot of the oak, with
the live man in front of us! I can see that my two judges might have
flinched a little at that moment. And so would my third judge, eh, All's
Well, you sensitive, tearful fellow? And I am like you, my friends. We
are not people who condemn and execute. But, all the same, think of what
Vorski was, think of his thirty murders and his refinements of cruelty
and congratulate me on having, in the last resort, chosen blind destiny
as his judge and the loathsome Otto as his responsible executioner. The
will of the gods be done!"

The Sarek coast was making a thinner line on the horizon. It disappeared
in the mist in which sea and sky were merged.

The three men were silent. All three were thinking of the isle of the
dead, laid waste by one man's madness, the isle of the dead where soon
some visitor would find the inexplicable traces of the tragedy, the
entrances to the tunnels, the cells with their "death-chambers," the
hall of the God-Stone, the mortuary crypts, Elfride's body, Conrad's
body, the skeletons of the sisters Archignat and, right at the end of
the island, near the Fairies' Dolmen, where the prophecy of the thirty
coffins and the four crosses was written for all to read, Vorski's great
body, lonely and pitiable, mangled by the ravens and owls.

       *       *       *       *       *

A villa near Arcachon, in the pretty village of Les Moulleaux, whose
pine-trees run down to the shores of the gulf.

Veronique is sitting in the garden. A week's rest and happiness have
restored the colour to her comely face and assuaged all evil memories.
She is looking with a smile at her son, who, standing a little way off,
is listening to and questioning Don Luis Perenna. She also looks at
Stephane; and their eyes meet gently.

It is easy to see that the affection in which they both hold the boy is
a link which unites them closely and which is strengthened by their
secret thoughts and their unuttered feelings. Not once has Stephane
recalled the avowals which he made in the cell, under the Black Heath;
but Veronique has not forgotten them; and the profound gratitude which
she feels for the man who brought up her son is mingled with a special
emotion and an agitation of which she unconsciously savours the charm.

That day, Don Luis, who, on the evening when the _Crystal Stopper_
brought them all to the Villa des Moulleaux, had taken the train for
Paris, arrived unexpectedly at lunch-time, accompanied by Patrice
Belval; and during the hour that they have been sitting in their
rocking-chairs in the garden, the boy, his face all pink with
excitement, has never ceased to question his rescuer:

"And what did you do next? . . . But how did you know? . . . And what
put you on the track of that?"

"My darling," says Veronique, "aren't you afraid of boring Don Luis?"

"No, madame," replies Don Luis, rising, going up to Veronique and
speaking in such a way that the boy cannot hear, "no, Francois is not
boring me; and in fact I like answering his questions. But I confess
that he perplexes me a little and that I am afraid of saying something
awkward. Tell me, how much exactly does he know of the whole story?"

"As much as I know myself, except Vorski's name, of course."

"But does he know the part which Vorski played?"

"Yes, but with certain differences. He thinks that Vorski is an escaped
prisoner who picked up the legend of Sarek and, in order to get hold of
the God-Stone, proceeded to carry out the prophecy touching it. I have
kept some of the lines of the prophecy from Francois."

"And the part played by Elfride? Her hatred for you? The threats she
made you?"

"Madwoman's talk, I told Francois, of which I myself did not understand
the meaning."

Don Luis smiled:

"The explanation is a little arbitrary; and I have a notion that
Francois quite well understands that certain parts of the tragedy remain
and must remain obscure to him. The great thing, don't you think, is
that he should not know that Vorski was his father?"

"He does not know and he never will."

"And then--and this is what I was coming to--what name will he bear
himself?"

"What do you mean?"

"Whose son will he believe himself to be? For you know as well as I do
that the legal reality is this, that Francois Vorski died fifteen years
ago, drowned in a shipwreck, and his grandfather with him. And Vorski
died last year, stabbed by a fellow-prisoner. Neither of them is alive
in the eyes of the law. So . . ."

Veronique nodded her head and smiled:

"So I don't know. The position seems to me, as you say, incapable of
explanation. But everything will come out all right."

"Why?"

"Because you're here to do it."

It was his turn to smile:

"I can no longer take credit for the actions which I perform or the
steps which I take. Everything is arranging itself _a priori_. Then why
worry?"

"Am I not right to?"

"Yes," he said, gravely. "The woman who has suffered all that you have
must not be subjected to the least additional annoyance. And nothing
shall happen to her after this, I swear. So what I suggest to you is
this: long ago, you married against your father's wish a very distant
cousin, who died after leaving you a son, Francois. This son your
father, to be revenged upon you, kidnapped and brought to Sarek. At your
father's death, the name of d'Hergemont became extinct and there is
nothing to recall the events of your marriage."

"But my name remains. Legally, in the official records, I am Veronique
d'Hergemont."

"Your maiden name disappears under your married name."

"You mean under that of Vorski."

"No, because you did not marry that fellow Vorski, but one of your
cousins called . . ."

"Called what?"

"Jean Maroux. Here is a stamped certificate of your marriage to Jean
Maroux, a marriage mentioned in your official records, as this other
document shows."

Veronique looked at Don Luis in amazement:

"But why? Why that name?"

"Why? So that your son may be neither d'Hergemont, which would have
recalled past events, nor Vorski, which would have recalled the name of
a traitor. Here is his birth-certificate, as Francois Maroux."

She repeated, all blushing and confused:

"But why did you choose just that name?"

"It seemed easy for Francois. It's the name of Stephane, with whom
Francois will go on living for some time. We can say that Stephane was a
relation of your husband's; and this will explain the intimacy
generally. That is my plan. It presents, believe me, no possible danger.
When one is confronted by an inexplicable and painful position like
yours, one must needs employ special means and resort to drastic and, I
admit, very illegal measures. I did so without scruple, because I have
the good fortune to dispose of resources which are not within
everybody's reach. Do you approve of what I have done?"

Veronique bent her head:

"Yes," she said, "yes."

He half-rose from his seat:

"Besides," he added, "if there should be any drawbacks, the future will
no doubt take upon itself the burden of removing them. It would be
enough, for instance--there is no indiscretion, is there, in alluding to
the feelings which Stephane entertains for Francois' mother?--it would
be enough if, one day or another, for reasons of common-sense, or
reasons of gratitude, Francois' mother were moved to accept the homage
of those feelings. How much simpler everything will be if Francois
already bears the name of Maroux! How much more easily the past will be
abolished, both for the outside world and for Francois, who will no
longer be able to pry into the secret of bygone events which there will
be nothing to recall to memory. It seemed to me that these were rather
weighty arguments. I am glad to see that you share my opinion."

Don Luis bowed to Veronique and, without insisting any further, without
appearing to notice her confusion, turned to Francois and explained:

"I'm at your orders now, young man. And, since you don't want to leave
anything unexplained, let's go back to the God-Stone and the scoundrel
who coveted its possession. Yes, the scoundrel," repeated Don Luis,
seeing no reason not to speak of Vorski with absolute frankness, "and
the most terrible scoundrel that I have ever met with, because he
believed in his mission; in short, a sick-brained man, a lunatic . . ."

"Well, first of all," Francois observed, "what I don't understand is
that you waited all night to capture him, when he and his accomplices
were sleeping under the Fairies' Dolmen."

"Well done, youngster," said Don Luis, laughing, "you have put your
finger on a weak point! If I had acted as you suggest, the tragedy would
have been finished twelve or fifteen hours earlier. But think, would you
have been released? Would the scoundrel have spoken and revealed your
hiding-place? I don't think so. To loosen his tongue I had to keep him
simmering. I had to make him dizzy, to drive him mad with apprehension
and anguish and to convince him by means of a mass of proofs, that he
was irretrievably defeated. Otherwise he would have held his tongue and
we might perhaps not have found you. . . . . Besides, at that time, my
plan was not very clear, I did not quite know how to wind up; and it was
not until much later that I thought not of submitting him to violent
torture--I am incapable of that--but of tying him to that tree on which
he wanted to let your mother die. So that, in my perplexity and
hesitation, I simply yielded, in the end, to the wish--the rather
puerile wish, I blush to confess--to carry out the prophecy to the end,
to see how the missionary would behave in the presence of the ancient
Druid, in short to amuse myself. After all, the adventure was so dark
and gloomy that a little fun seemed to me essential. And I laughed like
blazes. That was wrong. I admit it and I apologize."

The boy was laughing too. Don Luis, who was holding him between his
knees, kissed him and asked:

"Do you forgive me?"

"Yes, on condition that you answer two more questions. The first is not
important."

"Ask away."

"It's about the ring. Where did you get that ring which you put first on
mother's finger and afterwards on Elfride's?"

"I made it that same night, in a few minutes, out of an old wedding-ring
and some coloured stones."

"But the scoundrel recognized it as having belonged to his mother."

"He thought he recognized it; and he thought it because the ring was
like the other."

"But how did you know that? And how did you learn the story?"

"From himself."

"You don't mean that?"

"Certainly I do! From words that escaped him while he was sleeping under
the Fairies' Dolmen. A drunkard's nightmare. Bit by bit he told the
whole story of his mother. Elfride knew a good part of it besides. You
see how simple it is and how my luck stood by me!"

"But the riddle of the God-Stone is not simple," Francois cried, "and
you deciphered it! People have been trying for centuries and you took a
few hours!"

"No, a few minutes, Francois. It was enough for me to read the letter
which your grandfather wrote about it to Captain Belval. I sent your
grandfather by post all the explanations as to the position and the
marvellous nature of the God-Stone."

"Well," cried the boy, "it's those explanations that I'm asking of you,
Don Luis. This is my last question, I promise you. What made people
believe in the power of the God-Stone? And what did that so-called power
consist of exactly?"

Stephane and Patrice drew up their chairs. Veronique sat up and
listened. They all understood that Don Luis had waited until they were
together before rending the veil of the mystery before their eyes.

He began to laugh:

"You mustn't hope for anything sensational," he said. "A mystery is
worth just as much as the darkness in which it is shrouded; and, as we
have begun by dispelling the darkness, nothing remains but the fact
itself in its naked reality. Nevertheless the facts in this case are
strange and the reality is not denuded of a certain grandeur."

"It must needs be so," said Patrice Belval, "seeing that the reality
left so miraculous a legend in the isle of Sarek and even all over
Brittany."

"Yes," said Don Luis, "and a legend so persistent that it influences us
to this day and that not one of you has escaped the obsession of the
miraculous."

"What do you mean?" protested Patrice. "I don't believe in miracles."

"No more do I," said the boy.

"Yes, you do, you believe in them, you accept miracles as possible. If
not, you would long ago have seen the whole truth."

"Why?"

Don Luis picked a magnificent rose from a tree by his side and asked
Francois:

"Is it possible for me to transform this rose, whose proportions, as it
is, are larger than those a rose often attains, into a flower double
the size and this rose-tree into a shrub twice as tall?"

"Certainly not," said Francois.

"Then why did you admit, why did you all admit that Maguennoc could
achieve that result, merely by digging up earth in certain parts of the
island, at certain fixed hours? That was a miracle; and you accepted it
without hesitation, unconsciously."

Stephane objected:

"We accept what we saw with our eyes."

"But you accepted it as a miracle, that is to say, as a phenomenon which
Maguennoc produced by special and, truth to tell, by supernatural means.
Whereas I, when I read this detail in M. d'Hergemont's letter, at
once--what shall I say?--caught on. I at once established the connection
between those monstrous blossoms and the name borne by the Calvary of
the flowers. And my conviction was immediate: 'No, Maguennoc is not a
wizard. He simply cleared a piece of uncultivated land around the
Calvary; and all he had to do, to produce abnormal flowers, was to bring
along a layer of mould. So the God-Stone is underneath; the God-Stone
which, in the middle-ages, produced the same abnormal flowers; the
God-Stone, which, in the days of the Druids, healed the sick and
strengthened children.'"

"Therefore," said Patrice, "there is a miracle."

"There is a miracle if we accept the supernatural explanation. There is
a natural phenomenon if we look for it and if we find the physical cause
capable of giving rise to the apparent miracle."

"But those physical causes don't exist! They are not present."

"They exist, because you have seen monstrous flowers."

"Then there is a stone," asked Patrice, almost chaffingly, "which can
naturally give health and strength? And that stone is the God-Stone?"

"There is not a particular, individual stone. But there are stones,
blocks of stone, rocks, hills and mountains of rock, which contain
mineral veins formed of various metals, oxides of uranium, silver, lead,
copper, nickel, cobalt and so on. And among these metals are some which
emit a special radiation, endowed with peculiar properties known as
radioactivity. These veins are veins of pitchblende which are found
hardly anywhere in Europe except in the north of Bohemia and which are
worked near the little town of Joachimsthal. And those radioactive
bodies are uranium, thorium, helium and chiefly, in the case which we
are considering . . ."

"Radium," Francois interrupted.

"You've said it, my boy: radium. Phenomena of radioactivity occur more
or less everywhere; and we may say that they are manifested throughout
nature, as in the healing action of thermal springs. But plainly
radioactive bodies like radium possess more definite properties. For
instance, there is no doubt that the rays and the emanation of radium
exercise a power over the life of plants, a power similar to that caused
by the passage of an electric current. In both cases, the stimulation of
the nutritive centres makes the elements required by the plant more easy
to assimilate and promotes its growth. In the same way, there is no
doubt that the radium rays are capable of exercising a physiological
action on living tissues, by producing more or less profound
modifications, destroying certain cells and contributing to develop
other cells and even to control their evolution. Radiotherapy claims to
have healed or improved numerous cases of rheumatism of the joints,
nervous troubles, ulceration, eczema, tumours and adhesive cicatrices.
In short radium is a really effective therapeutic agent."

"So," said Stephane, "you regard the God-Stone . . ."

"I regard the God-Stone as a block of radiferous pitchblende originating
from the Joachimsthal lodes. I have long known the Bohemian legend which
speaks of a miraculous stone that was once removed from the side of a
hill; and, when I was travelling in Bohemia, I saw the hole left by the
stone. It corresponds pretty accurately with the dimensions of the
God-Stone."

"But," Stephane objected, "radium is contained in rocks only in the form
of infinitesimal particles. Remember that, after a mass of fourteen
hundred tons of rock have been duly mined and washed and treated, there
remains at the end of it all only a filtrate of some fifteen grains of
radium. And you attribute a miraculous power to the God-Stone, which
weighs two tons at most!"

"But it evidently contains radium in appreciable quantities. Nature has
not pledged herself to be always niggardly and invariably to dilute the
radium. She was pleased to accumulate in the God-Stone a generous supply
which enabled it to produce the apparently extraordinary phenomena which
we know of . . . not forgetting that we have to allow for popular
exaggeration."

Stephane seemed to be yielding to conviction. Nevertheless he said:

"One last point. Apart from the God-Stone, there was the little chip of
stone which Maguennoc found in the leaden sceptre, the prolonged touch
of which burnt his hand. According to you, this was a particle of
radium?"

"Undoubtedly. And it is this perhaps that most clearly reveals the
presence and the power of radium in all this adventure. When Henri
Becquerel, the great physicist, kept a tube containing a salt of radium
in his waistcoat-pocket, his skin became covered in a few days with
suppurating ulcers. Curie repeated the experiment, with the same result.
Maguennoc's case was more serious, because he held the particle of
radium in his hand. A wound formed which had a cancerous appearance.
Scared by all that he knew and all that he himself had said about the
miraculous stone which burns like hell-fire and 'gives life or death,'
he chopped off his hand."

"Very well," said Stephane, "but where did that particle of pure radium
come from? It can't have been a chip of the God-Stone, because, once
again, however rich a mineral may be, radium is incorporated in it, not
in isolated grains, but in a soluble form, which has to be dissolved and
afterwards collected, by a series of mechanical operations, into a
solution rich enough to enable successive crystallizations and
concentrations to isolate the active product which the solution
contains. All this and a number of other later operations demand an
enormous plant, with workshops, laboratories, expert chemists, in short,
a very different state of civilization, you must admit, from the state
of barbarism in which our ancestors the Celts were immersed."

Don Luis smiled and tapped the young man on the shoulder:

"Hear, hear, Stephane! I am glad to see that Francois' friend and tutor
has a far-seeing and logical mind. The objection is perfectly valid and
suggested itself to me at once. I might reply by putting forward some
quite legitimate theory, I might presume a natural means of isolating
radium and imagine that, in a geological fault occurring in the granite,
at the bottom of a big pocket containing radiferous ore, a fissure has
opened through which the waters of the river slowly trickle, carrying
with them infinitesimal quantities of radium; that the waters so charged
flow for a long time in a narrow channel, combine again, become
concentrated and, after centuries upon centuries, filter through in
little drops, which evaporate at once, and form at the point of
emergence a tiny stalactite, exceedingly rich in radium, the tip of
which is broken off one day by some Gallic warrior. But is there any
need to seek so far and to have recourse to hypotheses? Cannot we rely
on the unaided genius and the inexhaustible resources of nature? Does it
call for a more wonderful effort on her part to evolve by her own
methods a particle of pure radium than to make a cherry ripen or to make
this rose bloom . . . or to give life to our delightful All's Well? What
do you say, young Francois? Do we agree?"

"We always agree," replied the boy.

"So you don't unduly regret the miracle of the God-Stone?"

"Why, the miracle still exists!"

"You're right, Francois, it still exists and a hundred times more
beautiful and dazzling than before. Science does not kill miracles: it
purifies them and ennobles them. What was that crafty, capricious,
wicked, incomprehensible little power attached to the tip of a magic
wand and acting at random, according to the ignorant fancy of a
barbarian chief or Druid, what was it, I ask you, beside the beneficent,
logical, reliable and quite as miraculous power which we behold to-day
in a pinch of radium?"

Don Luis suddenly interrupted himself and began to laugh:

"Come, come, I'm allowing myself to be carried away and singing an ode
to science! Forgive me, madame," he added, rising and going up to
Veronique, "and tell me that I have not bored you too much with my
explanations. I haven't, have I? Not too much? Besides, it's finished
. . . or nearly finished. There is only one more point to make clear,
one decision to take."

He sat down beside her:

"It's this. Now that we have won the God-Stone, in other words, an
actual treasure, what are we going to do with it?"

Veronique spoke with a heartfelt impulse:

"Oh, as to that, don't let us speak of it! I don't want anything that
may come from Sarek, or anything that's found in the Priory. We will
work."

"Still, the Priory belongs to you."

"No, no, Veronique d'Hergemont no longer exists and the Priory no longer
belongs to any one. Let it all be put up to auction. I don't want
anything of that accursed past."

"And how will you live?"

"As I used to by my work. I am sure that Francois approves, don't you,
darling?"

And, with an instinctive movement, turning to Stephane, as though he had
a certain right to give his opinion, she added:

"You too approve, don't you, dear Stephane?"

"Entirely," he said.

She at once went on:

"Besides, though I don't doubt my father's feelings of affection, I have
no proof of his wishes towards me."

"I have the proofs," said Don Luis.

"How?"

"Patrice and I went back to Sarek. In a writing-desk in Maguennoc's
room, in a secret drawer, we found a sealed, but unaddressed envelope,
and opened it. It contained a bond worth ten thousand francs a year and
a sheet of paper which read as follows:

"'After my death, Maguennoc will hand this bond to Stephane Maroux, to
whom I confide the charge of my grandson, Francois. When Francois is
eighteen years of age, the bond will be his to do what he likes with. I
hope and trust, however, that he will seek his mother and find her and
that she will pray for my soul. I bless them both.'

"Here is the bond," said Don Luis, "and here is the letter. It is dated
April of this year."

Veronique was astounded. She looked at Don Luis and the thought occurred
to her that all this was perhaps merely a story invented by that strange
man to place her and her son beyond the reach of want. It was a passing
thought. When all was considered, it was a natural consequence.
Everything said, M. d'Hergemont's action was very reasonable; and,
foreseeing the difficulties that would crop up after his death, it was
only right that he should think of his grandson. She murmured:

"I have not the right to refuse."

"You have so much the less right," said Don Luis, "in that the
transaction excludes you altogether. Your father's wishes affect
Francois and Stephane directly. So we are agreed. There remains the
God-Stone; and I repeat my question. What are we to do with it? To whom
does it belong?"

"To you," said Veronique, definitely.

"To me?"

"Yes, to you. You discovered it and you have given it a real
signification."

"I must remind you," said Don Luis, "that this block of stone possesses,
beyond a doubt, an incalculable value. However great the miracles
wrought by nature may be, it is only through a wonderful concourse of
circumstances that she was able to perform the miracle of collecting so
much precious matter in so small a volume. There are treasures and
treasures there."

"So much the better," said Veronique, "you will be able to make a better
use of them than any one else."

Don Luis thought for a moment and added:

"You are quite right; and I confess that I prepared for this climax.
First, because my right to the God-Stone seemed to me to be proved by
adequate titles of ownership; and, next, because I have need of that
block of stone. Yes, upon my word, the tombstone of the Kings of Bohemia
has not exhausted its magic power; there are plenty of nations left on
whom that power might produce as great an effect as on our ancestors the
Gauls; and, as it happens, I am tackling a formidable undertaking in
which an assistance of this kind will be invaluable to me. In a few
years, when my task is completed, I will bring the God-Stone back to
France and present it to a national laboratory which I intend to found.
In this way science will purge any evil that the God-Stone may have done
and the horrible adventure of Sarek will be atoned for. Do you approve,
madame?"

She gave him her hand:

"With all my heart."

There was a fairly long pause. Then Don Luis said:

"Ah, yes, a horrible adventure, too terrible for words. I have had some
gruesome adventures in my life which have left painful memories behind
them. But this outdoes them all. It exceeds anything that is possible in
reality or human in suffering. It was so excessively logical as to
become illogical; and this because it was the act of a madman . . . and
also because it came to pass at a season of madness and bewilderment. It
was the war which facilitated the safe silent committal of an obscure
crime prepared and executed by a monster. In times of peace, monsters
have not the time to realize their stupid dreams. To-day, in that
solitary island, this particular monster found special, abnormal
conditions . . ."

"Please don't let us talk about all this," murmured Veronique, in a
trembling voice.

Don Luis kissed her hand and then took All's Well and lifted him in his
arms:

"You're right. Don't let's talk about it, or else tears would come and
All's Well would be sad. Therefore, All's Well, my delightful All's
Well, let us talk no more of the dreadful adventure. But all the same
let us recall certain episodes which were beautiful and picturesque. For
instance, Maguennoc's garden with the gigantic flowers; you will
remember it as I shall, won't you, All's Well? And the legend of the
God-Stone, the idyll of the Celtic tribes wandering with the memorial
stone of their kings, the stone all vibrant with radium, emitting an
incessant bombardment of vivifying and miraculous atoms; all that, All's
Well, possesses a certain charm, doesn't it? Only, my most exquisite
All's Well, if I were a novelist and if it were my duty to tell the
story of Coffin Island, I should not trouble too much about the horrid
truth and I should give you a much more important part. I should do away
with the intervention of that phrase-mongering humbug of a Don Luis and
you would be the fearless and silent rescuer. You would fight the
abominable monster, you would thwart his machinations and, in the end,
you, with your marvellous instinct, would punish vice and make virtue
triumph. And it would be much better so, because none would be more
capable than you, my delightful All's Well, of demonstrating by a
thousand proofs, each more convincing than the other, that in this life
of ours all things come right and all's well."


THE END




Popular Copyright Novels

_AT MODERATE PRICES_

Ask Your Dealer for a Complete List of A. L. Burt Company's Popular
Copyright Fiction

Adventures of Jimmie Dale, The.  By Frank L. Packard.
Adventures of Sherlock Holmes.  By A. Conan Doyle.
After House, The.  By Mary Roberts Rinehart.
Ailsa Paige.  By Robert W. Chambers.
Alton of Somasco.  By Harold Bindloss.
Amateur Gentleman, The.  By Jeffery Farnol.
Anna, the Adventuress.  By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
Anne's House of Dreams.  By L. M. Montgomery.
Around Old Chester.  By Margaret Deland.
Athalie.  By Robert W. Chambers.
At the Mercy of Tiberius.  By Augusta Evans Wilson.
Auction Block, The.  By Rex Beach.
Aunt Jane of Kentucky.  By Eliza C. Hall.
Awakening of Helena Richie.  By Margaret Deland.

Bab: a Sub-Deb.  By Mary Roberts Rinehart.
Barrier, The.  By Rex Beach.
Barbarians.  By Robert W. Chambers.
Bargain True, The.  By Nalbro Bartley.
Bar 20.  By Clarence E. Mulford.
Bar 20 Days.  By Clarence E. Mulford.
Bars of Iron, The.  By Ethel M. Dell.
Beasts of Tarzan, The.  By Edgar Rice Burroughs.
Beloved Traitor, The.  By Frank L. Packard.
Beltane the Smith.  By Jeffery Farnol.
Betrayal, The.  By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
Beyond the Frontier.  By Randall Parrish.
Big Timber.  By Bertrand W. Sinclair.
Black Is White.  By George Barr McCutcheon.
Blind Man's Eyes, The.  By Wm. MacHarg and Edwin Balmer.
Bob, Son of Battle.  By Alfred Ollivant.
Boston Blackie.  By Jack Boyle.
Boy with Wings, The.  By Berta Ruck.
Brandon of the Engineers.  By Harold Bindloss.
Broad Highway, The.  By Jeffery Farnol.
Brown Study, The.  By Grace S. Richmond.
Bruce of the Circle, A.  By Harold Titus.
Buck Peters, Ranchman.  By Clarence E. Mulford.
Business of Life, The.  By Robert W. Chambers.

Cabbages and Kings.  By O. Henry.
Cabin Fever.  By B. M. Bower.
Calling of Dan Matthews, The.  By Harold Bell Wright.
Cape Cod Stories.  By Joseph C. Lincoln.
Cap'n Abe, Storekeeper.  By James A. Cooper.
Cap'n Dan's Daughter.  By Joseph C. Lincoln.
Cap'n Eri.  By Joseph C. Lincoln.
Cap'n Jonah's Fortune.  By James A. Cooper.
Cap'n Warren's Wards.  By Joseph C. Lincoln.
Chain of Evidence, A.  By Carolyn Wells.
Chief Legatee, The.  By Anna Katharine Green.
Cinderella Jane.  By Marjorie B. Cooke.
Cinema Murder, The.  By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
City of Masks, The.  By George Barr McCutcheon.
Cleek of Scotland Yard.  By T. W. Hanshew.
Cleek, The Man of Forty Faces.  By Thomas W. Hanshew.
Cleek's Government Cases.  By Thomas W. Hanshew.
Clipped Wings.  By Rupert Hughes.
Clue, The.  By Carolyn Wells.
Clutch of Circumstance, The.  By Marjorie Benton Cooke.
Coast of Adventure, The.  By Harold Bindloss.
Coming of Cassidy, The.  By Clarence E. Mulford.
Coming of the Law, The.  By Chas. A. Seltzer.
Conquest of Canaan, The.  By Booth Tarkington.
Conspirators, The.  By Robert W. Chambers.
Court of Inquiry, A.  By Grace S. Richmond.
Cow Puncher, The.  By Robert J. C. Stead.
Crimson Gardenia, The, and Other Tales of Adventure.  By Rex Beach.
Cross Currents.  By Author of "Pollyanna."
Cry in the Wilderness, A.  By Mary E. Waller.

Danger, And Other Stories.  By A. Conan Doyle.
Dark Hollow, The.  By Anna Katharine Green.
Dark Star, The.  By Robert W. Chambers.
Daughter Pays, The.  By Mrs. Baillie Reynolds.
Day of Days, The.  By Louis Joseph Vance.
Depot Master, The.  By Joseph C. Lincoln.
Desired Woman, The.  By Will N. Harben.
Destroying Angel, The.  By Louis Jos. Vance.
Devil's Own, The.  By Randall Parrish.
Double Traitor, The.  By E. Phillips Oppenheim.

Empty Pockets.  By Rupert Hughes.
Eyes of the Blind, The.  By Arthur Somers Roche.
Eye of Dread, The.  By Payne Erskine.
Eyes of the World, The.  By Harold Bell Wright
Extricating Obadiah.  By Joseph C. Lincoln.

Felix O'Day.  By F. Hopkinson Smith.
54-40 or Fight.  By Emerson Hough.
Fighting Chance, The.  By Robert W. Chambers.
Fighting Shepherdess, The.  By Caroline Lockhart
Financier, The.  By Theodore Dreiser.
Flame, The.  By Olive Wadsley.
Flamsted Quarries.  By Mary E. Wallar.
Forfeit, The.  By Ridgwell Cullum.
Four Million, The.  By O. Henry.
Fruitful Vine, The.  By Robert Hichens.
Further Adventures of Jimmie Dale, The.  By Frank L. Packard.

Girl of the Blue Ridge, A.  By Payne Erskine.
Girl from Keller's, The.  By Harold Bindloss.
Girl Philippa, The.  By Robert W. Chambers.
Girls at His Billet, The.  By Berta Ruck.
God's Country and the Woman.  By James Oliver Curwood.
Going Some.  By Rex Beach.
Golden Slipper, The.  By Anna Katharine Green.
Golden Woman, The.  By Ridgwell Cullum.
Greater Love Hath No Man.  By Frank L. Packard.
Greyfriars Bobby.  By Eleanor Atkinson.
Gun Brand, The.  By James B. Hendryx.

Halcyone.  By Elinor Glyn.
Hand of Fu-Manchu, The.  By Sax Rohmer.
Havoc.  By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
Heart of the Desert The.  By Honore Willsie.
Heart of the Hills, The.  By John Fox, Jr.
Heart of the Sunset.  By Rex Beach.
Heart of Thunder Mountain, The.  By Edfrid A. Bingham.
Her Weight in Gold.  By Geo. B. McCutcheon.
Hidden Children, The.  By Robert W. Chambers.
Hidden Spring, The.  By Clarence B. Kelland.
Hillman, The.  By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
Hills of Refuge, The.  By Will N. Harben.
His Official Fiancee.  By Berta Ruck.
Honor of the Big Snows.  By James Oliver Curwood.
Hopalong Cassidy.  By Clarence E. Mulford.
Hound from the North, The.  By Ridgwell Cullum.
House of the Whispering Pines, The.  By Anna Katharine Green.
Hugh Wynne, Free Quaker.  By S. Weir Mitchell, M.D.

I Conquered.  By Harold Titus.
Illustrious Prince, The.  By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
In Another Girl's Shoes.  By Berta Ruck.
Indifference of Juliet, The.  By Grace S. Richmond.
Infelice.  By Augusta Evans Wilson.
Initials Only.  By Anna Katharine Green.
Inner Law, The.  By Will N. Harben.
Innocent.  By Marie Corelli.
Insidious Dr. Fu-Manchu, The.  By Sax Rohmer.
In the Brooding Wild.  By Ridgwell Cullum.
Intriguers, The.  By Harold Bindloss.
Iron Trail, The.  By Rex Beach.
Iron Woman, The.  By Margaret Deland.
I Spy.  By Natalie Sumner Lincoln.

Japonette.  By Robert W. Chambers.
Jean of the Lazy A.  By B. M. Bower.
Jeanne of the Marshes.  By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
Jennie Gerhardt.  By Theodore Dreiser.
Judgment House, The.  By Gilbert Parker.

Keeper of the Door, The.  By Ethel M. Dell.
Keith of the Border.  By Randall Parrish.
Kent Knowles: Quahaug.  By Joseph C. Lincoln.
Kingdom of the Blind, The.  By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
King Spruce.  By Holman Day.
King's Widow, The.  By Mrs. Baillie Reynolds.
Knave of Diamonds, The.  By Ethel M. Dell.

Ladder of Swords.  By Gilbert Parker.
Lady Betty Across the Water.  By C. N. & A. M. Williamson.
Land-Girl's Love Story, A.  By Berta Ruck.
Landloper, The.  By Holman Day.
Land of Long Ago, The.  By Eliza Calvert Hall.
Land of Strong Men, The.  By A. M. Chisholm.
Last Trail, The.  By Zane Grey.
Laugh and Live.  By Douglas Fairbanks.
Laughing Bill Hyde.  By Rex Beach.
Laughing Girl, The.  By Robert W. Chambers.
Law Breakers, The.  By Ridgwell Cullum.
Lifted Veil, The.  By Basil King.
Lighted Way, The.  By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
Lin McLean.  By Owen Wister.
Lonesome Land.  By B. M. Bower.
Lone Wolf, The.  By Louis Joseph Vance.
Long Ever Ago.  By Rupert Hughes.
Lonely Stronghold, The.  By Mrs. Baillie Reynolds.
Long Live the King.  By Mary Roberts Rinehart.
Long Roll, The.  By Mary Johnston.
Lord Tony's Wife.  By Baroness Orczy.
Lost Ambassador.  By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
Lost Prince, The.  By Frances Hodgson Burnett.
Lydia of the Pines.  By Honore Willsie.

Maid of the Forest, The.  By Randall Parrish.
Maid of the Whispering Hills, The.  By Vingie E. Roe.
Maids of Paradise, The.  By Robert W. Chambers.
Major, The.  By Ralph Connor.
Maker of History, A.  By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
Malefactor, The.  By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
Man from Bar 20, The.  By Clarence E. Mulford.
Man in Grey, The.  By Baroness Orczy.
Man Trail, The.  By Henry Oyen.
Man Who Couldn't Sleep, The.  By Arthur Stringer.
Man with the Club Foot, The.  By Valentine Williams.
Mary-'Gusta.  By Joseph C. Lincoln.
Mary Moreland.  By Marie Van Vorst.
Mary Regan.  By Leroy Scott.
Master Mummer, The.  By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes.  By A. Conan Doyle.
Men Who Wrought, The.  By Ridgwell Cullum.
Mischief Maker, The.  By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
Missioner, The.  By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
Miss Million's Maid.  By Berta Ruck.
Molly McDonald.  By Randall Parrish.
Money Master, The.  By Gilbert Parker.
Money Moon, The.  By Jeffery Farnol.
Mountain Girl, The.  By Payne Erskine.
Moving Finger, The.  By Natalie Sumner Lincoln.
Mr. Bingle.  By George Barr McCutcheon.
Mr. Grex of Monte Carlo.  By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
Mr. Pratt.  By Joseph C. Lincoln.
Mr. Pratt's Patients.  By Joseph C. Lincoln.
Mrs. Belfame.  By Gertrude Atherton.
Mrs. Red Pepper.  By Grace S. Richmond.
My Lady Caprice.  By Jeffrey Farnol.
My Lady of the North.  By Randall Parrish.
My Lady of the South.  By Randall Parrish.
Mystery of the Hasty Arrow, The.  By Anna K. Green.

Nameless Man, The.  By Natalie Sumner Lincoln.
Ne'er-Do-Well, The.  By Rex Beach.
Nest Builders, The.  By Beatrice Forbes-Robertson Hale.
Net, The.  By Rex Beach.
New Clarion.  By Will N. Harben.
Night Operator, The.  By Frank L. Packard.
Night Riders, The.  By Ridgwell Cullum.
Nobody.  By Louis Joseph Vance.

Okewood of the Secret Service.  By the Author of "The Man with the
    Club Foot."
One Way Trail, The.  By Ridgwell Cullum.
Open, Sesame.  By Mrs. Baillie Reynolds.
Otherwise Phyllis.  By Meredith Nicholson.
Outlaw, The.  By Jackson Gregory.

Paradise Auction.  By Nalbro Bartley.
Pardners.  By Rex Beach.
Parrot & Co.  By Harold MacGrath.
Partners of the Night.  By Leroy Scott.
Partners of the Tide.  By Joseph C. Lincoln.
Passionate Friends, The.  By H. G. Wells.
Patrol of the Sun Dance Trail, The.  By Ralph Connor.
Paul Anthony, Christian.  By Hiram W. Hays.
Pawns Count, The.  By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
People's Man, A.  By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
Perch of the Devil.  By Gertrude Atherton.
Peter Ruff and the Double Four.  By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
Pidgin Island.  By Harold MacGrath.
Place of Honeymoon, The.  By Harold MacGrath.
Pool of Flame, The.  By Louis Joseph Vance.
Postmaster, The.  By Joseph C. Lincoln.
Prairie Wife, The.  By Arthur Stringer.
Price of the Prairie, The.  By Margaret Hill McCarter.
Prince of Sinners, A.  By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
Promise, The.  By J. B. Hendryx.
Proof of the Pudding, The.  By Meredith Nicholson.

Rainbow's End, The.  By Rex Beach.
Ranch at the Wolverine, The.  By B. M. Bower.
Ranching for Sylvia.  By Harold Bindloss.
Ransom.  By Arthur Somers Roche.
Reason Why, The.  By Elinor Glyn.
Reclaimers, The.  By Margaret Hill McCarter.
Red Mist, The.  By Randall Parrish.
Red Pepper Burns.  By Grace S. Richmond.
Red Pepper's Patients.  By Grace S. Richmond.
Rejuvenation of Aunt Mary, The.  By Anne Warner.
Restless Sex, The.  By Robert W. Chambers.
Return of Dr. Fu-Manchu, The.  By Sax Rohmer.
Return of Tarzan, The.  By Edgar Rice Burroughs.
Riddle of Night, The.  By Thomas W. Hanshew.
Rim of the Desert, The.  By Ada Woodruff Anderson.
Rise of Roscoe Paine, The.  By J. C. Lincoln.
Rising Tide, The.  By Margaret Deland.
Rocks of Valpre, The.  By Ethel M. Dell.
Rogue by Compulsion, A.  By Victor Bridges.
Room Number 3.  By Anna Katharine Green.
Rose in the Ring, The.  By George Barr McCutcheon.
Rose of Old Harpeth, The.  By Maria Thompson Daviess.
Round the Corner in Gay Street.  By Grace S. Richmond.

Second Choice.  By Will N. Harben.
Second Violin, The.  By Grace S. Richmond.
Secret History.  By C. N. & A. M. Williamson.
Secret of the Reef, The.  By Harold Bindloss.
Seven Darlings, The.  By Gouverneur Morris.
Shavings.  By Joseph C. Lincoln.
Shepherd of the Hills, The.  By Harold Bell Wright.
Sheriff of Dyke Hole, The.  By Ridgwell Cullum.
Sherry.  By George Barr McCutcheon.
Side of the Angels, The.  By Basil King.
Silver Horde, The.  By Rex Beach.
Sin That Was His, The.  By Frank L. Packard.
Sixty-first Second, The.  By Owen Johnson.
Soldier of the Legion, A.  By C. N. & A. M. Williamson.
Son of His Father, The.  By Ridgwell Cullum.
Son of Tarzan, The.  By Edgar Rice Burroughs.
Source, The.  By Clarence Buddington Kelland.
Speckled Bird, A.  By Augusta Evans Wilson.
Spirit in Prison, A.  By Robert Hichens.
Spirit of the Border, The. (New Edition.) By Zane Grey.
Spoilers, The.  By Rex Beach.
Steele of the Royal Mounted.  By James Oliver Curwood.
Still Jim.  By Honore Willsie.
Story of Foss River Ranch, The.  By Ridgwell Cullum.
Story of Marco, The.  By Eleanor H. Porter.
Strange Case of Cavendish, The.  By Randall Parrish.
Strawberry Acres.  By Grace S. Richmond.
Sudden Jim.  By Clarence B. Kelland.

Tales of Sherlock Holmes.  By A. Conan Doyle.
Tarzan of the Apes.  By Edgar R. Burroughs.
Tarzan and the Jewels of Opar.  By Edgar Rice Burroughs.
Tempting of Tavernake, The.  By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
Tess of the D'Urbervilles.  By Thos. Hardy.
Thankful's Inheritance.  By Joseph C. Lincoln.
That Affair Next Door.  By Anna Katharine Green.
That Printer of Udell's.  By Harold Bell Wright.
Their Yesterdays.  By Harold Bell Wright.
Thirteenth Commandment, The.  By Rupert Hughes.
Three of Hearts, The.  By Berta Ruck.
Three Strings, The.  By Natalie Sumner Lincoln.
Threshold, The.  By Marjorie Benton Cooke.
Throwback, The.  By Alfred Henry Lewis.
Tish.  By Mary Roberts Rinehart.
To M. L. G.; or, He Who Passed. Anon.
Trail of the Axe, The.  By Ridgwell Cullum.
Trail to Yesterday, The.  By Chas. A. Seltzer.
Treasure of Heaven, The.  By Marie Corelli.
Triumph, The.  By Will N. Harben.
T. Tembarom.  By Frances Hodgson Burnett.
Turn of the Tide.  By Author of "Pollyanna."
Twenty-fourth of June, The.  By Grace S. Richmond.
Twins of Suffering Creek, The.  By Ridgwell Cullum.
Two-Gun Man, The.  By Chas. A. Seltzer.

Uncle William.  By Jeannette Lee.
Under Handicap.  By Jackson Gregory.
Under the Country Sky.  By Grace S. Richmond.
Unforgiving Offender, The.  By John Reed Scott.
Unknown Mr. Kent, The.  By Roy Norton.
Unpardonable Sin, The.  By Major Rupert Hughes.
Up From Slavery.  By Booker T. Washington.

Valiants of Virginia, The.  By Hallie Ermine Rives.
Valley of Fear, The.  By Sir A. Conan Doyle.
Vanished Messenger, The.  By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
Vanguards of the Plains.  By Margaret Hill McCarter.
Vashti.  By Augusta Evans Wilson.
Virtuous Wives.  By Owen Johnson.
Visioning, The.  By Susan Glaspell.

Waif-o'-the-Sea.  By Cyrus Townsend Brady.
Wall of Men, A.  By Margaret H. McCarter.
Watchers of the Plans, The.  By Ridgwell Cullum.
Way Home, The.  By Basil King.
Way of an Eagle, The.  By E. M. Dell.
Way of the Strong, The.  By Ridgwell Cullum.
Way of These Women, The.  By E. Phillips Oppenheim.
We Can't Have Everything.  By Major Rupert Hughes.
Weavers, The.  By Gilbert Parker.
When a Man's a Man.  By Harold Bell Wright.
When Wilderness Was King.  By Randall Parrish.
Where the Trail Divides.  By Will Lillibridge.
Where There's a Will.  By Mary R. Rinehart.
White Sister, The.  By Marion Crawford.
Who Goes There?  By Robert W. Chambers.
Why Not.  By Margaret Widdemer.
Window at the White Cat, The.  By Mary Roberts Rinehart.
Winds of Chance, The.  By Rex Beach.
Wings of Youth, The.  By Elizabeth Jordan.
Winning of Barbara Worth, The.  By Harold Bell Wright.
Wire Devils, The.  By Frank L. Packard.
Winning the Wilderness.  By Margaret Hill McCarter.
Wishing Ring Man, The.  By Margaret Widdemer.
With Juliet in England.  By Grace S. Richmond.
Wolves of the Sea.  By Randall Parrish.
Woman Gives, The.  By Owen Johnson.
Woman Haters, The.  By Joseph C. Lincoln.
Woman in Question, The.  By John Reed Scott.
Woman Thou Gavest Me, The.  By Hall Caine.
Woodcarver of 'Lympus, The.  By Mary E. Waller.
Wooing of Rosamond Fayre, The.  By Berta Ruck.
World for Sale, The.  By Gilbert Parker.

Years for Rachel, The.  By Berta Ruck.
Yellow Claw, The.  By Sax Rohmer.
You Never Know Your Luck.  By Gilbert Parker.

Zeppelin's Passenger, The.  By E. Phillips Oppenheim.




       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's note:

The following typographical errors present in the original edition
have been corrected.

In Chapter I, "But the tree letters were visible" was changed to "But
the three letters were visible", and "though an ever-thickening mist"
was changed to "through an ever-thickening mist".

In Chapter III, a missing period was added after "spluttered Honorine",
and "You musn't stay" was changed to "You mustn't stay".

In Chapter IV, "Then . . . then. . . it's happening" was changed to
"Then . . . then . . . it's happening", and "slackened spend when she
was level" was changed to "slackened speed when she was level".

In Chapter V, a quotation mark was added after "They: the people of
old.", and "that killed M. Antoine, Marie le Goff and the others" was
changed to "that killed M. Antoine, Marie Le Goff and the others".

In Chapter VI, quotation marks were added before "Did you put them under
there?" and "and I am not a bit afraid", and after "Then what is it?".

In Chapter VII, "one of the cells probably the last" was changed to "one
of the cells, probably the last", and a missing period was added after
"Yes, Madeleine Ferrand".

In Chapter VIII, "Last night . . or rather this morning" was changed to
"Last night . . . or rather this morning", and "painted Perenna is such
strange colours" was changed to "painted Perenna in such strange
colours".

In Chapter X, a quotation mark was removed before "Veronique received
her answer", "None come" was changed to "None came", a quotation mark
was added after "my boat is hanging at the foot of the cliff.", and
"We'll land at Pont-L'Abbe" was changed to "We'll land at Pont-l'Abbe".

In Chapter XII, a quotation mark was removed after "Its feathered end
was still quivering."

In Chapter XIV, "The other joined him" was changed to "The others joined
him", and a quotation mark was added after "At any rate, it's a sacred
stone".

In Chapter XV, a quotation mark was added before "She is dead",
"yatching-cap" was changed to "yachting-cap", a comma was changed to a
period after "There's no hypocrisy about you", and "Is is agreed" was
changed to "Is it agreed".

In Chapter XVI, "ascertain Veronique d'Hergemont's whereabout" was
changed to "ascertain Veronique d'Hergemont's whereabouts", and "The
worthy man envolved the prophecy from his own consciousness" was changed
to "The worthy man evolved the prophecy from his own consciousness".

In Chapter XVII, "The ancient Druid, whom we may call either Don Luis
Perenna or Arsene Lupin" was changed to "The ancient Druid, whom we may
call either Don Luis Perenna or Arsene Lupin".

In Chapter XVIII, a period was changed to a comma after "one after the
other", and quotation marks were added after "the boat should have
started" and "he chopped off his hand".

In the advertisements, Bruce of the Circle A was changed to Bruce of
the Circle, A, in the entry for The Nameless Man "Nataile Sumner
Lincoln" was changed to "Natalie Sumner Lincoln", and in the entry for
The World for Sale "Gilbert-Parker" was changed to "Gilbert Parker".



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SECRET OF SAREK***


******* This file should be named 34939.txt or 34939.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/4/9/3/34939



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

