The Project Gutenberg EBook of Music and Other Poems, by Henry van Dyke

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Music and Other Poems

Author: Henry van Dyke

Release Date:  November, 2002  [Etext #3525]
Posting Date: October 13, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MUSIC AND OTHER POEMS ***




Produced by Mardi Desjardins





MUSIC AND OTHER POEMS

By Henry van Dyke


To my son Tertius this book is dedicated

Transcribed from the book published October, 1904

by Charles Scribner's Sons.



CONTENTS



ODES
  Music
  Peace
  Victor Hugo
  God of the Open Air


SONNETS
  Work
  Life
  Love
  The Child in the Garden
  Love's Reason
  Portrait and Reality
  The Wind of Sorrow
  Patria


LEGENDS
  A Legend of Service
  The Vain King


LYRICS
  A Mile with Me
  Spring in the South
  Love's Nearness
  Two Schools
  A Prayer for a Mother's Birthday
  Indian Summer
  One World
  Hide and Seek
  Dulcis Memoria
  Autumn in the Garden
  The Message
  Light Between the Trees
  Reliance


GREETINGS AND INSCRIPTIONS
  Katrina's Sun-dial
  To James Whitcomb Riley
  A Health to Mark Twain
  A Rondeau of College Rhymes
  The Mocking-bird
  The Empty Quatrain
  Inscriptions for a Friend's House
  The Statue of Sherman by St. Gaudens
  The Sun-dial at Wells College






ODES




MUSIC




I. PRELUDE

        Daughter of Psyche, pledge of that last night
          When, pierced with pain and bitter-sweet delight,
        She knew her Love and saw her Lord depart,
        Then breathed her wonder and her woe forlorn
        Into a single cry, and thou wast born?
        Thou flower of rapture and thou fruit of grief;
        Invisible enchantress of the heart;
          Mistress of charms that bring relief
          To sorrow, and to joy impart
        A heavenly tone that keeps it undefiled,--
            Thou art the child
          Of Amor, and by right divine
            A throne of love is thine,
     Thou flower-folded, golden-girdled, star-crowned Queen,
     Whose bridal beauty mortal eyes have never seen!


                        II

       Thou art the Angel of the pool that sleeps,
       While peace and joy lie hidden in its deeps,
       Waiting thy touch to make the waters roll
       In healing murmurs round the weary soul.
           Ah, when wilt thou draw near,
       Thou messenger of mercy robed in song?
       My lonely heart has listened for thee long;
           And now I seem to hear
       Across the crowded market-place of life,
       Thy measured foot-fall, ringing light and clear
     Above the unmeaning noises and the unruly strife;
           In quiet cadence, sweet and slow,
           Serenely pacing to and fro,
       Thy far-off steps are magical and dear.
       Ah, turn this way, come close and speak to me!
     From this dull bed of languor set my spirit free,
     And bid me rise, and let me walk awhile with thee


                        III

           Where wilt thou lead me first?
            In what still region
              Of thy domain,
           Whose provinces are legion,
       Wilt thou restore me to myself again,
           And quench my heart's long thirst?
     I pray thee lay thy golden girdle down,
           And put away thy starry crown:
            For one dear restful hour
            Assume a state more mild.
     Clad only in thy blossom-broidered gown
     That breathes familiar scent of many a flower,
     Take the low path that leads thro' pastures green;
              And though thou art a Queen,
     Be Rosamund awhile, and in thy bower,
     By tranquil love and simple joy beguiled,
     Sing to my soul, as mother to her child.


                     IV

        O lead me by the hand,
        And let my heart have rest,
     And bring me back to childhood land,
     To find again the long-lost band
        Of playmates blithe and blest.

        Some quaint, old-fashioned air,
        That all the children knew,
     Shall run before us everywhere,
     Like a little maid with flying hair,
        To guide the merry crew.

        Along the garden ways
        We chase the light-foot tune,
     And in and out the flowery maze,
     With eager haste and fond delays,
     In pleasant paths of June.

        For us the fields are new,
        For us the woods are rife
     With fairy secrets, deep and true,
     And heaven is but a tent of blue
        Above the game of life.

        The world is far away:
        The fever and the fret,
     And all that makes the heart grow gray,
     Is out of sight and far away,
     Dear Music, while I hear thee play
     That olden, golden roundelay,
        "Remember and forget!"




V. SLEEP SONG

                   Forget, forget!
           The tide of life is turning;
         The waves of light ebb slowly down the west:
       Along the edge of dark some stars are burning
     To guide thy spirit safely to an isle of rest.
           A little rocking on the tranquil deep
             Of song, to soothe thy yearning,
           A little slumber and a little sleep,
                And so, forget, forget!

                   Forget, forget,--
           The day was long in pleasure;
         Its echoes die away across the hill;
       Now let thy heart beat time to their slow measure
     That swells, and sinks, and faints, and falls, till all is still.
            Then, like a weary child that loves to keep
              Locked in its arms some treasure,
            Thy soul in calm content shall fall asleep,
                And so forget, forget.

                   Forget, forget,--
           And if thou hast been weeping,
         Let go the thoughts that bind thee to thy grief:
       Lie still, and watch the singing angels, reaping
     The golden harvest of thy sorrow, sheaf by sheaf;
            Or count thy joys like flocks of snow-white sheep
              That one by one come creeping
            Into the quiet fold, until thou sleep,
                And so forget, forget!

                   Forget, forget,--
           Thou art a child and knowest
         So little of thy life! But music tells
       One secret of the world thro' which thou goest
     To work with morning song, to rest with evening bells:
            Life is in tune with harmony so deep
              That when the notes are lowest
            Thou still canst lay thee down in peace and sleep,
                For God will not forget.




VI. HUNTING SONG

     Out of the garden of playtime, out of the bower of rest,
     Fain would I follow at daytime, music that calls to a quest.
         Hark, how the galloping measure
         Quickens the pulses of pleasure;
           Gaily saluting the morn
     With the long clear note of the hunting-horn
         Echoing up from the valley,
           Over the mountain side,--
         Rally, you hunters, rally,
           Rally, and ride!

     Drink of the magical potion music has mixed with her wine,
     Full of the madness of motion, joyful, exultant, divine!
         Leave all your troubles behind you,
         Ride where they never can find you,
           Into the gladness of morn,
     With the long, clear note of the hunting-horn,
           Swiftly o'er hillock and hollow,
             Sweeping along with the wind,--
           Follow, you hunters, follow,
             Follow and find!

     What will you reach with your riding?  What is the charm of the chase?
     Just the delight and the striding swing of the jubilant pace.
           Danger is sweet when you front her,--
           In at the death, every hunter!
           Now on the breeze the mort is borne
     In the long, clear note of the hunting-horn,
           Winding merrily, over and over,--
             Come, come, come!
           Home again, Ranger! home again, Rover!
             Turn again, home!




VII. DANCE-MUSIC

     Now let the sleep-tune blend with the play-tune,
     Weaving the mystical spell of the dance;
     Lighten the deep tune, soften the gay tune,
     Mingle a tempo that turns in a trance.
     Half of it sighing, half of it smiling,
     Smoothly it swings, with a triplicate beat;
     Calling, replying, yearning, beguiling,
     Wooing the heart and bewitching the feet.
          Every drop of blood
          Rises with the flood,
      Rocking on the waves of the strain;
          Youth and beauty glide
          Turning with the tide--
        Music making one out of twain,
     Bearing them away, and away, and away,
          Like a tone and its terce--
     Till the chord dissolves, and the dancers stay,
               And reverse.

     Violins leading, take up the measure,
     Turn with the tune again,--clarinets clear
     Answer their pleading,--harps full of pleasure
     Sprinkle their silver like light on the mere.
              Semiquaver notes,
              Merry little motes,
              Tangled in the haze
            Of the lamp's golden rays,
              Quiver everywhere
                In the air,
                Like a spray,--
     Till the fuller stream of the might of the tune,
     Gliding like a dream in the light of the moon,
     Bears them all away, and away, and away,
         Floating in the trance of the dance.

     Then begins a measure stately,
        Languid, slow, serene;
     All the dancers move sedately,
     Stepping leisurely and straitly,
        With a courtly mien;
     Crossing hands and changing places,
        Bowing low between,
     While the minuet inlaces
     Waving arms and woven paces,--
        Glittering damaskeen.
     Where is she whose form is folden
        In its royal sheen?
     From our longing eyes withholden
     By her mystic girdle golden,
        Beauty sought but never seen,
     Music walks the maze, a queen.




VIII. THE SYMPHONY

       Music, they do thee wrong who say thine art
           Is only to enchant the sense.
       For every timid motion of the heart,
           And every passion too intense
       To bear the chain of the imperfect word,
           And every tremulous longing, stirred
       By spirit winds that come we know not whence
              And go we know not where,
              And every inarticulate prayer
       Beating about the depths of pain or bliss,
              Like some bewildered bird
       That seeks its nest but knows not where it is,
       And every dream that haunts, with dim delight,
       The drowsy hour between the day and night,
       The wakeful hour between the night and day,--
              Imprisoned, waits for thee,
              Impatient, yearns for thee,
       The queen who comes to set the captive free
       Thou lendest wings to grief to fly away,
       And wings to joy to reach a heavenly height;
     And every dumb desire that Storms within the breast
     Thou leadest forth to sob or sing itself to rest.

       All these are thine, and therefore love is thine.
              For love is joy and grief,
       And trembling doubt, and certain-sure belief,
       And fear, and hope, and longing unexpressed,
       In pain most human, and in rapture brief
                   Almost divine.
       Love would possess, yet deepens when denied;
       And love would give, yet hungers to receive;
       Love like a prince his triumph would achieve;
     And like a miser in the dark his joys would hide.
                   Love is most bold:
       He leads his dreams like armed men in line;
       Yet when the siege is set, and he must speak,
           Calling the fortress to resign
       Its treasure, valiant love grows weak,
       And hardly dares his purpose to unfold.
       Less with his faltering lips than with his eyes
              He claims the longed-for prize:
     Love fain would tell it all, yet leaves the best untold.

     But thou shalt speak for love.  Yea, thou shalt teach
           The mystery of measured tone,
             The Pentecostal speech
      That every listener heareth as his own.
      For on thy head the cloven tongues of fire,--
      Diminished chords that quiver with desire,
      And major chords that glow with perfect peace,--
             Have fallen from above;
             And thou canst give release
      In music to the burdened heart of love.

       Sound with the 'cellos' pleading, passionate strain
       The yearning theme, and let the flute reply
       In placid melody, while violins complain,
                And sob, and sigh,
                With muted string;
       Then let the oboe half-reluctant sing
       Of bliss that trembles on the verge of pain,
         While 'cellos plead and plead again,
     With throbbing notes delayed, that would impart
     To every urgent tone the beating of the heart.
         So runs the andante, making plain
     The hopes and fears of love without a word.

       Then comes the adagio, with a yielding theme
     Through which the violas flow soft as in a dream,
          While horns and mild bassoons are heard
          In tender tune, that seems to float
            Like an enchanted boat
          Upon the downward-gliding stream,
          Toward the allegro's wide, bright sea
          Of dancing, glittering, blending tone,
         Where every instrument is sounding free,
     And harps like wedding-chimes are rung, and trumpets blown
            Around the barque of love
          That sweeps, with smiling skies above,
          A royal galley, many-oared,
       Into the happy harbour of the perfect chord.




IX. IRIS

     Light to the eye and Music to the ear,--
     These are the builders of the bridge that springs
     From earths's dim shore of half-remembered things
     To reach the spirit's home, the heavenly sphere
     Where nothing silent is and nothing dark.
        So when I see the rainbow's arc
     Spanning the showery sky, far-off I hear
        Music, and every colour sings:
     And while the symphony builds up its round
     Full sweep of architectural harmony
     Above the tide of Time, far, far away I see
     A bow of colour in the bow of sound.

                 Red as the dawn the trumpet rings,
             Imperial purple from the trombone flows,
             The mellow horn melts into evening rose.
                 Blue as the sky, the choir of strings
             Darkens in double-bass to ocean's hue,
             Rises in violins to noon-tide's blue,
       With threads of quivering light shot through and through.
             Green as the mantle that the summer flings
             Around the world, the pastoral reeds in time
             Embroider melodies of May and June.
                   Yellow as gold,
                 Yea, thrice-refined gold,
             And purer than the treasures of the mine,
             Floods of the human voice divine
             Along the arch in choral song are rolled.
                 So bends the bow complete:
                 And radiant rapture flows
             Across the bridge, so full, so strong, so sweet,
             That the uplifted spirit hardly knows
              Whether the Music-Light that glows
       Within the arch of tones and colours seven
     Is sunset-peace of earth, or sunrise-joy of Heaven.




X. SEA AND SHORE

        Music, I yield to thee;
        As swimmer to the sea
     I give my Spirit to the flood of song:
        Bear me upon thy breast
        In rapture and at rest,
     Bathe me in pure delight and make me strong;
        From strife and struggle bring release,
     And draw the waves of passion into tides of peace.

        Remember'd songs, most dear,
        In living songs I hear,
     While blending voices gently swing and sway
        In melodies of love,
        Whose mighty currents move,
     With singing near and singing far away;
        Sweet in the glow of morning light,
     And sweeter still across the starlit gulf of night.

        Music, in thee we float,
        And lose the lonely note
     Of self in thy celestial-ordered strain,
        Until at last we find
        The life to love resigned
     In harmony of joy restored again;
        And songs that cheered our mortal days
     Break on the coast of light in endless hymns of praise.

     December, 1901 - May, 1903.




PEACE




I. IN EXCELSIS

     Two dwellings, Peace, are thine.
          One is the mountain-height,
     Uplifted in the loneliness of light
       Beyond the realm of shadows,--fine,
     And far, and clear,--where advent of the night
     Means only glorious nearness of the stars,
     And dawn, unhindered, breaks above the bars
     That long the lower world in twilight keep.
     Thou sleepest not, and hast no need of sleep,
     For all thy cares and fears have dropped away;
     The night's fatigue, the fever-fret of day,
     Are far below thee; and earth's weary wars,
       In vain expense of passion, pass
     Before thy sight like visions in a glass,
     Or like the wrinkles of the storm that creep
       Across the sea and leave no trace
     Of trouble on that immemorial face,--
     So brief appear the conflicts, and so slight
     The wounds men give, the things for which they fight.

     Here hangs a fortress on the distant steep,--
       A lichen clinging to the rock:
     There sails a fleet upon the deep,--
              A wandering flock
     Of snow-winged gulls: and yonder, in the plain,
       A marble palace shines,--a grain
       Of mica glittering in the rain.
       Beneath thy feet the clouds are rolled
       By voiceless winds: and far between
     The rolling clouds new shores and peaks are seen,
       In shimmering robes of green and gold,
             And faint aerial hue
     That silent fades into the silent blue.
          Thou, from thy mountain-hold,
     All day, in tranquil wisdom, looking down
     On distant scenes of human toil and strife,
     All night, with eyes aware of loftier life,
     Uplooking to the sky, where stars are sown,
     Dost watch the everlasting fields grow white
     Unto the harvest of the sons of light,
     And welcome to thy dwelling-place sublime
     The few strong souls that dare to climb
     The slippery crags and find thee on the height.




II. DE PROFUNDIS

     But in the depth thou hast another home,
         For hearts less daring, or more frail.
     Thou dwellest also in the shadowy vale;
           And pilgrim-souls that roam
         With weary feet o'er hill and dale,
         Bearing the burden and the heat
             Of toilful days,
           Turn from the dusty ways
     To find thee in thy green and still retreat.
         Here is no vision wide outspread
     Before the lonely and exalted seat
     Of all-embracing knowledge.  Here, instead,
     A little garden, and a sheltered nook,
           With outlooks brief and sweet
     Across the meadows, and along the brook,--
         A little stream that little knows
     Of the great sea towards which it gladly flows,--
     A little field that bears a little wheat
     To make a portion of earth's daily bread.
         The vast cloud-armies overhead
         Are marshalled, and the wild wind blows
         Its trumpet, but thou canst not tell
     Whence the storm comes nor where it goes.

     Nor dost thou greatly care, since all is well;
                  Thy daily task is done,
                  And though a lowly one,
                  Thou gavest it of thy best,
                  And art content to rest
     In patience till its slow reward is won.
     Not far thou lookest, but thy sight is clear;
     Not much thou knowest, but thy faith is dear;
     For life is love, and love is always near.
     Here friendship lights the fire, and every heart,
     Sure of itself and sure of all the rest,
     Dares to be true, and gladly takes its part
     In open converse, bringing forth its best:
     Here is Sweet music, melting every chain
                  Of lassitude and pain:
     And here, at last, is sleep, the gift of gifts,
                  The tender nurse, who lifts
     The soul grown weary of the waking world,
     And lays it, with its thoughts all furled,
     Its fears forgotten, and its passions still,
     On the deep bosom of the Eternal Will.

     August, 1901.




VICTOR HUGO 1802-1902

     Heart of France for a hundred years,
         Passionate, sensitive, proud, and strong,
     Quick to throb with her hopes and fears,
       Fierce to flame with her sense of wrong!
       You, who hailed with a morning song
     Dream-light gilding a throne of old:
     You, who turned when the dream grew cold,
     Singing still, to the light that shone
     Pure from Liberty's ancient throne,
         Over the human throng!
     You, who dared in the dark eclipse,--
       When the pygmy heir of a giant name
       Dimmed the face of the land with shame,--
     Speak the truth with indignant lips,
     Call him little whom men called great,
         Scoff at him, scorn him, deny him,
     Point to the blood on his robe of state,
         Fling back his bribes and defy him!

     You, who fronted the waves of fate
       As you faced the sea from your island home,
     Exiled, yet with a soul elate,
       Sending songs o'er the rolling foam,
     Bidding the heart of man to wait
         For the day when all should see
       Floods of wrath from the frowning skies
       Fall on an Empire founded in lies,
         And France again be free!
     You, who came in the Terrible Year
     Swiftly back to your broken land,
     Now to your heart a thousand times more dear,--
       Prayed for her, sung to her, fought for her,
       Patiently, fervently wrought for her,
             Till once again,
       After the storm of fear and pain,
     High in the heavens the star of France stood clear!

       You, who knew that a man must take
     Good and ill with a steadfast soul,
     Holding fast, while the billows roll
       Over his head, to the things that make
     Life worth living for great and small,--
         Honour and pity and truth,
         The heart and the hope of youth,
     And the good God over all!
         You, to whom work was rest,
       Dauntless Toiler of the Sea,
         Following ever the joyful quest
     Of beauty on the shores of old Romance,
     Bard of the poor of France,
       And warrior-priest of world-wide charity!

       You who loved little children best
     Of all the poets that ever sung,
         Great heart, golden heart,
     Old, and yet ever young,
         Minstrel of liberty,
     Lover of all free, winged things,
       Now at last you are free,--
       Your soul has its wings!
     Heart of France for a hundred years,
       Floating far in the light that never fails you,
     Over the turmoil of mortal hopes and fears
       Victor, forever victor, the whole world hails you!

     March, 1902.




GOD OF THE OPEN AIR




I

       Thou who hast made thy dwelling fair
             With flowers beneath, above with starry lights,
       And set thine altars everywhere,--
               On mountain heights,
       In woodlands dim with many a dream,
             In valleys bright with springs,
     And on the curving capes of every stream:
     Thou who hast taken to thyself the wings
             Of morning, to abide
     Upon the secret places of the sea,
       And on far islands, where the tide
     Visits the beauty of untrodden shores,
     Waiting for worshippers to come to thee
             In thy great out-of-doors!
     To thee I turn, to thee I make my prayer,
             God of the open air.




II

       Seeking for thee, the heart of man
             Lonely and longing ran,
       In that first, solitary hour,
             When the mysterious power
     To know and love the wonder of the morn
     Was breathed within him, and his soul was born;
             And thou didst meet thy child,
             Not in some hidden shrine,
     But in the freedom of the garden wild,
             And take his hand in thine,--
     There all day long in Paradise he walked,
     And in the cool of evening with thee talked.




III

       Lost, long ago, that garden bright and pure,
       Lost, that calm day too perfect to endure,
     And lost the childlike love that worshipped and was sure!
       For men have dulled their eyes with sin,
       And dimmed the light of heaven with doubt,
       And built their temple walls to shut thee in,
       And framed their iron creeds to shut thee out.
         But not for thee the closing of the door,
               O Spirit unconfined!
                 Thy ways are free
               As is the wandering wind,
       And thou hast wooed thy children, to restore
               Their fellowship with thee,
       In peace of soul and simpleness of mind.




IV

       Joyful the heart that, when the flood rolled by,
       Leaped up to see the rainbow in the sky;
       And glad the pilgrim, in the lonely night,
       For whom the hills of Haran, tier on tier,
       Built up a secret stairway to the height
       Where stars like angel eyes were shining clear.
       From mountain-peaks, in many a land and age,
         Disciples of the Persian seer
       Have hailed the rising sun and worshipped thee;
       And wayworn followers of the Indian sage
     Have found the peace of God beneath a spreading tree.

         But One, but One,--ah, child most dear,
       And perfect image of the Love Unseen,--
         Walked every day in pastures green,
       And all his life the quiet waters by,
       Reading their beauty with a tranquil eye.

     To him the desert was a place prepared
             For weary hearts to rest;
       The hillside was a temple blest;
       The grassy vale a banquet-room
     Where he could feed and comfort many a guest.
             With him the lily shared
     The vital joy that breathes itself in bloom;
     And every bird that sang beside the nest
     Told of the love that broods o'er every living thing.
         He watched the shepherd bring
     His flock at sundown to the welcome fold,
       The fisherman at daybreak fling
     His net across the waters gray and cold,
     And all day long the patient reaper swing
     His curving sickle through the harvest-gold.
     So through the world the foot-path way he trod,
     Drawing the air of heaven in every breath;
     And in the evening sacrifice of death
     Beneath the open sky he gave his soul to God.
     Him will I trust, and for my Master take;
     Him will I follow; and for his dear sake,
             God of the open air,
             To thee I make my prayer.




V

     From the prison of anxious thought that greed has builded,
     From the fetters that envy has wrought and pride has gilded,
     From the noise of the crowded ways and the fierce confusion,
     From the folly that wastes its days in a world of illusion,
     (Ah, but the life is lost that frets and languishes there!)
     I would escape and be free in the joy of the open air.

     By the breadth of the blue that shines in silence o'er me,
     By the length of the mountain-lines that stretch before me,
     By the height of the cloud that sails, with rest in motion,
     Over the plains and the vales to the measureless ocean,
     (Oh, how the sight of the things that are great enlarges the eyes!)
     Lead me out of the narrow life, to the peace of the hills
          and the skies.

     While the tremulous leafy haze on the woodland is spreading,
     And the bloom on the meadow betrays where May has been treading;
     While the birds on the branches above, and the brooks flowing under,
     Are singing together of love in a world full of wonder,
     (Lo, in the marvel of Springtime, dreams are changed into truth!)
     Quicken my heart, and restore the beautiful hopes of youth.

     By the faith that the flowers show when they bloom unbidden,
     By the calm of the river's flow to a goal that is hidden,
     By the trust of the tree that clings to its deep foundation,
     By the courage of wild birds' wings on the long migration,
     (Wonderful secret of peace that abides in Nature's breast!)
     Teach me how to confide, and live my life, and rest.

     For the comforting warmth of the sun that my body embraces,
     For the cool of the waters that run through the shadowy places,
     For the balm of the breezes that brush my face with their fingers,
     For the vesper-hymn of the thrush when the twilight lingers,
     For the long breath, the deep breath, the breath
         of a heart without care,--
     I will give thanks and adore thee, God of the open air!




VI

             These are the gifts I ask
             Of thee, Spirit serene:
             Strength for the daily task,
             Courage to face the road,
     Good cheer to help me bear the traveller's load,
     And, for the hours of rest that come between,
     An inward joy in all things heard and seen.
             These are the sins I fain
             Would have thee take away:
             Malice, and cold disdain,
             Hot anger, sullen hate,
     Scorn of the lowly, envy of the great,
     And discontent that casts a shadow gray
     On all the brightness of the common day.

             These are the things I prize
             And hold of dearest worth:
             Light of the sapphire skies,
             Peace of the silent hills,
       Shelter of forests, comfort of the grass,
       Music of birds, murmur of little rills,
       Shadow of clouds that swiftly pass,
             And, after showers,
             The smell of flowers
         And of the good brown earth,--
     And best of all, along the way, friendship and mirth.

                So let me keep
         These treasures of the humble heart
       In true possession, owning them by love;
       And when at last I can no longer move
         Among them freely, but must part
       From the green fields and from the waters clear,
                Let me not creep
       Into some darkened room and hide
       From all that makes the world so bright and dear;
                But throw the windows wide
                To welcome in the light;
       And while I clasp a well-beloved hand,
                Let me once more have sight
       Of the deep sky and the far-smiling land,--
                Then gently fall on sleep,
     And breathe my body back to Nature's care,
     My spirit out to thee, God of the open air.




SONNETS




WORK

     Let me but do my work from day to day,
          In field or forest, at the desk or loom,
          In roaring market-place or tranquil room;
     Let me but find it in my heart to say,
     When vagrant wishes beckon me astray,
       "This is my work; my blessing, not my doom;
       "Of all who live, I am the one by whom
     "This work can best be done in the right way."

     Then shall I see it not too great, nor small,
       To suit my spirit and to prove my powers;
       Then shall I cheerful greet the labouring hours,
     And cheerful turn, when the long shadows fall
     At eventide, to play and love and rest,
     Because I know for me my work is best.

     April, 1902.




LIFE

     Let me but live my life from year to year,
         With forward face and unreluctant soul;
         Not hurrying to, nor turning from, the goal;
     Not mourning for the things that disappear
     In the dim past, nor holding back in fear
       From what the future veils; but with a whole
       And happy heart, that pays its toll
     To Youth and Age, and travels on with cheer.

     So let the way wind up the hill or down,
       O'er rough or smooth, the journey will be joy:
       Still seeking what I sought when but a boy,
     New friendship, high adventure, and a crown,
     My heart will keep the courage of the quest,
     And hope the road's last turn will be the best.

     May, 1902.




LOVE

     Let me but love my love without disguise,
         Nor wear a mask of fashion old or new,
         Nor wait to speak till I can hear a clue,
     Nor play a part to shine in others' eyes,
     Nor bow my knees to what my heart denies;
       But what I am, to that let me be true,
       And let me worship where my love is due,
     And so through love and worship let me rise.

     For love is but the heart's immortal thirst
       To be completely known and all forgiven,
       Even as sinful souls that enter Heaven:
     So take me, dear, and understand my worst,
     And freely pardon it, because confessed,
     And let me find in loving thee, my best.

     May, 1902.




THE CHILD IN THE GARDEN

     When to the garden of untroubled thought
         I came of late, and saw the open door,
         And wished again to enter, and explore
     The sweet, wild ways with stainless bloom inwrought,
     And bowers of innocence with beauty fraught,
       It seemed some purer voice must speak before
       I dared to tread that garden loved of yore,
     That Eden lost unknown and found unsought.

     Then just within the gate I saw a child,--
       A stranger-child, yet to my heart most dear;
     He held his hands to me, and softly smiled
       With eyes that knew no shade of sin or fear:
     "Come in," he said, "and play awhile with me;
     "I am the little child you used to be."

     January, 1903.




LOVE'S REASON

     For that thy face is fair I love thee not;
         Nor yet because the light of thy brown eyes
         Hath gleams of wonder and of glad surprise,
     Like woodland streams that cross a sunlit spot:
     Nor for thy beauty, born without a blot,
       Most perfect when it shines through no disguise
       Pure as the star of Eve in Paradise,--
     For all these outward things I love thee not:

     But for a something in thy form and face,
       Thy looks and ways, of primal harmony;
     A certain soothing charm, a vital grace
       That breathes of the eternal womanly,
     And makes me feel the warmth of Nature's breast,
     When in her arms, and thine, I sink to rest.

     February, 1904.




PORTRAIT AND REALITY

     If on the closed curtain of my sight
         My fancy paints thy portrait far away,
         I see thee still the same, by night or day;
     Crossing the crowded street, or moving bright
     'Mid festal throngs, or reading by the light
       Of shaded lamp some friendly poet's lay,
       Or shepherding the children at their play,--
     The same sweet self, and my unchanged delight.

     But when I see thee near, I recognize
       In every dear familiar way some strange
     Perfection, and behold in April guise
       The magic of thy beauty that doth range
     Through many moods with infinite surprise,--
       Never the same, and sweeter with each change.

     May, 1904.




THE WIND OF SORROW

     The fire of love was burning, yet so low
         That in the dark we scarce could see its rays,
         And in the light of perfect-placid days
     Nothing but smouldering embers dull and slow.
     Vainly, for love's delight, we sought to throw
       New pleasures on the pyre to make it blaze:
       In life's calm air and tranquil-prosperous ways
     We missed the radiant heat of long ago.

     Then in the night, a night of sad alarms,
       Bitter with pain and black with fog of fears,
     That drove us trembling to each other's arms--
       Across the gulf of darkness and salt tears,
     Into life's calm the wind of sorrow came,
     And fanned the fire of love to clearest flame.

     March, 1903.




PATRIA

     I would not even ask my heart to say
         If I could love some other land as well
         As thee, my country, had I felt the spell
     Of Italy at birth, or learned to obey
     The charm of France, or England's mighty sway.
       I would not be so much an infidel
       As once to dream, or fashion words to tell,
     What land could hold my love from thee away.

     For like a law of nature in my blood
       I feel thy sweet and secret sovereignty,
         And woven through my soul thy vital sign.
     My life is but a wave, and thou the flood;
       I am a leaf and thou the mother-tree;
         Nor should I be at all, were I not thine.

     June, 1904.




LEGENDS




A LEGEND OF SERVICE

     It pleased the Lord of Angels (praise His name!)
     To hear, one day, report from those who came
     With pitying sorrow, or exultant joy,
     To tell of earthly tasks in His employ:
     For some were sorry when they saw how slow
     The stream of heavenly love on earth must flow;
     And some were glad because their eyes had seen,
     Along its banks, fresh flowers and living green.
     So, at a certain hour, before the throne
     The youngest angel, Asmiel, stood alone;
     Nor glad, nor sad, but full of earnest thought,
     And thus his tidings to the Master brought:
     "Lord, in the city Lupon I have found
     "Three servants of thy holy name, renowned
     "Above their fellows.  One is very wise,
     "With thoughts that ever range above the skies;
     "And one is gifted with the golden speech
     "That makes men glad to hear when he will teach;
     "And one, with no rare gift or grace endued,
     "Has won the people's love by doing good.
     "With three such saints Lupon is trebly blest;
     "But, Lord, I fain would know, which loves Thee best?"

     Then spake the Lord of Angels, to whose look
     The hearts of all are like an open book:
     "In every soul the secret thought I read,
     "And well I know who loves me best indeed.
     "But every life has pages vacant still,
     "Whereon a man may write the thing he will;
     "Therefore I read in silence, day by day,
     "And wait for hearts untaught to learn my way.
     "But thou shalt go to Lupon, to the three
     "Who serve me there, and take this word from me:
     "Tell each of them his Master bids him go
     "Alone to Spiran's huts, across the snow;
     "There he shall find a certain task for me:
     "But what, I do not tell to them nor thee.
     "Give thou the message, make my word the test,
     "And crown for me the one who answers best."
     Silent the angel stood, with folded hands,
     To take the imprint of his Lord's commands;
     Then drew one breath, obedient and elate,
     And passed, the self-same hour, through Lupon's gate.

     First to the Temple door he made his way;
     And there, because it was an holy-day,
     He saw the folk by thousands thronging, stirred
     By ardent thirst to hear the preacher's word.
     Then, while the echoes murmured Bernol's name,
     Through aisles that hushed behind him, Bernol came;
     Strung to the keenest pitch of conscious might,
     With lips prepared and firm, and eyes alight.
     One moment at the pulpit steps he knelt
     In silent prayer, and on his shoulder felt
     The angel's hand:--"The Master bids thee go
     "Alone to Spiran's huts, across the snow,
     "To serve Him there."  Then Bernol's hidden face
     Went white as death, and for about the space
     Of ten slow heart-beats there was no reply;
     Till Bernol looked around and whispered, "WHY?"
     But answer to his question came there none;
     The angel sighed, and with a sigh was gone.

     Within the humble house where Malvin spent
     His studious years, on holy things intent,
     Sweet stillness reigned; and there the angel found
     The saintly sage immersed in thought profound,
     Weaving with patient toil and willing care
     A web of wisdom, wonderful and fair:
     A seamless robe for Truth's great bridal meet,
     And needing but one thread to be complete.
     Then Asmiel touched his hand, and broke the thread
     Of fine-spun thought, and very gently said,
     "The One of whom thou thinkest bids thee go
     "Alone to Spiran's huts, across the snow,
     "To serve Him there."  With sorrow and surprise
     Malvin looked up, reluctance in his eyes.
     The broken thought, the strangeness of the call,
     The perilous passage of the mountain-wall,
     The solitary journey, and the length
     Of ways unknown, too great for his frail strength,
     Appalled him.  With a doubtful brow
     He scanned the doubtful task, and muttered "HOW?"
     But Asmiel answered, as he turned to go,
     With cold, disheartened voice, "I do not know."

     Now as he went, with fading hope, to seek
     The third and last to whom God bade him speak,
     Scarce twenty steps away whom should he meet
     But Fermor, hurrying cheerful down the street,
     With ready heart that faced his work like play,
     And joyed to find it greater every day!
     The angel stopped him with uplifted hand,
     And gave without delay his Lord's command:
     "He whom thou servest here would have thee go
     "Alone to Spiran's huts, across the snow,
     "To serve Him there."  Ere Asmiel breathed again
     The eager answer leaped to meet him, "WHEN?"

     The angel's face with inward joy grew bright,
     And all his figure glowed with heavenly light;
     He took the golden circlet from his brow
     And gave the crown to Fermor, answering, "Now!
     "For thou hast met the Master's bidden test,
     "And I have found the man who loves Him best.
     "Not thine, nor mine, to question or reply
     "When He commands us, asking 'how?' or 'why?'
     "He knows the cause; His ways are wise and just;
     "Who serves the King must serve with perfect trust."

     February, 1902.




THE VAIN KING

     In robes of Tyrian blue the King was drest,
     A jewelled collar shone upon his breast,
     A giant ruby glittered in his crown--
     Lord of rich lands and many a splendid town.
     In him the glories of an ancient line
     Of sober kings, who ruled by right divine,
     Were centred; and to him with loyal awe
     The people looked for leadership and law.
     Ten thousand knights, the safeguard of the land,
     Lay like a single sword within his hand;
     A hundred courts, with power of life and death,
     Proclaimed decrees of justice by his breath;
     And all the sacred growths that men had known
     Of order and of rule upheld his throne.

     Proud was the King: yet not with such a heart
     As fits a man to play a royal part.
     Not his the pride that honours as a trust
     The right to rule, the duty to be just:
     Not his the dignity that bends to bear
     The monarch's yoke, the master's load of care,
     And labours like the peasant at his gate,
     To serve the people and protect the State.
     Another pride was his, and other joys:
     To him the crown and sceptre were but toys,
     With which he played at glory's idle game,
     To please himself and win the wreaths of fame.
     The throne his fathers held from age to age,
     To his ambition, seemed a fitting stage
     Built for King Martin to display at will,
     His mighty strength and universal skill.

     No conscious child, that, spoiled with praising, tries
     At every step to win admiring eyes,--
     No favourite mountebank, whose acting draws
     From gaping crowds loud thunder of applause,
     Was vainer than the King: his only thirst
     Was to be hailed, in every race, the first.
     When tournament was held, in knightly guise
     The King would ride the lists and win the prize;
     When music charmed the court, with golden lyre
     The King would take the stage and lead the choir;
     In hunting, his the lance to slay the boar;
     In hawking, see his falcon highest soar;
     In painting, he would wield the master's brush;
     In high debate,--"the King is speaking! Hush!"
     Thus, with a restless heart, in every field
     He sought renown, and found his subjects yield
     As if he were a demi-god revealed.

     But while he played the petty games of life
     His kingdom fell a prey to inward strife;
     Corruption through the court unheeded crept,
     And on the seat of honour justice slept.
     The strong trod down the weak; the helpless poor
     Groaned under burdens grievous to endure.
     The nation's wealth was spent in vain display,
     And weakness wore the nation's heart away.

     Yet think not Earth is blind to human woes--
     Man has more friends and helpers than he knows;
     And when a patient people are oppressed,
     The land that bore them feels it in her breast.
     Spirits of field and flood, of heath and hill,
     Are grieved and angry at the spreading ill;
     The trees complain together in the night,
     Voices of wrath are heard along the height,
     And secret vows are sworn, by stream and strand,
     To bring the tyrant low and liberate the land.

     But little recked the pampered King of these;
     He heard no voice but such as praise and please.
     Flattered and fooled, victor in every sport,
     One day he wandered idly with his court
     Beside the river, seeking to devise
     New ways to show his skill to wondering eyes.
     There in the stream a patient fisher stood,
     And cast his line across the rippling flood.
     His silver spoil lay near him on the green:
     "Such fish," the courtiers cried, "were never seen!
     "Three salmon longer than a cloth-yard shaft--
     "This man must be the master of his craft!"
     "An easy art!" the jealous King replied:
     "Myself could learn it better, if I tried,
     "And catch a hundred larger fish a week--
     "Wilt thou accept the challenge, fellow? Speak!"
     The fisher turned, came near, and bent his knee:
     "'T is not for kings to strive with such as me;
     "Yet if the King commands it, I obey.
     "But one condition of the strife I pray:
     "The fisherman who brings the least to land
     "Shall do whate'er the other may command."
     Loud laughed the King: "A foolish fisher thou!
     "For I shall win and rule thee then as now."

     So to Prince John, a sober soul, sedate
     And slow, King Martin left the helm of state,
     While to the novel game with eager zest
     He all his time and all his powers addrest.
     Sure such a sight was never seen before!
     For robed and crowned the monarch trod the shore;
     His golden hooks were decked with feathers fine,
     His jewelled reel ran out a silken line.
     With kingly strokes he flogged the crystal stream,
     Far-off the salmon saw his tackle gleam;
     Careless of kings, they eyed with calm disdain
     The gaudy lure, and Martin fished in vain.
     On Friday, when the week was almost spent,
     He scanned his empty creel with discontent,
     Called for a net, and cast it far and wide,
     And drew--a thousand minnows from the tide!
     Then came the fisher to conclude the match,
     And at the monarch's feet spread out his catch--
     A hundred salmon, greater than before--
     "I win!" he cried: "the King must pay the score."
     Then Martin, angry, threw his tackle down:
     "Rather than lose this game I'd lose my crown!"

     Nay, thou hast lost them both," the fisher said;
     And as he spoke a wondrous light was shed
     Around his form; he dropped his garments mean,
     And in his place the River-god was seen.
     "Thy vanity hast brought thee in my power,
     "And thou shalt pay the forfeit at this hour:
     "For thou hast shown thyself a royal fool,
     "Too proud to angle, and too vain to rule.
     "Eager to win in every trivial strife,--
     "Go! Thou shalt fish for minnows all thy life!"
     Wrathful, the King the scornful sentence heard;
     He strove to answer, but he only CHIRR-R-ED:
     His Tyrian robe was changed to wings of blue,
     His crown became a crest,--away he flew!

     And still, along the reaches of the stream,
     The vain King-fisher flits, an azure gleam,--
     You see his ruby crest, you hear his jealous scream.

     April, 1904.




  LYRICS




A MILE WITH ME

     O who will walk a mile with me
       Along life's merry way?
     A comrade blithe and full of glee,
     Who dares to laugh out loud and free,
     And let his frolic fancy play,
     Like a happy child, through the flowers gay
     That fill the field and fringe the way
       Where he walks a mile with me.

     And who will walk a mile with me
       Along life's weary way?
     A friend whose heart has eyes to see
     The stars shine out o'er the darkening lea,
     And the quiet rest at the end o' the day,--
     A friend who knows, and dares to say,
     The brave, sweet words that cheer the way
       Where he walks a mile with me.

     With such a comrade, such a friend,
     I fain would walk till journeys end,
     Through summer sunshine, winter rain,
     And then?--Farewell, we shall meet again!

     December, 1902.




SPRING IN THE SOUTH

     Now in the oak the sap of life is welling,
       Tho' to the bough the rusty leafage clings;
     Now on the elm the misty buds are swelling,
       See how the pine-wood grows alive with wings;
     Blue-jays fluttering, yodeling and crying,
       Meadow-larks sailing low above the faded grass,
     Red-birds whistling clear, silent robins flying,--
       Who has waked the birds up?  What has come to pass?

     Last year's cotton-plants, desolately bowing,
       Tremble in the March-wind, ragged and forlorn;
     Red are the hill-sides of the early ploughing,
       Gray are the lowlands, waiting for the corn.
     Earth seems asleep still, but she's only feigning;
       Deep in her bosom thrills a sweet unrest.
     Look where the jasmine lavishly is raining
       Jove's golden shower into Danae's breast!

     Now on the plum the snowy bloom is sifted,
       Now on the peach the glory of the rose,
     Over the hills a tender haze is drifted,
       Full to the brim the yellow river flows.
     Dark cypress boughs with vivid jewels glisten,
       Greener than emeralds shining in the sun.
     Who has wrought the magic?  Listen, sweetheart, listen!
     The mocking-bird is singing Spring has begun.

     Hark, in his song no tremor of misgiving!
       All of his heart he pours into his lay,--
     "Love, love, love, and pure delight of living:
       Winter is forgotten: here's a happy day!"
     Fair in your face I read the flowery presage,
       Snowy on your brow and rosy on your mouth:
     Sweet in your voice I hear the season's message,--
       Love, love, love, and Spring in the South!

     March, 1904.




LOVE'S NEARNESS

     I think of thee, when golden sunbeams shimmer
                   Across the sea;
     And when the waves reflect the moon's pale glimmer,
                   I think of thee.

     I see thy form, when down the distant highway
                   The dust-clouds rise;
     In deepest night, above the mountain by-way,
                   I see thine eyes.

     I hear thee when the ocean-tides returning
                   Loudly rejoice;
     And on the lonely moor, in stillness yearning,
                   I hear thy voice.

     I dwell with thee: though thou art far removed,
                   Yet art thou near.
     The sun goes down, the stars shine out,--
                      Beloved,
                   Ah, wert thou here!

     From Goethe: "Nahe des Geliebten."




TWO SCHOOLS

     I put my heart to school
     In the world, where men grow wise,
     "Go out," I said, "and learn the rule;
     "Come back when you win a prize."

     My heart came back again:
     "Now where is the prize?" I cried.--
     "The rule was false, and the prize was pain,
     "And the teacher's name was Pride."

     I put my heart to school
     In the woods, where veeries sing,
     And brooks run cool and clear;
     In the fields, where wild flowers spring,
     And the blue of heaven bends near.
     "Go out," I said: "you are half a fool,
     "But perhaps they can teach you here."

     "And why do you stay so long,
     "My heart, and where do you roam?"
     The answer came with a laugh and a song,--
     "I find this school is home."

     April, 1901.




A PRAYER FOR A MOTHER'S BIRTHDAY

     Lord Jesus, Thou hast known
       A mother's love and tender care:
     And Thou wilt hear, while for my own
       Mother most dear I make this birthday prayer.

     Protect her life, I pray,
       Who gave the gift of life to me;
     And may she know, from day to day,
       The deepening glow of Life that comes from Thee.

     As once upon her breast
       Fearless and well content I lay,
     So let her heart, on Thee at rest,
       Feel fears depart and troubles fade away.

     Her every wish fulfill;
       And even if Thou must refuse
     In anything, let Thy wise will
       A comfort bring such as kind mothers use.

     Ah, hold her by the hand,
       As once her hand held mine;
     And though she may not understand
       Life's winding way, lead her in peace divine.

     I cannot pay my debt
     For all the love that she has given;
       But Thou, love's Lord, wilt not forget
     Her due reward,--bless her in earth and heaven.

     July, 1903.




INDIAN SUMMER

     A soft veil dims the tender skies,
     And half conceals from pensive eyes
       The bronzing tokens of the fall;
     A calmness broods upon the hills,
     And summer's parting dream distills
       A charm of silence over all.

     The stacks of corn, in brown array,
     Stand waiting through the placid day,
       Like tattered wigwams on the plain;
     The tribes that find a shelter there
     Are phantom peoples, forms of air,
       And ghosts of vanished joy and pain.

     At evening when the crimson crest
     Of sunset passes down the West,
       I hear the whispering host returning;
     On far-off fields, by elm and oak,
     I see the lights, I smell the smoke,--
       The Camp-fires of the Past are burning.

                         Tertius and Henry Van Dyke.

     November, 1903.




ONE WORLD

         "The worlds in which we live are two
          The world 'I am' and the world 'I do.'"

     The worlds in which we live at heart are one,
     The world "I am," the fruit of "I have done";
     And underneath these worlds of flower and fruit,
     The world "I love,"--the only living root.




HIDE AND SEEK

                        I

     All the trees are sleeping, all the winds are still,
     All the flocks of fleecy clouds have wandered past the hill;
     Through the noonday silence, down the woods of June,
     Hark, a little hunter's voice comes running with a tune.
                  "Hide and seek!
                  "When I speak,
                  "You must answer me:
                  "Call again,
                  "Merry men,
             "Coo-ee, coo-ee, coo-ee!"

     Now I hear his footsteps, rustling through the grass:
     Hidden in my leafy nook, shall I let him pass?
     Just a low, soft whistle,--quick the hunter turns,
     Leaps upon me laughing, rolls me in the ferns.
                  "Hold him fast,
                  "Caught at last!
                  "Now you're it, you see.
                  "Hide your eye,
                  "Till I cry,
             "Coo-ee, coo-ee, coo-ee!"


                        II

     Long ago he left me, long and long ago:
     Now I wander through the world and seek him high and low;
     Hidden safe and happy, in some pleasant place,--
     Ah, if I could hear his voice, I soon should find his face.
                  Far away,
                  Many a day,
                  Where can Barney be?
                  Answer, dear,
                  Don't you hear?
              Coo-ee, coo-ee, coo-ee!

     Birds that in the spring-time thrilled his heart with joy,
     Flowers he loved to pick for me, mind me of my boy.
     Surely he is waiting till my steps come nigh;
     Love may hide itself awhile, but love can never die.
                  Heart, be glad,
                  The little lad
                  Will call some day to thee:
                  "Father dear,
                  "Heaven is here,
             "Coo-ee, coo-ee, coo-ee!"

     January, 1900.




DULCIS MEMORIA

     Long, long ago I heard a little song,
       (Ah, was it long ago, or yesterday?)
     So lowly, slowly wound the tune along,
       That far into my heart it found the way:
     A melody consoling and endearing;
       And still, in silent hours, I'm often hearing
     The small, sweet song that does not die away.

     Long, long ago I saw a little flower,--
       (Ah, was it long ago, or yesterday?)
     So fair of face and fragrant for an hour,
       That something dear to me it seemed to say:
     A thought of joy that blossomed into being
       Without a word; and now I'm often seeing
     The friendly flower that does not fade away.

     Long, long ago we had a little child,--
       (Ah, was it long ago, or yesterday?)
     Into his mother's eyes and mine he smiled
       Unconscious love; warm in our arms he lay.
     An angel called! Dear heart, we could not hold him;
       Yet secretly your arms and mine infold him--
     Our little child who does not go away.

     Long, long ago?  Ah, memory, make it clear--
       (It was not long ago, but yesterday,)
     So little and so helpless and so dear
       Let not the song be lost, the flower decay!
     His voice, his waking eyes, his gentle sleeping:
       The smallest things are safest in thy keeping.
     Sweet memory, keep our child with us alway.

     April, 1903.




AUTUMN IN THE GARDEN

     When the frosty kiss of Autumn in the dark
                 Makes its mark
     On the flowers, and the misty morning grieves
                 Over fallen leaves;
     Then my olden garden, where the golden soil
                 Through the toil
     Of a hundred years is mellow, rich, and deep,
                 Whispers in its sleep.

     'Mid the crumpled beds of marigold and phlox,
                 Where the box
     Borders with its glossy green the ancient walks,
                 There's a voice that talks
     Of the human hopes that bloomed and withered here
                 Year by year,--
     Dreams of joy, that brightened all the labouring hours,
                 Fading as the flowers.

     Yet the whispered story does not deepen grief;
                 But relief
     For the loneliness of sorrow seems to flow
                 From the Long-Ago,
     When I think of other lives that learned, like mine,
                 To resign,
     And remember that the sadness of the fall
                 Comes alike to all.

     What regrets, what longings for the lost were theirs!
                 And what prayers
     For the silent strength that nerves us to endure
                 Things we cannot cure!
     Pacing up and down the garden where they paced,
                 I have traced
     All their well-worn paths of patience, till I find
                 Comfort in my mind.

     Faint and far away their ancient griefs appear:
                 Yet how near
     Is the tender voice, the careworn, kindly face,
                 Of the human race!
     Let us walk together in the garden, dearest heart,
                 Not apart!
     They who know the sorrows other lives have known
                 Never walk alone.

     October, 1903.




THE MESSAGE

     Waking from tender sleep,
     My neighbour's little child
     Put out his baby hand to me,
     Looked in my face, and smiled.

     It seemed as if he came
     Home from a happy land,
     To tell me something that my heart
     Would surely understand.

     Somewhere, among bright dreams,
     A child that once was mine
     Had whispered wordless love to him,
     And given him a sign.

     Comfort of kindly speech,
     And counsel of the wise,
     Have helped me less than what I read
     In those deep-smiling eyes.

     Sleep sweetly, little friend,
     And dream again of heaven:
     With double love I kiss your hand,--
     Your message has been given.

     November, 1903.




LIGHT BETWEEN THE TREES

     Long, long, long the trail
       Through the brooding forest-gloom,
     Down the shadowy, lonely vale
       Into silence, like a room
         Where the light of life has fled,
       And the jealous curtains close
       Round the passionless repose
         Of the silent dead.

     Plod, plod, plod away,
       Step by step in mouldering moss;
     Thick branches bar the day
       Over languid streams that cross
         Softly, slowly, with a sound
       In their aimless creeping
       Like a smothered weeping,
         Through the enchanted ground.

     "Yield, yield, yield thy quest,"
       Whispers through the woodland deep;
     "Come to me and be at rest;
       "I am slumber, I am sleep."
         Then the weary feet would fail,
       But the never-daunted will
       Urges "Forward, forward still!
         "Press along the trail!"

     Breast, breast, breast the slope!
       See, the path is growing steep.
     Hark! a little song of hope
       When the stream begins to leap.
         Though the forest, far and wide,
       Still shuts out the bending blue,
       We shall finally win through,
         Cross the long divide.

     On, on, onward tramp!
       Will the journey never end?
     Over yonder lies the camp;
       Welcome waits us there, my friend.
         Can we reach it ere the night?
       Upward, upward, never fear!
       Look, the summit must be near;
         See the line of light!

     Red, red, red the shine
       Of the splendour in the west,
     Glowing through the ranks of pine,
       Clear along the mountain-crest!
         Long, long, long the trail
       Out of sorrow's lonely vale;
       But at last the traveller sees
         Light between the trees!

     March, 1904.




RELIANCE

         Not to the swift, the race:
         Not to the strong, the fight:
     Not to the righteous, perfect grace:
         Not to the wise, the light.

         But often faltering feet
         Come surest to the goal;
     And they who walk in darkness meet
         The sunrise of the soul.

         A thousand times by night
         The Syrian hosts have died;
     A thousand times the vanquished right
         Hath risen, glorified.

         The truth the wise men sought
         Was spoken by a child;
     The alabaster box was brought
         In trembling hands defiled.

         Not from my torch, the gleam,
         But from the stars above:
     Not from my heart, life's crystal stream,
         But from the depths of Love.

     October, 1903.




  GREETINGS AND INSCRIPTIONS




KATRINA'S SUN-DIAL

             Hours fly,
             Flowers die:
             New days,
             New ways:
             Pass by!
             Love stays.

                 **

             Time is
     Too Slow for those who Wait,
     Too Swift for those who Fear,
     Too Long for those who Grieve,
     Too Short for those who Rejoice;
         But for those who Love,
             Time is not.




TO JAMES WHITCOMB RILEY

         On his "Book of Joyous Children"

     Yours is a garden of old-fashioned flowers;
       Joyous children delight to play there;
     Weary men find rest in its bowers,
       Watching the lingering light of day there.

     Old-time tunes and young love's laughter
       Ripple and run among the roses;
     Memory's echoes, murmuring after,
       Fill the dusk when the long day closes.

     Simple songs with a cadence olden--
       These you learned in the Forest of Arden:
     Friendly flowers with hearts all golden--
       These you borrowed from Eden's garden.

     This is the reason why all men love you;
       Truth to life is the charm of art:
     Other poets may soar above you--
       You keep close to the human heart.

     December, 1903.




A HEALTH TO MARK TWAIN

               At his Birthday Feast

     With memories old and wishes new
       We crown our cups again,
     And here's to you, and here's to you
       With love that ne'er shall wane!
     And may you keep, at sixty-seven,
     The joy of earth, the hope of heaven,
     And fame well-earned, and friendship true,
       And peace that comforts every pain,
     And faith that fights the battle through,
     And all your heart's unbounded wealth,
     And all your wit, and all your health,--
     Yes, here's a hearty health to you,
     And here's to you, and here's to you,
       Long life to you, Mark Twain.




A RONDEAU OF COLLEGE RHYMES

     Our college rhymes,--how light they seem,
        Like little ghosts of love's young dream
        That led our boyish hearts away
        From lectures and from books, to stray
     By flowery mead and flowing stream!

     There's nothing here, in form or theme,
     Of thought sublime or art supreme:
        We would not have the critic weigh
           Our college rhymes.

     Yet if, perchance, a slender beam
     Of feeling's glow or fancy's gleam
        Still lingers in the lines we lay
        At Alma Mater's feet today,
     The touch of Nature may redeem
           Our college rhymes.

     May, 1904.




THE MOCKING-BIRD

     In mirth he mocks the other birds at noon,
     Catching the lilt of every easy tune;
     But when the day departs he sings of love,--
     His own wild song beneath the listening moon.

     March, 1904.




THE EMPTY QUATRAIN

     A flawless cup: how delicate and fine
       The flowing curve of every jewelled line!
       Look, turn it up or down, 't is perfect still,--
     But holds no drop of life's heart-warming wine.

     April, 1904.




INSCRIPTIONS FOR A FRIEND'S HOUSE


                    THE HOUSE

     The cornerstone in Truth is laid,
     The guardian walls of Honour made,
     The roof of Faith is built above,
     The fire upon the hearth is Love:
     Though rains descend and loud winds call,
     This happy house shall never fall.


                  THE DOORSTEAD

     The lintel low enough to keep out pomp and pride:
     The threshold high enough to turn deceit aside:
     The doorband strong enough from robbers to defend:
     This door will open at a touch to welcome every friend.


                 THE HEARTHSTONE

     When the logs are burning free,
     Then the fire is full of glee:
     When each heart gives out its best,
     Then the talk is full of zest:
     Light your fire and never fear,
     Life was made for love and cheer.



          THE SUN-DIAL

     Time can never take
     What Time did not give;
     When my shadows have all passed,
     You shall live.




THE STATUE OF SHERMAN BY ST. GAUDENS

     This is the soldier brave enough to tell
     The glory-dazzled world that 'war is hell':
     Lover of peace, he looks beyond the strife,
     And rides through hell to save his country's life.

     April, 1904.




THE SUN-DIAL AT WELLS COLLEGE

     The shadow by my finger cast
     Divides the future from the past:
     Before it, sleeps the unborn hour
     In darkness, and beyond thy power:
     Behind its unreturning line,
     The vanished hour, no longer thine:
     One hour alone is in thy hands,--
     The NOW on which the shadow stands.

     March, 1904.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Music and Other Poems, by Henry van Dyke

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MUSIC AND OTHER POEMS ***

***** This file should be named 3525.txt or 3525.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/2/3525/

Produced by Mardi Desjardins

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
