The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Course of Lectures on the Principles of
Domestic Economy and Cookery, by Juliet Corson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Course of Lectures on the Principles of Domestic Economy and Cookery

Author: Juliet Corson

Release Date: March 13, 2011 [EBook #35567]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A COURSE OF LECTURES ***




Produced by Julia Miller and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)





Transcriber's Note

Obvious typographical errors have been corrected. A list of corrections
is found at the end of the text. Inconsistencies in spelling and
hyphenation have been maintained. A list of inconsistently spelled and
hyphenated words is found at the end of the text.




  A COURSE OF LECTURES

  ON THE

  PRINCIPLES OF DOMESTIC ECONOMY

  AND COOKERY,


  BY MISS JULIET CORSON,

  Superintendent of the New York School of Cookery.


  DELIVERED IN THE FARMERS' LECTURE COURSE OF THE
  COLLEGE OF AGRICULTURE OF THE
  UNIVERSITY OF MINNESOTA.


  APPENDIX TO SUPPLEMENT I.

  FOURTH BIENNIAL REPORT OF

  Board of Regents of the University of Minnesota.

  1886.


  ST. PAUL, MINN.:
  THE PIONEER PRESS COMPANY.
  1887.




PREFACE.


The following lectures were delivered in the "Farmers Lecture Course,"
at the College of Agriculture, Minneapolis, during the session of 1884.
The topics selected at previous sessions had been such as to especially
interest the male members of the large classes in attendance, and it was
considered no more than fair to the women of the State that attention
should be given to such matters as would aid them in the conduct of home
duties. Influenced by this desire, I secured the services of Miss Juliet
Corson, the superintendent of the New York School of Cookery, and so
widely known wherever the English language is spoken, by her
publications and writings upon all topics relating to domestic economy.
The interest manifested in this course of lectures by the ladies of
Minnesota was shown by the crowded audiences present at each exercise,
nearly 1,200 of whom registered their names and addresses, a list of
which is appended to this report.

The lectures were familiar, extemporaneous discourses upon the topics
under discussion, and the lecturer was surrounded by all the
appointments of a well-ordered kitchen. The dishes as prepared were
passed to the audience for examination and criticism, and full
opportunity allowed for discussion. This statement is necessary to
explain the colloquial character of the discourses.

In placing these lectures before the public the editor does but simple
justice to Miss Corson in stating that circumstances have prevented the
preparation by her of a finished report, and have compelled the
publication of the notes taken at the "cooking lessons." But if the
_form_ of the instruction is devoid of rhetorical style, the editor
guarantees its _accuracy_.

Although Miss Corson is a steady worker, her usefulness is curtailed by
serious illness. In this instance, therefore, indulgence is claimed for
the method. Whatever graces of literature the reader seeks, may be found
in the author's other published works; here the public is entreated to
accept a very plain record of the work done at the State University by
Miss Corson.

A word of explanation is due to the members of the class, who were
promised copies of these lectures. I had full reports taken at the time,
by a stenographer. They were written out shortly after, and sent to Miss
Corson, as by her request, for review; but owing to her protracted and
nearly fatal illness and very slow recovery, these notes have only
recently been returned to me. I hope this statement will relieve me from
any charges of neglect, which the ladies might otherwise be disposed to
make.

  EDWARD D. PORTER,
  _Professor in Charge_.




INTRODUCTION.


This course of lectures is designed to meet the wants of two classes of
persons:

_First_--Those who are experienced housekeepers, familiar with the
principles and practice of cookery, but who desire information
concerning the preparation of the finer dishes of the modern school.

_Second_--The young ladies in attendance at the University and others
like them, who have had their time and attention so engrossed with
studies and other duties that they have not had the opportunity to
qualify themselves in this most important branch of a woman's education.

To meet the wants of the first class, the morning exercises will be
devoted to the preparation of palatable and nutritious dishes, suitable
for every day use in families of moderate means, and some of the finer
dishes will be introduced.

As the afternoons are the only times at which the young ladies of the
University can be present, these sessions will be devoted to practical
illustrations of the elementary principles of household management and
cookery. As time permits, some of the salient points in the chemistry of
food and the physiology of nutrition will be briefly discussed.




BILL OF FARE

FOR

THE HOUSEKEEPERS' COURSE.


FIRST DAY.

                          Soup Stock.
  Boiled Salmon, with Cream Sauce.
                  Potatoes, Stewed in Butter.
                                      Quail, boned and broiled.
                          Omelettes.


SECOND DAY.

                              Clear Soup.
                  Caramel for coloring Soups and Sauces.
                            Baked Whitefish.
  Beefsteak, broiled and fried.              Baked Apple Dumplings.


THIRD DAY.

                    Cream of Salmon.
          Shoulder of Lamb, boned and roasted.
  Forcemeat for Meats.
                          Potatoes, broiled and baked.
                      Cheese Crusts.


FOURTH DAY.

                      Pea Soup with Crusts.
      Salt Codfish, stewed in Cream.
                              Venison with Currant Jelly.
  Stewed Carrots.                            Cabinet Pudding.


FIFTH DAY.

  Tomato Soup.                                         Fried Pickerel.
                          Beef, _a la mode_ Rolls.
            _Puree_ of Spinach.
                                            Caramel Custard.


SIXTH DAY.

                          Oyster Soup.
                  Oysters, broiled and fried.
  Oysters with Bacon.                  Mobile Roast Oysters.
                        Welsh Rarebits.




THE UNIVERSITY COURSE.


AT 2 P. M. DAILY.

_First Day_--Soup Making, and Stews.

_Second Day_--Good Breads, Plain Pastry and Puddings.

_Third Day_--Fish and Poultry.

_Fourth Day_--Meats and Vegetables.

_Fifth Day_--Cheap Dishes and Rewarmed Foods.

_Sixth Day_--Cookery for the Sick.

Tea, Coffee, Omelettes, Sauces, and various small dishes will be treated
when the occasion offers.

       *       *       *       *       *

The last half hour of each day will be devoted to the discussion of
questions referring to the subject in hand, and to the testing of dishes
cooked.




FIRST LECTURE.


Our lesson this morning, ladies, will consist of the preparation of what
is called soup stock, or beef broth, which is the basis of many kinds of
soup; it is very easily made, simple in its composition, and exceedingly
nutritious; the other dishes to be made are boiled salmon with cream
sauce; potatoes, stewed in butter; and quail, boned and broiled. I give
you the boned quail to show you what an exceedingly simple operation
boning is. It is supposed to be very difficult, and it is done sometimes
in curious ways; but the best way is the simplest and easiest. If we
have time we will prepare a few omelettes.

As I shall begin with soup stock, you will take your receipt for that.
For each quart of soup stock or broth which you intend to make, use one
pound of meat and bone. By that I mean meat and bone weighed together.
The cut which I have here is from the upper part of the leg, next to the
round. You can use any cut of the leg, the shank, which is the lower
part of the leg, or the neck; any of the cheaper parts of meat will
answer for soup meat. First, cut the meat from the bone; the butcher
will always do that for you; then have the bone broken in small pieces.
The butcher, of course, will do that very much more easily than you can
do it. Do not wash the meat; wipe it all over with a towel wet in cold
water. Put the bones in the bottom of the soup kettle, laying the meat
on the bones; then add cold water in the proportion of a quart to each
pound of meat and bones. Set the soup kettle over the fire, and let the
broth slowly heat and boil. As it boils a scum will rise to the surface,
which is to be removed in case you are preparing stock for clear soup.
The scum is composed of the blood and the albumen of the meat, and is
only removed for the purpose of clarifying the soup. It is nutritious,
and for that reason it should always be saved. In France, and in
kitchens where French cooks are employed, this scum is used either in
thick soup--for instance, in vegetable soup, such as I shall make this
afternoon--or put into brown sauces or gravies. Remember, it is nothing
that is to be thrown away; it is to be saved because it is both
nutritious and savory. It adds flavor and nutriment to any dish to
which it is added. While the soup meat is being boiled for the first
time, prepare the vegetables. For three or four pounds of meat, which
will make as many quarts of soup, use one medium-size carrot, which is
to be scraped, a turnip, which is to be peeled, and an onion, which is
also to be peeled, in such a way as to prevent breaking apart; take off
the outer dry skin of the onion without trimming it closely; do not cut
it off at the top, because in that way you will cause the layers to
break apart. After the onion is peeled stick a dozen whole cloves into
it. The cloves are added to the soup for the purpose of flavoring it.
You very often hear the remark made that the cookery of certain people
has an indefinable taste, exceedingly nice, but something that you do
not exactly understand. It is always produced by a combination of
seasonings and flavorings. In this soup I shall use for seasoning not
only the cloves in the onions, but a dozen peppercorns--that is,
unground grains of pepper, instead of ground pepper, because I want the
soup to be perfectly clear. I shall use also bay leaves, which may be
new to some of you; they are the dried leaves of the laurel or bay tree,
and can be bought at any drug store. You can buy five cents' worth of
them and they will last you a year or more. The seasoning is slightly
aromatic; for four quarts of soup use only a little leaf, or a piece of
a large leaf; use also a blade of mace, and a sprig of any dried herb
except sage.

The peppercorns, the bay leaf, the blade of mace, and the sprig of sweet
herb are tied in the midst of a little bunch of parsley, the stalk with
all the leaves on, and if it is ever marketed here with the root on, use
that as well; the root of the parsley has all the flavor of the leaf
intensified, and you have only to thoroughly wash it, and then use it.
All these dried herbs are to be gathered inside of the parsley and tied
in a little bunch; tie the parsley by winding string around it,
inclosing all the dried herbs; this little bunch is called in cooking
books a _fagot_ or bouquet of herbs; it is what gives soups and sauces
that indefinable spicy, delicate flavor so much liked.

After the soup stock boils remove whatever scum has risen, put in the
_fagot_, the turnip, the carrot, the onion stuck with cloves, and for
the four quarts of soup a heaping tablespoonful of salt. Keep the soup
stock covered as much as possible while it is heating; and after you
have put in the vegetables keep it covered all the time. Let it boil
very slowly. After all the vegetables are in set the kettle back so that
the heat of the fire strikes from one side; let it boil from one side
and gently; in that way you begin the clarifying. You will find if you
boil the stock from one side, and very gently, then when you strain it
after it is done it already will be as clear as most clear soup. After
it has been strained, to-morrow, we shall clarify it in order to show
the process, which is very simple. Then it will be what is called on
hotel bills of fare clear soup.

After the vegetables have been added let the stock boil for at least two
hours. In that length of time the flavor of the vegetables and the
nourishment from the meat will be extracted, but not the gelatine from
the bones. It is the gelatine in the bones which makes broth or stock
jelly when it is cold; in order to extract the gelatine it is necessary
to boil the soup meat and bones at least five hours. The soup can be
strained at the end of two hours, or boiled five or six hours, keeping
it covered so that none of it wastes or evaporates. When the soup is
boiled, strain it; use an earthen bowl or jar; set a colander in it, and
lay a towel folded twice in the colander, having the colander either
over the bowl or jar; pour the soup into the towel, and let it run
through without squeezing, because if you squeeze the towel you will
force small particles of scum through, and thus cloud the soup. After
the soup has run through the towel let it cool; do not cover it while it
is cooling unless you are afraid of flies or insects getting into it; in
that case cover it with a sieve. If you cover it with a solid earthen
cover or plate the steam arising from the soup will condense on the
under part of the cover and fall back into the soup; if the weather is
warm, or if it is a close, rainy day, the steam condensed falling back
into the warm soup will cause it to sour. For this reason when you put
away a dish of meat or vegetables after dinner do not cover them until
they are cold.


BOILED SALMON WITH CREAM SAUCE.

In boiling a whole fish, or a large piece, use cold water. If you put a
large piece of fish into boiling water, the outside will be cooked
before it is done near the bone. Nothing is more disagreeable than a
piece of fish half raw at the bone; it is uneatable. For a small piece
of fish, such as I have here, use boiling salted water enough to cover
it, and boil it until the flakes begin to separate, or until, by testing
a fin, you can easily pull it out. That will probably be, if you use
cold water, soon after the water boils; if you put the fish into
boiling water, it may be five or more minutes. Boil the fish, whether it
is large or small, until you can pull out a fin, or until the flakes
separate. Then drain it, and serve it with any nice sauce. To-day I will
make a very simple one--cream sauce. Of course you would always make the
sauce while you were boiling the fish, taking care to have both done at
the same time. For a pint of sauce, use a heaping tablespoonful of
butter and a tablespoonful of flour; put them in a saucepan over the
fire, and stir them together until they are smoothly mixed; then begin
to add hot milk, half a cupful at a time; when the first half cupful of
milk is stirred in, put in another half cupful and again stir until it
is smooth; continue to add milk until you have used a pint, or until the
sauce is about the consistency of thick cream. There will always be a
margin there for a little discretion, because some flour will thicken
very much more than others. Flour that is very rich in gluten will
thicken more than that which has most starch in it. But you have there
about the right proportions--a tablespoonful of flour, a tablespoonful
of butter, a pint of milk. Add more or less milk as is required to make
the sauce the consistency of thick cream, or of a thickness which will
coat the spoon; that is, if you dip a spoon in and hold it up, the sauce
will not all run off like water; when all the milk has been used, season
the sauce with a level teaspoonful of salt and about a quarter of a salt
spoon of white pepper. I speak of white pepper particularly because in
making a white sauce, if you use the ordinary black pepper, the sauce
will be full of little black specks. The white pepper is quite as cheap,
quite as plentiful as the black pepper; all the grocers keep it, and its
flavor is nicer, rather more delicate, scarcely as pungent as the black
pepper; there is a certain biting, acrid flavor in the black pepper
which does not exist in the white pepper; the latter contains all the
stimulating property and all the aromatic flavor.

After the same is finished, keep it hot by setting the sauce pan
containing it in a pan of hot water, on the back of the stove. A
perfectly plain white sauce (which can be made the basis of an infinite
variety of other sauces) is made by substituting water for milk; by
leaving out the pepper and salt, and using sugar for sweetening, you can
make a nice pudding sauce. If you add a tablespoonful of chopped parsley
to a pint of white sauce, you make parsley sauce. Putting a few capers
into it, makes caper sauce. A teaspoonful of anchovies dissolved in it
makes anchovy sauce. It is easily made the basis of a great many sauces,
the name of which depends on preferred addition to the white sauce. Egg
sauce is made by adding chopped hard boiled eggs to white sauce.

_Question by a Lady._ Would you ever substitute cornstarch for flour?

MISS CORSON. You can if you wish. You must use your own discretion about
the quantities. Simply get the thickness of thick cream.

_Question._ Is it better to use a porcelain vessel, or will tin do?

MISS CORSON. Use any saucepan made of material thick enough to prevent
burning.

_Question._ Do you put the fish right into the water, or have you a fish
kettle?

MISS CORSON. If you are using a fish kettle you will have a little wire
frame. You can lay the fish on that, or you can tie it up in a cloth, if
you wish to.

_Question._ Then how can you tell when it is done?

MISS CORSON. If you tie it in a cloth you must leave a little space so
that you can test it.

_Question._ How much pepper did you say to put in the sauce?

MISS CORSON. About a quarter of a salt spoon; that is, a good pinch of
pepper. One of the ladies asked me about using a thick sauce
pan--porcelain-lined sauce pan; you will find the advantage of thick
sauce pans of all kinds is that they are less likely to burn than thin
ones. The thinner the metal the sauce pan is made of, the more likely it
is to burn. There are so many different kinds of utensils that every
lady can take her own choice. Black sauce pans, lined with tin or with
porcelain; tin sauce pans, thin ones, and thick ones made of block tin.
You notice that I use copper sauce pans. Coppers are the most durable;
they are lined with tin, and they have to be relined about once a year;
the cost of relining is very little--comparatively little; I think it
costs me about three cents a foot to have them relined, and the copper
never wears out. If you buy a copper sauce pan you have got something
that lasts you all your life, and you can leave it as an heirloom; if
you don't want to do that, you can sell it for old copper for nearly as
much as you paid for it. In using copper, you must never let them become
bare on the inside. If the tin wears off and the copper is exposed to
any acid in the food cooked, it is apt to form a poisonous combination.
But with proper care and cleanliness, copper sauce pans are perfectly
safe.

_Question._ Do you prefer them to the galvanized iron?

MISS CORSON. Yes, I do, on the score of cleanliness, economy and ease in
cooking.

_Question._ Do you use a wooden spoon from choice?

MISS CORSON. Yes; of course you can understand, ladies, that I could
very soon scrape the tin off of the inside of a sauce pan with a metal
spoon, a knife, or anything of that sort. Copper sauce pans should be
cleaned with a rag, a little Sapolio and hot water. If they are cleaned
as fast as they are used they are no more trouble to keep clean than any
other sauce pan. I use in stirring simply a small pudding stick--an
old-fashioned wooden pudding stick. It does not scrape the sauce pans,
and there is no danger of uncooked flour accumulating on the sticks, as
it does in the bowl of a spoon. If you are stirring with a spoon, some
of the half-cooked flour might get in the bowl of the spoon, and then
your sauce would have the taste of the raw flour. I will leave the stick
in the sauce pan and pass it about so that you can see what I mean.
Anyone can whittle these little sticks out, using any kind of hard wood.
Do not use soft wood. You will have noticed, ladies, if you have ever
put sauce of this kind, thick sauce, to keep hot, it may have grown very
much thicker by standing; in such case add a little more milk or water,
and a little more seasoning when you are ready to use it.

_Question._ How do you make perfectly clear sauce?

MISS CORSON. You can make a nearly clear thick sauce by using arrow
root. Of course, a clear thin sauce is simply sugar dissolved in water,
with butter or flavoring as you like.


POTATOES, STEWED IN BUTTER.

The potatoes are peeled and sliced in rather small slices of even size;
put them over the fire in enough salted boiling water to cover them,
boil them until they begin to grow tender; not till they break, but just
till they begin to grow tender; after the potatoes are boiled tender
drain them, and suppose you have a pint bowl full of potatoes, use about
two heaping tablespoonfuls of butter; melt the butter in a scant half
cupful of milk. When the butter is melted put the potatoes into it, and
with a spoon lift them very carefully from the bottom, always without
breaking them, until they have absorbed the milk and butter; then season
them with salt and white pepper, and they will be ready to serve. Season
them palatably; I could not give you the quantity of seasoning because
it would depend upon the salt that the potatoes had absorbed from the
water. You should taste them first before seasoning at all, and then if
they need any more salt add a very little at a time. If you simply want
the potatoes nicely stewed you don't add so much butter, a scant
tablespoonful, and milk enough to moisten them; but this receipt is an
exceedingly nice one--rather rich, but very nice.

(At this point the fish was done, and Miss Corson continued.)

You notice, ladies, that I take off the skin of the fish before taking
it up. That is very easy; it slips off easily, and without it the fish
is much nicer to serve at the table. In serving sauce with fish you pour
some around it, not over it; or you serve the fish on a napkin, and the
sauce in a dish, as you prefer. If you serve the fish in a folded napkin
garnish it with a few sprigs of parsley, if you can get them, or with a
lemon sliced, if you do not live--as some unfortunate people do--"fifty
miles from a lemon." Lemons are very nice always with any kind of fish.
Parsley can be bought here all winter long. I have learned that from the
advertisements in the papers already; and a little of it makes a great
difference in the appearance of a dish.

_Question._ Can you tell us how we can tell whether a frozen fish is
stale or fresh?

MISS CORSON. You can after you have thawed it in cold water; you can
tell by the smell. (Laughter.) The way to thaw frozen fish is to put it
into perfectly cold water and keep it in a cold place until all the
frost is drawn out. Of course the most of the fish in this market would
be frozen in the winter. This one has been frozen.

_Question._ Can you tell us how to carve a whole fish?

MISS CORSON. You would have a rather sharp knife and spoon; a fish
knife, though it looks pretty, is not good to serve fish with because it
is apt to be dull; you want a knife that will cut down through the fish
without tearing it, without attempting to cut down through the bone,
unless you know where the joints are located.

_Question._ Would you cook a fish with the fins?

MISS CORSON. The latest fancy of fish lovers in New York, the members of
the Ichthyophagous Club, who are supposed to be the leaders in the
fashions of fish, is to have the fish served with the fins, head and
tail on; and with some fish they want even the scales; and then they
simply lift off the skin, the entire skin, before they begin to serve
it. They have the fish thoroughly washed and drawn, and then cooked
with the scales and fins on. You can judge how easy it would be to do
that, because you saw how easily that skin came off this fish. The skin
comes off-easily if the fish is properly cooked--cooked enough.

_Question._ What kind of fish can be cooked with the scales on?

MISS CORSON. I think the black bass, and some kinds of sea fish. The
idea is that if the fish are not scaled they will keep their flavor; a
fish properly dressed retains enough of its flavor even if it is scalded
before it is cooked.


OMELETTES.

First, I will make a plain breakfast omelette. Use for two or three
people not more than three eggs. You can not very well manage more than
three in an ordinary pan. It is better to make several omelettes,
especially because people are not apt to come to the table all at once,
and an omelette to be nice must be eaten directly it is cooked. Say
three eggs; break them into a cup or bowl; add to them a saltspoonful of
salt, quarter of a saltspoonful of pepper, and mix them just enough to
thoroughly break the whites and yolks together. Put over the fire a
frying pan with a heaping teaspoonful of butter in it. Let the butter
get hot. If you like an omelette brown let the butter begin to brown.
After pouring the eggs into the hot frying pan break the omelette on the
bottom of the pan with a fork, just a little, so that you let the
uncooked part run down on the bottom of the pan. I do not mean to stir
the omelette as you would scrambled eggs, but just break it a little
until it is cooked as much as you want it. French breakfast omelettes
are always cooked so that they are slightly juicy in the middle; in
order to accomplish that result of course you have them still liquid
before you begin to turn them. When the omelette is done as much as you
want it run a fork under one side of it and fold it half over, then fold
it again; loosen it from the pan; have a platter hot, and turn the
omelette out. Serve it the moment it is done.

Next I will make a light omelette. The same rule--three eggs, whites and
yolks separate; beat the whites to a stiff froth; add seasoning to the
yolks in the same proportion as before; mix the yolks slightly with the
seasoning; after the white has been beaten quite stiff and the yolk
seasoned, mix them very lightly together; have a heaping tablespoonful
of butter in the frying pan over the fire, hot, just as for the plain
omelette; mix the whites and the yolks together, without breaking down
the white. Of course the lightness of the omelette depends on keeping
all the air in the white of the egg that you have beaten into it. Put
the eggs into the hot frying pan; run the fork under the omelette and
lift it from the pan as it cooks; lift the cooked portions from the pan,
and let them fall back on the top of the omelette, taking care not to
pat the omelette down at all; but just lift the cooked portions and let
them fall back on the top of the omelette, until it is done as much as
you like. Usually this omelette is served soft--as soft as ice cream.
When it is done as much as you want it, push it to the side of the pan,
gently, and then turn it out on a hot platter. Always remember that the
success of an omelette depends upon the quickness with which it is made
and served; because, in the first place, you make it light by beating
air into it; then, of course, the heat expands the air, and that makes
the omelette still lighter; and you must get it served before the hot
air escapes.


BONING QUAIL.

After the quail have been picked, cut the wings off at the first joint,
cut the legs just above the joint of the drum-stick. Cut off the head,
take out the crop, cut the quail down the back bone; from the inside,
cut the joint where the wing joins the body; and having cut that wing
joint, begin and cut close to the carcass of the bird till you get down
to the leg joint, where the second joint of the leg unites with the
body; break that joint, and keep on cutting the flesh from the carcass,
taking care not to cut through the carcass so that you strike the
intestines until you reach the ridge of the breast bone; close to the
breast bone you will find that little division in the flesh of the
breast which you have noticed in carving chickens and turkeys; it is
called the little filet, and lies close to the breast bone; separate
this natural division from the outside of the breast. Then beginning
again on the other side, cut close to the carcass of the bird until you
have reached the breast, as on the other side. Now the flesh is loose on
both sides of the bird, and needs only to be taken off without breaking
the skin of the breast. You would bone chickens and turkeys in the same
way. Take the carcass out entire. Now take out the wing and leg bones
from the inside. Do not tear the skin of the bird any more than you can
help. Now lay the flesh on the table, with the skin down, and
straighten it out a little, distributing the flesh evenly over the
skin, and it is ready to stuff. If I were making boned turkey I should
have it all ready, just like this, and then put the force meat in, draw
the bird up over the force meat, and sew it down the back. This bird is
simply going to be broiled. Season with salt and pepper. In preparing
boned birds you can use any kind of force meat--a layer of sausage meat,
or any kind of chopped cold meat; season it with salt and pepper. Put
the birds between the bars of the wire gridiron, and broil them with a
very hot fire. The gridiron should be well buttered, so that the birds
can not stick. By the time the bird is broiled brown on both sides it
will be done. Of course you do half a dozen or a dozen in the same way
precisely. Remember, ladies, always, that to broil you should use the
hottest fire you can get--the hottest and the clearest fire, because
part of the success of broiling depends upon quickly cooking the
outside, while the inside of anything you are broiling still remains
juicy. If you had a wood fire you would broil over the fire. If you
broil over the fire you must expect the blaze to rise, and you must
naturally suppose the meat will be smoked; but you can make your fire
clear--that is, have it alive; do not have it smoky and full of unburnt
wood or coal; have a clear bed of coals if you are going to broil over
the fire.

_Question._ Do you never wash the birds before boiling?

_Answer._ No; you will find that I am very _un_-neat about that. In the
first place, I would not use a piece of meat or a bird of any kind that
was really dirty enough to need washing. If it had anything on it that I
could not get off by wiping with a wet cloth, I simply wouldn't use it.
If you wash meat or poultry you destroy a certain amount of its
flavoring and take away some of its nourishment.

_Question._ Sometimes a bird shot will have a great deal of the blood
settle in the breast or in the flesh.

MISS CORSON. Yes; you want the blood; you want to keep the blood there.
The blood is a part of the nourishment. The idea of washing meat comes
from the old Hebrew prohibition which involved the removal of every
particle of blood. You know that the Hebrews believed that the blood was
the life and even to this day every particle of blood is taken away from
their meat, not only by washing after it comes into the house, but
before that by the treatment it receives from the butcher. The blood is
a part of the nourishment, and you want to keep as much of it as you
can; in some cooking it forms a very important part; for instance, in
cooking a hare or rabbit, the blood which escapes in the dressing is
saved and used.

_Question._ Would you treat prairie chicken, grouse or partridge in this
way?

MISS CORSON. Yes, in the same way.

_Question._ Not if you were going to roast turkey?

MISS CORSON. One of my good friends in the far Northwest several years
ago sent me a nice recipe for making a fricassee of chicken which I will
tell you. The recipe said that after the chicken was picked you might
wash it thoroughly with _nice soap_, then rinse it. (Laughter.) Now if
you like you can prepare it that way. No, you will find, ladies, that if
you use a cloth well wet in cold water you can remove all objectionable
matter from the outside of meat or poultry. Indeed, if a piece of meat
or poultry can not be cleaned with a wet cloth, it is not clean enough
to use. One lady asks me about keeping meat for a long time. Of course
that is a question of taste entirely, whether you like meat hung a long
time or whether you like it fresh. All meat, when it is first killed,
whether it is poultry, or game, or the ordinary domestic meat, is very
tender. It is tender until the flesh begins to grow cold, until the
animal heat, etc., parts from the flesh. Then it becomes tough, rigid
and hard, and remains so until the process of decomposition begins. I do
not mean until it begins to taint, but until it begins to decompose; at
that point it begins to grow tender; it is still fresh and good enough
for food. Remember that the hanging of meat is for the purpose of
allowing it to begin to decompose.




LECTURE SECOND.


Our lesson this afternoon will consist of some plain soups and stews of
meat. I shall begin with a soup,--of yellow split peas. For four quarts
of soup use an ordinary cupful of yellow split peas; pick them over and
wash them in cold water, put them in a saucepan or a soup kettle with
two quarts of cold water. Set the saucepan or soup kettle over the fire
and let the water very gradually heat. When it boils put in some cold
water,--part of a cupful, let them boil again; keep on putting in cold
water every fifteen or twenty minutes, until you have used two quarts
of cold water besides the first two quarts. The object of adding cold
water slowly is this: You soften the peas by the gradual heating of the
cold water. After the first boiling the addition of a little cold water
lowers the temperature, and as the water heats again the peas are
gradually softening; so that within an hour and a half or two hours you
will find them quite tender enough. You will notice that I have used no
salt; the salt would tend to harden the peas. You add salt after the
soup is nearly finished. The old way of soaking the peas over night is a
very good one, but this is rather better, for this reason: If you soak
the peas over night you destroy a small portion of their nutritive
properties; especially if you make the soup in warm water, there will be
a slight fermentation. The object of soaking them over night is simply
to soften them, and as you can soften them in this way you accomplish
the same purpose by adding cold water gradually. You will notice that
this is for perfectly plain pea soup. You can vary it by adding bones of
cold ham, or of cold roast beef; you can boil the bones with the peas.
In that way you get the flavor of whatever meat you add. A very nice
soup is made simply with the peas without any meat, by the addition of a
fried onion, for that soup you would peel and slice an onion and put it
in the bottom of the soup kettle with a tablespoonful of butter or
drippings,--beef drippings or poultry drippings,--and fry it light
brown; then put on the peas and cold water and proceed just as we do
to-day for a plain pea soup, without any addition except a seasoning of
salt and pepper, and by and by a little flour and butter, which I shall
put in at the close, the object of which I will explain to you then.


BEEF AND VEGETABLE SOUP.

For four quarts of soup use one cupful each of the ingredients which I
shall name: lean beef cut in half-inch pieces; carrot, which must first
be scraped and then cut in half-inch bits; turnip, which must be peeled
and then cut in small pieces; rice, picked over, washed in cold water;
tomatoes, peeled and sliced if they are fresh; but if you use canned
tomatoes simply cut them in small pieces; half a cupful of onion, peeled
and chopped rather fine; and four quarts of cold water. First put the
water over the fire with the beef in it, and let it gradually heat;
while it is heating get ready all the other ingredients that I have
spoken of, and add them when the water is hot. Don't add salt for
seasoning until after the soup has been cooking for a little while,
because it would tend to harden the meat. When the soup is boiling, put
in all the other ingredients; and after the soup has cooked for an hour,
season it with salt and pepper. Cook it slowly for about two hours, or
until the vegetables are tender. The length of time will depend somewhat
on the season of the year. You will find that carrots and turnips, like
all vegetables which have woody fibre in them, will cook more quickly
early in the winter while they still have their natural moisture in
them. The later in the winter it grows the drier they get, the harder
the woody fibre is, and the longer it will take to cook them tender. So
you will cook the soup until the vegetables are tender; and then, having
seen that it is palatably seasoned, serve it with all the vegetables in
it. You notice that this is a thick soup, made in an entirely different
way from that which I made this morning. I think some of the ladies are
here who were here this morning. Then we were making clear soup which is
to be served without any vegetables in it. This is a good hearty soup
for every-day use; in fact it is so hearty that you can make the bulk of
a meal using this and bread or potatoes. When all the vegetables are
quite tender then the soup simply is to be served.

Now, while I am preparing the soup, I want to say a little about the
value of soup as a food. This comes properly into our afternoon course
of instruction. Many of the ladies may not have thought of it in
precisely the connection in which I am going to speak of it. Habitually,
Americans do not use soup. Some have grown gradually accustomed to have
soup as a part of their every-day dinner, but as a rule people have it
once or twice a week. I am speaking now of average families. As a matter
of fact, it ought to be used every day, because it is not only a very
easy form in which to obtain nourishment, but you obtain from soup that
which you would not get from any other dish; that is, you get every
particle of the nourishment there is in the ingredients which you put
into the soup. You can make a perfectly nutritious and palatable meal
with soup at about one-half the cost of a meal without soup, because the
soup, if it is savory, will be eaten with a relish; and it will satisfy
the appetite for two reasons; the first I have already spoken
of--because you get every particle of nourishment there is in the
ingredients; and second, because directly you eat it--that is, directly
it reaches the stomach, some of its nutritious liquid properties will
begin to be absorbed at once. They pass directly into the system, by the
process which is known in physiology as _osmosis_--that is, absorption
by the coats of the stomach; so that the liquid part of the food is
actually absorbed and passes into the circulation in less than five
minutes after you have eaten it. A very familiar illustration of that
fact was made by Sir Henry Thompson several years ago, in his
exceedingly valuable article called "Food and Feeding," where he said
that a hungry man eating clear soup for his dinner would feel a sense of
refreshment in less than three minutes; that is, he would feel the
effect of his plate of clear soup almost as soon as he would feel the
stimulus which he would receive from a glass of wine. He would feel
refreshed at once; his sense of hunger, which is the indication that his
system needs food, would be practically appeased within three minutes
from the time he had taken his soup.

Then there is another very important question; and that is the effect of
soups and liquid foods on the appetite for stimulants. I am not a
temperance advocate in the sense in which the word is usually
understood. That is, I neither believe in nor advocate total abstinence;
but I do believe in temperance--in the temperate use of everything; no
matter whether it is drink, or food, or pleasure, in a life of work, so
that I speak solely from the standpoint of an advocate of the moderate
use of everything. The system requires a certain amount of liquid
nourishment. We have to get that in the form of liquid, and many people
take it by using water to excess--drinking quantities of water. On the
other hand, there are some people who never drink more than a glass of
water all day long. They must drink something--some kind of liquid--to
make up the quantity of water that is absolutely required by the system
in the course of twenty-four hours. Some persons take it in the form of
tea and coffee; others drink beer and wine; but a certain amount of
liquid the system must have. Now, you can easily see that you can supply
a part of that liquid in the form of soups and stews. It is not possible
for many people to drink much cold water: it does not seem to agree with
them. The advocates of the latest craze, for hot water, will get their
quantity of liquid, but they will get it in a form that by and by will
make serious trouble for them; because, while under certain conditions
the entire mucous membrane or lining of the digestive tract, warm water
may be desirable, still the excessive use of it is very apt in time to
produces a serious congestion. Now, the fact once admitted that we must
have a certain amount of liquid supplied to the system every day, then
the question comes of giving it in a form that will be the least
injurious to the system. I think I have shown you one or two good
reasons why soup supplies it well. On the score of economy there is no
food which can be as cheaply prepared as soup--that is, no palatable,
enjoyable, nutritious food. It is possible to make this soup, this thick
soup which I am making now, in New York, and here also, I suppose, for
less than ten cents a gallon, buying the materials at retail; and I am
sure a gallon of this soup will go very far towards satisfying one's
hunger. I presume, from what I have seen of the market reports in the
papers, that it can be made here quite as cheaply as it can in New York.

_Question._ Does that make very strong soup--does it give a very good
rich flavor of the meat, with one cupful of meat to a gallon of water?

MISS CORSON. That gives a perfectly nutritious soup. It gives as much
nutriment from the meat as is needed by the system.

_Question._ Wouldn't a bone or two thrown in be a good thing?

MISS CORSON. You can put in bones if you want to. But I am giving you a
recipe for a perfectly nutritious soup, made upon the most economical
principles. The proportion of meat which I use here is all that is
required by the system in connection with the other ingredients. We
Americans have, as a rule, the idea that there is no nutritious food
except meat. We think that we get all our nourishment from meat; and the
other things--the vegetables and bread, and all those other articles of
food that we eat, are what the dressmakers would call "trimmings." We do
not regard them as real nourishing food, when in reality there are some
vegetables which are nearly as nutritious as meat. Take for instance,
lentils; I do not know if you are familiar with them. They are a variety
of vetch or field pea, little flat, dried peas, that grow very
abundantly; in fact, if they are once planted in a field it is almost
impossible to root them out. They have been for ages used in all older
countries, in Egypt, in Asia, all through Europe, especially in Germany.
Within the last ten years they have become known in this country.
Lentils, with the addition of a very little fat in the form of fat meat,
suet drippings or butter, are quite as nutritious as meat; that is, they
sustain strength, and enable people to work just as well as meat. So,
you see, that so far as actual nourishment is concerned, vegetables
approach closely to meat. Next to lentils come peas and beans, dried
peas and beans. I have not graded the different articles of food, but
some day when we have more time I will give you a table of nutritive
values of different articles of food so that you can form some
comparison in your own mind. Remember this, that meat is not the only
nutritious article of food in use, and we only need a certain quantity
of it. For instance, for the purpose of health meat once a day will
answer. It is very nice to have it two or even three times if we want
it, or if we can afford it; but if we have it once a day we answer all
the requirements of health, and in communities where it is not possible
to have an abundant supply of fresh meat, a very small proportion of
salt meat used in connection with the most nutritious vegetables keeps
the health and strength of the really active laborers up to the working
point.


MEAT STEWS.

For a brown stew, use any kind of dark meat. To-day I am going to use
some of the cooked round of beef; but you can use fresh beef; you can
use raw beef, rare roast beef, or any of the dark meats; always use
white meats for white stews. Presently we will make a white stew of
veal; but for a brown stew use dark meats. Cut the meat in pieces about
an inch and a half square, put it over the fire with enough fat of some
kind to keep it from burning; use the fat of the meat, or drippings, or
butter, and brown it as fast as possible. If you make a stew large
enough for four or five people, use about three pounds of beef. As soon
as the meat is brown, sprinkle a heaping tablespoonful of flour over it;
then add enough boiling water to cover the meat, and three teaspoons of
vinegar. The vinegar is used for the purpose of softening the fibres of
the meat and making it tender. You will find that by adding vinegar to
meat in cooking, you can always make it tender. When we come to treat of
steak, I shall explain that. After the vinegar has been used, season the
meat palatably with salt and pepper, cover it, and let it cook very
gently for at least an hour, or until it is tender. To the stew add any
vegetable you wish, or cook it perfectly plain, having only the meat and
the gravy. To-day I am going to use carrots with it. For three pounds of
beef use carrots enough to fill a pint bowl after they are cut in little
slices, or in little quarters. Of course, if you add vegetables of any
kind, carrots, turnips, or potatoes, you want to put them in long
enough before the meat is done to insure their being perfectly cooked.
For instance, carrots take from one to two hours to cook; I shall put
the carrots in directly I make the gravy. Turnips, if they are fresh,
will cook in about half an hour. Potatoes will cook in twenty minutes;
small onions will cook in from half to three-quarters of an hour. The
meat usually needs to cook about two hours. The meat being brown, I
shall put in a tablespoonful of flour, stirring it, and then send it
down to you so that you can see what it is like. The question naturally
would arise about the color of this stew, throwing in raw flour, the
white, uncooked flour. You can see for yourselves what the effect is.

_Question._ Does cold meat cook as long as raw?

MISS CORSON. If you use cold meat, brown it just in the same way, just
exactly as we browned this, first in drippings or butter and then
putting in the flour; only if you use meat which already has been
cooked, it will not take it so long to cook as it does this raw meat.

For a _white stew_, use any kind of white meat--veal, pork, poultry, or
lamb. To-day I shall use veal. To go back to the question which was
debated this morning about washing meat: first, wipe the meat all over
with a wet towel. It is important to have the towel clean. Wet the towel
in cold water and wipe the meat, then cut it in little pieces about two
inches square. The butcher will crack all the bones, and if you wish he
will cut the meat for you. At least he will crack the bones so that the
meat can be easily cut in pieces about two inches square. Put it over
the fire; suppose you have three pounds of meat; put it in cold water
enough to cover it. Let it slowly boil; when it boils, add about a
tablespoonful of salt and a dozen grains of peppercorns, or a small red
pepper, or if you have not either of those seasonings, about half a
saltspoonful of ordinary pepper; and let the meat boil slowly until it
is tender. That will be in from an hour to two hours, according to the
tenderness of the meat in the beginning. When the meat is tender lay a
clean towel in a colander, set over a bowl or an earthen jar, and pour
the meat and broth directly into the colander. Let the broth run through
the towel. If the meat has any particles of scum on it, wipe the pieces
with a wet towel to remove the scum. You can, in making the stew, remove
the scum as you would from clear soup, but in that case you have not
quite so richly flavored a stew. The better way is to wipe off the
little particles after you have taken up the meat. Now you have the meat
cooked quite tender and the broth strained. Then you make the sauce. Any
of the ladies who were at the lesson this morning and saw the white
sauce made, will understand the principle upon which the sauce is made
for the stew. Put a heaping tablespoonful of butter and a heaping
tablespoonful of flour into a saucepan for the quantity of broth which
you would be likely to have from about three pounds of meat; that would
be broth enough to cover it. Stir the butter and flour until they are
smoothly mixed; then begin to add the meat broth gradually until you
have used enough of the broth to make the sauce like thick cream. If you
find that you have not enough broth from the meat, add a little hot
water, to make the sauce or gravy like thick cream; then put the meat
into it. Season it palatably with salt and pepper, remembering that you
already have some seasoning in it. Stir the meat in the saucepan over
the fire until it is hot, and then serve it. That gives you a plain
white stew of meat. You can transform that into a dish called in French
cookery books _blanquette_, or white stew of meat, by adding to it just
before you take it off the fire a tablespoonful of chopped parsley and
the yolk of one egg. You will add the egg by separating the yolk from
the white, putting the yolk in a cup with two or three tablespoonfuls of
gravy from the meat and mix it well; then turn it all among the meat,
stir it and dish it at once. Don't let the stew go back on the fire
after you put in the yolk of egg; it may curdle the egg if the sauce or
the stew boils after the egg is added. So you see you have a plain white
stew, or a stew with the addition of chopped parsley, or chopped parsley
and the yolk of an egg. Do not use the white of the egg.

_Question._ Why is not the fat meat as good as the lean?

MISS CORSON. Do you mean why is it not as nutritious? Lean meat
nourishes muscle and flesh. Fat meat affords heat to the system. That is
the reason why we naturally crave more fat meat in cold weather. It is
not so strengthening; it is heating and in that nutritious. A great deal
of its substance, of course, is wasted in the cooking. That is another
reason why, weight for weight, fat meat is not so nutritious as lean.

_Question._ In making this stew brown or white do you use bones?

MISS CORSON. You can use bones. In making the soup to-day I used cooked
lean meat that was on hand over from the soup this morning. You can use
the breast of any kind of brown meat; you can use the ends of the ribs
of roast beef; you remember the rather fat ends of the ribs of roast
beef? After cooking the beef have these cut up in small pieces; after
you have cooked them in the stew if there is any excess of fat, as there
probably will be, skim that off and put it by to add to any brown stew
or gravy; the fat replaces drippings in that case. That is a very good
way to use ends of ribs of beef. Cold beefsteak makes a nice brown stew,
treated in this same way.

_Question._ Do you skim the stew?

MISS CORSON. No. Not unless you are going to make a perfectly clear soup
need you ever skim; because, as I explained this morning, the scum which
rises on the surface in boiling meat is not dirt, it is albumen and
blood, with the same nutritious properties as the meat itself, and you
do not want to remove them. If the water boils away in cooking soups and
stews always add a little more; it will save time if you add boiling
water, unless as in the case of peas, you add cold water for the purpose
of softening them. You will find, if you are trying to cook dried beans,
that it will be well to add cold water, and boil them gradually.

_Question._ In cooking beans isn't it a good way to let the beans come
to a boil and then pour off the water and put on more cold?

MISS CORSON. That is simply a question of taste. It is not necessary to
do it. If you pour away the first water in which they come to a boil,
you pour away a certain amount of their nourishment, which already has
escaped in the water. Some people say that they like to pour away that
first water, because it carries off the strong taste of the beans. That
is a question for any one to settle individually. The water would not
have the strong taste of the beans if there were not some of the
nourishment of the beans in it. While we are on the subject of beans I
might tell you a good way to cook beans plainly, a favorite way in the
south of France, the beans to be served with roast mutton. Cook them in
just water enough to cover them, after having first washed them, adding
only water enough to keep them covered all the time. They are dried
white beans. Then at the last, when the beans are tender, leave off the
cover of the sauce pan and let the beans cook, so that nearly all the
water is evaporated, and the beans have about them simply water enough
to form a very thick sauce, just enough to moisten them. Then they are
seasoned with salt and pepper. In that way they are served as stewed
beans, with roast mutton or roast lamb.

In regard to the lentils that I was talking to you about, I think you
may be able to learn something more about them from Prof. Porter. He
probably would know. You long ago have made their acquaintance in the
form of the _tares_ that the enemy sowed among the wheat. Lentils are
really a species of tare or vetch. If you do not know about them--if
they are not known in the market--it really would be worth while to make
some inquiry which would lead to the introduction of them; but very
likely if there are German people here, as I suppose there are,--there
are always German people in every thriving city,--they will already have
had them for sale in their special groceries; you can get them in that
way, and they make a very good winter vegetable to use alternately with
others. You cook them either by soaking them over night, or boil them
just as we boiled the peas, until they are tender, and then drain them,
and either heat them, with a little salt and pepper and butter, after
they are drained, or fry them. They are exceedingly nice fried with a
little chopped onion or parsley. If you have a pint bowl full of
lentils, use a tablespoonful of chopped parsley, a tablespoonful of
onion, very finely chopped; put the onion in the frying pan with a
tablespoonful of butter or drippings, and let it brown; then put in the
lentils and chopped parsley, a little salt and pepper, stir them till
you have them hot, and serve them. They are exceedingly good.

PROF. PORTER. I may say that the first cousin of the lentils is well
known among our Minnesota farmers in our wheat fields, and they are such
an intolerable pest that we prefer paying the duties on the German
article and importing them.


PEA SOUP--_Continued_.

     (The pea soap being now about ready to take up, Miss Corson
     continued:)

You know how the flour of the peas settles to the bottom of the soup
tureen or plate, and leaves the top clear? Prevent that by adding to the
soup, just before it is dished, a little paste made of flour and butter.
For four quarts of soup a tablespoonful of flour and a tablespoonful of
butter; mix the flour and butter to a smooth paste just before the soup
is done. After the peas are soft pour them into a fine sieve and rub
them through the sieve with a potato masher; just a stout wire sieve.
After you have rubbed them through the sieve put them back into the soup
kettle with the soup, and mix the flour and butter in with them over the
fire; stir them until they come to a boil, then season palatably with
salt and pepper, and the soup is ready to serve. Remember this is a
perfectly plain soup I am making to-day, without the addition of meat of
any kind; but of course you will vary the flavor of the soup by adding
the bones of ham or other meat, or a very little fried onion. Now, you
can count for yourselves how cheap a soup that is.

_Question._ Can you give us your experience with regard to pea meal for
soup?

MISS CORSON. I have used one form that has been put on the New York
market. It was made of dried green peas. I do not know whether there is
on this market a meal made of the yellow peas. There is a German
preparation which is admirable. In New York it is for sale at the German
stores; but the meal of which I speak, the meal made of dried green
peas, was not at all satisfactory to me. Of course the meal of the green
peas has not the flavor of the split peas. You will find in rubbing the
peas through the sieve that if you moisten them a little once in a while
they will go through more readily.

       *       *       *       *       *

I have left the brown stew with all the fat on. It is a question not
only of taste but of economy whether you leave on the fat in addition to
the first butter in which you browned the meat, a question of economy
and nourishment. If the people you are cooking for have good strong
digestions you do not need to remove the fat. The bread or potatoes
which are eaten with the stew will absorb it and will render it
perfectly digestible; and, of course, as I have already told you, the
fat serves certain purposes in nutrition. If you are cooking for people
having weak digestions then you would take the fat off the stew. The
white stew I am going to finish plain, without any parsley or
egg--simply seasoned with salt and pepper.




LECTURE THIRD.


Our lesson this morning is the clarifying of soup, or the soup stock
that we made yesterday; caramel for coloring soup, gravy and sauces;
baked whitefish, after a very nice Western fashion; beefsteak, broiled
and fried; and baked apple dumplings.

The first thing I prepare will be the whitefish, after a method which I
learned from one of my Cleveland friends, who, by the way, is one of the
nicest cooks I know of. I shall use only a little butter, and tell you
about the wine which the recipe calls for. When the fish is prepared
especially for gentlemen, wine is considered exceedingly nice, but that,
as in all other cookery, is a matter of choice. We to-day will use some
butter, pepper and salt. I will tell you the kind of wine, and the
quantity that is used, when I come to cook the fish. In the winter, of
course, all the fish is frozen. We were speaking of that yesterday, how
to prepare frozen fish. In the first place, thaw it in plenty of cold
water. Put it in a large pan of cold water and let it stay till it is
perfectly thawed. Then cut it from the bone and take off the skin. Now,
please write down the directions, and then watch and see how I do it.
The fish simply has been scaled; to cut it from the bone, make one cut
down to the bone through the middle of the side of the fish, lengthwise;
having made that line, cut round under the head, to the bone; now lay
the knife against the bone of the fish, and turn it until you have the
blade cutting against the bone, holding the knife flat; it will take
that entire piece of the fish off; cut two pieces from one side of the
fish. Now I am going to cut from the other side in the same way, and
then I shall take the skin off. First take the four pieces of fish off
the bone; you will not find this at all difficult to do, ladies; after
you have done it once or twice it will be very easy, and if you have
fish that has not been frozen it will be much more easy to do than if
you have frozen fish, which, of course, will break a little. It is not
possible to keep the pieces entire, cutting from a frozen fish. One of
the ladies asks if this can be done as well if the fish has been dressed
by the fishmonger; that is, if the entrails have been taken out. Yes,
quite as well. This is not dressed simply because it had been sent from
market without being dressed. I did not take the trouble to have it
dressed here, as I am not going to use the bone of the fish. After I
have finished giving you the direction for taking off the skin, I am
going to tell you how you could use the bone of the fish. To cut the
skin off the fish, lay the pieces of fish skin down on the board; then,
holding the knife down straight, cut through the fish until you feel the
skin under the knife; as soon as you feel the skin under the knife,
flatten the knife out so that it lies against the skin; cut away from
you, holding the knife perfectly level, leaving the skin between the
board and the knife. Hold the piece of fish in your fingers; lay it flat
on the board, skin down, keeping hold of the skin all the time. That
takes the skin off, and none of the fish; there is no waste there, and
it certainly is very much easier to eat fish in this shape than it is if
you have the skin and bone on it. Now, I assure you, ladies, if you only
hold the knife flat, you will have no trouble whatever in taking the
skin off. If you slant it you will cut through the skin of the fish, but
if you hold it perfectly flat you will have no trouble. Of course, with
certain kinds of fish there are bones that run transversely from the
spine out through the sides of the fish. You do not take these bones out
by this operation, but you take out the large back bone. It comes out
every time, and I assure you it is a very easy operation.

After you have taken all the skin and bones from the fish, then, for
this special dish, cut it in small slices three inches long and a couple
of inches wide. Use two soup plates, or two dishes of the same size,
deep dishes that you can send to the table. Butter them very thickly,
both of them. Lay the fish in one of the dishes, season the layers with
salt and pepper, and put a very little butter between each layer, and
plenty of butter on the top. Turn the second plate over the first one,
upside down on it. Put the dishes with the fish between them into the
oven to bake for about twenty minutes, or until the fish flakes. You can
tell about that by opening the oven at the end of twenty minutes, and
lifting off the top plate; then you can see whether the fish is done or
not. Now, in the recipe of which I spoke to you first, the addition of
Sauterne wine is made. After the fish is put into the dish, being
seasoned as I have told you, using less butter than you would without
the wine, with half as much butter on the layers, pour on Sauterne
wine,--that is a light, rather acid wine,--just enough to moisten the
fish. In placing the fish into the dish it does not make any difference
which side you put down. You simply want to put the pieces nicely
together so that when you come to help them you can lift each piece out
with a spoon. There is no acid that will take the place of the wine and
give the same taste. The fish is very nice cooked simply with the
butter, pepper and salt. You do not need the wine to make a nice dish,
only wine is used by the lady of whom I speak. That is her special
preparation of the dish. The wine is put in after the fish is in the
dish, just enough wine to moisten it. You will notice that often I will
make dishes that have no wine in them; if I make dishes that require
wine, I of course put it in, saying that you may use the wine or not, as
you please. In this instance I use butter, pepper and salt because it
makes a very nice dish, a very nice plain dish, but it is a distinct
dish, entirely different to the dish cooked with wine; simply two ways
of cooking fish, making two different dishes. For a fish of this
size--which probably weighed nearly three pounds--you may use about a
heaping tablespoonful of butter in all; that is, besides what you put on
the plates. You will butter the plates, and distribute butter throughout
the dish. The oven should be moderately hot, not hot enough to brown
it--hot enough to heat the plates, which are very thick, and to cook the
fish within twenty or twenty-five minutes.

If you wash the board on which the fish is cut, at once, in plenty of
hot water, with soap and a little soda or borax all the odor of the fish
will be removed. Don't let any of the utensils stand with the fish
drying on them, because if you do it will be very much harder to destroy
the odor. And, by the way, ladies, the odor of onions is another thing
that troubles some persons. The odor of onions on boards, knives and
dishes you can do away with entirely by using parsley. If you take a
knife with which you have cut onions, and chop a little parsley with it,
or draw the knife through the root of parsley two or three times, it
entirely destroys the odor of the onion. So that you see you never need
have any trouble in that way in the kitchen.

One of the ladies asks me how to prevent the odor of onions going
through the house when you are cooking them. What makes onions, cabbage
and turnips smell when you are cooking them is the escape of an
exceedingly volatile oil which they all contain; in all of them it has
the same characteristics; it does not begin to escape until they are
tender. The oil does not begin to escape until the vegetables are
tender; if you continue to boil them after that, it will escape. If you
take up cabbage or turnips as soon as they are tender, that is, as soon
as their substance begins to grow tender, you will notice there will be
comparatively little odor; but if you keep on boiling them, according to
the old-fashioned rules, for an hour, two hours, or three hours,--you
know you sometimes boil cabbage all day long,--you will be sure to have
a nice odor through the house. In cutting the onions, of course, if you
bend over them, that same oil rising from them escapes as you cut into
their substance, and will be sure to make you cry; but if you hold them
a little away from you in peeling them, or under water, or if you stand
where there is a draught blowing over your hands, it will blow that oil
away. In eating onions at the table, if you will subsequently eat
parsley dipped in vinegar, you will find that there will be very little
odor of the onion remaining in the breath.

Now to return to our fish. After you have taken the flesh of the fish
off the bone, you still would see a little of the fish remaining, even
if you cut closely. Then draw the fish, and trim the bone; that is, cut
off the head, and the fins, and the tail, and take out the entrails of
the fish; then make a paste of dry mustard, salt, and a dust of Cayenne
pepper. For a bone the size we have here, a long bone like that, use two
heaping tablespoonfuls of mustard, a dust of Cayenne pepper and enough
vinegar, or Worcestershire sauce, to moisten the mustard to make a
paste, which is to be spread over the fishbone. Have the double wire
gridiron very thickly buttered, put the bone into the gridiron, brown it
quickly at a hot fire, and serve it simply as a relish. A sort of
Barmecide feast, but I assure you it is very nice with bread or crackers
and butter. It makes a very nice little relish. I might say, ladies,
that you can treat any kind of bones in this way. Cold roast beef bones
are exceedingly nice. Of course there will be more flesh on the beef
bones than on the fish bones.


PLAIN PASTRY.

Use butter, or lard, or very finely chopped suet. If you can get good
lard it makes nice pastry; by that I mean lard which has a very little
water in it. A good deal of the lard that you buy in the stores has a
large proportion of water in it, and I believe in these days it is apt
to be sophisticated with several articles which are not exactly lard, so
that home-made lard is decidedly the best; that which you try out
yourself. First take the butter, or whatever shortening you
use,--butter, lard, or suet,--and mix it with twice the quantity of
flour. For instance, if you are going to use a pound of flour allow half
a pound of shortening. Take half the shortening and mix it with the
flour, using a knife. Then wet the mixed flour and butter with just
enough cold water to form a paste which you can roll out. If you mix
with a knife or spoon you avoid heating the pastry. After the flour and
the first half of the shortening have been mixed to a paste roll it out,
about half an inch thick, and put the rest of the shortening in flakes
on it. One of the ladies asks about putting flour on the pastry board:
Extra flour, of course, besides the quantity that you put in the pastry.
The only object in washing the butter is to get out any buttermilk that
there may be in it. After putting the butter--the second half of the
butter--over the pastry in rather large pieces, put just a little flour
over it, fold the pastry in such a way that the edge is turned up all
round to inclose the butter; that is about an inch and a half all round.
Fold the pastry together thin, and roll it out, and fold it several
times. Remember that the oftener you fold it and roll it the more flakes
you will have in the cooked pastry. Take care to use flour enough to
keep it from sticking to the board or the roller. You will remember the
pastry is not salted and unless the shortening has enough salt in it to
salt the flour, you must add it. Good lard makes a more tender pastry
than butter.

_Question._ Do you ever mix them?

MISS CORSON. Yes, you can mix them if you like, using part lard and part
butter. To roll out the pastry, roll it in a rather long strip, that is,
a strip about three times as long as it is wide. That enables you then
to fold it and keep it in a nice shape. It does not make any difference
whether you roll it from you or towards you. As many times as you roll
and fold it you give it three additional layers. Now I might keep on
rolling and folding indefinitely, and I simply should make the pastry
have more layers than this has, but I think you thoroughly understand
that, so that I will roll it out, and make our dumplings now. Only
remember that the more times you roll it the more folds you make, the
more layers you have in the pastry. Keep it as cool as possible all the
time. If you roll and fold it three times remember that you have nine
layers of butter and pastry. You can roll it out more than that if you
want to. Puff paste, which is rolled and folded in this way, has what is
called nine turns. Rolling and folding it three times makes a turn. The
object of using marble or stone pastry slabs is to keep the pastry
cool. If you make more pastry than you want to use, wrap it in a
floured towel and put it in a very cool place; then when you are ready
to use it roll and fold it two or three times, and it will be very much
better than when first made. I am going to roll up a strip of the pastry
that I cut off the edge in such a way that you will see how the layers
are formed, and you can pass it about. One of the ladies has asked me
about heating the flour. It is not necessary to heat the flour for
pastry, on the contrary, it would rather tend to spoil it. You want to
keep it as cool as possible. But in the winter when you are going to
make bread, if you heat the flour it facilitates the rising of the
bread; there you need the heat.


BAKED APPLE DUMPLINGS.

For apple dumplings, after the pastry is made, cut it in pieces about
four inches square and about a quarter of an inch thick. One of the
ladies asks about sifting the flour. That is necessary, always. For
apple dumplings, peel the apples and take out the cores, leaving the
apples as whole as possible. The corer that I have here is nothing but a
round tin cylinder. Use any apple corer that will take the core out
without breaking the apple. For this purpose Greening apples are the
nicest. These are table apples. Put an apple on each piece of pastry. In
the core of the apple put as much sugar as it will hold, and a very
small pinch of powdered cinnamon--about a quarter of a saltspoonful of
powdered cinnamon, or any powdered spice you prefer. Then fold the
corners of the square pieces of pastry up over the apple so that they
will lap over on the top of the apple. Fasten the corners by moistening
them a little with cold water. After the dumplings are all made, brush
them over the top with water, or with melted butter, or with egg,
beaten; the entire egg, or if you have the white or the yolk, you can
beat that up; of course if you use just the yolk you make them a little
yellower. If you use the yolk of an egg, beat it with a little water.
Ladies are asking me about that little rolling pin. It is like that
little knife, it is bewitched, but the magic consists simply in keeping
the rolling pin perfectly smooth, and the knife sharp. That is made of
hard wood, and is polished so that it is perfectly smooth, and of course
I keep it so by not having it soaked in water. Instead of putting water
and soap on to clean it, it simply will be wiped with a wet cloth, and
then with a dry one. The thousand dents it has in it it has got by
travel; it has been knocked around in my traveling trunk for the last
five years. The dents did not get in it by using it. It may be made of
any hard wood. One of the ladies asks me why I leave the corners of the
dumpling open. I could pat the crust around and bring it right up close
to the apple, but it would not be so light in the first place. The crust
will hold together, it will not break apart in baking, and you leave the
ends nice and light; and it makes a nicer-looking dumpling. The idea
seems to be that if I should close up the corners the juice of the
apples would stay in. It won't boil out much, anyway.

Now, ladies, I am going to take a little of the soup stock that we made
yesterday out in a cup and pass it, so you can see what it looks like
before it is clarified. That is the soup stock or broth that we made
yesterday. You will remember where your recipe ended yesterday, about
the soup stock being poured into a bowl and allowed to cool. That is the
condition in which the stock is now. After a little, I am going to tell
you about the clarifying of it, but now I want to finish telling you
about dumplings, so you will have all your dumpling recipes in one
place.

The question was asked, I believe, about the temperature of the oven.
About the same as for the fish--a moderate oven, so you can put your
hand in and count, say fifteen, quickly. It takes from half an hour to
three-quarters to bake the dumplings. Be careful not to brown them. If
the pastry seems to be browning before the apples get done,--and
something will depend upon the kind of apples you use,--cover the pastry
with a buttered paper. The object of the egg on the dumplings is to make
them a little glossy. Use either butter, or egg, or water for brushing
over the tops.


STEAMED APPLE DUMPLINGS.

For steamed dumplings usually a suet crust is used. You could use this
crust if you wanted to, but it would not be sure to be light. It might
possibly absorb a little of the steam. For suet crust you would use half
a pound of suet chopped very fine, a teaspoonful of salt and a pound of
flour. Mix carefully the flour and suet and salt with enough cold water
to make a pastry just soft enough to roll out. Roll it out about a
quarter of an inch thick, and then cut it in little squares; prepare the
apples just as I prepare them for the baked dumpling; instead of folding
the crust up and leaving the corners open, pat it with your hands so
that you entirely inclose the apple. Just roll the pastry out once and
then inclose the apples in it, and put the dumpling into the steamer;
that is, an ordinary tin steamer; set over a pot of boiling water and
steam the dumplings until they are done. You must decide that by running
a trussing needle or knitting needle through the pastry into the apple.
It may take an hour and a half to steam the dumplings; be sure they are
done.

For another kind of pastry that has been described to me by enthusiastic
gentlemen who used to have mothers, a kind of pastry "that melted in
your mouth;" it is very easy to make that; not a flaky pastry, but a
soft, exceedingly tender pastry that really crumbles. To do that you
simply rub all of the shortening into the flour. Half a pound of
shortening and a pound of flour; put the shortening into the flour with
the salt; rub them with your hands till you have the shortening
thoroughly mixed with the flour. It looks like meal; the ingredients
must be thoroughly mixed, but not melted together; then use just enough
cold water to make the pastry, and roll it out just once, and use it; be
sure to keep it cool.

_Question._ Did you say an hour and a half for steamed dumpling?

MISS CORSON. It will take nearly that, but you must try them; try them
at the end of an hour. For the dumpling you can use one of the sauces I
told you of yesterday morning, white cream sauce, or you can use simply
powdered sugar, or powdered sugar mixed with a little cinnamon. You can
use a hard sauce, which is butter and sugar mixed together in equal
quantities, with any flavoring you like.


FRIED BEEFSTEAK.

That is supposed to be the great abomination of American cooking, so
that we are going now to see whether it can not be nearly as nicely
fried as broiled. It seems a heresy, but it is true, and there are very
many occasions where it is not possible to broil in an ordinary kitchen;
the fire may not be good, or uncovering it may cool the oven. There is a
very important secret in frying beefsteak, or chops, and that is to have
the pan hot before you put the meat into it. It doesn't make any
difference what kind of a pan you use. Use the ordinary iron frying pan,
the old-fashioned spider, or dripping pan, if you wish to; but have the
pan hot; have the pan hot enough to sear the outside of the meat
directly it touches it; after the pan is hot put the beefsteak, or
chops--because they are both cooked in the same way--into the hot pan.
If the meat is entirely lean, if there is not a particle of fat on it,
you may put not more than half a teaspoonful of butter in the pan; run
it quickly over the bottom of the pan. But I never saw meat yet so lean,
unless the fat was all trimmed off, that there was not fat enough to
cook any chop or steak. The portion of fat you will usually find on meat
is about one-third, unless you take the meat from the short loin; that
is called the porterhouse, or tenderloin steak. In that case you have an
excess of fat; there is more than one-third, reckoning in the kidney
fat, or suet. You may cut away some of the fat, unless the butchers have
cut it away. The butcher has already cut it away from this piece, and,
by the way, I notice that Minneapolis butchers cut a very long and thin
steak. Now I would not advise the cooking, broiling or frying of that
thin end. I would rather buy two steaks of that kind and cut off that
and use it for stewing, because it would stew very nicely; broiled it
will be rather tough.

As my frying pan is small I am going to cut the steak short. These
steaks are cut too thin. A beefsteak to be nice should be over an inch
thick--an inch and a half thick. You can easily economise on a thick
steak by simply cutting it in halves, and using only as much of it as
you want at once, because in almost any weather steak will keep at least
over night. Have it too thick rather than too thin. Have it just the
thickness you want and then cut it in two, using part only if you only
need part of it. Trim off the outside skin, the tough skin; scrape the
steak to make sure that there are no particles of bone on it. That bone,
of course, comes in sawing the steak. Cut off the cartilage at the top
of the steak, otherwise the steak may curl up. Have your pan hot enough
to make it sear. Put the steak in and brown it quickly, first on one
side and then on the other. In turning the steak run a knife or fork
under it and lift it. Don't stick a fork into it, because by doing that
you make little holes in the fibre of the steak and so let the juice
escape.

_Question._ Will you pound your steak?

MISS CORSON. No, decidedly not; that lets out the juice. You make little
holes in the steak if you stick a fork into it, and by pounding you let
the juice out. Now, you want to keep all the juice in the steak, all the
juice that you can; so that, in turning the steak simply lift it with a
fork or knife and turn it over; when it is brown on both sides push the
frying pan back toward the back part of the fire, and finish cooking it
until it is done to your taste. After it is brown on one side, turn it
over; and then, after that, you can turn it once or twice; the frequent
turning does not make any difference after you have got it browned on
both sides and you can keep all the juice in. Turn it as soon as it is
brown at first; have the hottest kind of a fire; get it brown on the
under side as fast as you can; don't be afraid of burning it; then turn
it over and brown it on the other side; after that you can turn it as
often as you please. Some people like their steak rare, some medium
rare, and some well done. To test steak, do not cut into it to see if it
is done, but press your finger on it, on the substance of the steak. If
you do that quickly you won't burn your finger. As long as the steak is
very rare the fibre of the meat will be elastic, and directly you take
your finger up the fibre will press up again; there will be no dent
there. When it is medium rare just a little dent will remain from the
pressure, because the fibre is less elastic. When it is well done you
can press on it and make a little hollow that will stay there. Do not
season the meat until after it is done; don't put salt on any meat
before cooking; you draw out the juice by salting it.

Now for the seasoning of the steak. I have already said that to apply
salt to the cut fibre of meat will be sure to draw out the juice, so
that you do not want to season a steak until it is done. When it is done
season it with salt, pepper and butter. The quantities you use depend
upon the taste. That rule applies whether steak is broiled or fried. On
that plate you will see the drippings, all that was in the frying pan.
There is no juice of the meat there; it is simply browned fat. Whatever
juice there was in the meat is still there. Broiled steak is cooked on
precisely the same principle. It is to be put just as near the fire as
you can get it. After the broiled steak is browned on one side and then
on the other, just as fast as you can brown it; don't be afraid of
burning it; you need to watch it; then move it away from the fire, and
let it cook as much as you like. Test it in the same way I told you to
test fried steak. When it is done put it on a hot dish; put butter,
pepper and salt on it, and serve it hot.

_Question._ What do you do when the fat drops in the fire and blazes?

MISS CORSON. Of course it will do that, but that will help brown the
steak. If it is possible to broil under the fire it is very much nicer.
Sometimes the front of the stove is so arranged that you can let it down
and run the gridiron under it; before you begin to broil over the fire
you can get the top of the fire very red and clear by throwing a little
salt upon it; that will help to destroy the odor. If the meat is frozen
you should put it in cold water to thaw before cooking it; you can not
avoid in that case washing the meat. To return to the matter of pounding
steak: If you pound or break the fibre of meat in any way you let the
juice escape; that makes the meat dry.

_Question._ What do you say to the notion that so many have, that
pounding the meat makes it tender?

MISS CORSON. You do nothing but break the fibre and save yourself the
trouble of chewing the steak. To encourage laziness it is a very good
idea. But remember, if you drive the juice out of the steak by pounding
you destroy its nutriment. You need the juice in the steak. Now, there
is a remedy for the toughness of steak, which I can give you, depending
upon whether you like salad oil. If you do not, you ought to learn to,
because it is one of the most nutritious and purest of the fats when it
is perfectly good. Good sweet salad oil is preferable to any animal or
vegetable fat for purposes of nutriment. There is no reason why you
should not use salad oil on the score of health. A great many people
object to it; they do not like the idea; they think it is rather
foreign, and to some people it is distasteful, but they have very strong
memories of childhood and another kind of oil. You know even that kind
of oil in these days does not taste badly. Olive oil, the peanut oil, or
lard oil, when they are fresh and sweet, are very desirable. To soften
the fibre of the meat with vinegar and salad oil put on the platter
about three tablespoonfuls of salad oil, and half a teacupful of vinegar
and a pinch of pepper; no salt. Put these on the platter; then lay the
raw steak on the platter, and let it stand at least an hour; then turn
it over and let it stand another hour. The longer you can let it stand,
if it is in the daytime, turning it over every hour, the tenderer you
will make it. The vinegar makes the fibre of the meat tender, and the
oil keeps it so. That is, the vinegar softens the fibre of the meat and
the oil keeps it soft. If you want to prepare it for over night put it
in the oil and vinegar about 6 o'clock, about supper time, and let it
stand till bed time, then turn it over, and let it stand till morning.
When you come to cook the steak do not wipe the oil and vinegar off;
simply let what will run off, and then lay the meat on the gridiron and
broil it, or fry it; there will be no taste perceptible if the oil is
good.


CARAMEL FOR COLORING SOUP.

A heaping tablespoonful of common brown sugar if you have it; if not,
use any kind of sugar; put it in the frying pan and stir it until it is
dark brown; that is, until it is on the point of burning; see that it
browns evenly. Then put in a tablespoonful of water, either hot or
cold--it does not make any difference; stir that until it is mixed with
the sugar; then another tablespoonful, until you have used about half a
cupful of water. If you should pour the water all in at once the sugar
would simply boil over and burn you. Use about half a cupful of water,
adding it gradually, and stirring until the burnt sugar is dissolved.
That gives you the caramel. Now, while I am making the caramel, I will
describe to you the clarifying of the soup.


CLARIFYING SOUP.

To clarify soup stock: For each quart use the white and shell of one egg
and one tablespoonful of cold water. Put the white and shell of the egg
and the cold water into the bottom of the saucepan, and mix them
together. Then put in the soup stock. Set the saucepan over the fire and
let it boil gradually, stirring it every minute to mix the egg
thoroughly so that it will not cake on the bottom of the pan before it
begins to boil. When you have the stock made quite hot, when it begins
to boil, then you do not need to stir it; but let it boil until the egg
rises to the surface in the form of a thick, white scum, and the soup
underneath looks perfectly clear, like sherry wine. Then strain it. When
the egg is thick and white, as you see this, and the soup is clear
underneath, set a colander in an earthen bowl, put a folded towel,
doubled, in it, pour the soup into the bowl, and let it run through the
colander without squeezing the towel. You see that is a repetition of
the direction I gave you for straining the soup in the first place. The
egg is in the towel. Now, I am going to put some of the soup into a
goblet before coloring it, so that you can see the natural color. A
light straw-color is the proper color for clear soup. You will very
often find clear soup served to you, even at nice hotels, much darker
than that; as dark as what I am going to make now, which is the proper
color for the luncheon soups called _bouillon_. The coloring is a matter
of taste. The clear soup, or _consomme_, is to be served plain like
that, or with the addition of any macaroni paste, or poached eggs, and
then it takes its name from the additional ingredient which goes into
the clear soup. Julienne soup is served with strips of vegetables in it,
as I may tell you in some subsequent lesson.




LECTURE FOURTH.


SLICED APPLE PIE.

Half a pound of shortening to a pound of flour, the shortening to be
rubbed into the flour with the hands until it is so thoroughly mixed
that it seems like meal, but not at all melted or softened; then just
enough cold water to make a pastry which will roll out. Roll out the
pastry and use it at once to line the pie plates. Fill the plates with
sliced apples, or with any fruit or mince meat. To-day I shall use
sliced apples. Sprinkle flour over the pastry, and then roll it out and
line the plates; wet the lower crust to make the upper crust stick to
it. Cut two or three little slits in the upper crust. Take care not to
press the outer edges of the crust together. After the upper crust has
been put on the pie brush it with beaten egg, if you wish it to be
glossy when it is done. Then put it in a moderate oven and bake it for
three-quarters of an hour, until you are very sure that the apple is
done. You can tell that by trying the apple through the little cuts that
you make in the pastry. This morning, in making pastry, you remember
that we rolled and folded it a number of times. I simply roll this out
once, just enough to get it thin enough to use for my pie. First roll
out the pastry, and cut off the cover for the top of the pie. Lay it one
side, and then roll out the rest and use it for the pie, as I have
already directed. Use Greening apples if you can get them. These are
table apples. They are not so good for pies for two or three reasons.
They will not keep their form when they are baked in the pie, and they
may not be perfectly tender. These will break and grow very soft as soon
as they begin to cook.

I might, while I am making our pie, say a little about flour in general
use in the family. As a rule I use what is called pastry flour, best for
pie crusts. Pastry flour has more starch in it than ordinary family
flour, or bread flour. The starch is the interior of the grain. The
family flour is the grain ground entire, only the husk being removed.
From grain ground in that way none of the nutritious elements are
removed. You get a greater proportion of gluten, and some of the mineral
elements of the grain that lie close to the husk; the flour that has an
excess of gluten in it will absorb more water than pastry flour, or
flour composed chiefly of starch, and it will make a tougher dough,
either in the form of pie crust or bread than a flour which has the most
starch in it. It is more nutritious than starchy flour, so that if you
want tender, rather white pastry and bread, you must make up your minds
to sacrifice some of the nutritious elements of the flour. All through
the West the flour which is marketed is made, I think, from the entire
wheat, and that is more thoroughly good, and more nutritious, than the
so-called choice pastry flour. In the West you have a better flour than
we at the East do, if we depend upon the Eastern mills. There are some
very good brands of flour made in New York State, but as a rule they are
not so full of gluten and not so nutritious as the Western flours. Where
flour is made from winter wheat, which lies in the ground all winter
long and gathers more of the mineral elements of the soil than spring
wheat does, the flour is superior.

The pie is now heaped full of sliced apples by using about half a dozen
rather small apples. I suppose you think this is a rather extravagant
way to make a pie, but you do not need to put so many apples in unless
you want to; we want a nice thick pie. This is cinnamon that I am using
for flavoring. Put two heaping tablespoonfuls of sugar on top of the
apples in the pie. Finally brush the top of the pie, either with beaten
egg or with a little sugar and water dissolved, and put it into the oven
to bake.


BREAD MAKING.

Now take your recipe for bread making. Use the compressed yeast which
you buy at the grocery store. For two small loaves of bread or a large
pan of biscuit use a whole cake of yeast. Dissolve the yeast in lukewarm
water, a cupful of lukewarm water. Then add enough flour to form a thick
batter; that will be about a cupful of flour; a thick batter which will
cling to the mixing spoon when you lift the spoon and let a drop fall
on the surface. Cover the bowl with a towel folded several times, or a
thick cloth, so that all the heat can be retained. Then set the bowl
somewhere near the fire, in a place not too hot to bear your hand, and
let it stand for about half an hour, or until the batter is light and
foamy. Keep the bowl covered all the time, and take care that you do not
have it in too hot a place. Don't have it in a place where you can not
bear your hand. After the sponge--as the batter is called--is light and
foaming, mix in another cupful of lukewarm water in which a teaspoonful
of salt is dissolved. After the second cupful of lukewarm water with the
teaspoonful of salt dissolved in it, add enough flour to form a dough
stiff enough to knead with the hands. Knead the dough on the board for
just five minutes. Some good housekeepers would declare that just five
minutes' kneading is flying in the face of Providence in the way of
bread making, but I assure you it is enough. That is, it is enough to
give you bread of a firm, fine grain, perfectly even in its consistency.
It won't be full of large, uneven holes; it will be firm, fine bread.
After you have kneaded the bread five minutes make it up in a little
loaf, or two loaves, as you like; put them in small iron pans,
buttered--black iron bread pans--and set them again by the fire, where
you can bear your hand, and let the little loaves of dough rise until
they are just twice as large as when you put them down. That generally
will take about half an hour if the yeast is good. Brush the loaves over
the top with a little melted butter, or with a teaspoonful of sugar
dissolved in water. Put them in the oven and bake them. The bread is to
be baked until you can run a sharp knife or trussing needle in through
the thickest part of the loaf without the bread sticking in any way. If
the needle or knife comes out clean and bright the bread is done. It may
take from half an hour to an hour to bake the bread. In the stove that I
used the first morning over in the other building I have baked a loaf of
bread, the size of those I am going to show you, in eleven minutes. I
had not realized that bread could be baked thoroughly in so short a
time, but one day in Northampton, Mass., one of my class timed the
baking of the bread. A loaf of bread of that size was baked in eleven
minutes. This same bread dough you can make up in the form of little
rolls. I will make part of it up in rolls. Of course you will understand
that the smaller the piece of dough the more rapidly it will rise the
second time, and the quicker you will be enabled to bake it. So if you
are in a hurry, and want bread baked quickly, you will make it in the
form of little rolls; when I make the rolls I will describe the process.

_Question._ Should bread be baked a long or a short time?

MISS CORSON. The sooner it can be baked the better. There is no special
object to be gained in the baking of bread except to thoroughly cook the
dough. It can not affect the nutriment of the flour very much whether it
takes a longer or a shorter time. The nutriment of the flour might be
slightly wasted if it took a very long time. There is no objection to
baking bread as quickly as it can be done.

Now before I begin to make the pudding I will answer a question that has
been asked about the best yeast and the quick rising of bread. The
object of raising bread is simply to make it digestible by separating
the mass of the dough. If it is firm and solid, that is, if the bread is
heavy, it can not be easily penetrated by the gastric juice, and
consequently is indigestible. So that the most healthy bread is that
which is sufficiently light and porous to allow the gastric juice to
penetrate it easily. Only a mechanical operation is required to make the
bread light. Now that process which will most quickly make the bread
dough light is the most desirable. The longer you take to raise bread,
the more slowly you raise, the more of the nutriment of the flour you
destroy by the process of fermentation that lightens the bread. The
yeast combining with water at a certain temperature causes fermentation,
and from that fermentation carbolic acid gas is evolved, which forces
its way up through the dough and fills it with little bubbles,--in other
words, makes it light. Now the more quickly you can accomplish that
fermentation, or rather lightening of the dough by the formation of
little air cells, the more you will preserve the nutriment of the flour.

The idea prevails to some extent that if ladies use as much yeast as I
have to-day the bread will taste of the yeast. It will not if the yeast
is fresh. If the yeast is old or sour it will taste. But you can use as
much as I have shown you and not have the bread taste after it is done.
You see my object in using a great deal of yeast, proportionately, is to
accomplish the lightening of the dough in a very short time. The best
bread that ever was made or that ever was put on the market was raised
mechanically, without the action of yeast; it was called aerated bread.
It was bread dough lightened by a mechanical process. Carbonic acid gas
was driven into the dough by machinery after the flour was mixed with
salt water; and the bread made was very light and every particle of the
nourishment preserved in that way.

_Question._ Do you ever put sugar in bread?

MISS CORSON. You can put in anything you like. You can put sugar, or
milk, or anything you like in the bread to vary it. I will use nothing
to-day but yeast, flour, water, and salt. This is perfectly plain,
wholesome bread. You put milk in bread and it makes it dry quicker.
Vienna bread, which is made partly of milk, dries more quickly than any
other bread that is made. You can make any variation you like from the
recipe I have given you. I have given you a perfectly plain home-made
bread.

_Question._ Do you ever scald the flour for bread?

MISS CORSON. You can scald the flour if you wish, but you do not
accomplish any special purpose by it. In the winter time, if you heat
the flour before you mix it with yeast and warm water, you increase the
rapidity with which the bread dough rises.

_Question._ How would you make brown bread--ordinary graham bread?

MISS CORSON. Use graham flour; mix your white flour with it, if it is
for graham bread proper; if it is for graham gems use simply graham
flour, water and salt, beaten together. Graham flour, salt and water
beaten together into a form and baked in little buttered tins is the
graham bread pure and simple of the Grahamites. It is not necessary to
knead bread more than once to secure lightness. I have already said that
the longer you prolong the process of bread making the more of the
nourishment of the flour you destroy. You will see when the bread is
baked to-day, if we are fortunate in our baking, that the bread is
perfectly light and of even grain.


BREAD AND APPLE PUDDING.

Stale bread cut in slices or small pieces, fill a pudding dish of medium
size, only three eggs, or if eggs are very dear, four tablespoonfuls of
sugar, and a pint of milk, or enough more milk to saturate the bread. If
the bread is very stale and dry you will have to use a pint and a half
of milk. Three eggs, a pint of milk, four tablespoons of sugar, will
make about a quart of liquid. The custard you pour over the bread; let
the custard soak into the bread; then on the top of the pudding put a
layer of fruit about an inch thick. You may vary the fruit, using sliced
apples, or dried apples which have been soaked over night, and then
stewed tender, dried peaches treated in the same way, or canned peaches,
canned pears--any fruit you like. In the summer, in berry season, use
berries. If the fruit is sour sprinkle it with sugar; then put the
pudding in the oven and bake it. You can use dried fruit with this
pudding, such as raisins or currants, but you put the fruit in through
the pudding instead of on top. If you want to make the pudding
particularly good you will separate the white and yolks of the eggs, mix
the yolks of the eggs with the milk and sugar; save the whites until the
pudding is done; in that case you have to use a little more milk
proportionately. Save the whites until the pudding is done, then beat
them to a stiff froth and add to it three heaping tablespoons of
powdered sugar, very gently mixing them, just as I mixed that light
omelette yesterday. That makes what is called a _meringue_. Put the
_meringue_ over the top of the pudding after it is done; run it through
the oven for about a minute, just long enough to color it slightly, and
then serve the pudding.

If you want the pudding entirely smooth when it is done, you must break
the bread up in the custard before you bake it. My way is simply to
saturate the bread with the custard. You can beat it if you wish. The
pudding will be slightly liquid, like bread pudding, and then the fruit,
if it is juicy, makes it still more liquid, and if you add the
_meringue_, that of itself is a sauce. You will notice, as a rule, that
I make everything as plain as possible, because I wish to demonstrate
that plain dishes cooked with simple and few materials, can be very
good. Perforated tin pie plates bake very nicely. Of course you want to
take care to have the bottom crust thick enough, so that none of the
juice from fruit pies will run through. If the oven is very hot on the
bottom, it will not do to set a pie on the very bottom; a grating must
be used. You will have to use your judgment about baking, watching the
pie, and taking care that it does not get burnt.

(Returning to the bread making, Miss Corson continued:)

Now I am going to put the second cup of water and flour into the dough.
You want to remember, in raising bread, to keep it always at the same
temperature until you get it light. It should be set where you can put
your hand without burning. Keep the bowl, containing the sponge, just
warm. You don't want it anywhere where it will get so hot as to scald
the sponge. You can set the bowl in winter over boiling water to keep
the temperature equal.

(A question was asked in regard to rhubarb pie.)

MISS CORSON. Some ladies put the rhubarb raw into the pies when they
make rhubarb pies, trusting to its cooking while the crust is baking;
others stew it with sugar before they put it in the pies. When it comes
in from the market it should be cut in little pieces about half an inch
long, and the outside, or thin skin, stripped off. It requires a great
deal of sugar, whether you put it into the pie uncooked, or you first
cook it. It makes an exceedingly nice acid pie. Usually the best way is
to stew it first before you put it in the pie. That gives it to you in
the form of a pulp. If you put it raw into the pie, to a certain extent
the form is perfect, that is, it retains its little block-like shape
after it is cooked.

(The bread now being ready to knead, Miss Corson recurred to that
subject.)

I will take for the dough three cups of flour, about three heaping
cupfuls besides the first one. There was an old adage to the effect that
some imaginary substance called "elbow grease" was necessary in kneading
bread. I presume that is another name for force. But there is no special
strength necessary. The bread is kneaded for the purpose of entangling a
little more air in it, and you accomplish that by folding and refolding
it, as I am doing; just using enough flour to keep it from sticking to
your hands. In five minutes you will find that you have a rather smooth,
soft dough, that does not stick to your hands. That is all you want. You
will always find perfectly good yeast in any town, or you can make the
yeast yourself.

_Question._ If you use twice as much flour would you use twice as much
yeast?

MISS CORSON. If you want to raise the bread quickly you can increase the
quantity of yeast in the same proportion that I have given it you here
to-day, until you reach as much as six or seven pounds of flour, and
then you would not need to use proportionately as much yeast. You could
diminish the quantity a little. You see, the object of using plenty of
yeast is to get the bread raised quickly.

_Question._ Doesn't home-made yeast make heartier bread than the other?

MISS CORSON. It makes bread less digestible--it may be heartier in that
sense; the Irishman does not like his potatoes quite done; he thinks
them heartier when they are somewhat indigestible. There could not be
more nutritious or wholesome bread than this quickly raised bread. I
have given you several very good reasons for raising bread as quickly as
possible. Bread raised more slowly is not so nutritious, because some of
the nutritive elements are destroyed in the fermentation which goes on
in the slow process.

To make rolls, take small pieces of dough and make them round, and cut
them nearly through the centre. Put the rolls in a buttered pan; cover
them up with a cloth and let them rise double their original size, where
you can bear your hand. Then bake them. Let the dough always rise until
it is twice its size before baking. I think I have already explained to
you that if you want the bread or roll glossy you can brush it with
sugar and water, or melted butter. These rolls will be set on the top of
the stove to rise, just like bread. As soon as they are twice their size
they go into the oven to bake.

_Question._ Do you ever use any shortening in the rolls?

MISS CORSON. You can use it if you want to. Knead butter in the part of
the dough that is designed for rolls--say a tablespoonful of butter; put
it in when you are doing the five minutes' kneading. There is no reason
why you should not knead in anything that your fancy calls for,
providing it is edible.

Now I will show you how you can prevent the juice running out of fruit
pies. For fruit pies--pies made in the summer time, of juicy
fruits--better use no under crust. Take a deep dish; put the fruit into
the dish, heaping it a little, just as I heaped the apples; wet the
edges of the dish with cold water; lay the pastry on the dish and press
it very slightly, _not on the edge itself_, because that makes the
pastry heavy, but just inside of the edge. As I press it I leave the
edge intact; press the pastry against the dish all the way round; then
with your finger make a little groove all the way round your pie, inside
the edge of the crust; then, with a little knife, cut holes in the
groove. Now, when the juice of the fruit boils out, as it will, instead
of forcing its way out of the edges, the crust will be held upon the wet
dish, and the fruit juice will boil out in the little groove and stay
there. To serve the pie, you cut the upper crust with a sharp knife, and
serve with a spoon, taking a piece of crust and plenty of fruit out on
each plate. No under crust is there. If you have an under crust with
very juicy pie it will be pretty sure to be soggy and heavy. The
English way of serving these pies is a very nice one, and is, as I have
described, with whipped cream. Serve whipped cream with a fruit pie.
Among other nice things that we can not get in this country is
Devonshire cream, which is a cream almost as thick as the hard sauce you
make by mixing powdered sugar and egg together; it is thick enough
almost to cut. We can not get that cream here, but use thick, nice
cream, sweetened or not, as you like. One of my English friends, who
first taught me this way of serving pie, said that at her home they
never sweetened the cream; they simply whipped it to a froth and served
it piled up on a dish by the side of the pie. The pie was taken out on a
plate, and then two or three spoonfuls of this whipped cream laid on the
plate by the side of the pie. You can sweeten it if you like.


MERINGUE.

I will next make a _meringue_. I have already told you to use the whites
of three eggs, three tablespoonfuls of powdered sugar--and that really
must be pulverized very fine and sifted. In beating the eggs you can
always get them light very quickly, if they are reasonably cold in the
beginning, by beating with a change of movement. Beat until your hand
grows tired, and then simply change the way you hold the beater. Don't
stop beating. Of course you can use any kind of an egg-whip you like.
This which I use is made of twisted wire. Only take care to have the egg
beaten entirely stiff. Do not have any liquid egg in the bottom of the
bowl. In the summer time you can cool the egg by putting in a little
pinch of salt if it does not beat stiff at once. I would not advise
using an egg that had the least odor about it. As soon as the custard in
the pudding is done we are going to take the pudding out of the oven,
and put the _meringue_ on the top, whether the apples are done or not.
It does not do any harm to stop beating for awhile. Mix this, using a
cutting motion, not a stirring motion. Mix until the sugar and egg are
smoothly blended, and the _meringue_ is ready to use.




LECTURE FIFTH.


Our lesson this morning is cream of salmon; shoulder of lamb, boned and
roasted; force meat or stuffing for roast meats; potatoes, boiled and
baked; and cheese crusts. I shall begin with the lamb or mutton.

Remove the bone first, then stuff and bake the meat, as I have no
facilities for roasting with this stove; but I will have something to
say about the process of roasting in the course of the lesson. A great
many of the ladies think that the shoulder or fore quarters of meat is
not so desirable a piece for use as the loin or hind quarter, but that
is a mistake. In the first place the proportion of bone in the fore
quarter is very much less than in the hind quarter. In one lesson that I
gave, about a week ago, at Cleveland, I had a butcher remove all the
bones from a fore quarter weighing between five and six pounds, and then
weighed the bones: They weighed a pound and a quarter. I also had him
remove the bones from the hind quarters and weighed them, and they
weighed more. The meat of the fore quarter is sweeter, and quite as
nutritious as the meat of the hind quarter, and the fore quarter is
always cheaper. So that, you see, on the score of flavor and economy,
the fore quarter is more desirable for use than the hind quarter. In
England, where mutton is always in perfection, it is the fore quarter or
shoulder of mutton that is served to guests, and the hind quarter is the
one that is used for the family dinner.

To make the dish which I am going to prepare this morning, I have had
the whole quarter brought in so that I can show you how the shoulder
should be cut off. Simply with a large piece of the outside skin
attached. Usually the butcher might cut the shoulder square off close,
but I want this large piece of skin for stuffing. There is a natural
division between the shoulder and the ribs, so that the shoulder comes
off with perfect ease. If you buy an entire fore quarter like that you
will have the butcher cut off the shoulder for roasting or baking, then
let him cut the neck in rather small pieces for stews or mutton broth.
What is called the rack or ribs would be cut into chops for broiling or
frying, and the breast would be cut off entire to be stewed or roasted
or baked. A very nice way to prepare the breast is to have the bones all
taken out, spread a layer of nice force meat or stuffing over it, roll
it up, and tie it. Then it can be baked, or roasted, or stewed. Another
nice way to cook the breast is to boil it until it is tender enough to
enable you to pull the bones out without any difficulty; then take out
all the bones, put it on a platter, set another platter on top of it
with a heavy weight on the top platter, and press it until it is cold.
Then cut it in rather small pieces, about two or three inches square,
and bread and fry it. The process of breading and frying is accomplished
in this way. You have cracker crumbs--cracker crumbs rolled and
sifted--or bread crumbs, stale bread, dried in the oven and rolled and
sifted, in a large dish. In another dish beat a couple of eggs until
they are liquid. It does not need to be frothy, but simply to have the
substance of the egg well broken; then dip the little pieces of boiled
lamb, first in the cracker dust, then in the beaten egg, then again in
the cracker dust. That is called breading. To fry properly, so that you
have no grease, you want the frying kettle half full of fat. You don't
want a little fat in a frying pan, but a frying kettle like that which
you use in frying doughnuts. Put the kettle over the fire and let the
fat get hot, that is, let it get so hot that it begins to smoke. When
the fat begins to smoke you plunge whatever article you wish to fry into
it. If you take the precaution to do that, have plenty of fat and let it
get smoking hot and then fry in it, you will never have anything greasy.
The action of the hot fat at once so carbonizes the surface of what you
wish to fry, and prevents the soaking of the fat. Fry whatever article
you are treating until it is a light brown, then take it out of the fat
with a skimmer, and lay it on brown paper for a moment--coarse brown
paper--and that will absorb the very little fat on the surface. It will
be perfectly free from grease. You can season before you bread an
article, or you can season the bread crumbs or cracker dust which you
use in breading, just as you like. Or, after the article is fried you
can season it with salt and pepper. Some things are seasoned after the
frying--for instance, Saratoga potatoes--they are always salted after
frying. You can make bread crumbs very fine by using a fine sieve and
sifting. If you have cracker meal already prepared you will see that it
is as fine as Indian meal; it is sold in the grocery stores and at the
cracker factories, and it is cheaper to buy cracker dust or cracker meal
than it is to make it at home, if you buy the whole crackers, because,
of course the manufacturers can afford to use their broken
crackers--they are all perfectly good--in making cracker meal and sell
that very much cheaper than they can sell the whole crackers. The
question of the digestibility of fried articles of food is very often
raised. You understand that the hard fried surface is less digestible
than any soft surface, and many fried articles are indigestible because
of the quantity of grease they contain. If you fry in the way I have
told you, you will not have that excess of grease.

To take the bone from the shoulder, first cut from the inside and take
out the shoulder blade, cutting from the inside, avoiding as far as
possible cutting through the skin on the outside. The butcher will
always do this for you probably, if you tell him about what you want
done. First, the shoulder blade is taken out, then the bone which
follows down along the leg. After the shoulder blade is taken out put it
into a kettle of water, over the fire, and boil it for awhile until you
can scrape all the meat off of it. You will have to use it in finishing
the dish. After taking out the shoulder blade the cutting must all be
done from the inside. There will be two or three places where you may
possibly cut through the skin, where it is drawn very close over the
bone, but cut as little as possible. When the meat is freshly killed
before the skin is dried, you may not always cut through there, but
where the skin is dried fast to the bone you will have to. This may seem
a slight waste of time, but this dish is desirable for several reasons.
In the first place, the bone being entirely taken out you can carve it
without any waste whatever and with a great deal of ease. In the next
place it gives you a very ornamental dish. In fact, I am going to show
you how to make a duck out of it. And as I say, if you get the butcher
to do it, it will not make any difference to you if it does take time.

Always in sewing meat or poultry, ladies, take very large stitches, not
with fine thread. Use cord, so that you can see where the threads are
when the meat is done. Any kind of a large needle will answer for
sewing, large enough to carry your cord. Always leave long ends too.

To stuff the meat, season it nicely with pepper and salt and any herb
that you are going to use in making stuffing. Sage, of course, would be
very good with fat meat; put onion in the stuffing to make it imitate
duck. For a force meat of bread, a teaspoonful of chopped onion; fry it
in a tablespoonful of butter until it is light brown. While the onion is
frying soak a cupful of stale bread in cold water until it is soft, then
squeeze out the water. Put the soaked bread with the fried onion, add a
teaspoonful of salt, a teaspoonful of any herb that you decide for
seasoning, any dried sweet herb, half a saltspoonful of pepper, and stir
all these ingredients over the fire until they are scalding hot. Use
that force meat for stuffing any kind of meat or poultry. Of course
there are a great many ways of making force meats; this is only one, and
a very simple one. Another good stuffing for duck or for this dish, if
you wish it more closely to imitate duck, would be to increase the
quantity of onion--use much more onion, half a cupful of onion, or even
more when you want to make onion stuffing. Another way is to use dry
bread without cooking, a chopped onion, herbs, butter; some ladies like
to put an egg in stuffing. There are a great many different methods of
making it. Cold, chopped meat is very nice added to stuffing or
dressing.

After the shoulder is stuffed thus, run a needle entirely round the edge
in a large, over-hand stitch, so that you can draw it up like a purse;
stitches at least an inch and a half long. That draws the edge up. Then
take two or three stitches in such a way as to hold the stuffing in.
Remember always to leave long ends in tying the cord used in sewing.
Then curl the leg up like the neck of a duck and fasten with a cord.
After it is prepared like that it is to be put into a pan in the oven,
or before a hot fire, and browned quickly on the outside. It may be
seasoned after it is browned. There will be a little drippings in the
pan; baste it with the drippings; bake it or roast it, allowing, if you
want it well done, about twenty minutes to the pound. A shoulder like
that will weigh about two pounds and a half or three pounds. It will do
in an hour's time in a pretty quick oven; in an hour and a half in a
moderate one. Use no water in the baking pan, because water never can
get as hot as the fat outside of the meat. The temperature of the hot
fat is higher than the temperature of hot water, and the result of
putting water around meat in a baking pan is to draw out the juice. The
object is to keep all the juice in the meat. You will always find that
there will be drippings enough from any ordinary cut of meat for the
purpose of basting. If you have an absolutely lean piece of meat pour
about a couple of tablespoonfuls of drippings, or butter, in the baking
pan, but no water, and use the drippings for basting. A nice gravy is
very easily made from the drippings in the pan. I will tell you about
that later. If the meat appears to be baking too quickly, if there is
any danger of its burning, put a sheet of buttered paper over it. Baste
the meat every fifteen or twenty minutes. You can drench it with flour,
just before basting, if you want to. That gives it a rough surface. The
flour browns with the fat. If you are basting with water of course the
flour would not brown so quickly. I think I have given you good reasons
for not basting it with water.


CREAM OF SALMON.

A cupful of boiled salmon separated from the skin and bone and rubbed
through a sieve with a potato masher, mixed with a quart of cream soup,
gives you cream of salmon. Any of the ladies who have seen cream sauce
made will understand the making of the cream soup. Put a slice of salmon
that will make a cupful, over the fire in enough boiling water to cover
it, with a heaping tablespoonful of salt, and boil it until the flakes
separate. That will be perhaps ten minutes. Watch it a little. When the
flakes separate drain it, take away the skin and bones and put it into a
fine colander or stout wire sieve, and rub it through with a potato
masher.

_Question._ Do you use canned salmon?

MISS CORSON. Yes, you can use canned salmon. That is already cooked, and
you simply would rub it through the sieve. The fresh salmon is to be
boiled in salted water. If you use canned salmon you do not need to boil
it. After the salmon is rubbed through the sieve it is called _puree_ or
pulp of salmon.

Now to make a quart of cream soup: For each quart of soup put in the
sauce pan a heaping tablespoonful of butter, a heaping tablespoonful of
flour; put them over the fire and stir them until they are quite
smooth. Then begin to add hot milk, half a cupful at a time, stirring
each half cupful smoothly with the butter and flour before you add any
more, till you have added a quart, or if milk is scarce a pint of milk
and a pint of water. If you haven't any milk at all, a quart of water.
That gives you a white soup, if you add simply water; if you add milk
it is called cream soup. If you are very fortunate and have lots of
cream, in place of some of the milk, use cream, and then you will have
genuine cream soup. After the milk or water is all added, then season
the soup palatably with salt and pepper--white pepper. I have told you
about white pepper. It is to be had at all the grocery stores; it costs
no more than black pepper and is very much nicer for any white soup or
white sauce. Salt and pepper to taste, and a very little grated
nutmeg; a quarter of a saltspoonful, a little pinch of grated nutmeg.
After the soup is seasoned stir in the salmon. I have told you already
how to prepare the salmon. Stir the soup constantly until it boils for
a couple of minutes. By that time you will find that the salmon is
stirred smoothly all through it. Then it will be ready to serve, and it
is very good. You can use any other kind of fish in the same way, and
your soup will take its name from the fish that you use. Halibut or
codfish, trout or any fish. Only remember if you want the soup to be
white you must use the white part of the fish. For instance, if you had
a large dark fish you would want to take off the brown parts and use
only the white parts. Otherwise the brown parts of the fish will color
the soup. You can use cream soup as the basis for vegetable soups that
are very nice. Prepare the vegetables in the same way; boil them, and
rub them through a sieve with a potato masher. Then stir them into the
cream soup. Use asparagus, celery, cucumbers, green peas, string beans,
Jerusalem artichokes,--those little root artichokes,--any vegetable, in
fact, varying the quantity of vegetable in this way. You will find that
some vegetables will give a much more decided flavor than others. For
instance, celery has a very strong flavor, and cucumbers have rather a
decided flavor. You want to use enough vegetables to flavor the soup,
if it is a white vegetable. If it is a vegetable that has a decided
color like carrots, for instance, or beets,--by the way, beets make a
delicious soup, and a very pretty one is made with spinach,--you want
to use enough to color the soup. The beets, boiled so that all the
color is preserved, and then rubbed through a sieve, make a very pretty
soup. One of our New York pupils calls it a "pink velvet soup." Spinach
makes a very nice green soup if it is properly boiled. We shall try to
get some spinach for one of the lessons. We have _puree_ of spinach on
our list, and if we can get any spinach I will show you how to boil it
so as to keep its color.


BOILED POTATOES.

The boiling of potatoes is a very simple operation, but there is a good
deal of talking to be done in connection with it. It does not make any
difference whether you use hot water or cold in boiling potatoes. What
you want to watch is the stage at which you take the potatoes out of the
water. That is what determines whether they are to be mealy or not. The
cause of the potatoes being mealy is the rupture of the starch cells
and the escape of the steam just at the right moment, just when the
potatoes are tender; and if you leave them in the water after they are
tender, then the membrane of the starch cells being broken permits the
water to penetrate; even if the skins are not cut or broken, the
moisture in the starch cells themselves will condense and make the
potato heavy, so that you want to give the steam a chance to escape as
soon as the potatoes are tender. If you will do that you are sure of
mealy potatoes, provided the potatoes are ripe. Unripe potatoes, or new
potatoes, or sprouted or frosted potatoes, you cannot well make mealy,
because the starch cells in the new potatoes are not fully matured, in
the old sprouted potatoes they are disorganized, especially as the
little sprouts take up the nutritive properties which enable them to
grow. But if you use ripe potatoes, before they are beginning to sprout,
and pour the water off of them when they are tender and allow the steam
to escape, you will be sure to have the potatoes mealy, unless they are
watery potatoes; the ordinary market potatoes will be sure to be mealy.
Now you can insure the escape of the steam by draining the potatoes and
covering them with a towel folded several times; that is, draining off
all the water as soon as the potatoes are tender enough to enable you to
run a fork through them. Do not wait until they begin to break apart,
because by that time the starch cells are being broken up, and the water
will have begun to penetrate to the interior of the potato.

After boiling the potatoes, either in cold or hot water, until they are
tender, drain them and put a folded towel over them in the sauce pan.
Set the sauce pan on the back part of the stove where the potatoes can
not burn, or put it up on a brick on the back part of the stove. The
potatoes may be peeled or not, as you choose; if you peel the potatoes
in the most careful way, that is, cutting the thinnest possible skin
off, you will waste at least an ounce in every pound. A very good way to
peel potatoes is to take off just a little rim of the skin all around
them and boil them; then if you want to peel them before they go to the
table, it will be easy to strip off the two pieces of skin remaining. In
order to save time I shall put the potatoes into boiling water enough to
cover them, with a tablespoonful of salt. Take about a quart of water
and a tablespoonful of salt. I have already said that as soon as the
potatoes are tender enough to pierce with a fork, not when they are
beginning to break, and they are drained, cover them with a cloth and
keep them hot as long as you like. In about three or four minutes after
they have been covered with the cloth they will begin to grow mealy, as
the steam escapes; and you can keep them hot and mealy for three or four
hours. It makes very little difference with potatoes, although with some
kinds of vegetables it makes a decided difference, whether you boil them
in hard or soft water. But as a rule soft water is best for boiling
vegetables. You can always soften the water by putting a very little
carbonate of soda in it, to counteract the extreme hardness of the
water, which is caused by lime or mineral elements. The hardness of
water slightly hardens the surface of vegetables, but it has an entirely
different action on meats. It slightly hardens the surface--not enough
to make the vegetable tough, by any means, but enough to retain all the
juices and all the flavors. Do not have the potatoes tightly covered
after they are cooked, because the steam will condense on the inside of
the cover and fall back on the potatoes, thus making them watery. In
serving potatoes on the table after they are cooked, do not put a cover
on the dish; put a folded napkin over the potatoes. Do not put the dish
cover on--it will have the same effect that it would have if you put the
cover on the pot. The steam arising would condense, and fall back on the
potatoes in the form of moisture, and make the potatoes watery.

In baking potatoes, the same general principles apply. That is, at the
moment when the potatoes are tender--and that of course depends upon the
oven in which you bake them--the starch cells are ruptured and the
moisture is at the point of escaping if you give it vent by slightly
breaking the potato, then the potatoes will keep mealy for a little
while. But baked potatoes deteriorate every moment they stand after they
are tender. You should serve baked potatoes just the moment they are
done, if you want them to be perfect. If you wrap them up in a napkin it
keeps in the steam. The longer they stand, the more of the hard skin
forms on them, and if you let them stand for half an hour or more you
find the skin sometimes a sixteenth of an inch thick. You can take a
little slice off the end without breaking them, to permit the escape of
the steam. But serve them just as quick as you can. In sending them to
the table do not put the dish cover on them. Throw a napkin over them to
keep the heat in. I have found that in baking potatoes that the hotter
the oven the better the potatoes would be; that is, the more quickly
they would be baked. I have been able to bake them sometimes in twenty
minutes.

To soak potatoes in cold water restores a little of their moisture that
may have been lost by the natural evaporation. For instance, late in the
winter you will find potatoes slightly shriveled. That is caused by the
escape of the moisture. If you had weighed them in the fall, and weighed
them again at that time you would find they weighed less. To soak them
for an hour or more before you cook them is to restore that wasted water
and to increase the substance of the potato. There is very little
nutriment lost in the waste of the moisture; it is only the bulk of the
potato. You do not need to salt the water in which the potatoes are
soaked. The only effect of salting water would be to make it colder. In
soaking green vegetables it is well to salt the water, because if there
are any insects in the vegetables they are killed by the action of the
salt. In lettuce, or cabbage, or cauliflower, there are insects that
hide away among the leaves, and salt kills them. In regard to the
soaking of the green vegetables, of course, directly the insects are
dead they naturally fall of their own weight from among the leaves. But
if the leaves are closely packed, as sometimes they are in cabbage or
lettuce; you want to hold the vegetable by the root and turn it up and
with your hands separate the leaves without tearing; if lettuce is used,
take care not to tear them; if cauliflower is being washed, take hold of
the root and shake it well through the water, so that the motion will
dislodge the little creatures.


CHEESE CRUSTS.

For cheese crusts use bread that is a day or two old, baker's bread or
home-made bread; baker's bread is the best for toast of all kinds, and
this is a sort of toast. Cut the bread in even slices, rather small,
cutting off the crusts. There is no waste in doing that, for I have
already told you how to use up pieces of stale bread by making them into
crumbs. Grate some cheese so that you have a tablespoonful of cheese for
each little slice of bread. On each of the little pieces of bread put a
tablespoonful of the grated cheese, a very little dust of pepper and
salt and a small piece of butter not larger than a white dried bean. Put
the pieces of bread in a pan, set the pan in a rather quick oven, and
just brown the cheese crusts. If the oven is in a good condition it will
toast the bread and brown the cheese in about ten minutes, or even
less; they are very good, those little cheese crusts. You can use them
either hot or cold. They are a very nice supper dish. They are very good
with salad at dinner, with any green salad. Of course, if you serve them
hot the cheese is a little more tender. Any kind of cheese will answer
for making the crusts. I think that the ordinary American factory cheese
is about as good as any other cheese. You do not want a rich expensive
cheese for cheese crusts.

(At this point the stuffed shoulder of mutton was brought forth, done,
the fan-shaped shoulder blade being stuck in to represent the tail of
the duck, which the whole dish strongly resembled.)


GRAVY FOR MEAT.

There are about two tablespoonfuls of drippings in the pan. I am going
to put a heaping tablespoonful of flour with it and stir until it is
brown; then I am going to stir in gradually about a pint of boiling
water, and season it with salt and pepper, and then I will send it down
and show it to you. Make gravy in this way for any baked meat.




LECTURE SIXTH.


Our first dish this afternoon, ladies, will be roast chicken. The lesson
will include fish and poultry. First, to choose a tender chicken,
examine the tip end of the breastbone--the lower end of the breast bone,
to see if it is soft; if it bends without breaking under pressure; in
other words, if the cartilage has not hardened into bone, you may be
sure that the chicken is young, and consequently probably tender. The
market people have a favorite way of showing you that the chicken is
tender by taking hold of the wing and giving the joint a twist. They
say, "You see how tender it is!" But that is no test except of strength.
But there is no ingenuity which can simulate that soft cartilage on the
end of the breast bone. That is always a sure test. After choosing the
chicken--of course now I am speaking of dressed chicken, or chickens
that are killed--after choosing the chicken, have it carefully picked
and singed; then, if it is undrawn, wipe it with a wet towel, and
proceed to draw it carefully without breaking the intestines. If it is
drawn already the chances are that it will be imperfectly drawn and you
will have to wash it. There is the disadvantage of having poultry drawn
before it goes to the market, because where people draw poultry in large
quantities they are very apt to do it carelessly. In that case it is
necessary to wash it, but if you draw it carefully yourself you will not
have to do that. By washing, you of course take away the flavor, as I
told you the other day, because you lose more or less of the blood.

Cut the skin of the back of the neck and take out the crop, then out off
the neck close to the body, that leaves the skin so that you can draw it
up and fasten it back. If this chicken was not already cut for drawing I
should cut it at one side under one of the legs, so that when I came to
sew it up and dress it I could hide the cut. This chicken has been drawn
carefully and does not seem to need washing. The liver and gizzard have
been laid back inside. The entrails are all taken away. You can always
tell by looking at the chicken whether the entrails are broken and
whether it needs washing. After you have drawn the chicken very
carefully separate the gall from the liver. The gall is that little
greenish bag that lies on one side of the liver; and you want to cut it
off without breaking, because if you break it it will make bitter
everything that it touches. Save whatever fat there is about the
entrails, and put it in the baking pan with the chicken. The gizzard has
been cut open from one side and the inside bag which contains gravel and
straw taken out. But a very much easier way to dress the gizzard instead
of opening it, is to cut away the bluish skin which lies on the outside,
on both sides, without opening the gizzard at all, and cut out that
piece of flesh. That is the only valuable portion of the gizzard; if you
dress the gizzard in this way when it is not already opened you save
yourself a great deal of trouble, for it is a very hard matter to open a
gizzard like that and take away the bag which contains the gravel,
especially if the poultry has been frozen, as the bag is apt to break
and let out the gravel. Use the gizzard and liver for making gravy, and
the neck also. Cut out the oil sac or bag which lies at the back of the
tail. Then the chicken is ready for stuffing. In cutting off the feet
cut them below the joint, not just at the joint. If you cut them just at
the joint the skin and flesh will draw up in cooking. But if you cut
them just below the joint you will find that they do not draw up. After
cutting off the feet scrape the skin all round to make sure that there
are no bits of feather or anything of that sort, and wipe it with a wet
towel and you have the chicken in readiness to stuff.

Stuff it with any force meat that you like. You remember this morning
that we made force meat by chopping a teaspoonful of onion and frying it
in a tablespoonful of butter, then putting in with the fried onion a
cupful of stale bread soaked in cold water, seasoning with salt and
pepper and sweet herbs. I said also that you could add chopped meat,
cold meat or eggs, or to make any desired addition to the force meat in
the way of seasoning. A little grated cheese in stuffing is very nice.
You scarcely will realize what the seasoning is. I will use a little
grated cheese this afternoon to make a force meat--very like what I made
this morning, except in addition to the chopped onion, fried in a
tablespoonful of butter, seasoned with salt and pepper, I shall put in
half a cupful of grated cheese. You may like to know my way of chopping
onion. In the first place, I make a lot of little cuts in one direction
as far down as I think I shall need in order to get my teaspoonful; then
I make little cuts in the other direction, and then by slicing it across
you get your chopped onion. A very nice addition to force meat is
chestnuts, either our ordinary American chestnut, or French or Italian
chestnuts. These are quite large. I presume they are for sale at the
fruit stores here. Our ordinary American chestnut is very good. Choose
rather large chestnuts and either roast or boil them; take off the husks
and skins and thus use them to stuff the chicken with, either simply
using the chestnuts seasoned with salt, pepper and butter, or if you
have boiled or roasted and skinned them, mix them with bread and
seasoning. Then, after having prepared the force meat, you put it into
the chicken, sew it up and truss it into shape. I will show you directly
how to do that so as to keep the chicken plump, and so that it does not,
in roasting, spread apart. I shall sew it with a trussing needle and a
cord, or you might accomplish the same purpose, by using skewers,
putting the skewers just where I put the cords. In sewing up a chicken
after it is stuffed, remember what I said this morning; take large
stitches with coarse cord so that you can easily see where to take the
threads out when the chicken is done. After the chicken is trussed, if
you are going to bake it, put it into a pan without any water, for the
same reason that I gave you this morning. The water will soak it, half
simmer it; you do not need water to keep it from burning, because a
little drippings will soon come from the chicken; brown it and then
dredge it with flour, and baste it every fifteen minutes or so. Bake it
until it is tender and nicely brown; the time of course depends upon the
heat of the oven. Truss the chicken first, pushing the legs as far up as
you can towards the breast, and run the trussing needle, which is simply
a long needle, through so as to hold the legs fast. Then either bend the
wings back in turning them, or simply fold them together and secure them
with the same string. By drawing the string tight, you keep the bird
plump; keep it drawn together, and when the bird is done all you have to
do is to take these two ends of string in one hand, make one cut and
pull the string out.

The liver, the gizzard, the heart, the neck and the feet, use in making
gravy. Of course the gizzard, liver and heart are all right as they are
now prepared. If you wish to add the feet, you will scald them and
scrape off the skin. Then cut off the ends of the claws, and you have
the feet perfectly clean; put them with the gizzard, liver and heart to
boil as the basis of your gravy. The French people always save all the
feet of all kinds of poultry. They prepare them in this way and put them
into soups; sometimes they cook them till the bones grow gelatinous,
till they are very soft and tender; they dress them with sauce and serve
them as what they call an _entree_ or side dish. They make a dish which
is more delicate than pigs' feet. Of course in a large kitchen where a
great deal of poultry is used it is possible to make a very good-sized
dish of them.


FRICASSEED CHICKEN.

I shall use this chicken for fricassee; it has been singed, picked and
wiped with a wet towel.

First, cut the skin down back of the neck, and cut off the neck. I shall
talk about this chicken as if it was not drawn at all. Showing you how
to cut it up and draw it at the same time. Cut off the neck and take out
the crop, as I showed you with the other chicken. Then cut off the
wings, taking a little of the breast with the wings. Find the joint
where the wings join the body, cut at that joint; then, instead of
cutting the wing right off short, take a little piece of the breast with
it. That gives you a nice piece. Then cut the wing in two, and cut off
the tip, which is dry; that you can cook in the fricassee, or not, as
you please. It flavors, but there is very little meat on it. The other
part of the wing you want, of course, to use. Put the pieces of chicken
on two plates, putting the good pieces on one plate and the inferior
pieces on the other. Having taken off the wing, take off what is called
the wing side bone. Then cut forward and break off the shoulder bone.
The idea is to cut the breast into several good-sized pieces. Cutting in
this way you sacrifice what is called the merry-thought or wishbone. You
either can cut off the side bone or not. Cut off the other wing in the
same way. Then cut off the leg and second joint together. Instead of
cutting the leg in two pieces at both joints, cut it in three pieces,
that gives you two pieces of the second joint. In cooking chicken for
fricassee you want to have the pieces about one size, so that they will
cook easily. Then if they are one size they are much easier to help.

Next, to separate the breast from the back bone, cut down through the
ribs on each side. If the chicken has not been drawn be careful with
your knife, not to cut into the entrails. Then you can take the breast
off, and if the chicken is not drawn, all the entrails will be exposed,
and you can draw it with perfect ease. The lungs of the chicken, which
are those light red organs on the side of the back bone, are always used
by the French in cookery, not only those organs in chicken but in the
larger carcasses of meat. They are quite as much food as the heart or
liver. I am not in the habit of using them, but they are quite as
available. After the breast has been taken off, cut it up in several
pieces. First, cut off the entire tip, leaving that in one piece. Then
cut the remainder in two or four pieces, according to its size. Next cut
the back bone. There is a natural division in the upper part of the back
bone that breaks there; cut that off and trim off the ribs. In cutting
the lower part of the back bone, instead of cutting it just in two,
making rather queer pieces to help, cut off the upper part of it leaving
it entire, not splitting that part of it. In that way, cut off the
portion called the "oysters,"--two little pieces of flesh in the upper
part of the back bone, that are considered very nice. On one plate we
have the inferior parts, on the other the nice parts of the chicken,
being all cut in pieces of one size. It is easy to help, it cooks more
evenly, and is rather nicer than if you had it in two or three sizes.
Part of the chicken I am going to make into a brown fricassee, and part
of it I am going to fry. There would be thirteen pieces if we counted
the two pieces of the back bone. There are half a dozen of the poor
pieces, not counting the wing pieces or neck. The question is asked
whether the cords or sinews should be drawn from the legs. You can do
that with old poultry if you want to, because those cords never get very
tender. It is not necessary to do it with medium tender poultry.

First brown the chicken, using either some of the chicken fat, or
butter, or salad oil for browning it. Now, since the question of using
salad oil in cooking has come up, suppose I cook this chicken with salad
oil so that you can taste it. After all, that is the best test you
possibly can have as to whether you like salad oil in cooking. I shall
put in just salad oil enough to cover the bottom of the sauce pan. That
is enough to prevent sticking. For a chicken of three pounds take about
three or four tablespoonfuls of salad oil; just enough to cover the
bottom of the sauce pan. First put the sauce pan containing the salad
oil over the fire and let it get hot; then put in the chicken and brown
it. Now, can you notice the slightly aromatic odor? That is the oil, and
directly you notice that odor, and the oil begins to smoke, it is hot
enough. As soon as the chicken is brown,--and you can brown it just as
fast as you want to,--then put a heaping tablespoonful of flour over
it--some of the ladies will have seen the same process in making the
brown stew of meat the other day--and stir the chicken until the flour
is brown. When the flour is brown on the chicken,--and that will be by
the time you get it well stirred up,--then add boiling water enough to
cover it. When the flour is brown among the chicken, put in boiling
water enough to cover it, season it with pepper and salt, palatably, and
let it cook until it is tender. That will take from half an hour to two
hours, according to the toughness of the chicken. Remember the more
slowly you cook it after it once begins to cook, the nicer it will be.
Cover up the sauce pan after the fricassee is seasoned, and cook it
until it is tender. In the cooking of chicken the gravy that you make by
putting boiling water on seems to boil away, and you may want to add a
little more; just keep enough gravy over it to cover it, and when it is
tender it is ready to serve. The odor you notice now is the aromatic
odor of that salad oil, and is all that you will get in cooking with
olive oil.


FRIED CHICKENS.

Next the fried chicken, Maryland style, will be prepared. We will fry
the chicken, and then I will tell you about hominy. The Southern cooks
use lard for frying, either lard entirely or half lard and half butter;
enough to cover the bottom of the frying pan about half an inch. Let the
fat get hot, put some flour on a plate, season it with salt and pepper,
and roll the pieces of chicken in it. When the fat is hot in the pan and
the chicken has been rolled in the flour, put it into the hot fat and
fry it brown, first on one side and then on the other. Of course tender
chicken is generally used for this dish so that by the time it is fried
brown it is done. Fry the chicken until it is tender and brown. Take up
the chicken when it is brown, put it on a hot dish; in the frying pan
where it was fried, put enough cream to make a good gravy, stirring it
constantly. You see there will be flour on the pan off the fried chicken
that will thicken the gravy. Season the gravy with salt and pepper, pour
it over the chicken and serve it. Some of the colored cooks whom I have
seen prepare this dish first dip their chicken in water before rolling
it in the butter and flour. That is for the purpose of making more flour
stick to it; but there is always this disadvantage, if you do that there
will be some particles of water remaining, and when you put it in the
hot fat it will sputter very much. You can do that or not as you like.
While the chicken is being browned I will tell you how to prepare the
hominy. Of course the chicken is to be seasoned with more pepper and
salt if you wish, in addition to what you put on in the first place with
the flour.


HOMINY.

First pick the hominy over and wash it. Fine hominy is generally used
for this dish. Put it over the fire in cold water, a cupful of hominy to
about four cupfuls of water. Boil it and stir it often enough to prevent
sticking, until it begins to be tender. Boil it for an hour, until it
begins to grow tender. Then place it where there is no danger of
burning, pour off the water, or leave off the cover of the sauce pan so
that the water will evaporate. The hominy will need to cook pretty
nearly an hour, and when it is done or nearly done it should be as thick
as hasty pudding. If you have a double boiler you can put in very much
less water, for there is no danger of burning. I think you would need
only about half or a little more than half as much water. Only take care
to leave the cover off the kettle if you find that the hominy is going
to be thinner than hasty pudding when it is nearly done. If the hominy
is used rather coarse, about five minutes before it is done mix a
tablespoonful of flour with just enough water or milk to make it a thin
liquid, and stir it into the hominy. That will hold it together when it
is cold, so that it can be cut into slices. In making hasty pudding you
can put that tablespoonful of flour in to hold it together when it is
cold. You want to allow long enough for the flour to boil thoroughly;
before dishing the hominy when it is tender pour it into an earthen dish
or shallow tin pan wet with cold water, and let it get cold and hard.
Always make this in advance of your fried chicken. You want the hominy
cold and solid so that you can cut it. Cut it in little cakes about an
inch thick and two inches square. These little cakes of hominy are to be
fried either in the pan with the chicken or in another pan by the side
of the chicken, and served on a dish with the chicken.


FRIED FISH.

I have here some fish which I shall fry. We will not try broiled fish,
because this has been frozen; we will do that some other day. In frying
fish use either Indian meal or flour, seasoned with salt and pepper, to
roll the fish in. Fry the fish in lard or the drippings from salt pork.
In case you use salt pork, fry it brown. Olive oil is one of the nicest
fats for frying fish. You may have your choice whether I fry with lard
or oil. We will fry in oil. If you use lard at all you want it to be
very nice. In the frying pan I shall put about half an inch of oil; that
is less than half a cupful. Put it over the fire and let it get hot,
just as I did for the chicken. This is frozen fish that has been thawed.
Cut the fish in pieces about two inches square and roll them either in
flour seasoned with pepper and salt, or Indian meal, as I told you; put
them into the oil when the oil is hot. As soon as the fish is browned
nicely it will be done. You can add more seasoning than there is in the
flour. Use Indian meal with pork; it is particularly nice.




LECTURE SEVENTH.


Our lesson this morning, ladies, will begin with pea soup with crusts.
This soup I shall make with the addition of a little onion. You remember
the other day we made pea soup perfectly plain. We shall cook salt
codfish stewed in cream, venison with currant jelly, stewed carrots, and
cabinet pudding. First the peas will be put on the fire to boil, and I
shall begin to make the pudding.


CABINET PUDDING.

The cabinet pudding as I shall make it to-day will be rather elaborate.
You can make it more plainly. It is made of cake,--sponge cake is the
best,--French candied fruit, eggs and milk. So that, first, I shall give
you the recipe for the pudding as I make it to-day, and then I will give
you the recipe for the plainer form. For the pudding use a pudding mould
of the size I have in my hand (holding about a quart), about half a
pound of French candied fruit, which you can get at the confectionaries
here; I have to-day candied cherries, a little candied pear, a green
lime candied, a small orange, and an apricot. I shall also use a very
little citron, about an ounce of citron. That I want simply for the
effect of the green part of the citron. Put the citron in the form of
small leaves. The large fruits cut in slices, which you may leave round
or cut in the form of stars or to imitate a flower bud. After you have
cut the fruit, butter a perfectly plain tin pudding mould thickly with
cold butter,--quite thickly. Have the butter cold; lay the fruit against
the mould in the form of a wreath, or a star, or any fanciful form you
like, some on the bottom of the mould and some on the sides. The cold
butter will hold the fruit in place. After part of the fruit is laid
against the sides and bottom of the mould, then cut the sponge cake in
large slices about half an inch thick, one slice the size and shape of
the bottom of the mould, and either one long slice that will go round
the sides of the mould inside; or two or three pieces, according to the
size of your cake. Generally, in cities where there are confectionaries,
you can buy sponge cake baked in large thin sheets. You know the form in
which it is used for the bakers' _charlotte russe_. This is baked in
large sheets; cut it in small sheets and fit it into the moulds.
Because it is very thin you can work with it very much better than you
can with that which is thicker. This will be very apt to break, because
it is very stiff. If you are to shape the cake to your mould the cake
should be perfectly soft and flexible.

After the first layer of cake is put against the mould, then use the
rest of the cake cut in small pieces, or broken, and put into the mould
in layers with the rest of the fruit. You see, first you use some of the
fruit to ornament the inside of the mould, then some of the cake to line
the inside of the mould. That gives you what will be the outside of your
pudding when it is done. Then when the mould is decorated with fruit and
lined with cake, put the rest of the cake and fruit into the mould in
layers. Make a custard of a pint of milk and six eggs, because for this
pudding the custard must be firm enough to hold the pudding in shape so
that it can be turned out of the mould; also a quarter of a pound of
sugar; that is about four heaping tablespoonfuls of sugar.

After the custard is made, pour it into the mould which you have filled
with cake and fruit, and let it stand so that all the custard may be
absorbed by the cake. When the custard has been entirely absorbed by the
cake, set the mould in the steamer or in the sauce pan with water to
reach two-thirds up the side of the mould. Put the cover on the steamer,
or sauce pan, and steam it until the custard is firm. That will
generally take about an hour and a half. It may take a little longer,
but be quite sure that the custard is firm. Do not cook the custard
first, just mix it up. In order to be sure that the custard is firm
before you attempt to turn the pudding out, you want to run a fork or a
small knife down through the thickest part in the middle of the pudding;
move it backward and forward; look into the pudding to make sure that
the custard is done. As long as the custard looks liquid at all, you
must keep on cooking. When the pudding is done take the mould out of the
steamer, using a towel, because the mould will be hot. Take a dish or
platter that fits just over the top of the mould; have the inside of the
platter the size of the top of the mould; put the platter over the mould
and turn it upside down; then you will find that you can lift the mould
from the pudding without any trouble, and the pudding will remain there
on the platter. This pudding I shall serve with-powdered sugar. It is
exceedingly rich. It is not necessary to have a sauce with it because it
is so rich. But you can use, if you wish, any of the nice pudding
sauces that I have told you of. This is a pudding which in Europe is
served as the greatest luxury. It takes its name "cabinet" pudding from
the fact that it is served in the little rooms, or cabinets, that is,
the private rooms where special dinners or suppers are given in the
European restaurants. What is called cabinet pudding in the restaurants
and hotels in this country is usually a nice bread pudding made with
fruit, and it is not decorated in this way. Trouble is not taken to
decorate the mould. It is simply a nice bread pudding made with custard,
with some raisins or currants in it. That is what is called cabinet
pudding in this country in the restaurants and hotels. So you can make
the memorandum that you can use instead of the cake, bread; and instead
of the French fruit, simply raisins, currants and citron. You can spend
as much time and ingenuity decorating the pudding as you like, but I
have done this very quickly and very simply. The pudding can be served
hot, or it can be cooled and then put on the ice and made very cold. You
noticed that in filling the mould I pressed the cake down on the inside,
because, as it is saturated with the custard, of course it would sink
down. You want to press the cake well down in the mould, and have a
layer of cake on top, the last layer of cake.

_Question._ If you made it of bread wouldn't you have to use more sugar
in it?

MISS CORSON. Yes, if you use bread you would have to use more sugar.

_Question._ Do you have any salt in it?

MISS CORSON. You don't need to put any salt in it. You can if you want
to. There is no necessity for it, because there will be salt both in
your bread and in your cake.

_Question._ Do you flavor the custard?

MISS CORSON. No, just the plainest custard. You will find that the
French fruit will give the custard all the flavor you require. You will
find that if you put the custard into a pitcher after it is made you can
pour it into the pudding very much more readily than if you try to pour
it from the bowl. Either put it into a pitcher or use a cup, because you
will have to pour it slowly in order to let it thoroughly absorb.


PEA SOUP WITH CRUSTS.

Next take the recipe for pea soup. Some of the ladies who were at the
Monday afternoon lesson will need only to make one or two notes, and
the others will take the full recipe. For pea soup, four quarts, use a
cupful of dried peas, yellow split peas. Pick them over, wash them in
cold water, put them over the fire in two quarts of cold water and let
them heat slowly. As the water heats it softens the peas. When it is
boiling add half a cupful more of cold water and let that heat; then add
more cold water; continue to add cold water, half a cupful at a time,
until you have used two quarts more of cold water in addition to the
first two quarts. The object of adding cold water slowly is to soften
the peas, by reducing the heat of the water and then gradually
increasing it again you soften the peas so that you can cook them in
from an hour and a half to two hours. Boil them very slowly without the
addition of salt until they are soft enough to rub through a sieve with
a potato masher. After they are rubbed through the sieve put them again
into the soup kettle with a tablespoonful of butter and a tablespoonful
of flour rubbed to a smooth paste. Stir the soup over the fire until the
butter and flour are entirely dissolved; then season the soup palatably
with salt and pepper and let it boil for two or three minutes. While it
is boiling cut two slices of stale bread--bakers' bread is the best, or
very light home-made bread--in little dice about half an inch square.
Put a couple of tablespoonfuls of butter in a frying pan over the fire
and let the butter begin to brown, then throw the dice of stale bread
into the butter and stir the bread until it is brown. Take it out of the
butter with a skimmer, if it has not absorbed all the butter, and lay it
for a moment on brown paper, and then put it on a hot dish to send to
the table with the soup. Do not put the bread into the soup unless you
are going to serve at once, because it will soften a little; but you
will find that fried bread will soften less quickly than toasted bread.
A great many people put small squares of toast in the pea soup, but that
softens at once. If you have a frying kettle which you use for doughnuts
or fritters, or anything of that sort, partly full of frying fat, you
can heat it and fry the bread in that instead of frying it with the
butter in a frying pan. Have the fat smoking hot; the bread browns very
quickly; take it out on a skimmer and lay it on a brown paper for a
moment; then it is ready for the soup. These little fried crusts of
bread are called _croutons_ or crusts in the cookery books. I am going
to add an onion fried in butter to the soup to-day. Put that in, if you
use it, when you first begin to cook the soup. One onion, peeled,
sliced, and fried light brown in a tablespoonful of butter. You could
also use the bones from ham, cold roast ham, cold boiled ham, or the
bones of beef either raw or cooked, in the place of the onion, or in
addition to the onion, as you like. Remember all those things give
distinct flavors to the pea soup. If you put any kind of bones in, put
them in with the peas at the beginning and boil them with the peas.


SALT CODFISH, STEWED IN CREAM.

Next take the recipe for salt codfish, stewed in cream. First, to
freshen salt codfish; that, of course, is always the first thing you do
with salt codfish, no matter how you finish. You can do that by soaking
it over night in cold water; if it has any skin on it be sure to have
the skin side up. If you put it in the water with the skin side down,
the salt which soaks out of the fibre of the fish simply falls against
the skin and stays there. The fish does not get any fresher. A great
deal of codfish in these days is sent to the market without either skin
or bone. Supposing we have the regulation dried codfish, we skin and
bone it, then soak it over night in cold water, and next morning put it
over the fire in more cold water, plenty of it, and put the kettle or
pan containing the fish and the cold water on the back part of the
stove, where it will heat very gradually. Do not let it boil at all, but
keep it at a scalding heat. Do not more than let it simmer. The effect
of the boiling on any salted fibre, whether it is fish or meat, is
simply to harden it. Keep it at a scalding heat until the fish is
tender. Of course that will depend upon the dryness of the fish. It may
take a half hour, it may take an hour. That is one way to freshen fish.
Another way--the way I am doing now--is accomplished more quickly by
putting the fish over the fire in plenty of cold water, enough to cover
it; set it on the stove where it will heat gradually. When the water is
nearly hot on the fish pour it off and put more cold water on. Let that
get scalding hot; do not let it boil at all; simply let it get scalding
hot--that is, let the steam begin to rise from it. Change the water as
often as it gets scalding hot, until the fish is tender. If you are
careful to change the water often enough, that is, if you do not let it
begin to boil, probably the fish will be tender in half an hour--from
half to three-quarters of an hour. The time will depend upon the dryness
of the fibre of the fish. Generally in about half an hour it will be
tender. As soon as the fish is tender drain it, and then it is ready to
dress in any way you wish to use it. To-day I shall make a little cream
sauce, and heat the fish in it. That will be codfish stewed in cream
sauce. Boiled codfish you would serve with boiled potatoes, and the
white sauce is made either with water or milk and hard-boiled eggs. That
is the old New England salt fish dinner. Usually, with a salt codfish
dinner there were boiled parsnips and sometimes boiled beets; and it is
very nice if you like codfish. For codfish hash, the old-fashioned
codfish hash, use simply boiled codfish torn apart, forked in little
fine flakes or chopped in fine flakes; of course all the skin and bone
is taken off, mixed with an equal quantity of boiled potatoes, either
mashed or chopped fine, palatably seasoned with pepper; of course the
fish would be salt enough, usually; for a pint bowl full of fish and
potatoes, use a tablespoonful of butter. The fish and potatoes are
thoroughly mixed, then put into a frying pan, with just enough butter or
drippings to keep it from burning. You may put, for the quantity I have
given you, a heaping tablespoonful of butter in the frying pan, and let
it melt; then put in the fish, and continue stirring it. Remember there
is some butter in the hash already, and that will melt with the heat and
probably be enough; but if you need any more to prevent its burning, add
a tablespoonful. Stir the hash until it is scalding hot; then push it to
one side of the frying pan with the knife you are stirring it with, and
form it into a little oval cake at one side of the frying pan. When the
hash is thoroughly hot, the butter in it will begin to fry out of it,
and there probably will be butter enough to prevent its burning. Let it
stand in the little cake at the side of the pan until it is browned on
the bottom. You want to watch it a little, and now and then run a knife
under it and loosen it from the pan, to make sure that it is not
burning. Then, when the bottom is browned, hold a plate in one hand and
the frying pan in the other, and turn the fish out in a little cake on
the plate or dish.


CODFISH CAKES.

To make codfish cakes, first make the fish fine; after freshening it and
taking off the skin and bone, chop it or tear it in fine flakes; mix it
with an equal quantity of potato either mashed or chopped--mashed potato
is rather better for codfish cakes because you can pack it a little more
closely in the form of cakes. To a pint bowlful of codfish hash add a
tablespoonful of butter, a palatable seasoning of pepper and the yolk of
one raw egg. That is, half codfish, half potato, a tablespoonful of
butter and the yolk of one raw egg, and a palatable seasoning of pepper.
Then dust your hands, with dry flour; take a tablespoonful of this
mixture up in your hand and either form it in the shape of a round ball
or flat cake, as you like. Have ready a frying kettle or deep frying pan
with enough fat or drippings, or lard, in it to cover three or four of
the codfish cakes or balls, when you drop them into it. So that if you
use a frying pan you must have a deep frying pan. You may make in that
case codfish cakes, not balls. If you have a frying kettle you can make
little round balls. When the fat is smoking hot drop the codfish cakes
or balls into it and fry them just a golden brown, light brown. Take
them out of the fat with a skimmer and lay them on brown paper for a
moment to free them from grease, then serve them hot.

You will notice that I always tell you in frying everything to take it
out of the fat and lay it for a moment on brown paper, because then you
are sure to free it from grease. Not necessarily very coarse paper; just
ordinary brown wrapping paper. I do not mean manila paper, but the
common brown wrapping paper that comes around groceries and meat, that
tradesmen generally use. The paper must be porous so that the grease
will be easily absorbed. That is the only point you have to remember.
The usual way of frying codfish cakes is simply to put fat enough in the
pan to keep them from sticking, and in that way they are not browned all
over, that is, they are not browned on the sides. They are simply
browned on the top and on the bottom, and the fat has, of course,
generally soaked into them so that you get them thoroughly greasy unless
you have fat enough to cover them and have the fat smoking hot when you
put them in. In frying it is very easy to use the fat repeatedly, if you
only remember one thing. The fat you fry fish in you want to keep always
for fish; then you can fry anything else, meat, chicken, fritters or
doughnuts, in the other fat. Generally keep two jars or crocks of fat,
and take care only to let the fat get smoking hot in frying, and as soon
as you have done frying set the kettle off the stove so that the fat
does not burn; let it cool a very little, then strain it through a cloth
into an earthen bowl and let it get cold. Wash the frying kettle out and
clean it thoroughly, and then you can put the fat back in it, and it
will be ready for the next time, if you use a porcelain-lined kettle; if
you use a metal kettle for frying, tin or anything of that sort, do not
put the fat in it till you are ready to use it again, because it might
rust it a little. If you strain it through an ordinarily thick towel
there will be no sediment. If you strain it through a sieve there will
be a little sediment that will settle to the bottom of the fat, and you
can turn the cake of fat out of the bowl when it is cold and scrape that
off. The best way is to strain through a cloth in the first place. If
you are careful with the fat you can use it repeatedly,--use it a dozen
times or more, until it really is nearly used up. But if you are
careless and let it burn, of course you very soon get it so dark in
color that it colors anything directly you put it in, before it is
cooked, and it has a burnt taste. But if you use it at the heat I tell
you, just smoking hot, and do not let it burn, you can use it
repeatedly. Sometimes you can lift it out in one solid cake when it is
cold; sometimes you will have to break it and take it off in more than
one piece. On the bottom of the cake you will find a little brownish
sediment which you must scrape off. Then you have the fat clarified and
ready for use. For ordinary frying purposes the straining through the
towel will answer. An earthen bowl is the best for keeping the fat in
the kitchen, very much better than metal of any kind.


STEWED CARROTS.

Next take the recipe for stewed carrots. Carrots, peeled, as many as you
wish to make a dishful; cut them in rather small slices, a quarter of an
inch thick, put them over the fire in salted boiling water enough to
cover them; boil them steadily until they are tender. That will be in
perhaps half or three-quarters of an hour; if the carrots are young and
fresh they will boil in half an hour; longer as the season advances and
the carrots grow denser in their fibre. Late in the winter it may take
an hour or even an hour and a half if they are very large and woody.
Boil them until they are tender. Then drain them and throw them into
plenty of cold water, and let them get thoroughly cold. While they are
cooling make a sauce of water or of milk, as you like. If you have an
ordinary vegetable dish full of carrots you want about a pint of sauce.
In that case you will make the sauce as I have told you several times: a
tablespoonful of butter, and a tablespoonful of flour for a pint of
sauce; melt the butter and flour together over the fire, stirring them
constantly until they bubble and are smoothly mixed; then begin to add
half a cupful at a time the milk or water that you are going to use in
making the sauce; stir each half cupful in smooth before you add any
more water. If the milk or water is hot, of course the sauce will be
cooked all the more quickly. Let the sauce boil for a minute, stirring
all the time, then season with a level teaspoonful of salt for a pint of
sauce, a quarter of a saltspoonful of pepper, remembering what I have
said about using white pepper. Drain the carrots from the cold water and
put them into the sauce to heat. While they are heating--and that will
only take three or four minutes--chop a tablespoonful of parsley fine,
and stir it among the carrots; then serve them as soon as they are hot.
You may make the addition of parsley or not, as you like, but it is very
nice. In some seasons of the year you can not have the parsley. If you
have not parsley, and have made the sauce of water, you will improve the
dish very much if you stir the yolk of a raw egg into the sauce and
carrots when you take them off the fire, just before you dish them. I
will do that to-day. I will make a sauce of water and add the yolk of an
egg. You had better put two or three tablespoons of sauce into a cup
with the egg and mix it, and then pour that into the sauce and stir it
well. In chopping parsley use just the leaves, not the stalks; put them
in the chopping bowl and chop them fine. If you chop on a board steady
the point of a knife with one hand and use an up-and-down motion with
the other hand. Of course you can understand that using a long knife in
chopping you can chop very much more quickly than you could in a
chopping bowl, where you only get a circular cut. One of the ladies asks
me the object of putting the carrots in cold water. They are put first
in boiling salted water-to set their color. The action of the salt in
the boiling water slightly hardens the surface so that the color does
not boil out. Then if you take them at the point when they are tender
you check the boiling at once by the cold water and secure the color
entirely. Of course you will understand that by draining them and
throwing them into cold water you check the heat at once. If you simply
let them stand in the water and gradually soften and soak, letting the
water keep warm, you would soak the color out. That follows with all
boiled vegetables. Where we want to preserve the color this is the
simplest and easiest way to do it.

_Question._ Can the color of beets be preserved in the way you speak of?

MISS CORSON. No, beets have to be boiled differently from any other
vegetable. If you break the skin of beets, or cut them in any way, the
color escapes in the water. So that to prepare the beets for boiling,
wash them very carefully without breaking the skin. Do not cut off the
roots or the tops of the beets close; leave some of the roots and three
or four inches of the stalk. Do not trim them off close, because if you
cut the roots or stalks close to the beet you make a cut whence the
color can escape; wash them very carefully without breaking the skin.
Put them over the fire in boiling water. You do not need to salt it, in
fact, it is better not to salt it. Boil them until they grow tender to
the touch. If you puncture the beet with a fork or knife, to try it, you
let the color out, but you can take one of the beets up on a skimmer and
use a thick towel and hold it in your hand and squeeze it to see if it
is growing soft. Do not break the skin, always remember that. When the
beet is tender you will find that it will yield a little, between your
fingers, and the length of time required for cooking them will be from
half an hour to two hours and a half, perhaps even longer than that.
Young, tender, juicy beets may be cooked in half an hour. The older they
are, the later it is in the season, the harder the woody fibre will be,
and the longer it will take to cook them. After they are cooked really
tender, then throw them into a bowl of cold water and rub off the skin
with a wet towel. Do not leave them soaking in cold water.


VENISON WITH CURRANT JELLY.

Take the recipe for venison now, ladies. Enough butter to cover the
bottom of the pan about a quarter of an inch. Let it get smoking hot,
then put in the venison. You must have the pan large enough to hold the
venison. As soon as the venison is brown on one side turn it and brown
it on the other. Brown it very fast. As soon as the venison is browned
put with it the currant jelly. For every pound of venison use two
tablespoonfuls of currant jelly--not heaping spoonfuls; or you might put
one heaping tablespoonful for every pound of venison. As soon as the
venison is brown put the currant jelly in with it. Put the pan back
where it will not be too hot, and finish cooking the venison until it is
done to suit your taste. It will cook, if it is an inch thick, pretty
well done in about twenty minutes. Season it with salt and pepper, and
when it is done put it on the platter and pour the currant jelly and
butter over it. The cooking of the jelly with the venison makes it a
nice sauce or gravy.

_Question._ Wouldn't this be a nice way to cook buffalo or any other
kind of game?

MISS CORSON. Yes, it is a very good way.




LECTURE EIGHTH.


MEATS AND VEGETABLES.

We will begin to-day with so-called roast beef, it is really baked. This
is what is called a shoulder cut of beef, and is just as the butcher has
sent it home, that is, without any of the bones being taken out. This
thin part of the beef can be either roasted with the rest or cut off and
used as a stew. It is not very available at the table. It almost always
is tough, and there is a great deal of fat proportionately. The lean
that is there is very apt to dry and harden in the baking. So that the
best way to use the part is to cut it off and cook it separately. Have
the beef cut large enough to give a roast from the thickest part. The
white line of cartilage will be sure to bother in carving, and the best
way is to cut it out before you cook the meat. You can cut it out
without any difficulty. You can also cut off the bone entirely. You will
not find that doing this will make the meat waste if you bake it or
roast it properly, and you can carve it more easily and more
economically. Carving when the bone is in the meat you are sure to leave
more meat on than you really want to, and it is quite a difficult matter
to carve even slices when the bone is in the meat. It is a very easy
matter to take the bone out, and then either use the bone for soup meat
or put it in the pan with the meat and let it bake as the basis for
gravy. You will notice both in cutting the cartilage and the bone, I do
not take off any meat. I simply cut close, and take away the parts I
wish to remove without wasting any of the meat. That leaves a solid
piece of meat which offers no difficulty in carving; you can either
fasten it in shape by tying a string around it or by running a few
skewers through it. The better way is to tie it with a string, because
the skewers will make holes and permit the juice to escape. You can
either take off the thin, outside skin of the beef or wipe it as I have
already said, with a wet towel. With good beef the skin is so
exceedingly thin that it is not objectionable in carving or to the
taste. With poor beef, the skin is decidedly leathery, and then it is
advisable to take it off.

_Question._ How many pounds were there in your piece altogether, before
you began to cut it?

MISS CORSON. Oh, I fancy it weighed five or six pounds. Of course you
use the number of pounds that your family requires. I am speaking of
dividing the meat so as to cook it in the most economical manner. You
would buy a sufficiently large piece in weight to give you the thick
part--large enough for your family for the roast, and the other part you
use for the stew subsequently. We made a beef stew one day, here, I
think. Roasting is cooking meat before the direct blaze of the open
fire. Baking is cooking it in the oven. Nearly all the so-called roast
beef that we get is baked beef. It is not quite so delicate as real
roast beef. You can accomplish the roasting of beef with any range or
kitchen stove that has a large grate, that is, a grate where you can
have a clear surface of coals against the grate, by using what is called
a Dutch oven. This is a tin box, with one side open and a little hook in
the top of the box, from which you can hang the meat. Then in the bottom
part of the tin case there is a pan that catches the drippings. After
you have got the meat all ready, you put the Dutch oven in front of the
grate, standing it so that the open side of the Dutch oven is directly
in front of the grate of your stove or range. You will find that the
bright tin of the oven will reflect heat enough to cook the meat nicely.
There you get a genuine roast. You do not get an old-fashioned roast on
a spit before the open fire, but you get a nice roast. Generally those
little hooks are so arranged that the meat swings a little--swings and
turns, and if the hooks are not so arranged, once in a while, say once
in half an hour, you want to turn it.

Now, suppose you have not that oven, but still have an open fire, you
can roast. I have roasted a chicken before a grate fire in the sitting
room. You can roast small birds of any kind in that way, by putting
something on the mantel piece heavy enough to support the weight of the
bird. Tie a string around the bird or around the piece of beef and let
it hang down in front of the fire. Put a platter under it or a dripping
pan, and put the blower up in front of it. You might be amused at the
idea of doing that as an experiment. I have made coffee in an old tomato
can as an experiment, to see whether it can be done, and it is just as
nice as any you could possibly make in the finest French coffee pot.
After all there are many expedients that you can resort to in cooking
with good results.

After the meat is browned on the outside, whether you are roasting or
baking, season it. Get it browned first on the outside very quickly,
then season it with salt and pepper, and after that moderate the heat
of the oven, or draw the Dutch oven a little away from the fire, and
finish cooking till the meat is done, allowing fifteen minutes to the
pound if you want it medium rare, about twenty minutes to the pound if
you want it very well done. If you are baking the meat put it in the
hottest oven, without any seasoning at all, without any water in the
pan. You will find that the meat will yield drippings enough for
basting. Our chicken that we basted yesterday,--do you remember how nice
and brown that was? Pretty well basted, wasn't it? That had nothing in
the pan for basting except the drippings which flowed from the chicken
itself. Put the meat in the hottest oven until it is browned, and then
moderate the heat and cook the meat fifteen minutes to the pound. We
might do what the French call braise the end of the roast, if you like
to see the effect of slow cooking. One difficulty that we labor under
here is that we have to use a very intense heat, otherwise the flame of
this vapor stove goes out. In order to braise successfully you want a
very gentle and continuous heat,--such as you would get on the back part
of a cooking stove,--just heat enough to keep the meat simmering. We
will do as well as we can by keeping the sauce pan at one side of the
fire, and then I will describe the braising process, so that you can do
it perfectly at home. If we have any cabbage we will braise the meat
with it. That makes a dish that is used very much in the north of
Europe, in Poland and Sweden. I think I will give you the recipe,
whether we have our cabbage or not.

Use a large pot or sauce pan, large enough to allow you to lay the piece
of meat on the bottom; or, you can use a thick, deep, iron pan. I
remember, several days ago, seeing in the hardware stores pans about ten
inches high, pans made of Russia iron, oval. You can use that for quite
a large piece of meat if you have not a sauce pan. You want a pan deep
enough to allow the water to come just over the beef. Put water in the
pan, enough to cover the beef, and let it get boiling hot. I will give
you two methods of braising. When the water is boiling hot, put the beef
in it; watch it carefully until it just begins to boil again. The moment
it boils, push back the pot or pan in which it is far enough away from
the hot part of the stove to keep the water only simmering, only
bubbling, not boiling. Put in whatever seasoning you like. If you use
spice, cloves for instance, or mace, use it whole. If you use simply
salt and pepper, of course use them in the powder. Keep the cover very
tightly over the pot or sauce pan, and cook the meat in that slow,
gentle way, for at least two hours. A piece weighing not more than four
or five pounds you want to cook at least two hours, or until it is
tender. Remember to cook very, very slowly. That is a very simple and
easy way of braising, which any one can accomplish.

Now I am going to give you the French method of braising. Cut part of
the fat off the meat, about half the fat off the meat. Put the part that
you cut off in the bottom of the pot. Lay the meat on the fat. That is
the way we will cook our meat to-day, because I have decided to cook the
cabbage in another way. After you have put the fat in the bottom of the
sauce pan, lay the meat on it, with the fat part up, so that, you see,
you have fat under and over the meat. On top or by the side of the meat
put an onion of medium size, peeled and stuck with about a dozen cloves.
Put parsley, if you have it, about a tablespoonful of leaves, or some
stalks, or parsley root; but remember that the flavor of parsley root is
very much stronger than the leaf, so that you will use proportionately
less root. One bay leaf, a tablespoonful of carrot, sliced, about a
tablespoonful of turnip, sliced, and a level teaspoonful of
peppercorns--unground pepper--or a small red pepper. Then boiling water
enough just to cover the meat. Then put on the cover of the sauce pan,
and put the meat where it will simmer very gently until it is quite
tender. The French always braise in what is called a braising pan; that
is, two oval pans made in such a way that one sets into the other, and
goes about a third of the way down. They put the article that is to be
braised in the bottom pan, and then in the top pan they put hot ashes,
or coals of wood or charcoal, mixed with ashes; so that there is heat
top and bottom; then they put their braising pan by the side of the fire
or at the back of the stove, where it will have a gentle heat, and cook
it for a very long time. They braise it four or five hours, and it makes
the toughest meat tender. After you once bring the meat to the boiling
point you must not boil it fast; if you boil it fast you will make it
very much tougher. After you get it to the boiling point keep it there,
and cook it slowly, and long enough so that it will be sure to be
tender. If you are sure the meat is tough in the beginning, put half a
cupful of vinegar into the water with it. You won't notice the vinegar
when you come to eat the meat, and it will help to make the meat tender.
The French, of course, use the ordinary wine of the country,--a sour
wine,--it has the same effect; it is about as sour as vinegar, and has
about the same effect. I think, indeed, that is the reason why the
French use so much wine in cooking meat. They use a very acid wine
always, and probably use it for the purpose of making the meat tender in
many instances. Put in salt, but not too much, for the effect of salt,
while the meat is boiling, would be to harden it. Just a little salt,
and then in seasoning your gravy you can add more salt. After the meat
is braised French fashion, it is taken out of the broth, and the broth
is strained and then used as a broth or soup, or made into a gravy.

To make the gravy, for each pint of gravy that you wish to make, use a
tablespoonful of butter or beef drippings and a tablespoonful of flour.
Stir the drippings and flour over the fire in a sauce pan until they are
brown. Then begin to add the seasoned broth in which the meat was
cooked, half a cupful at a time, stirring it until it is smooth each
time, until it boils; then season it with salt and pepper, remembering
that the broth is already seasoned, so that you have to taste it. That
makes a very nice gravy or sauce. Of course, you have plenty of broth,
so you can make as much of it as you like.

Take now a recipe for cooking cabbage to serve with braised meat. For a
cabbage of medium size,--that is, a cabbage about as large as a
breakfast plate,--first wash the cabbage thoroughly, cutting away any
part of the stalk that seems woody. Then cut the cabbage in rather thin
slices. That is very easy. Lay it on the board and cut it down through.
You would need a large sauce pan to cook a cabbage as large as a
breakfast plate, because remember when it is cut up it takes up more
space. Put in the bottom of the sauce pan a tablespoonful of butter or
drippings. If you are braising your meat you can open the pot and dip
some of the drippings out of it. A tablespoonful of butter or drippings,
half a cupful of vinegar, a tablespoonful of cloves, a teaspoonful of
peppercorns and a tablespoonful of brown sugar. Then put in the cabbage
on top of these things. Put the cover on the sauce pan, set it over the
fire where it will steam. Be very careful not to let it burn. Keep it on
the back part of the fire where it will simmer. Keep it covered. Every
fifteen minutes take off the cover, and with a large fork or spoon lift
the cabbage from the bottom so that the top uncooked part goes down to
the bottom. In about an hour the cabbage will be tender. You do not need
to begin to cook that until within, say an hour and a quarter of the
time the beef is likely to be done. To serve it, turn it on a dish,
leaving the spice, cloves and pepper in with it, and lay the beef on it.
Just moisten the cabbage with a little gravy or broth from the beef, and
serve the rest of the gravy in a bowl; remember that the broth from the
meat is salted, and that in moistening the cabbage it seasons it, or if
you like very much salt you can put a little with the cabbage in
cooking.

Now, to boil cabbage quickly, and without odor: After thoroughly washing
it take off the decayed leaves, cut it in rather small pieces, but do
not use the stalk of the cabbage--avoid that. Put over the fire a sauce
pan large enough to hold the cabbage twice over. Have plenty of space in
your sauce pan or kettle, fill it half full of water, put plenty of salt
in the water,--that is, a level tablespoonful of salt to about a quart
of water,--let the water boil; be sure that it is boiling fast. Then put
in the cabbage; get it boiling again just as fast as you can, and
continue to boil it just as fast as you can until it is tender. That
will be in from ten to twenty-five minutes, according to the age of the
cabbage. Young cabbage, early in the season, will boil tender in ten
minutes; or it may take 15, 20 or 25. It never takes over a half hour
unless the cabbage is very old or dry. The cabbage is done the moment
the stalk is tender. A great many people have the idea that they must
boil the cabbage until the leaf is almost dissolved. It needs only to be
boiled as tender as you boil the stalks of cauliflower, and you would
try, of course, the thickest part, which would be near the stalk.
Remember, in the first place you would cut out any tough, woody stalk,
but the tender stalk you would leave in, and that is the part you would
try. If you boil it fast it will not take over thirty or thirty-five
minutes at the outside, probably not more than twenty. Just as soon as
the cabbage is tender drain it and put with it whatever sauce or
dressing you are going to serve with it. That sometimes is vinegar,
butter, pepper, and salt. Sometimes a little milk, butter, pepper, and
salt. In that case it is called cabbage stewed with cream. Sometimes you
would simply serve it without any further seasoning, only remember that
the moment it is tender, drain it and serve. As I told you the other
day, the odor of the cabbage comes from letting it boil until after the
substance of the cabbage is so soft that the oil begins to escape from
it, the volatile oil. That makes a strong odor in the room. As soon as
the cabbage is tender it is ready to eat, and should be taken from the
fire.


TURNIPS.

To bake turnips, peel the turnips, either white or yellow ones, cut them
in rather small slices, a quarter of an inch thick; put them over the
fire in salted boiling water enough to cover them, and boil them fast
until they are tender. It may take ten or fifteen minutes, possibly
twenty minutes, according to the age of the turnips. Of course you will
understand that if the turnips are old and corky they will not be as
nice when they are done as if they are in good condition. But as soon as
the turnips are tender, drain them, put them in an earthen pudding dish,
make a little white sauce, either with milk or water,--for a pint, a
tablespoonful of butter, tablespoonful of flour; stir over the fire;
then milk added gradually and stirred smooth; seasoned with salt and
pepper,--make enough of the white sauce just to moisten the turnips;
pour it over the turnips; dust over the top some cracker dust or bread
crumbs, just enough to cover the top of the turnips; put a little salt
and pepper over the crumbs, and a scant tablespoonful of butter over the
top of the crumbs. Then put the dish into the hot oven, and just brown
the crumbs on the top of the dish. Serve it as soon as the bread crumbs
are brown. That is a very nice and easy dish. If you have cold boiled
turnips, slice them, cover them with white sauce and bread crumbs, and
cook them just in the same way.

(At this point Miss Corson announced that the cabbage was done, after
being in between nine and ten minutes, and no smell was perceptible in
the room.)

I am going to moisten the cabbage with cream sauce,--that is white sauce
made with milk,--and heat it for a moment and then it will be done.

I will now answer a question that has been asked about cooking corned
beef. The same principle applies to the cooking of corned beef that
applies to the cooking of salted fish. You remember this morning in
talking about codfish I said, if you boil the salted fibre hard and
fast, you make it hard and toughen it. That holds good in relation to
salted meat or corned meat. You want to boil it very gently. There is
comparatively little juice left in corned beef, so that the action of
cold water is not so disastrous to it as it would be to fresh meat.
Sometimes the beef is so very salt that it is desirable to change the
water upon it. Put it over the fire in cold water. Let it slowly reach
the boiling point, and then try and see if it is too salt. If the water
itself seems very salt, change it. Put fresh water in, let it gradually
heat, and boil very gently always. As soon as the meat reaches the
boiling point, push it to the back part of the stove and boil it very
gently until it is tender. It usually takes about twenty minutes to a
pound, but boil it very gently and slowly. Then it will be tender. If
you boil it fast it will be hard and tough. If you put a whole dried red
pepper in with the beef in boiling, you will find that it will improve
the flavor very much. If you intend to use the beef cold, leave it in
the water in which it is boiled; take the pot off the stove and let it
cool in the water in which it was boiled. Those same directions apply to
boiling smoked or salted tongue.

The turnips were just fifteen minutes in boiling.

Nice points about boiled dinners are asked for. I think I have given you
the nicest point in cooking beef, so that you will be sure to get it
tender, and to cook cabbage so that it is tender and does not smell.
Cabbage always goes with a New England boiled dinner, potatoes, onions,
parsnips and squash. I told you about cooking beets this morning. All
the other vegetables you may cook in boiling water, and salt to suit the
taste. The old-fashioned way was to boil all the vegetables in the pot
with the beef, adding the vegetables in succession, so that each one was
put in just long enough before the beef was done to have it done at the
time the beef was done; each one except the squash. The squash is best
peeled and cut in small pieces and steamed. If you boil it you want to
put it in boiling salted water until it is tender, and then put it into
a towel and squeeze it, so as to get out the water; then season it with
butter, salt and pepper, and serve it.

I made gravy yesterday; I think if I give you the recipe to-day it will
answer. Pour the drippings out of the pan, all except about a
tablespoonful; put a tablespoonful of flour in with the brown drippings;
set the pan over the fire; stir the drippings and flour together until
they are quite brown; then begin to put in boiling water, a little at a
time, not more than half a cupful, and stir until the gravy is smooth;
then season it palatably with salt and pepper. Onions are very nice
cooked precisely as I have cooked cabbage to-day; that is, cooked until
they are tender, and dressed with the white sauce that I used in
dressing the carrot.

For pressed corn beef the nicest cut is the brisket. Have the cut
rather long and narrow, and not a short chunk or piece. Take a long
piece of meat, a foot long, or more; have all the bones cut out and roll
it up tight. Tie it compactly, in the same way that I tied this meat.
Tie it so that you have it in a tight bundle. Then boil it according to
the directions I have already given you. After it is done let it partly
cool in the liquor; then take it out and lay it on the platter; lay
another platter on top of it, and put a heavy weight on the platter, and
press it with the string still on until it is cold; then cut off the
string and you have it in nice shape. If you want to use part of it hot
for dinner, and then have it cold, you would have to boil it, and when
it is done cut off enough for your dinner; then press the rest of it
between two platters. You could double it over, but you could not press
it so very well in shape. Cut it in slices; put it into a tin mould or
tin pan and boil down the broth in which you have cooked it until it
begins to look thick. Or, you could dissolve a little gelatine in the
broth to thicken it, and pour it over the slices of corned beef in the
mould. In that case you would depend upon the gelatine to thicken the
broth, without boiling it down.




LECTURE NINTH.


BEEF A LA MODE ROLLS.

Our lesson this morning will begin with beef _a la mode_ rolls. Use the
round of the beef or the end of sirloin steak. I have here a piece of
round of beef. Cut the beef in pieces about two inches wide and five
long; lay these strips of meat on the cutting board and season them with
salt and pepper. In the middle of each one put a little piece of salt
pork about a quarter of an inch thick. Roll the meat up in such a way
that the pork is inclosed in the middle of the little roll. Tie the roll
to keep it in shape. You can use instead of salt pork pieces of fat from
the meat. After all the little rolls are tied up put a very small
quantity of beef drippings or butter in the bottom of the saucepan or
kettle. Put the saucepan over the fire with the drippings or butter in
it and let the fat get hot. As soon as it is hot put the little rolls of
meat in it and let them brown. As soon as the little rolls of meat are
brown sprinkle flour over them, a tablespoonful of dry flour to half a
dozen little rolls of meat. Let the flour brown. As soon as the flour
is brown pour in boiling water enough to cover the rolls; add salt. Then
put the cover on the sauce pan and set the meat where it will cook very
gently. Remember what I have told you about cooking meat slowly if you
want it to be tender. When the meat is quite tender--and that will be in
from half an hour to an hour and a half--the time will depend, of
course, upon the fibre of the meat, then take off the strings and serve
the rolls in the gravy in which they have been cooking. You see the
brown flour and water and butter will have make a nice gravy for the
rolls. Now if the meat is very tough remember what I have told you about
the action of the vinegar on the meat fibre. For a pound of meat add
about two tablespoonfuls of vinegar, when you begin to stew the meat,
and let it cook with the meat; that will make it tender. You can vary
the dish by cooking with it vegetables of any kind that you like to use.
Add potatoes when it is within half an hour of being done, turnips
peeled, cut in small pieces; carrots peeled and sliced.


CARAMEL CUSTARD.

I will make a caramel custard next. For caramel custard use a plain tin
mould, oval or square in shape, that will hold about three pints. Put a
teaspoonful of sugar in the bottom of the mould and set the mould on the
top of the stove where the sugar will brown. You may want to shake the
mould a little to scatter the sugar evenly over the bottom. When the
sugar is brown set the mould off the fire on the table where the burnt
sugar will get cold; that forms what is called a caramel or coat of
burnt sugar on the bottom of the mould. Make a custard by beating
together six eggs, a quarter of a pound of sugar and a pint of milk.
After the custard is made pour it into the mould and set the mould in a
sauce pan with boiling water that will come half way up the sides of the
mould, and steam the custard until it is firm. When the custard is firm
you can turn it out of the mold and use it hot or leave it until it is
quite cold and use it cold. I have used granulated sugar this time. You
can make the same custard, preparing it just exactly as for steaming,
but bake it, if you like, only you would set the mould in the dripping
pan with water in it, baking it just until it is firm, in a moderate
oven. You could make it in teacups; in that case you would burn the
sugar in an iron-spoon or in the frying pan and while it still is liquid
put just a little in the bottom of each cup, because you remember it
hardens directly. Then bake the cups of custard in a pan of water. Use
the custard in the cups either hot or cold. If the custard is to be used
cold leave it in the mould; it will stand better than if it is turned
out hot. But it is stiff enough to retain its form even when it is hot.
And the sugar that is in the mould forms a little sauce around it on the
dish.


TOMATO SOUP.

Next take a recipe for tomato soup. A can of tomatoes; put them over the
fire. In the summer use about two quarts of fresh tomatoes. You will
find that about two quarts will be sufficient. After the fresh tomatoes
are peeled and sliced (you will remember canned tomatoes are already
peeled), put them over the fire and stew them gently for about half an
hour, or until they are tender. If the canned tomatoes are entirely
solid you may need to add a little liquid, but I find there is generally
more liquid in the can than you need. When the tomatoes are tender
enough to rub through a sieve, put them through the sieve with a potato
masher. That gives you pulp, or _puree_, of tomatoes. And you will add
to the tomatoes, after they have been passed through the sieve, half a
salt spoon of baking soda, and then milk enough to thin them to the
proper consistency of soup. Season with salt and pepper, and let them
boil, and serve the soup. If you want a thick soup, add to the tomatoes
a quart of milk, and thicken the soup with cracker dust, very finely
powdered and sifted. Thicken as much as you like, beginning with two
heaping tablespoonfuls; add more if you want it. Of course you can put
butter in either of these soups, but it is not necessary. The way I
shall make the soup to-day will be to thicken it with butter and flour
after the tomatoes have been passed through the sieve. Do not confuse
these two recipes. You have got one of thin soup; you have got another
with milk, salt and pepper, thickened with cracker dust. Now a third:
Put a tablespoonful of butter and a tablespoonful of flour in a
saucepan. Stir them over the fire until they are melted together, then
put in a pint of water gradually--a pint of hot water--stirring it
smooth; and the tomato pulp. If that does not make the soup as thin as
you desire--and it should be about the consistency of good cream--add a
little more boiling water. Season with salt and pepper, and stir it
until it boils, and then it is ready to use.

Next take directions for boiling vegetables, so that the color is
perfectly kept. I told you yesterday that we should have spinach if we
could get it, if not, that we would use lettuce. I think that next week,
in the course of the lessons, I shall succeed in having some spinach
from Cleveland. However, I shall use lettuce to-day. First, thoroughly
wash it in salted water. For a quart of water use a tablespoonful of
salt. As I told you the other day, the salt in the water is for the
purpose of killing any little insects that are in the leaves, especially
of the lettuce. You know that it is very troublesome to dislodge them,
but the salt kills them, and of course you can wash them out. As long as
they are alive they cling there. If you sprinkle salt on the leaves it
will wither them, but if you put it in the water it will not. Salted
water is intensely cold, you know, and it would restore the freshness of
the leaves of lettuce, even if they were wilted, unless they were really
on the verge of decay. If you will remind me, after I have finished
giving the recipe for cooking the vegetables, I will tell you how to
keep lettuce fresh. After your vegetables, whatever they may be, whether
lettuce, or spinach, or asparagus, or string beans, are washed perfectly
clean--I do not say wash peas, and I will tell you after a little the
reason why--after they are thoroughly washed put them over the fire in
enough boiling salted water to more than cover them--plenty of water, so
that they can float about--the water to be salted with a tablespoonful
of salt in a quart of water, and to be actually boiling when you put in
the vegetables. This same rule applies to the cooking of peas, only that
the peas are treated a little differently in the cleaning, but they are
cooked in the same way. Boil the vegetable (whatever it is) in salted
water, fast, just till they are tender. Remember what I said about
boiling carrots yesterday. As soon as the vegetables are tender, drain
them and throw them into plenty of cold water. Leave them in the cold
water until you want to use them. Then, if peas or beans, drain them,
heat them quickly, with a little salt and pepper and butter, very
quickly, or any sauce or gravy you wish to serve them in, and serve them
hot. If lettuce or spinach, to make a _puree_, after having boiled in
boiling salted water and then put in cold water, rub them through a
sieve with a potato masher. After they are rubbed through the sieve they
are ready to be used in different ways. In Europe the _puree_ of lettuce
is served as a vegetable, just as the _puree_ of spinach is. We do not
often cook it in that way, but it is very nice; it is such an
exceedingly tender vegetable that it takes proportionately more than of
spinach. After the lettuce or spinach is rubbed through the colander or
sieve with a potato masher it is ready to be seasoned with salt, pepper
and vinegar, or any sauce you like, and used as a vegetable, or used in
soup. You remember what I told you about spinach soup yesterday--_puree_
of spinach with cream soup, colored green with spinach. Put in just
enough spinach to cover it. If I succeed in getting spinach next week I
shall make, at one of the lessons, spinach soup, and also boil and serve
some as a vegetable.

Now about peas. I spoke about washing string beans but not washing peas.
If the shells of the peas are at all dirty, and sometimes they are so
that they blacken your fingers in shelling, wash the shells of the peas
before you begin to shell them, but do not wash the peas after they are
shelled. Of course the inside of the pod is perfectly clean, and if your
hands are clean and the shells are clean, you do not need to wash them.
In using green peas in summer time it is well to have a quantity of
them, perhaps twice as many as you are likely to use for one meal, and
shell them, because you know they are of different sizes always. Shell
them and separate them into two different sizes, the smallest and the
largest, and then cook one size for one day, putting the others in a
very cool place, or refrigerator, and cook them the next day, because if
you have the large and small ones mixed they do not cook evenly. You
will find them very much nicer; if you keep them in a cool place it will
not hurt to keep them.

The length of time that it takes to boil lettuce or spinach depends
somewhat on the time of the year. The tenderer the spinach is, of
course, the quicker it will boil; when it is very young and tender it
will boil in two or three minutes; when it is older it may take as long
as ten minutes. Ladies very often make the mistake in boiling spinach
that they do in boiling cabbage. They boil it sometimes until the leaves
are destroyed, in order to soften the stalk. The better way is to tear
away the stalk and use only the leaf. Of course, that gives you a
smaller quantity of spinach than if you use the stalk, but when you use
the tough, woody stalk you waste the leaf in boiling. Lettuce usually
boils in a couple of minutes. One of the ladies speaks about cooking
spinach without any water. You can do that if you wish. Just put in a
sauce pan, after having carefully picked it over and washed it; stir it
a little once in a while to be sure that the uncooked top goes down to
the bottom. There is no special advantage in it, because if you boil it
as I tell you, only until it is tender, the water has no effect upon it
except to cook it more quickly. It is the English way to cook it without
water. If you use boiling salted water, as I told you, it cannot
possibly affect the nutriment of the vegetable. It is when you boil
vegetables a long time, and boil them away before you take up the dish,
that you waste the nutriment. These rules apply to every vegetable that
has color in it except beets. Beets have to be cooked without cutting
the skin or trimming them in any way, in order to keep the color.

Now to keep lettuce fresh. I have kept it fresh, even in the summer
time, for two or three days in this way: When it first comes in from the
market wash it thoroughly in plenty of cold salted water. You do not
need to tear it apart. You know I told you the other day about
separating the leaves slightly from the head of the lettuce and shaking
it in cold salted water. Trim off the outside wilted leaves. Wash it
thoroughly in cold salted water, then wet a towel and lay the lettuce in
it, fold it loosely up over the roots and if you have ice lay the towel
on the cake of ice in the refrigerator or by the side of the cake of
ice. If you haven't any ice and have a cold cellar, after you have
washed the lettuce and wrapped it in the wet towel, put it in a box; a
tight wooden box is the best, or a thick pasteboard box if it is not
broken; and put it in the cellar in the coldest place you can find. If
you wrap it in a wet towel and put it on the ice you do not want to look
at it. It will keep fresh at least two days, and sometimes longer; but
if you put it in the cellar you will have to wet the towel thoroughly
twice a day, morning and night; and you will find that you will have to
take away some of the leaves that have wilted, but if you have it upon
the ice the chances are that you will not lose any leaves. And it is
very much nicer than it is to let it wilt and then try to restore it by
soaking it in water.


FRIED PICKEREL.

Next take a recipe for fried pickerel. Some of the ladies will remember
that a few days ago we were talking about frying fish in this way with
salt pork. If any of the ladies have the recipe, of course they do not
need to take it again. For fried fish of any kind, enough salt pork to
cover the bottom of the frying pan that you are going to use for the
fish. You find you have three or four pounds of fish; you will need at
least half a pound of salt pork. Cut the pork in very thin slices; fat
salt pork is the best. Put it in the frying pan and fry it until it is
light brown. While the pork is being fried get ready the fish, having it
thoroughly cleaned by washing it in cold water. If the fish is small you
do not need to cut it; if it is large, cut it in pieces about three or
four inches square. After the fish has been cleaned dry it in a towel;
season some Indian meal with salt and pepper, roll the fish in the
Indian meal. When the pork is brown take it out of the fat and put the
fish into the drippings and fry the fish brown, first on one side and
then on the other. When the fish is browned nicely serve it in a dish
with the pork--fried pork and fish in one dish. This fish will not get
very brown to-day, because it is still frozen. It did not come in long
enough ago for us to get it thawed out, so, of course, there will be a
little water in the fat, and it will not get quite so brown.




LECTURE TENTH.


CHEAP DISHES AND REWARMED FOODS.

We begin our lesson this afternoon with a dish of rice,--piloff of
rice,--any cold meat cut in small squares, an onion peeled and chopped
fine, and if you have tomatoes, either canned, fresh, or cold stewed
tomatoes, a cupful. Sometimes the dish is made with tomatoes, sometimes
without. Put the onion in the sauce pan with a tablespoonful of
drippings; set it over the fire and let it get light brown. When it is
light brown put with it a cupful of rice, picked over and washed and
dried by the fire. After the onion begins to brown put the rice with it
and stir until the rice is light brown; then put in a quart of hot
water, the meat and tomatoes and a palatable seasoning of salt and
pepper. Of course, the quantity of salt and pepper that you use will
depend on the seasoning of the meat, and this may be any kind of meat.
Then cover the sauce pan in which you have all these things and let the
rice, meat, tomatoes and water all cook together gently. Every ten
minutes you must look to see whether the rice has absorbed all the
water. If it has you must add a little more water, not more than half a
cupful at a time, keeping the rice just moist until it is tender. You
will find that probably in about half an hour the rice will be tender,
and when the dish is done it should not have the gravy about it; it
simply needs to be moist, so you will have to add water cautiously after
the first quart.

If the meat that you use is very fat,--and sometimes beef like this is
very fat,--you may cook the meat, fat and lean together in with the
onion in the first place instead of the tablespoonful of butter or
drippings. If you have no meat you can make the dish in the same way
using tomato, onion and rice; and if you have cold gravy of any kind put
that in it.


FRENCH HASH.

Next take the recipe for a dish called French hash. There is no potato
in it, it is simply meat and gravy, so that you must not let the name
mislead you. Little slices of cold meat, fat and lean together. For a
pint bowlful of meat use about a tablespoonful of chopped onion. First
slightly brown the onion with a tablespoonful of butter or drippings or
fat from the meat; then when the onion begins to brown put in the meat
and let that brown. Next a tablespoonful of dried flour; stir the flour
with the brown meat and onion until the flour is quite brown; then cover
the meat with pork gravy or boiling water. After you have covered the
meat with water or cold gravy just let the water or gravy boil, then
season it palatably with salt and pepper; of course, the seasoning will
depend upon whether you have used gravy or broth or water. If you have
used gravy or broth that already will have been seasoned, so that you
want to taste for the seasoning. After the gravy is both boiled and
seasoned take the sauce pan off the fire and stir in the yolk of one raw
egg with it and dish at once. You must not put the hash back on the fire
after putting the egg in. If you do you will curdle it. Do not stir the
egg in till you are ready to serve it, on toast or plain.


BAKED TENDERLOINS.

The next recipe will be for baked tenderloins. Split the pork
tenderloins in such a way as to make rather thick slices. Tenderloins
are so thick that by cutting you spread them out. Inside the slice of
tenderloin put any stuffing that you like. I have given two or three
recipes for different kinds of stuffing. For this to-day I shall use a
little stale bread, crumbed, seasoned with salt and pepper, and
moistened with butter; a tablespoonful of butter to a scant cupful of
bread, or in place of butter you could use an egg. After you put a
little stuffing in the tenderloins fold them together and either tie or
sew them so as to keep the stuffing inside. Put the tenderloins in the
dripping pan in the oven and bake them until they are thoroughly
browned. Then take off the strings and serve them. They are very nice if
you bake potatoes in the pan with them. If the oven is hot the potatoes
and tenderloins will bake in about the same time. The potatoes should be
peeled. Remember what I told you about always taking large stitches in
sewing up meat, so that you can see to pull them out when the meat is
done. Of course, pork tenderloins will be pretty sure to yield drippings
enough to baste with. I have spoken about that in the baking of meats
two or three times. No water is needed in preparing them. The
tenderloins, when sewed up, will resume their original shape.


FRIED LIVER.

First, wash the liver in cold water, then pour scalding water on it and
let it stand for about ten minutes to draw out the blood; slice it about
half an inch thick. After the liver is scalded and sliced, roll it in
flour, season it with salt and pepper and put it into the frying pan
containing about a quarter of an inch of hot fat, which may be drippings
or fat from bacon or salt pork. In that case you first would fry the
salt pork or bacon to get the fat or drippings, and put the slices of
pork or bacon to keep warm when they are done. After the pork or bacon
is fried put it on a dish to keep warm, and then fry the liver in the
drippings. As soon as the liver is browned on both sides serve it on a
dish with the fried pork or bacon. Fried liver needs to be cooked as
quickly as possible, making sure that it is done. The more quickly you
can cook it the tenderer it will always be. You can take that as a rule
in regard to liver, heart and tongue, that the faster they can be cooked
the tenderer they will be. To-day I simply have fried this with
drippings. I have not fried the bacon with it, but I have told you how
to fry it.


BAKED HASH.

Next take a recipe for baked hash. Equal quantities of chopped meat and
stale bread, meat of any kind. Suppose you have a pint bowl of each. Mix
with the meat and the bread a heaping tablespoonful of butter, a
palatable seasoning of salt and pepper, and that, of course, will depend
upon the seasoning of the meat. You may use corned beef or highly
seasoned meat, and then you will not need so much seasoning as you would
if you used fresh meat. A heaping teaspoonful of chopped parsley, enough
cold gravy, if you have it, or broth to moisten the hash,--just to
moisten it, not make it sloppy,--or if you have not gravy or broth you
must use water and butter. Mix the hash very thoroughly. Have ready an
earthen dish, buttered. See that the oven is hot, then very quickly
dissolve a teaspoonful of baking powder in a teaspoonful of water or
broth and stir it into the hash just as fast as you can and put it into
the oven to bake. As soon as the hash is brown on top it will be done.


CORNED BEEF HASH.

Now I will give you a recipe for corned beef hash. Yesterday we spoke
about boiling corned beef. You will take cold corned beef and boiled
potatoes, either hot or cold, about equal quantities. Sometimes people
like a little more potato than meat. Mix the meat and potato together;
add just enough water or broth to moisten the meat and potato. Season
palatably with salt and pepper and butter; have the hash nicely mixed
together; put into the frying pan; suppose you have a quart of hash,
about two tablespoonfuls of butter and let it get hot, then put in the
hash. Stir the hash in the butter until it is nearly hot. Then, using a
knife, form it into a cake on one side of the frying pan and let the
bottom brown. Loosen the hash once in a while from the bottom of the pan
to make sure it is not burning and when it is brown on the bottom turn
it out on a dish with the brown side up. Another form of hash is the
moist hash. That is simply prepared and warmed without browning it,
using broth or butter and hot water for moistening it.




LECTURE ELEVENTH.


OYSTERS.

We begin our lecture this morning with roast oysters, Mobile style. All
oysters, when cooked in any way, should be first put in a colander and
the juice allowed to drain off, then strain the juice. Always take each
oyster in the hand and carefully remove all fragments of shell from the
gills. The shells of oysters are dangerous to swallow, and serious
illness is often the result. Hold the oyster by the hard part, removing
pieces of shell with the finger. Then wipe the oyster with a wet towel.
Keep the most perfect specimens for broiling, as the more imperfect ones
will do sufficiently well for soups or stews. For roasting oysters in
the Mobile style, have as many deep oyster shells as you intend to have
oysters, scrubbed very clean; put the shells in a dripping pan and place
them in the oven, until they become so hot as to melt butter when put
into them. When quite hot take the shells out of the oven and put a
small piece of butter and a very little pepper in each shell. If the
oysters are large lay one in each shell, if they are small put two or
three in each shell and put them back in the oven directly. By the time
the edges of the oysters curl they will be done. Oysters when heated
through are done. Do not put any salt on them. Serve them on the shells.
As they are served in Mobile, a large shell is used, laid on a small
charcoal furnace, putting the shell on top of the furnace to get very
hot; the furnace is brought to the table and the oysters opened and
dropped into the hot shell and turned once. The regulation way of
roasting oysters is to thoroughly wash the outside of the shell and lay
them on the fire with the large end down. As soon as the oysters open
serve them.

To use the liquor, take a pint of the oyster liquor after it has been
strained; sift a heaping cupful of flour; mix with it a level
teaspoonful of salt and a heaping teaspoonful of baking powder. Have the
griddle as hot as you would for pancakes. Very quickly stir into the
flour enough of the oyster liquor to make a batter, and fry just as any
pancake; serve hot with butter.

Next take a recipe for oyster fritters. Have the frying kettle half full
of fat, as you would for doughnuts. Strain the oysters and remove all
bits of shell. In the meantime the lard should be heating on the back
of the stove. Cut the oysters slightly. For a pint of oysters use a pint
of flour, sifted, and mixed with a level teaspoonful of salt. Put the
flour in a mixing bowl with the yolk of one egg, a tablespoonful of
salad oil, and a pinch of pepper. Use enough of the oyster liquor to
make a batter thick enough to drop from the spoon. Beat the white of an
egg to a stiff froth. Mix the oysters and the white of egg lightly with
the batter, and as soon as it is mixed drop by the large spoonful into
the hot lard. As soon as brown take the fritters out and lay them for a
moment on brown paper to drain the grease off. In order to keep them hot
while you are frying the rest lay the paper on a dripping pan and set it
in the oven.

Take next a recipe for oyster soup, thickened with cracker dust. For a
quart of oysters, remove all bits of shell, as usual, and mix the oyster
liquor with enough to make a quart. Take one tablespoonful of butter, a
very little white pepper, if you have it, two tablespoonfuls of cracker
dust finely powdered. As I told you the other day, the cracker dust
which you buy at the cracker factories is the nicest. Stir all together
over the fire, and when it comes to a boil put in the oysters, with a
level teaspoonful of salt. Stir till the edges of the oysters curl; then
serve. To thicken with flour, stir one tablespoonful of flour and one of
butter together over the fire. Season with pepper, and put in one quart
of liquor and milk.

For plain broiled oysters, prepare the oysters as above directed and lay
them on a towel. Take a double-wire broiler and butter it thickly,
taking care to have the fire hot. Season the oysters lightly with pepper
and but very little, if any, salt. Put the oysters between the broiler,
and broil them; serve them on toast.

For breaded oysters, prepare as before, and dip the oysters in melted
butter seasoned with pepper and salt, and roll them in cracker crumbs.
Put them on the gridiron and broil them until they are light brown.

For oysters broiled with bacon, cut very thin slices of breakfast bacon,
as many slices as oysters, and stick them on little skewers, half a
dozen oysters on each skewer, first a slice of bacon and then an oyster,
until you have half a dozen on each skewer. Flatten them so that they
will lie a little apart. Put the skewer between the buttered bars of the
gridiron, dust them a little with pepper and brown them. The bacon
should be cut very thin and about the size of the oyster. Serve them on
the skewers.

For oysters in the Philadelphia style, prepare the oysters by draining
the juice from them and removing the small pieces of shells. Use for one
dozen large oysters one tablespoonful of lard, two tablespoonfuls of
salad oil. As soon as the fat is hot put the oysters in and fry them
till the edges curl. Season them with pepper and salt. Fry them plain or
rolled in flour.


WELSH RAREBIT.

For a rarebit large enough for three or four persons, put in a sauce pan
a quarter of a pound of grated cheese, two tablespoonfuls of butter, a
saltspoonful of salt, two tablespoonfuls of ale, one teaspoonful of
mustard, a little dust of cayenne pepper, stir all these together over
the fire and serve on toast.




LECTURE TWELFTH.

_Cookery for the Sick._


BROILED CHICKEN.

For broiled chicken choose always a tender chicken. Remove all the
feathers, singe it over the fire, and wipe the chicken with a wet towel.
Split the chicken down the back. In doing that one can remove the
entrails without breaking. Take out the entrails and crop; lay the
chicken open on the gridiron. It is better to use a double gridiron,
well buttered. If the chicken is not tender, break the joints so the
chicken will lie flat on the gridiron. Put the inside of the chicken to
the fire first and brown it. Do not put it too close to the fire. Broil
it fifteen or twenty minutes, for it will require about that time to get
well done. When the inside is brown, turn it and broil the outside,
allowing about ten minutes. Take time enough to brown it nicely without
burning. If you have a very young spring chicken less time will be
required. Do not broil a chicken that weighs over three pounds. If the
chicken is very large it is better to put it in a very hot oven in a
pan, with no butter unless the chicken is very lean. Season with salt,
pepper and butter, if desired, when it is removed from the oven.


BARBECUED CHICKEN.

Split down the back, and after breaking the joints dress and lay it
open. Use two tablespoonfuls of butter and one cup of water. Season with
salt and pepper. Brown the chicken well, dredge it with flour and baste
it every fifteen minutes with drippings from the pan until tender. Pour
over it the gravy that you find in the pan, and serve. The Southerners,
with whom this dish is a great favorite, usually put in this gravy some
nice table sauce.


JELLIED OATMEAL.

Take one-half cup of very finely ground oatmeal and put it over the fire
with a pint of boiling water and a level teaspoonful of salt. Boil it
very slowly until it becomes transparent. This will require two hours or
longer. Do not add any more water unless it is positively necessary.
When it is done it should be stiff and hold its form when it is turned
out. It makes a dish which is very nice and nutritious for sick people,
when it is quite gelatinous. Add sugar, if it is desired, and put it in
a mould. Serve when cold and solid with cream and powdered sugar.


BOILED TROUT.

Boiled trout makes an excellent dish for convalescents and it is very
nutritious. Have the fish cleaned and the scales removed. The entrails
should be drawn from the gills. After the fish has been thoroughly
washed boil it in salted boiling water till you can easily pull a fin
out, then serve it with a white sauce either made plain or with milk.
French canned green peas are nice with trout. If the peas are served
with the trout put the peas on the dish and lay the trout on them.

Clam soup may be given to invalids with beef tea, alternating. Clam soup
may be given when beef tea can not be digested. It is very nutritious.
Drain off the juice and remove all bits of shell as with oysters. If the
clams are whole put the shells over the fire until they are heated;
remove the clams and simply season the juice very lightly with salt and
pepper and use the broth in that shape. If you are using canned clams
heat the clams in the juice, then remove the juice and season slightly,
using the juice. Strain the juice. Take the clams and cut away the hard
part from the soft part. Boil the juice, with the hard part, long enough
to extract the flavor. Use the juice to make the soup, adding water or
milk. When the soup is made season it, putting the soft part of the clam
in it. Boil it a couple of minutes and serve it. Use butter and flour in
the same manner as for thickening oyster soup.

Make orange salad to serve with broiled chicken in the following manner:
For a small chicken use two small sour oranges, sliced very thin.
Arrange them nicely on a dish. Place over the slices of orange a very
little salt, a little cayenne pepper, and three tablespoonfuls of salad
oil. If the oranges are sweet a few drops of vinegar or lemon juice must
be added. Serve the chicken on top of the orange salad.


RENNET CUSTARD.

Heat a half pint of milk until it is lukewarm. While the milk is heating
beat one egg with a teaspoonful of powdered sugar and stir the egg and
sugar in with it. When the milk is lukewarm add one teaspoonful of
liquid rennet and one teaspoonful of wine or one tablespoonful of rennet
wine. Mix all together and let it become cold. Rennet custard may be
given safely when the invalid is not able to take more than broth.


BEEF TEA.

For a pint of beef tea take one pound of beef chopped very fine. All the
fat is to be cut away. Put it in a bowl with a pint of cold water. Let
it stand in an earthen bowl at least an hour, and longer if possible.
Put the water and beef in the sauce pan over the fire, and heat them
very slowly indeed. When the beef tea arrives at the boiling point pour
it into a wire sieve to allow the juice and the little particles of
meat--not the fibres--to pass through. Season it very lightly, and if
any particles of fat are visible lay little pieces of white porous paper
on top of the tea to absorb the fat; serve it hot or cold.




NAMES AND ADDRESSES OF PERSONS IN ATTENDANCE UPON THIS COURSE.


  Alexander, Jane A.                  30 Prince Street, Minneapolis, E. D.
  Asire, Mrs. Dr. L.                  258 First Avenue South, Minneapolis.
  Aasland, G. P.                         1315 Seventh Street, S. E., City.
  Abbott, Mrs. A. L.                              1115 Fifth Street, E. D.
  Adams, Mrs. S. E.                          Care of Carrier 3, West Side.
  Ainsworth, Mrs. C. F.                  404 Nicollet Avenue, Minneapolis.
  Amy, Jennie M.                        1809 Portland Avenue,      "
  Anderson, Hannah                          2215 Park Avenue,      "
  Adair, Mrs. Mary                    206 Tenth Street South,      "
  Arnold, Mrs. E. L.                 513 Eighth Avenue South,      "
  Adams, Miss Alice.                 University of Minnesota,      "
  Allen, Mrs. M. L.              312 Fourth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Angbe, Mary                                       Box 1829,      "
  Adams, Mrs. August                       Care of Carrier 3,      "
  Abraham, Miss M. P.                   1025 Hennepin Avenue,      "
  Anderson, Henrietta        525 University Avenue Southeast,      "
  Alden, Jennie M.                                   Box 143,      "
  Athens, Mrs.                    801 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Anderson, Mrs. R.             1025 Eighth Street Southeast,      "
  Anderson, Anna E.              618 Fourth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Adams, Mrs. Charles                      107 Island Avenue,      "
  Allen, Miss Kitty                                       St. Cloud, Minn.
  Anderson, Miss Mary                       701 Union Avenue, Minneapolis.
  Ames, Mrs. C. W.                           233 Western Avenue, St. Paul.
  Avery, Mrs. G. W.          725 Fourteenth Avenue Southeast, Minneapolis.
  Alden, Bertha                  1227 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Alexander, Mrs. Jane                52 Prince Street E. D.,      "
  Allen, Mrs. E. S.                                 Jacksonville, Vermont.
  Alger, Mrs. Q. D.                   1227 University Avenue, Minneapolis.
  Asire, Mollie                       258 First Avenue South,      "
  Andrews, Mrs. F. P.             527 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Austin, Mrs. M. P.                1212 Eighth Street South,      "
  Anderson, Martha                                     Eden Prairie, Minn.
  Billings, Miss Ida P.              70 North Twelfth Street, Minneapolis.
  Bicknell, Mrs. Chas. A.    416 Nineteenth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Bicknell, Miss F. E.          1805 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Beach, Mrs. W. H.                         1509 Park Avenue,      "
  Berry, Flora                   300 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Barrows, Miss Nellie           227 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Beach, Miss M. P.                         1509 Park Avenue,      "
  Brown, Mrs. E. J.                       61 Highland Avenue,      "
  Barrett, Nellie                    611 Second Avenue North,      "
  Buhtolph, Mrs. F. G.           1829 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Butler, H. E.                  1829 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Berry, Miss Olive             1906 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Bradley, Miss Anna            1901 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Brown, Mrs. Elwood                   425 University Avenue,      "
  Bartlett, C. J.                             Care _Tribune_,      "
  Beveridge, Miss Nellie                 43 Royalston Avenue,      "
  Bolton, Lettie E.         1529 University Avenue Southeast,      "
  Benton, Mary L.                419 Eighth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Bausman, Miss Bertha                320 South Tenth Street,      "
  Budington, Miss Anna                 1209 Hawthorne Avenue,      "
  Barry, Mrs. J. L.                 218 Twelfth Street South,      "
  Bolton, Mrs. N. H.                  1529 University Avenue,      "
  Bell, Mrs. J. F.                                     Long Prairie, Minn.
  Bradford, Belle                1313 Fifth Street Southeast, Minneapolis.
  Bardwell, Mrs. Wm.                                      Excelsior, Minn.
  Bradley, Mrs. R.              1910 Fourth Street Southeast, Minneapolis.
  Bettman, Mrs. P. H.              35 Sixteenth Street North,      "
  Bernard, Mrs. M. M.             517 Ninth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Billings, Mrs. A. L.               70 North Twelfth Street,      "
  Butler, Mrs. L.                     808 Third Avenue South,      "
  Brown, Miss Nellie          625 Fifteenth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Butler, Mrs. H. E.                     1829 Western Avenue,      "
  Blake, Miss S. C.                      324 Hennepin Avenue,      "
  Bardwell, Mrs. C. T.                      1800 Park Avenue,      "
  Bolton, Miss L. F.            1801 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Bacon, Mrs. W. H.               401 Sixth Avenue Northeast,      "
  Bentliff, Mrs.
  Bevan, Mrs.                     801 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Bosworth, Inez                  502 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Berry, Mrs. R. W.               502 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Bemis, E. W.                    502 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Butler, Mrs. G. S.        Room 3 Lindley Block, corner Seventh
                              Street and Nicollet Avenue.          "
  Burtliff, Mrs. G.                  1806 Sixth Avenue South,      "
  Bredyman, Mrs. C.                                       St. Cloud, Minn.
  Bridgeman, Anna J.              837 Fifteenth Avenue South, Minneapolis.
  Burce, I. M.                              College Hospital,      "
  Brown, Paul                 625 Fifteenth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Bell, Annie D.                 616 Fourth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Brooks, Mrs. D. T.                                      Minneiska, Minn.
  Brown, Clara                          1129 Hennepin Avenue, Minneapolis.
  Beveridge, Miss Kate                   43 Royalston Avenue,      "
  Bonfoy, Anna H.         823 Twenty-second Avenue Southwest, Minneapolis.
  Burch, Mrs. Lottie J.                                   Excelsior, Minn.
  Blaisdell, Ada                                     Box 178, Minneapolis.
  Bragg, Mrs. W. F.                                                "
  Brooks, Mrs. Jabez                      1708 Laurel Avenue,      "
  Boeland, Mrs. Geo                                       Iowa City, Iowa.
  Baldwin, Mrs. R. J.               423 Seventh Street South, Minneapolis.
  Blaisdell, Miss Sadie                              Box 178,      "
  Ball, Mrs. Sarah                                        Excelsior, Minn.
  Beebe, Mrs. R. P.                      614 Franklin Avenue, Minneapolis.
  Bolton, Mrs. A. C.      1801 Fourth Street and Eighteenth Ave.
                            S. E.,                                 "
  Brown, Estelle              625 Fifteenth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Baker, Sibyl B.                1611 Sixth Street Southeast,      "
  Blanchard, Carrie W.               University of Minnesota,      "
  Cheney, Mrs. Isaac             238 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Carriel, Mrs. D. S.                     1808 Fourth Avenue,      "
  Connor, Miss A. A.                  1415 University Avenue,      "
  Cheney, Miss Nellie A.    Corner Franklin Avenue and
                              Minnehaha,                           "
  Cheney, Mrs. E.           Corner Franklin Avenue and
                              Minnehaha,                           "
  Cantwell, Miss M. J.     1215 Chestnut Avenue, Minneapolis,      "
  Cummings, Mrs. R.               325 Sixth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Cooley, Mrs. E.                 121 Cess. Avenue Southeast,      "
  Coe, C. E.                    Room 59, 315 Hennepin Avenue,      "
  Coe, Helen                 619 Thirteenth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Cooper, Mrs. Preston     Fourth Street and Third Avenue
                             South,                                "
  Castner, Mrs. F. H.        725 Fourteenth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Covey, Hattie D.                   508 Eighth Avenue South,      "
  Cuzner, Mrs. A. B.       Twelfth Ave. Southeast, bet. Com.
                             and Palm,                             "
  Cooke, Mrs. J.                 1521 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Cole, Miss Carrie A.         113 Pleasant Street Southeast,      "
  Cole, Mrs. Alida             113 Pleasant Street Southeast,      "
  Camp, Mrs. A. R.               1405 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Curtis, Mrs. E. F.             527 Second Avenue Southeast,      "
  Clark, Prudy                                         Eden Prairie, Minn.
  Crane, Tremont                1113 Fourth Street Southeast, Minneapolis.
  Conklin, Miss Margaret                    2215 Park Avenue,      "
  Chapman, Mrs. Dr. O. S.           1123 Fourth Avenue South,      "
  Carpenter, Mrs. G. W.                117 University Avenue,      "
  Carver, Miss Linda.                                              "
  Carver, Mr. R. I.              1226 Sixth Street Southeast,      "
  Cunningham, Miss          Portland Avenue, between Eighteenth
                              and Nineteenth streets.              "
  Cantwell, Mrs. P. P.                  1215 Chestnut Avenue,      "
  Chunt, Miss B. A.                  1133 Ninth Street North,      "
  Chapman, Miss                   204 Fifth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Caswell, Mrs. Vesta                                    Litchfield, Minn.
  Caswell, Mrs. Martha                                   Coon Creek, Minn.
  Clark, Mrs. Frank                   616 Sixth Avenue North, Minneapolis.
  Cone, Mrs. J. W.                701 Sixth Street Southeast,      "
  Crafts, Lettie                  610 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Croswell, Mrs. H. J. G.        1301 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Cary, Mrs. N. H.                       2216 Portland Place,      "
  Cook, Mrs. Nordy                                                 "
  Cole, Mrs. E.                 Seventeenth and Vine Streets,      "
  Cone, Mrs. M. D.            Stearns Avenue and Twenty-eighth
                                Street,                            "
  Chamberlain, Mrs. W. E.                                     Anoka, Minn.
  Crafts, Mrs. A.                 610 Fifth Street Southeast, Minneapolis.
  Crocker, Mrs. E. B.                    2222 Portland Place,      "
  Coe, Mrs. C. A.            619 Thirteenth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Conner, Mrs. J. L.                 252 Second Avenue South,      "
  Chute, Mrs. S. H.                     15 University Avenue,      "
  Cady, Louise                       University of Minnesota,      "
  Cummings, Miss L.               325 Sixth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Crippen, Miss                            34 Seventh Street,      "
  Cuzner, Mrs. E. A.                                               "
  Cummings, Miss M.               325 Sixth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Coplin, Mrs. Chas              318 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Creelman, Mrs. M. J.                      5 Eastman Avenue,      "
  Coverdale, Mrs. J. W.          336 South Eighteenth Street,      "
  Caskin, Miss E. C.         428 Eighth Street and Fifth Avenue
                               South,                              "
  Christian, Mrs. Geo. H.    Corner Eighth Street and Fourth
                               Avenue South.                       "
  Coverdale, Daniel              336 Eighteenth Street South,      "
  Cumming, Mrs. Gussie                                Taylors Falls, Minn.
  Calderwood, Mrs. J. T.                    415 Grant Street, Minneapolis.
  Cummings, Mrs. Henry                726 First Avenue North,      "
  Connell, Miss Kate B.              70 North Twelfth Street,      "
  Coe, Mrs.                             1906 Hawthorn Avenue,      "
  Christian, Mrs. L.         Eighth Street and Fifth Avenue
                               South,                              "
  Clark, Mrs. G. A.                 809 Seventh Street South,      "
  Calhoun, Mrs. J. F.                  60 South Tenth Street,      "
  Coffin, Mrs. W. F.         1013 Sixteenth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Coykendall, Mrs. J. K.          715 Sixteenth Street South,      "
  Chapin, Mrs. N. C.         319 University Avenue Southeast,      "
  Cordell, D. W.                       904 University Avenue,      "
  Crosby, Mrs. Judge                                       Hastings, Minn.
  Cook, Mrs. Alma                                             Anoka, Minn.
  Campbell, Mrs. L. W.           1100 Fifth Street Southeast, Minneapolis.
  Carey, Mrs. Maggie                 926 Second Avenue South,      "
  Connor, Mrs. E. H.             1105 Sixth Street Southeast,      "
  Carswell, Mrs. J. F.                     43 Eastman Avenue,      "
  Canfield, Miss Maggie      Corner Cedar Avenue and Twenty-sixth
                               Street,                             "
  Cheney, Jennie L.              325 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Christie, Mrs. J. O.       714 University Avenue Southeast,      "
  Cone, Mrs. E. C.           714 University Avenue Southeast,      "
  Dean, O. A.                                           Bloomington, Minn.
  Dexter, Mrs. Chas                         63 Island Avenue, Minneapolis.
  Davidson, Mrs. E. B.                  1021 Hennepin Avenue,      "
  Donnell, Mrs.              Nineteenth Street between Sixth
                               and Seventh Avenues South      Minneapolis.
  Dorsett, Mrs. C. W.                                              "
  Dix, Mrs. S. A.                    27 South Twelfth Street,      "
  Dyer, Mrs. C. E.           624 University Avenue Southeast,      "
  Durkee, Mrs. H. O.                                      Rochester, Minn.
  Dodson, Mrs. E. F.                    1509 Portland Avenue, Minneapolis.
  Donovan, Mrs. M.                     Street Railway Office,      "
  Derickson, Mrs. G. P.                   24 Highland Avenue,      "
  Davenport, Mrs. E. J.                         63 Oak Grove,      "
  Dudley, Mrs. D. W.                              2030 Place,      "
  Dennison, Mrs. J. E.         1413 Seventh Street Southeast,      "
  Dodge, Mrs. J. A.              417 Eighth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Dowers, Mrs. E.                110 Washington Avenue South,      "
  Dennett, Miss S. E.                  716 University Avenue,      "
  Doolittle, Mrs. L. A.           727 Sixth Street Southeast,      "
  Deveau, Miss Gertrude               804 Sixth Avenue South,      "
  Dickinson, Mrs. G. L.              1301 First Avenue South,      "
  Donthwaite, Mrs. M. A.                                Bloomington, Minn.
  Donald, Mrs. M.                  903 Main Street Southeast, Minneapolis.
  Downey, Mrs. Stella           801 Seventh Street Southeast,      "
  Davenport, Mrs. Jason                57 South Tenth Street,      "
  Doerr, Mrs. Henry                     25 Washington Avenue,      "
  Davenport, Mrs. G. C.                  619 Mississippi Street, St. Paul.
  Daniel, Mrs.                         319 University Avenue, Minneapolis.
  De Mott, Mrs. H. V.        Seventeenth St., bet. Nicollet
                               and Hennepin,                       "
  Davison, Mrs. R. A.                                Box 440,      "
  De Laittre, Mrs. Jno.                   24 Grove Place, Nicollet Island.
  Dailey, Mrs. C. W.                               Box 717 Brainerd, Minn.
  Dailey, Miss A. E.         714 University Avenue Southeast, Minneapolis.
  Dailey, Mrs. M. A.         714 University Avenue Southeast,      "
  Elliot, Mrs. J. R.         Cor. Tenth Street and Tenth Ave.
                               South,                              "
  Elliott, Mrs. A. F.                    429 Nicollet Avenue,      "
  Emery, Mrs. Fanny                      2030 Portland Place,      "
  Emery, Mrs. H. F.                  724 Fourth Street South,      "
  Elliot, Mrs. D.                    1415 Sixth Avenue South,      "
  Eustis, Miss Emma                        University Avenue,      "
  Eustis, Miss Nellie                      University Avenue,      "
  Eustis, Mrs. E. S.                       University Avenue,      "
  Eastman, Mrs. Geo. H.      18 Grove Place, Nicollet Island,      "
  Einstein, Mrs. Kate                    620 Nicollet Avenue,      "
  Eastman, Mrs. John W.                716 University Avenue,      "
  Eastman, Mrs. H. D.        20 Grove Place, Nicollet Island,      "
  Elliot, Mrs. M. E.                  814 Third Avenue South,      "
  Edgerly, Mrs. Frank        609 Thirteenth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Erickson, Mrs. O. P.       609 Thirteenth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Elwell, Mrs. Jas. P.                                             "
  Ermentrouh, Mrs. C. H.                1820 Nicollet Avenue,      "
  Edwards, Mrs. John                      617 Seventh Avenue,      "
  Edwards, Miss Flora                             Box 888, Brainerd, Minn.
  Eaton, Mrs. Chas. A.                    First Avenue North, Minneapolis.
  Emery, Mrs. J. C.                      2030 Portland Place,      "
  Emery, Dr. Mary                             433 Dayton Avenue, St. Paul.
  Elwell, Mary W.                     1002 Elwell's Addition, Minneapolis.
  Elwell, Mrs. George                 1002 Elwell's Addition,      "
  Edwards, Miss Fanny               617 Seventh Avenue South,      "
  Eastman, Mrs. C. C.           Grove Place, Nicollet Island,      "
  Eastman, Mrs. C. H.                        Dedham, Audubon County, Iowa.
  Emery, Mrs. H. F.          1721 Fourth Street South, E. D., Minneapolis.
  Eastman, Mrs. A. M.                  716 University Avenue,      "
  Fowle, Anna R.                   33 Sixteenth Street North,      "
  Foster, Mrs. C. E.                  1401 University Avenue,      "
  Fuller, Jennie, M. D.                       433 Dayton Avenue, St. Paul.
  Foset, Mrs. C. E.               521 Ninth Avenue Southeast, Minneapolis.
  Farrier, Mrs. G. W.                Room 59, Hennepin Block,      "
  Fish, Mrs. A. M.                     49 Third Street South,      "
  Fosberg, Lottie                 228 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Fosberg, Kate                  520 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Fules, Ida                      2118 Portland Avenue South,      "
  Folwell, Mrs. M. H.            1020 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Fobwle, Mrs. E. B.              409 Sixth Street Southeast,      "
  Foster, Mrs. F. P.            1323 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Firkins, Ina                       University of Minnesota,      "
  Fairly, Mrs. William                      613 Cedar Avenue,      "
  Foster, Miss L.                        2216 Portland Place,      "
  Foster, Mrs. Robert            1327 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Francis, Miss Emma                       Care A. B. Barton,      "
  Foster, Mrs. S. E.             518 Eighth Street Southeast,      "
  Foster, Flora              Between Fourth and Fifth Avenues
                               Southeast,                          "
  Fullerton, Mrs. C. F.            203 Eleventh Street South,      "
  Furber, Mrs. Geo.          Corner Sixteenth Avenue, Elwell's
                               Add.,                               "
  Flemming, Annie R.         312 Nineteenth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Felt, Mrs. E. S.                   34 Seventh Street South,      "
  Field, Mrs. Ellen M.       Twenty-first Avenue and Twelfth
                               Street N.,                          "
  Folds, Mrs. William B.             607 Second Avenue South,      "
  Foster, Mrs. A. F.                916 Seventh Street South,      "
  Fairchild, Mrs. E. K.           409 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Forbes, Carrie E.                        21 Eastman Avenue,      "
  Fratzke, Ida                        602 South Tenth Street,      "
  Francisca, Mrs. G. E.          409 Eighth Street Southeast,      "
  Gould, Mrs. Lucy                    527 Ninth Street South,      "
  Guild, S. A.                             1214 Harmon Place,      "
  Graham, Mrs. D. M.                 1527 Sixth Street North,      "
  Garfield, Mrs. J. M.       Corner Nicollet and Hennepin
                               Avenues,                            "
  Gould, Helen M.                                         Excelsior, Minn.
  Grimes, Mrs. J. T.         609 Thirteenth Avenue Southeast, Minneapolis.
  Goodale, Mrs. P. H.            1019 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Goss, Mrs. S. M.                          Olympia, Washington Territory.
  Gage, Mrs. H. C.                   21 South Twelfth Street, Minneapolis.
  Gallow, Mrs. J. E.                 University of Minnesota,      "
  Grindale, Mrs. C. J.           515 Fourth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Gardner, Mrs. E.                631 Fifteenth Street South,      "
  Greenleaf, Mrs. L. L.                                      Beloit,  Wis.
  Gray, Mrs. W. R.                   57 North Twelfth Street, Minneapolis.
  Gray, Miss Mamie                         Care J. R. Hoflin,      "
  Gillette, Mrs. L. S.          1301 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Gallinger, Mrs. H. E.            1103 South Seventh Street,      "
  Grimes, Emma                                         Fergus Falls, Minn.
  Gukell, Mrs. Joseph                38 North Twelfth Street, Minneapolis.
  Gudley, Mrs. J. C.                                         Victor, Iowa.
  Graham, Miss R.                       1224 Nicollet Avenue, Minneapolis.
  Gilpatrick, Mrs. Thos.             1018 Fifth Street South,      "
  Gilpatrick, Mrs. Eva           411 Eighth Street Southeast,      "
  Gordon, Mrs. E. P.         409 Madison Street, East
                               Division,                           "
  Gorham, Mrs. J. E.         Corner Fourteenth Street and Vine
                               Place,                              "
  Griffith, Mrs. O. J.              1307 Fourth Avenue South,      "
  Graves, Mrs. A. R.                513 Seventh Avenue South,      "
  Godfrey, Mrs. A. C.                                     Minnehaha, Minn.
  Gray, Mrs. T. J.                                        St. Cloud, Minn.
  Gilmore, Mrs. D. M.                     1600 Laurel Avenue, Minneapolis.
  Gale, Mrs. S. C.                           Care Gale & Co.,      "
  Graham, Mrs. J.               1112 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Griffith, Mrs. O. J.              1307 Fourth Avenue South,      "
  Grimes, Mrs E. E.                                                "
  Goodrich, Mrs. F. B.               713 Eighth Street South,      "
  Gilfillan, Mrs. J. B.      Corner Fourth St. & Tenth Ave.
                               Southeast,                          "
  Galpin, Mrs.               1328 Cor. Sixth St. and Fourteenth
                               Ave. Southeast,                     "
  Gould, Mrs. M. S.                                       Excelsior, Minn.
  Gould, Lucy M.                           1214 Harmon Place, Minneapolis.
  Goodfellow, Mrs. R. S.               33 South Ninth Street,      "
  Grimes, Mary               509 Thirteenth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Holbrook, Mattie                        210 Central Avenue,      "
  Hawes, Mrs. W. W.               419 Sixth Street Southeast,      "
  Hawes, Mrs. J.             Eighth Street and Tenth Avenue
                               Southeast,                          "
  Hughes, Helen G.              1104 Eighth Street Southeast,      "
  Holbrook, Mrs. E. R.                     29 Eastman Avenue,      "
  Hughes, Mrs. T. E.                     38 Oak Grove Street,      "
  Hayes, Mrs. M. P.                    525 University Avenue,      "
  Holmes, Mrs. J. V.                                          Beloit, Wis.
  Hinshaw, Mrs. A.                414 Sixth Avenue Northeast, Minneapolis.
  Hatch, Mrs. A. P.                   907 First Avenue North,      "
  Huntington, Florence               121 Fourth Street North,      "
  Hall, C. W.                          904 University Avenue,      "
  Hudson, Mrs. James                  Corner Ninth and Broadway, St. Paul.
  Huntley, Mrs J. S.            1025 Eighth Street Southeast, Minneapolis.
  Hoyt, Mrs. C. J.                      628 Sixteenth Street,      "
  How, Lizzie                    425 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Hicks, Mrs. H. G.                   120 Third Avenue South,      "
  Harmon, Miss Irene                  421 First Avenue South,      "
  Harmon, Mrs. E. A.                  421 First Avenue South,      "
  Hoit, Mrs. J. R.                        Pillsbury "A" Mill,      "
  Henderson, Laura E.             217 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Hutchins, Mrs. Dr.              30 Thirteenth Street South,      "
  Hendrickson, Mrs. E. H.                Room 20, F. & M. Block, St. Paul.
  Hayes, Miss Carrie         525 University Avenue Southeast, Minneapolis.
  Ham, Minnie                         640 Sixth Avenue North,      "
  Hayes, Amy N.                  1226 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Heath, Mrs. S. F.             1323 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Hurkinson, Zenobia          Fourth Street and Tenth Avenue,      "
  Hagan, Mrs. A. R.              1013 Sixth Street Southeast,      "
  Hall, Mrs. C. W.           904 University Avenue Southeast,      "
  Hush, Mrs. V. J.           Corner Tenth Street and Second
                               Ave. South,                         "
  Holman, Miss M. B.             1423 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Hoflin, Mrs. J. R.                    1521 Nicollet Avenue,      "
  Hermes, Miss Sarah            1219 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Henshaw, I. M.                  414 Sixth Avenue Northeast,      "
  Halnosson, Mrs. Emma                 30 South Tenth Street,      "
  Hammond, Mrs. Mary                                      Lake City, Minn.
  Harrison, Mrs. John                    700 Hennepin Avenue, Minneapolis.
  Haight, Miss Mamie                           Bismarck, Dakota Territory.
  Hurlburt, Mrs. Wm. H.                                      Winona, Minn.
  Hoag, Mrs. W. R.           1113 Fourth Street South, E. D., Minneapolis.
  Henderson, Mrs. A. C.           217 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Hance, Mrs. S. F.                   720 Sixth Avenue South,      "
  Howey, Mrs. J. F.                  316 Eighth Street South,      "
  Howell, Miss.                       307 Tenth Street South,      "
  Heath, Mrs. L. M.            1324 Fourth Street, Southeast,      "
  Haskell, Mrs. Frank                                Box 586,      "
  Hughs, Mrs. T. E.                      38 Oak Grove Street,      "
  Hall, Mrs. E. I.                     714 University Avenue,      "
  Hastings, Mrs. W. H.               1816 Fifth Avenue South,      "
  Hubbard, Mrs. R. M.                 804 Sixth Avenue South,      "
  Hendrickson, Minnie M.                 Room 20, F. & M. Block, St. Paul.
  Havens, Mrs. H. R.                        413 Grant Street, Minneapolis.
  Hall, Mrs. John            Bet. Eighteenth and Nineteenth
                               Aves. South,                        "
  Houghton, Mrs. A. C.                      1604 Park Avenue,      "
  Harper, Mrs. J. L.            34 South Seventh Street West,      "
  Hurd, Mrs. B. C.                    714 First Avenue North,      "
  Holmes, Mrs. H. A.              113 Pleasant Street, E. D.,      "
  Hall, Mrs. P. D.                     1305 Hawthorne Avenue,      "
  Holden, Mrs. W. H.                                       Hastings, Minn.
  Harrington, Mrs. L. G.                                    Mankato, Minn.
  Hyde, Mrs. E. R.                            Chelsea, Orange County,  Vt.
  Hudson, Mrs. H. H.                              Bridgewater Corner,  Vt.
  Haglin, Mrs. C. F.                 321 South Eighth Street, Minneapolis.
  Hemiup, Mrs. D. D.              604 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Hayes, Mrs. Geo.                      1018 Nicollet Avenue,      "
  Hagan, Fannie                  1013 Sixth Street Southeast,      "
  Hawes, Mrs. W. W.               419 Sixth Street Southeast,      "
  Holmes, Mrs. H. W.         820 University Avenue Southeast,      "
  Hastings, Mrs. A. W.           427 Eighth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Hager, Mrs. P. F.         1010 Fourteenth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Irving, Mary E.                    University of Minnesota,      "
  Irwin, Mrs. E. F.                                       Richfield, Minn.
  Jones, Mrs. C. C.             1529 Fourth Street Southeast, Minneapolis.
  Jefferson, Annie H.           1021 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Jones, A. W.                       University of Minnesota,      "
  Jones, Mrs. Dr.                                          Red Wing, Minn.
  Jamison, Mrs. Robt.            1409 Fifth Street Southeast, Minneapolis.
  Johnson, Miss Bessie           227 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Jones, Mrs. Bertha              88 South Fourteenth Street,      "
  Jones, Mrs. Howard              88 South Fourteenth Street,      "
  Jones, Jennie L.              1529 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Johnson, Mrs. R. H.                30 Seventh Street South,      "
  Joy, Miss Inez E.          Corner Tenth Street and Tenth
                               Ave. South,                         "
  Joslin, Mrs. E. O.                     404 Nicollet Avenue,      "
  Jones, Mrs. Jos.                                        Oskaloosa, Iowa.
  Jefferson, Mrs. C. A.         1021 Fourth Street Southeast, Minneapolis.
  Jones, Mrs. J. J.                  1221 First Avenue North,      "
  James, Mrs. W. A.                    1910 Hawthorne Avenue,      "
  Johnson, Hannah                        2500 Stevens Avenue,      "
  Jones, Mira C.                  502 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Johnson, Miss F. M.                 927 Fifth Avenue South,      "
  Jones, Miss Annie                   122 First Avenue North,      "
  Johnson, Lena                       720 Third Avenue South,      "
  Joslin, Mrs. J. C.                    1203 Hennepin Avenue,      "
  Jackson, Mrs. Geo.                   1914 Hawthorne Avenue,      "
  Jackson, Mrs. A. B.                 Care of Jackson & Pond,      "
  Jerome, Mrs. Chas. P.              620 Second Avenue South,      "
  Johnson, Mrs. L. G.                  329 University Avenue,      "
  Jackson, Mrs. A. B.             715 Sixteenth Avenue South,      "
  Jenkins, Mrs. J. H.                                        Oshkosh, Wis.
  Jones, Mrs. Chas.                           Bradford, Orange County, Vt.
  Johnson, Anna               Sixth Street and Eighth Avenue, Minneapolis.
  Johnson, A. L.             622 Fourteenth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Jackson, Mrs. H. N.                     89 Franklin Avenue,      "
  Jones, Mrs. M. H.                                       Excelsior, Minn.
  Jackson, Mrs. J. G.                                         Minneapolis.
  Johnson, Miss Margaret     714 University Avenue Southeast,      "
  Kingsley, Miss Mary             212 Grant Street Southeast,      "
  Kennedy, Julia                           21 Eastman Avenue,      "
  Kennedy, Miss Mary                   428 University Avenue,      "
  Kiehle, Louisa                     1719 Fifth Avenue South,      "
  Kiehle, Ada M.                     1719 Fifth Avenue South, Minneapolis.
  Kirkwood, Mrs. H.                      614 Hennepin Avenue,      "
  Knotson, Miss Martha                 30 Tenth Street South,      "
  Kittridge, Mrs. C. L.                710 University Avenue,      "
  Kennedy, Mrs. P. A.                  428 University Avenue,      "
  Kennedy, Miss Kate                   428 University Avenue,      "
  Kitteridge, Mary R.           1021 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Kitteridge, Mrs. T.           1021 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Knieff, Emma               1513 Fifteenth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Knox, Miss Florence          1005 Seventh Street Southeast,      "
  Kennedy, Ernest                      428 University Avenue,      "
  Kelly, Miss Kate              1529 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Kuderer, Miss Frances           419 Sixth Street Southeast,      "
  Kelley, Mrs. L. E.                 1203 First Avenue North,      "
  Koon, Mrs. M. B.            Ninth Street and Fourth Avenue,      "
  Kitchel, Mrs. Spanley R.               128 Highland Avenue,      "
  Kent, Mrs. Chas.                       2030 Portland Place,      "
  Kiehle, Mrs. D. L.                 1719 Fifth Avenue South,      "
  Knight, Mrs. S. H.                2018 Eighth Avenue South,      "
  Klopp, Mrs. M. J.                         63 Island Avenue,      "
  Kelley, Mrs. H. H.         803 University Avenue Southeast,      "
  Kelson, Mrs. W. H.         714 University Avenue Southeast,      "
  Little, Jennie E.               24 Fourteenth Street South,      "
  Lewis, Ruth C.                     1310 First Avenue South,      "
  Lyte, Mrs. F. A.               1222 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Loye, Mrs. Wm.                      613 Cedar Avenue South,      "
  Larson, Miss Martha                                              "
  Long, Miss Alva                     420 First Avenue South,      "
  Le Duc, Miss M. C.            1600 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Lackor, Miss Ida F.                       224 Grant Street,      "
  Lackor, Mrs. H. L.                        224 Grant Street,      "
  Lloyd, Mrs. Helen M.                                       Toledo, Ohio.
  Lawley, Mrs. Frank                  229 First Street North, Minneapolis.
  Lunt, Mrs. J. H.              1800 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Lewis, Mrs. D. J.              1600 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Lingrin, Pina                           Care of S. C. Gale,      "
  Lee, Miss                             1227 Hennepin Avenue,      "
  Larson, Miss Emma              1025 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Lyle, Mrs. Robert         1123 University Avenue Southeast,      "
  Lawrence, Lucy C.             1219 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Lovejoy, Mrs. Loren K.         715 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Lewis, Mrs. L. M.                  30 Seventh Street South,      "
  Laythe, Miss Bessie            803 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Laraway, Mrs. L. D.           2215 Thirteenth Avenue South,      "
  Lyall, Maude J.                    University of Minnesota,      "
  Lovell, C. P.                          131 Highland Avenue,      "
  Leathers, Mrs. Oliver                                   Princeton, Minn.
  Laurence Mrs. A. W.             622 Fifth Street Southeast, Minneapolis.
  Lyman, Mrs. J. P.                                        Grinnell, Iowa.
  Lyall, Miss M. E.               326 Fifth Street Northeast, Minneapolis.
  Lisk, Miss                        504 Fourth Street, E. D.,      "
  Lee, Mrs. J. W.                                     Box 51,      "
  Latz, Mrs. F. W.              1401 Washington Avenue South,      "
  Lyons, Wm.                                         Box 685,      "
  Lumley, Mrs. Chas.         Corner Seventh Ave. and Sixth
                               Street South,                       "
  Linton, Mrs. Abner                        Grand Forks, Dakota Territory.
  Latz, Mrs. Dr.            1816 Two-and-a-Half Street South, Minneapolis.
  Longee, Mrs. C. D.             1103 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Leonard, Mrs. L. D.                 812 Third Avenue South,      "
  Long, Mrs. M. C.                           443 Carroll Street, St. Paul.
  Linton, Mrs. A. H.                                 Box 240, Minneapolis.
  Lumbert, Mrs. E. R.                     469 Bluff Street, Dubuque, Iowa.
  Leavitt, Mrs. Elizabeth                31 Royalston Avenue, Minneapolis.
  Leighton, Mrs. H.                        803 Fourth Street,      "
  Lochren, Mrs. Wm.               422 Tenth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Lundeen, Mrs. John A.                               Fort Snelling, Minn.
  Lund, Mrs.                 315 University Avenue Southeast, Minneapolis.
  Lobdell, Mrs. Leila        2706 Twenty-eighth Street South,      "
  Lobdell, Mrs. C.            2910 Thirty-first Avenue South,      "
  Longbrake, Mrs. L. L.                    University Avenue,      "
  Lovejoy, Mrs. J. A.       1013 University Avenue Southeast,      "
  Long, Mrs. E. H.           111 University Avenue Southeast,      "
  Linton, Mrs. A. H.                   79 Sixth Street South,      "
  Lamborn, Mrs. E. F.                 724 First Avenue North,      "
  Lee, Mrs. J. B.               1228 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Libby, Minnie                         2617 Nicollet Avenue,      "
  Lyon, Mrs. R. C.          1010 Fourteenth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Lockwood, Mrs. Phillip         202 Thirteenth Street South,      "
  McDougall, Mrs. J. E.        1515 Seventh Street Southeast,      "
  Montgomery, Mrs. M. W.           720 Eleventh Avenue South,      "
  Markus, Emma                         1910 Hawthorne Avenue,      "
  Morrisson, Miss J. E.          328 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Mann, Ida V.                       1512 Sixth Avenue South,      "
  McMahon, Miss Kate                       Care A. B. Barton,      "
  Myers, Evelyn H.               1214 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  McNair, Will                    814 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  McIntyre, M. Eva                      1833 Portland Avenue,      "
  Murray, Margaret A.                2720 Third Avenue South,      "
  McLaughlin, Miss M.                 229 First Street North,      "
  Marsh, Mrs. C. A. J.                   324 Franklin Avenue,      "
  Marshall, Mrs. J.                  500 Eighth Avenue South,      "
  McSorley, Miss Florence    421 Thirteenth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Mann, Mrs. G. T.                   1512 Sixth Avenue South,      "
  Morris, M. L.                          700 Hennepin Avenue,      "
  Marrs, Josephine                          2211 Park Avenue,      "
  Milliken, Mrs. W. P.                                    Lake City, Minn.
  Martin, Mrs. John                    425 University Avenue, Minneapolis.
  Miner, V. F.                            Flat 5, Hale Block,      "
  Mitchell, Luella               1414 Sixth Street Southeast,      "
  Marston, Mrs. M.                          2211 Park Avenue,      "
  McKenney, Mrs. A. E.       311 University Avenue Southeast,      "
  Merrick, L. L.             Nicollet Ave. bet. Eighteenth &
                               Nineteenth Streets,                 "
  Moore, Mrs. J. P.                  30 South Seventh Street,      "
  Moore, Mrs. Kate                   30 South Seventh Street,      "
  Matthews, B. E.                 727 Sixth Street Southeast,      "
  McNair, Mrs. Isaac                                               "
  McCleary, Mrs. T.              820 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  McNair, Miss A. W.                       North Sparta, Lee County, N. Y.
  McNair, Miss Louise                      North Sparta, Lee County, N. Y.
  Marsh, Helen B.                    417 Second Avenue North, Minneapolis.
  Mayor, Mrs. Belle                      928 Hennepin Avenue,      "
  Morse, Mrs. Susie K.                       Care Gale & Co.,      "
  McMillan, Mrs. P. D.       Fifth Street and Tenth Avenue
                               Southeast,                          "
  Morse, Mrs. W. A.                     1231 Chestnut Avenue,      "
  Major, Mrs. Mollie S.                  917 Hennepin Avenue,      "
  Morrison, Mrs. H. G. O.    Cor. Nicollet Ave. and Fourteenth
                               St.,                                "
  McNair, Marie L.                  1200 Second Avenue South,      "
  Morse, Mrs. F. L.          Cor. Nineteenth St. and Hawthorne
                               Ave.,                               "
  Merrick, Mrs. A. N.                 Room 4, Hurlburt Block,      "
  McNiece, Mrs. Ettie         622 Fifteenth Avenue Southeast,      "
  McCord, Mrs. J.                                          La Crosse, Wis.
  Moffett, Mrs. Chas. W.             3105 Sixth Avenue South, Minneapolis.
  McIntyre, Miss                         324 Hennepin Avenue,      "
  Moore, Mrs. Geo. C.           1608 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  McCann, Mrs. M. A.             2745 Fifteenth Avenue South,      "
  Moore, Mrs. H. L.              301 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Moore, Mrs. A. G.              301 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Moulton, Miss Maddie          902 Seventh Street Southeast,      "
  McClellan, Eva                 2512 Sixteenth Avenue South,      "
  McCulloch, Mrs. A. S.                  1400 Stevens Avenue,      "
  McDonald, Mrs. F. S.              1212 Eighth Street South,      "
  May, Mrs. C.                                                     "
  May, Miss Mary O.             1202 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Mills, Mrs. A. W.                                                "
  McCulloch, Mrs. F. B.                  1400 Stevens Avenue,      "
  Monthei, Mrs. H.              1206 Washington Avenue South,      "
  Moore, Miss Mabel.                     140 Highland Avenue,      "
  Manchester, Mrs. M. S.         1412 Sixth Street Southeast,      "
  Mason, Mrs. M. T.                1103 Seventh Street South,      "
  Morrison, Mrs. L. L.                  1512 Nicollet Avenue,      "
  Milligan, Mrs. J. G.          1202 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Mitchell, Mrs. Nancy                                    Excelsior, Minn.
  Martin, Miss Ellen                   93 Sixth Street South, Minneapolis.
  Morse, Mrs. Frank                    1819 Hawthorne Avenue,      "
  McClary, Maggie A.              316 Sixth Street Southeast,      "
  Molynew, Mrs. B. S.                     702 Seventh Street,      "
  Martin, Mrs. C. J.                  602 Tenth Street South,      "
  Marshall, Mrs. Jas.                500 Eighth Avenue South,      "
  Miller, Nellie M.                        21 Eastman Avenue,      "
  Miller, Miss Mattie                      17 Eastman Avenue,      "
  Miller, Mrs. G. W.                       21 Eastman Avenue,      "
  Miller, Mrs. P. A.                        Cascade, Dubuque County, Iowa.
  Mills, Mrs. S.                                              Minneapolis.
  Morse, Mrs. Chas.                 317 Eighth Street, South,      "
  McNair, Minnie                              Care I. McNair,      "
  McLeod, Mrs. Jennie        725 Fourteenth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Mansfield, Miss A.             709 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Moody, Mrs. F. F.               39 North Nineteenth Street,      "
  Merriam, Mrs. G. N.                828 Second Avenue South,      "
  Miller, Mrs. W. A.                          916 Mary Place,      "
  Moore, Mrs. G. A.              1119 Sixth Street Southeast,      "
  Meader, Mrs. S. B.                 601 Second Avenue South,      "
  Nelson, Emma C.                     113 First Street South,      "
  Nettleton, Miss Carrie M.           927 Fifth Avenue South,      "
  Nind, J. Newton                                                  "
  Nelson, Miss Annie             1020 First Street Southeast,      "
  Noblit, Mrs. J. H.             30 Seventh Street Southeast,      "
  Naylor, Mrs. Geo. M.                     1418 Spruce Place,      "
  Norton, Mrs. L. B.         Northwestern Hospital,
                               Three-and-a-Half Avenue South       "
  Newcomb, Mrs. S.                                                 "
  Nicol, Miss Ida               914 Seventh Street Southeast,      "
  Newman, Mrs.               Sixth Street and Ninth Avenue
                               Southeast,                          "
  Nettleton, Mrs. A. B.               927 Fifth Avenue South,      "
  Nab, Miss Mary                      421 First Avenue South,      "
  Notervan, Mrs. R. E.              617 Seventh Avenue South,      "
  Nelson, Ellen M.               1401 Sixth Street Southeast,      "
  Nickell, Mrs. J. H.                 619 First Avenue South,      "
  Norton, Miss Carrie            715 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Norton, Mrs. H. A.             715 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Newten, Miss H.            Corner Fourteenth Avenue and
                               Eighth Street Southeast             "
  Nichols, Miss Lillie              1206 Eighth Street South,      "
  Outcalt, Miss F. B.            1827 Third Street Southeast,      "
  Outcalt, Miss Cora             1827 Third Street Southeast,      "
  Overmire, Kate                   2022 Seventh Avenue South,      "
  Overmire, Mrs. S.                   2022 Park Avenue South,      "
  Olson, Miss Olive               88 South Fourteenth Street,      "
  Oxnard, Mrs. M. A.                 829 Second Avenue South,      "
  O'Brien, Mrs. W.               411 Eighth Street Southeast,      "
  Owen, Miss Jennie                                       St. Cloud, Minn.
  Orborough, W. A.                                      Bloomington, Minn.
  Otto, Tilly                          63 Tenth Street South, Minneapolis.
  Osgood, Mrs. C. N.                  720 Sixth Avenue South,      "
  Peterson, Carrie                                                 "
  Preston, Jennie                           38 Prince Street,      "
  Pike, Mrs. W. A.                   University of Minnesota,      "
  Payne, Mrs. D. W.                   1415 University Avenue,      "
  Powell, Mrs. C. F.             1025 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Pratt, Mrs. E. A.                  27 Twelfth Street South,      "
  Perkins, Mrs. G. D.                  701 University Avenue,      "
  Plant, Mrs.                            408 Nicollet Avenue,      "
  Peck, Mrs. D. G.                     13 North Ninth Street,      "
  Pearson, Miss S. P.                      1101 Harmon Place,      "
  Pickard, Mrs. F. W.            1300 Sixth Street Southeast,      "
  Penney, Mrs. Robert L.             16 South Twelfth Street,      "
  Peterson, Miss Minnie      1211 Second Street and Twelfth
                               Ave. South,                         "
  Pardee, Mrs. W. S.         Eleventh Street and Twenty-Second
                               Ave. North,                         "
  Porter, M. Estella                                  Box 30,      "
  Porter, Katie P.                                    Box 30,      "
  Porter, Lillie C.                                   Box 30,      "
  Parker, Mrs. H. M.                 57 North Twelfth Street,      "
  Plant, Mrs. James C.                210 Ninth Street South,      "
  Plummer, Mrs. G. A.                   1915 Nicollet Avenue,      "
  Patten, Mrs.                  168 Seventh Street Southeast,      "
  Payne, Mrs. D. C.                 17 North Eleventh Street,      "
  Parker, Mrs. Dr. J. A.            17 North Eleventh Street,      "
  Parker, Mrs. Ed               908 Seventh Street Southeast,      "
  Potter, Miss Elma           623 Fifteenth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Pillsbury, Addie           Fifth Street and Tenth Ave.
                               Southeast,                          "
  Pratt, Mrs. C. H.               727 Sixth Street Southeast,      "
  Parker, Mrs. Geo. A.           516 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Paine, Mrs. J. M.                     2200 Nicollet Avenue,      "
  Pabody, Mrs. E. F.                  808 Third Avenue South,      "
  Paine, Miss Alice               73 Fourteenth Street South,      "
  Potter, Mrs. A. R.              24 Thirteenth Street South,      "
  Pearson, Clara E.                        1101 Harman Place,      "
  Page, Mrs. R. C.                   1236 First Avenue North,      "
  Parsons, Annie                           107 Island Avenue,      "
  Patton, Dr. E. A.                 1228 Second Avenue South,      "
  Plummer, Mrs. L. P.               1117 Second Avenue South,      "
  Page, Mrs. Dr.                                           Sandusky, Ohio.
  Pratt, Mrs. C. H.               727 Sixth Street Southeast, Minneapolis.
  Phelps, Mrs. Chas.                      60 Highland Avenue,      "
  Pond, Mrs. C. M.                        56 Highland Avenue,      "
  Phillips, Mrs. C. M.                    60 Highland Avenue,      "
  Palsepp, Anna D.                   2803 Third Avenue South,      "
  Palmer, Mrs. Chas. R.     2205 Three-and-a-Half Ave. South,      "
  Packer, Mrs. Mary                      413 Hennepin Avenue,      "
  Pillsbury, Mrs. J. S.   Fifth St. and Tenth Ave. Southeast,      "
  Pound, Jessie M.                  1402 Second Avenue South,      "
  Pratt, Mrs. Frank                  2747 First Avenue South,      "
  Phillips, Mrs. B., Jr.          Care C. A. Pillsbury & Co.,      "
  Quigley, Mrs. James             316 Sixth Street Southeast,      "
  Rieley, Mrs. A.              1513 Seventh Street Southeast,      "
  Rutz, Augusta                  529 Eighth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Rahmon, Laura                  822 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Rockwood, Mrs. C. J.            33 Nineteenth Street North,      "
  Ryan, Mary A.                                            La Crosse, Wis.
  Ryan, Julia                        418 Second Avenue South, Minneapolis.
  Russell, Mrs. O. M.                    608 Nicollet Avenue,      "
  Rich, Mrs. W. W.               529 Eighth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Russell, Mrs. Geo. V.                  614 Hennepin Avenue,      "
  Reynolds, Clara E.              21 Thirteenth Street South,      "
  Richardson, Mrs. L. H.          73 Fourteenth Street South,      "
  Rourke, Miss Nellie            702 Second Avenue Southeast,      "
  Ripley, Dr. Martha G.               48 Eighth Street South,      "
  Remington, Mrs.                                     Box 51,      "
  Rose, Virginia                                         Monticello, Minn.
  Rose, Mrs. A. H.               321 Fourth Street Southeast, Minneapolis.
  Rinker, Mrs. Andrew                      1015 Harmon Place,      "
  Raymond, Miss M. A.             727 Sixth Street Southeast,      "
  Richardson, Mrs. A. F.              111 Sixth Street South,      "
  Rickard, Mrs. C. F.           701 Seventh Street Southeast,      "
  Rolfe, Mrs. J. H.                    1910 Hawthorne Avenue,      "
  Rand, Miss Kate            Cor. Seventh Street and Sixth
                               Avenue,                             "
  Reynolds, Mrs. A. S.              422 South Seventh Street,      "
  Rickey, Mrs. Jas.          Tenth St. bet. Nicollet and
                               Hennepin Aves.,                     "
  Robinson, Mrs. S. C.                      1812 Park Avenue,      "
  Read, Mrs. J. H.               615 Fourth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Reeves, Mrs. T. H.         727 University Avenue Southeast,      "
  Rich, Mrs. W. W.               529 Eighth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Rich, Mrs. J. O.               529 Eighth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Robedeau, Mrs. C. T.                508 Fifth Avenue South,      "
  Rust, Mrs Geo. H.                     1114 Hennepin Avenue,      "
  Rolph, Mrs. W. T.               416 Third Avenue Southeast,      "
  Rockwood, Mrs. C. J.       Nineteenth Street between Laurel
                               and Hawthorne Avenues,              "
  Ricker, Mrs. H. M.                   716 University Avenue,      "
  Shepard, Miss F.                       1409 Stevens Avenue,      "
  Springate, Mrs. J. L.                  917 Hennepin Avenue,      "
  Soutar, Mrs.               Sixteenth Avenue and Seventh
                               Street Southeast,                   "
  Shaw, Mrs. J. M.                    527 Ninth Street South,      "
  Simmons, Laura             328 Thirteenth Avenue and Fourth
                               Street Southeast                    "
  Starr, C. M.                                       Box 499,      "
  Shockey, Mrs. C. C.               1320 Fourth Avenue South,      "
  Simpson, Mrs. M. E.        3, corner Central Avenue and Fifth
                               Street,                             "
  Stacy, Miss Frances           1113 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Smith, Mabel L.            622 Fourteenth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Starr, Mrs. C. M.                                  Box 499,      "
  Stagg, Nettie                          255 Hennepin Avenue,      "
  Shenebon, Frances S.          1113 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Siebert, Mrs. A. C.            Eighteenth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Stillman, Miss Nellie              2120 Third Avenue South,      "
  Sillowey, Mrs. R. A.          1914 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Sure, Mrs. E. M.               1320 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Sheffer, Miss Ada                 1811 Fourth Street North,      "
  Sprague, L. E. P.                        6 Highland Avenue,      "
  Secombe, Mrs. D. A.            927 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Smith, Mrs. Thomas         Corner Fifteenth Street and Spruce
                               Place,                              "
  Spear, Mrs. S. C.           713 Fifteenth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Stillman, Mrs. W. F.                                       Oshkosh, Wis.
  Sewall, E. Q.                              481 Carroll Street, St. Paul.
  Shillock, Anna                    1811 Fourth Avenue South, Minneapolis.
  Smith, Mrs. C. F.              457 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Swanson, Miss Hannah             201 Eleventh Street South,      "
  Spear, Minnie E.              1614 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Say, G. I.                  727 Fifteenth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Strothinham, Mrs. J. H.         629 Fifteenth Street South,      "
  Salisbury, Mrs. M. F.            719 Eleventh Avenue South,      "
  Shuman, Mrs. Geo. W.                    1001 Eighth Avenue,      "
  Shaw, Mrs. F. H.                   1509 Sixth Avenue South,      "
  Sheldon, Miss Emma F.            717 Eleventh Avenue South,      "
  Shaw, Mrs. Geo. K.                    1205 Hennepin Avenue,      "
  Shoemaker, Mrs. H. J.                  1903 Western Avenue,      "
  Selene, Miss Maggie            417 Eighth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Shillock, Miss                     University of Minnesota,      "
  Stillman, Mrs. R. L.               2720 Third Avenue South,      "
  Selden, Emma R.                      14 Tenth Street South,      "
  Stark, Mrs. Theo. F.                   134 Highland Avenue,      "
  Sweet, Mrs. O. T.              702 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Smith, Mrs. Dr. C.         1102 South Seventh Street
                               Southeast,                          "
  Seaton, Miss Rose             902 Seventh Street Southeast,      "
  Slosson, Mrs. Theo.             419 Sixth Street Southeast,      "
  Scudder, Mrs. M. C.            521 Eighth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Smith, Mrs. D. L.              516 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Stacy, Alice M.                1401 Sixth Street Southeast,      "
  Strever, Mrs.              101 University Avenue Southeast,      "
  Sisson, Mary                              College Hospital,      "
  Siddall, Mrs. W. A.             73 Fourteenth Street South,      "
  Smith, Carrie E.                    1800 Park Avenue South,      "
  Seaton, Mrs. J. K.                902 7th Street Southeast,      "
  Sheldon, Mrs. S.                    Care Dr. A. F. Elliott,      "
  Shepley, Mrs. L. C.        Cedar Avenue and Twenty-sixth
                               Street,                             "
  Shepley, Mrs. O. H.                                              "
  Swift, Grace H.                       1204 Chestnut Avenue,      "
  Swift, Mrs. L.                        1204 Chestnut Avenue,      "
  Spaulding, Mrs. W. A.                      1424 Vine Place,      "
  Smith, Mrs. D. C.          Cor. Fifth and Hennepin Avenues,      "
  Stark, Miss J. Mary                    134 Highland Avenue, Minneapolis.
  Sewall, A. R.                              481 Carroll Street, St. Paul.
  Sewall, Miss Ida                           481 Carroll Street, St. Paul.
  Shuey, Mrs. A. M.                       65 Highland Avenue, Minneapolis.
  Scribner, Mrs. D. M.                  1512 Nicollet Avenue,      "
  Sawyer, Mrs. T. J.                    1512 Nicollet Avenue,      "
  Sauter, Miss Laura         Eighteenth Avenue, bet. Fourth
                               and Fifth Streets, E. D.            "
  Scharpf, Mrs. Geo.              84 South Thirteenth Street,      "
  Scribner, Mrs. D. M.                  1512 Nicollet Avenue,      "
  Soutar, Mrs. Geo.                                         Luverne, Minn.
  Sheldon, Mrs. H. G.                                     Richfield, Minn.
  Smith, Mrs. E. T.                       66 Highland Avenue, Minneapolis.
  Smith, Mrs. Frank                                    Ft. Snelling, Minn.
  Spaulding, Mrs. G. S.          319 University Avenue South, Minneapolis.
  Sprague, Mrs. J. J.                                        Oshkosh, Wis.
  Shepherd, Mrs. Geo. B.     Cor. First Ave. and Sixteenth St.
                               South,                         Minneapolis.
  Sheldon, Miss Mary                                      Excelsior, Minn.
  Steele, Mrs. J. A.                  103 Ninth Street South, Minneapolis.
  Secombe, Kittie E.             927 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Spear, Mrs Edward                  502 Eighth Avenue South,      "
  Scudder, M. C.                 521 Eighth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Scudder, Mrs. J. L.            425 Eighth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Stone, Mrs. J. W.                  1015 First Avenue North,      "
  Smith, Mrs. W. K.                     100 Royalston Avenue,      "
  Swett, Ella A.                           702 Fourth Street,      "
  Shatto, Mrs. C. W.                                               "
  Tweedie, Mrs. Wm.                1815 Seventh Street South,      "
  Tucker, Mrs. Henry                  826 First Avenue South,      "
  Taylor, Mrs. Benjamin                  2200 Chicago Avenue,      "
  Taylor, Mrs. B. L.                  620 Fifth Street South,      "
  Talbert, Mrs. M. J.            1423 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Trogner, Miss                     1315 Second Street North,      "
  Tupper, Mrs. D. W.            1113 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Thompson, Clara A.          701 Fifteenth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Thompson, Mrs. P. M.        701 Fifteenth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Twichell, Mary                  400 Ninth Street Southeast,      "
  Teall, Mrs. B. F.                  1510 Sixth Avenue South,      "
  Taylor, Miss Virgi         Seventeenth Street, near Nicollet
                               Avenue,                             "
  Truesdell, Mrs. J. A.                   246 Farrington Avenue, St. Paul.
  Trail, Jane                Sixteenth Avenue and Seventh Street
                             Southeast,                       Minneapolis.
  Turner, L. H.               2910 Thirty-first Avenue South,      "
  Townsend, Mrs. L. R.            19 Thirteenth Street South,      "
  Twichell, Miss M. H.                      1604 Park Avenue,      "
  Todd, Mary W.                  504 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Taylor, Miss E.                     720 Sixth Avenue South,      "
  Thompson, Mrs. Anna              Northern Pacific Junction,      "
  Tuller, Mrs. C. S.                          Seventh Street, Lyons, Iowa.
  Truman, Mrs. B. H.               39 Fifteenth Street South, Minneapolis.
  Todd, Mrs. S. D.                  504 Fourth Street, E. D.,      "
  Trevellyan, Mrs. Am.            508 First Avenue Northeast,      "
  Tenney, Mrs. Wm.           Cor. Third Ave. South and Twelfth
                               Street,                             "
  Thomberg, Mrs. John                86 Twelfth Street South,      "
  Turner, Mrs. Rev. W.                                      Poynette, Wis.
  Thomberg, Miss Kate                86 Twelfth Street South, Minneapolis.
  Tice, Mrs. W. H.                         26 Eastman Avenue,      "
  Thompson, Miss Mettie                  613 Hennepin Avenue,      "
  Turner, Mrs. Murtz                                         Fifield, Wis.
  Tully, Miss Maggie         2527 Three-and-a-Half Avenue
                               South,                         Minneapolis.
  Thompson, Mrs. H. E.                      161 Pleasant Avenue, St. Paul.
  Taylor, Mrs. K. M.                                          Anoka, Minn.
  Townsend, Mrs. L. R.            19 South Thirteenth Street, Minneapolis.
  Twickham, Mrs. Willis                                   Richfield, Minn.
  Turner, Miss Minnie E.      2706 Thirty-first Avenue South, Minneapolis.
  Turner, Mrs. Alvira         2910 Thirty-first Avenue South,      "
  Thomas, Mrs. W.                409 Eighth Street Southeast,      "
  Ullmer, Mrs. M.            207 University Avenue Northeast,      "
  Vind, Mrs. C. L.           710 University Avenue Southeast,      "
  Vrooman, Mrs. W.                           8 Holden Street,      "
  Varney, Mrs. J. M.      1700 Three-and-a-Half Avenue South,      "
  Vosburg, Mrs. A.                 1103 Seventh Street South,      "
  Van Norman, J. D.                                  Box 123,      "
  Van Cleve, Mrs. E. M.          520 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Van Cleve, Mrs. H. S.           604 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Wilcox, Mrs. A. G.                     105 Highland Avenue,      "
  White, Mrs. C. A.                          1512 Vine Place,      "
  White, Miss Elburta               1804 Fourth Avenue South,      "
  Welles, Mrs. M. H.           1315 Seventh Street Southeast,      "
  Wornenninde, Miss                      353 Franklin Street,      "
  Webster, W. W.                                         Clearwater, Minn.
  Wahlstrom, Albert                         210 Third Street, Minneapolis.
  Wilder, Mrs. J. A.            1021 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Warnock, A. May                       1408 Nicollet Avenue,      "
  Wheaton, Mrs. Geo.             119 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  White, Mrs. M. C.              1319 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Waltemath, Miss                120 Fourteenth Avenue North,      "
  Williams, Mrs. A. P.                   255 Hennepin Avenue,      "
  Whitcomb, Mrs. M. B.               70 North Twelfth Street,      "
  Willenaw, Mrs. F.                  2014 Third Avenue North,      "
  Winterer, Edward              1113 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Worley, Mrs. Charlotte          88 South Fourteenth Street,      "
  Whipple, Mrs. Wm.                                          Winona, Minn.
  Winterer, Miss Ellen          1113 Fourth Street Southeast, Minneapolis.
  Weller, Miss Marian                16 South Twelfth Street,      "
  Woodward, Frances G.                     189 Island Avenue,      "
  Wyman, Mrs. William            415 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Winston, Mrs. Fred R.         1013 University Avenue South,      "
  Wetherald, A. E.                        235 Fourteenth Street, St. Paul.
  Woodburn, Miss Ida                 30 South Seventh Street, Minneapolis.
  Woodburn, Mrs. J. A.               30 South Seventh Street,      "
  Walcott, Mrs. Reynolds                 61 Oak Grove Street,      "
  Williams, Mrs. E. S.            1729 Eleventh Avenue South,      "
  Winchell, Mrs. C. S.                                             "
  Wilson, Helen E.               505 Eighth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Webber, Mrs. Minnie                       General Delivery,      "
  Wilson, Mrs. J. P.             505 Eighth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Wells, Mrs. Genevive                903 First Avenue North,      "
  Whitney, Mrs. F. W.                                         Beloit, Wis.
  Wells, Mrs. S. R.                          Buffalo, Wright County, Minn.
  Woods, Mrs. Chas.                    33 South Tenth Street, Minneapolis.
  Weller, Mrs. J. H.                    1824 Nicollet Avenue,      "
  Williams, Mrs. A. C.         Ninth Street, near Mary Place,      "
  White, Miss Ida E.                    1015 Nicollet Avenue,      "
  White, Miss M. E.                     1015 Nicollet Avenue,      "
  Wadleigh, H. L.                1417 Sixth Street Southeast,      "
  Wells, Mrs. C. W.                      2500 Stevens Avenue,      "
  Wadleigh, E. H.                1417 Sixth Street Southeast,      "
  Wade, Mrs. C. H.                        262 Central Avenue,      "
  Wilcox, Mrs. J. P.                                      Richfield, Minn.
  Wullweber, Mrs. M. R.                                   Iowa City, Iowa.
  Woodmansee, Mrs. D. W.         1214 Fifth Street Southeast, Minneapolis.
  Warner, A. A.                                           St. Cloud, Minn.
  Whiting, Mrs. A. V.                                     St. Cloud, Minn.
  Weber, Mary L.                 1401 Sixth Street Southeast, Minneapolis.
  Williams, Mrs. H. R.            837 Fifteenth Avenue South,      "
  Ware, Mrs. J. L.           312 Nineteenth Avenue Southeast,      "
  Wolfrum, Miss O.                312 Fifth Street Northeast,      "
  White, Mrs. S. B.                                      Watervliet, Mich.
  Walke, Mrs. Chas.                     1129 Hennepin Avenue, Minneapolis.
  Watson, Mrs. B. K.             39 Seventeenth Street South,      "
  Westcott, Mrs. Dr.                   1909 Hawthorne Avenue,      "
  Williams, Mrs. S. B.                12 Eighth Street North,      "
  Walker, Miss May                    726 First Avenue North,      "
  White, Ida E.                         1015 Nicollet Avenue,      "
  Wheeler, Mrs. Wm.                       Sixth Street North,      "
  Williams, Mrs. B. H.               34 South Seventh Street,      "
  Wilson, Mrs. E. M.                   1300 Hawthorne Avenue,      "
  Watts, Miss Martha         425 University Avenue Southeast,      "
  Wakefield, Annie L.                   1812 Nicollet Avenue,      "
  White, Miss Flora              529 Eighth Avenue Southeast,      "
  White, Mrs. E.                         616 Franklin Avenue,      "
  Whitney, Mrs. A.                          413 Grant Street,      "
  Wilson, Mrs. N. G.              424 Third Avenue Northeast,      "
  Willmas, Mrs. J. R.             510 First Avenue Northeast,      "
  West, Mrs. H. G.               200 Fourth Street Northeast,      "
  Wells, Mrs. T. B.                                                "
  Wilson, Mrs. M. G.             1115 Fifth Street Southeast,      "
  Wood, Mrs. Emma                                         Excelsior, Minn.
  Walker, Mrs. P. B.                  726 First Avenue North, Minneapolis.
  Walker, Mrs. James                   716 University Avenue,      "
  White, Mrs. S. B.             1228 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Wilcox, Mrs. M. L.         716 University Avenue Southeast,      "
  Watson, Mrs. Geo. C.               2618 First Avenue South,      "
  Wolverton, Mrs. I. A.               802 Sixth Avenue South,      "
  Wolford, Mrs. W. L.                  59 Tenth Street South,      "
  Whitney, Mrs. C. L.                                Box 178,      "
  Young, Mrs. S. J.             1721 Fourth Street Southeast,      "
  Yenney, P. F. P.                                        St. Cloud, Minn.
  Ziegler, Mrs. C. C.              2123 Lyndale Avenue North, Minneapolis.




  INDEX
  TO
  MISS CORSON'S LECTURES.


  Apple dumplings, baked, 33

  Apple dumplings, steamed, 34

  Apple meringue, 48

  Apple pie, 40


  Beans, How to cook, 25

  Beef a la mode rolls, 84

  Beef, Baked tenderloin of, 91

  Beef, Corned, 82

  Beef, Fried steak, 35

  Beef, To season and test when done, 37

  Beef, To make tender, 38

  Beef, Pounding, 37

  Beef, Gravy for, 80

  Beef, Pressed, 83

  Beef, Roast, 76

  Braising, French method, 79

  Beets, To boil, 74

  Bread, Graham, 44

  Bread, Making, 41, 45, 46

  Bread, Rolls, 47

  Breading meats, 50


  Caramel for coloring soups, 39

  Caramel custard, 85

  Cabbage, To boil quickly, without odor, 81

  Cabbage, To cook to serve with braised meat, 80

  Carrots, Stewed, 73

  Cheese crusts, 57

  Cheese, Welsh rarebit, 96

  Chicken, Fricasseed, 61

  Chicken, Fried, 63

  Chicken, Roast, 58

  Cookery for the sick, 96
    Beef tea, 98
    Chicken, Broiled, 96
    Chicken, Barbecued, 97
    Jelly, Oatmeal, 97
    Rennet, 98
    Salad, Orange, 98
    Trout, Broiled, 97


  Dumplings, Apple, 33, 34


  Fat, To absorb after frying, 72

  Fish, Cod, stewed in cream, 70

  Fish, Cod cakes, 71

  Fish, Fried, 65

  Fish, Pickerel, fried, 89

  Fish, White, to prepare, 28, 31

  Fish, To remove odor of, 30


  Gravy, for meat, 58


  Hash, French, 91

  Hash, Baked, 92

  Hash, Corned beef, 93

  Hominy, 64


  Lamb, Baked, 49

  Lentils, How used, 26

  Lettuce, To keep fresh, 89

  Liver, Fried, 92


  Meats, Breading, 50


  Omelettes, Plain breakfast, 14

  Omelettes, Light, 14

  Onions, To remove odor of, 30

  Oysters, breaded, 95

  Oysters, Broiled with bacon, 95

  Oysters, Broiled, plain, 95

  Oyster fritters, 94

  Oyster liquor, How to use, 94

  Oysters, Philadelphia, 96

  Oysters, Roast, 94

  Oyster soup, 95


  Pastry, Light, 35

  Pastry, Plain, 31

  Peas, To wash, 88

  Pie, Sliced apple, 40

  Pie, Rhubarb, 46

  Pie, To prevent juice from running out of, 47

  Potatoes, Baked, 56

  Potatoes, Boiled, 54

  Potatoes, Stewed in butter, 12

  Potatoes, To soak, 57

  Poultry, To sew for roasting, 51

  Pudding, Bread and apple, 44

  Pudding, Cabinet, 66


  Quail, Boned, 15


  Rice, Piloff of, 90


  Saucepans, To clean, 12

  Salmon, Boiled, with cream sauce, 9, 13

  Soup, Beef and vegetable, 18, 21

  Soup, Cream, 53

  Soup, Caramel for coloring, 39

  Soup, Clarify, 39

  Soup, Pea, with crusts, 17, 26, 68

  Soup, Tomato, 86

  Soup as a stimulant, 20

  Soup, Value of, 19

  Soup, Stock for, 7

  Spinach, To boil, 88

  Stews, Brown, 27

  Stews, Meat, 22

  Stews, White, 23


  Turnips, To bake, 82


  Venison, with currant jelly, 75

  Vegetables, To preserve color of in cooking, 87


  Welsh rarebit, 96


  Yeast, Use of, 43




Transcriber's Note


The following typographical errors were corrected:

  Page  Error
    4  sent to Miss Carson changed to sent to Miss Corson
    7  slowly head changed to slowly heat
    8  thoroughly wish changed to thoroughly wash
   10  tablespoonful of floor changed to tablespoonful of flour
   11  pans are pefectly changed to pans are perfectly
   12  _Question_: Do you use a wooden changed to _Question._ Do
       you use a wooden
   13  in the appearence changed to in the appearance
   13  Ichotyophagus changed to Ichthyophagous
   17  friends in this changed to friends in the
   17  fresh. Al changed to fresh. All
   17  Then it beomes changed to Then it becomes
   18  tend to harded changed to tend to harden
   22  To day I am changed to To-day I am
   23  use cold meat changed to use cold meat,
   36  from this pieee changed to from this piece
   36  CARSON. No, decidedly changed to CORSON. No,
   37  CARSON. Of course changed to CORSON. Of course
   41  Obscured text in flour use reconstructed as flour in general use
   44  with it,if changed to with it, if
   51  deal of erase changed to deal of ease
   58  those little chese changed to those little cheese
   60  way of choping changed to way of chopping
   60  burning, becausea changed to burning, because a
   64  double boileryou changed to double boiler you
   69  softens at once, changed to softens at once.
   71  bowlfull changed to bowlful
   72  from greese, changed to from grease
   72  it from greese changed to it from grease
   72  manilla changed to manila
   72  that the greese changed to that the grease
   74  No, beats changed to No, beets
   74  skin of beats, changed to skin of beets
   80  part of the stock changed to part of the stalk
   82  that the cabbags changed to that the cabbage
   83  tablespoonful of flower changed to tablespoonful of flour
   88  two or thre changed to two or three
   92  in the tenderlonis changed to in the tenderloins
   92  that the fatter changed to that the faster
   94  wet towl changed to wet towel
   95  pinch of peper changed to pinch of pepper
   95  finely powdered, changed to finely powdered.
   98  BEAF TEA. changed to BEEF TEA.
   98  in an earthern changed to in an earthen
  101  Eighteenth Ave. S E. changed to Eighteenth Ave. S. E.
  111  316 Sixth Street Southesst, Minneaplis. changed to 316 Sixth
       Street Southeast, Minneapolis
  111  Three-and-a-half changed to Three-and-a-Half
  111  St. Cloud, Minn changed to St. Cloud, Minn.
  115  Lyons, Iowa changed to Lyons, Iowa.
  119  merringue, changed to meringue,
  119  Section break added before Beans, How to cook, 25
  120  Saucepans, To clean, 11 changed to Saucepans, To clean, 12

The following word was inconsistently spelled.

  Force meat / Forcemeat





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Course of Lectures on the Principles
of Domestic Economy and Cookery, by Juliet Corson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A COURSE OF LECTURES ***

***** This file should be named 35567.txt or 35567.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/5/6/35567/

Produced by Julia Miller and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
