                  MOTOR BOAT BOYS ON THE ST. LAWRENCE


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost
no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license.

Title: Motor Boat Boys on the St. Lawrence

Author: Louis Arundel

Release Date: March 30, 2011 [EBook #35728]

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MOTOR BOAT BOYS ON THE ST.
LAWRENCE ***




Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net.


[Illustration: _"Promise to read to me the log of your last trip, when
you went down the big river."_]



                            MOTOR BOAT BOYS
                          ON THE ST. LAWRENCE




                                   OR



              Solving the Mystery of the Thousand Islands



                                   By



                             LOUIS ARUNDEL



                                Chicago
                          M. A. DONOHUE & CO.

                             COPYRIGHT 1913
                       BY M. A. DONOHUE & COMPANY

                             Made in U.S.A.






Table of Contents


  - CHAPTER I--AFTER THE GAME

  - CHAPTER II--CHUMS, TRIED AND TRUE

  - CHAPTER III--A CHANCE CLEW

  - CHAPTER IV--BLOCKING A SLY MOVE

  - CHAPTER V--THE GUARDIAN OF THE FLEET

  - CHAPTER VI--THE "FLASH"

  - CHAPTER VII--JOSH SCENTS TROUBLE

  - CHAPTER VIII--IN THE MIDNIGHT WATCH

  - CHAPTER IX--THE GHOST OF THE ISLAND

  - CHAPTER X--FOLLOWING A TRAIL

  - CHAPTER XI--BUSTER GETS AN IDEA

  - CHAPTER XII--YANKEE STUBBORNNESS

  - CHAPTER XIII--THE GHOST HUNTER

  - CHAPTER XIV--A STRANGE RIDE

  - CHAPTER XV--ANOTHER NIGHT

  - CHAPTER XVI--JACK'S DARING VENTURE

  - CHAPTER XVII--THE SECRET OUT

  - CHAPTER XVIII--THE ESCAPE

  - CHAPTER XIX--A RACE IN THE MOONLIGHT

  - CHAPTER XX--OVERHAULED

  - CHAPTER XXI--A CLEAN SWEEP

  - CHAPTER XXII--BUSTER'S HOUR OF TRIUMPH

  - CHAPTER XXIII--HAPPY DAYS--CONCLUSION



    MOTOR BOAT BOYS SERIES

    THE MOTOR CLUB'S CRUISE DOWN THE MISSISSIPPI
    THE MOTOR CLUB ON THE ST. LAWRENCE RIVER
    THE MOTOR CLUB ON THE GREAT LAKES
    MOTOR BOAT BOYS AMONG THE FLORIDA KEYS
    MOTOR BOAT BOYS DOWN THE COAST
    MOTOR BOAT BOYS RIVER CHASE
    MOTOR BOAT BOYS DOWN THE DANUBE

    List Price 60c Each




                THE MOTOR BOAT BOYS ON THE ST. LAWRENCE;
                                   or
               Solving a Mystery of the Thousand Islands






CHAPTER I--AFTER THE GAME


"That was a hard game for Macklin to lose, fellows!"

"I should say it was, Herb."

"He nearly pitched his head off, too. Wow! how they did come in like
cannon balls!"

"And talk about curves and drops, Little Clarence was roight there wid
the goods," said a stout boy; whose freckled face, carroty hair and blue
eyes, as well as the touch of brogue to his voice, told of Irish blood.

"But Jack met his hot pace, and went him one better. Clarence may be a
cracker jack in the box, but he can't _just_ come up to good old
reliable Jack Storm ways, of the high school baseball club."

"Oh, shucks! enough of that taffy, fellows," laughed the object of this
praise, as he swung the bat he was carrying; "why, you know right well I
was up against the fence when they made that ninth inning rally. They
had found me with the goods on. And you know who won that game for
us--our never failing, heavy pinch-hitter, Buster Longfellow. When his
bat got up against the horsehide I knew it was all over but the shouting
for Clarence."

"Wasn't he mad, though? Hurrah for Buster! He's not built for a runner,
they say, but he's got the batting eye. That hit was a peach!"

"Thanks, George. I believe I did help Brodie dash home with the winning
tally. It's awful nice of you fellows to appreciate talent!"

The boy called Buster made a mock bow as well as he was able. He was fat
and chunky, so that his baseball suit seemed moulded to his figure.
While his name was understood to be Nick Longfellow, he seldom heard it
save at home or in school. To his fellows he was known by such
significant names as "Buster," "Pudding," and "Hippopotamus."

There were just five in the bunch, dusty, tired fellows, all on the way
home from a most exciting game with a rival team, and the most bitter
rivals for supremacy in the little river town along the upper
Mississippi.

Besides Buster and Jack, there were the Irish lad, Jimmie Brannagan, who
lived with the Stormways, being something of a ward of Jack's father;
Herb Dickson, and George Rollins, all of them members of the high school
team.

These five boys, with the addition of another who was not present just
then, composed the membership of a motor boat club, and between them
owned three very clever craft. George's was a narrow speedboat, called
the _Wireless_, the powerful engine of which had a faculty for getting
out of order just when most wanted. The one of which Jack was skipper
was named the _Tramp_, and while not so fast as its dangerous
competitor, could still make great time. Herb possessed a commodious
launch, which he had very wisely christened the _Comfort_, for she was
as staunch and reliable as a houseboat.

During the preceding autumn, taking advantage of the school being closed
until New Year's because of an epidemic in the town, these boys had made
a long trip down the Mississippi river to New Orleans, being given
permission by their parents or guardians.

To make the run more interesting Jack's father had contributed a silver
cup as a trophy; and the annals of that adventurous race have already
been given in the first volume of this series. The boys for some time
had been laying their heads together and planning another outing for the
coming vacation; but for various good and sufficient reasons they were
keeping their intended cruising ground a dead secret from everybody.

"Where's Josh Purdue?" asked Herb, as the party swung into the main
street of the town. "We want him along when we talk over that letter
Jack had from Clayton, where our boats are going. What did you do about
hiding their destination, Jack?"

"Yes," said George, quickly. "You know we agreed that those chaps were
nosing all about, trying to get a clew. Clarence has ordered a rattling
motor boat from some eastern maker, and if he could only learn where
we're going to hang out this summer, wouldn't he just try to make it
warm for us, though? Ten to one you hadn't left the station five minutes
after fastening on the tags before he was reading the same."

"I expected that, fellows," laughed Jack, "and did the best I could to
fool him. The boats are only sent to the address in Milwaukee. From
there they will be rebilled to Clayton and shipped on a steamer through
the lakes."

"But he might even have the nerve to write to that agent and make some
excuse for asking where they were sent. How about that, Jack?" asked
Herb.

"I even thought of that," replied the other. "You see, when you're
dealing with wide-awake, unscrupulous fellows like Clarence Macklin, and
his toady, Joe Brinker, it pays to insure against trouble. And I've done
it as well as I knew how."

"Tell us about it, please," asked Buster, anxiously.

"Well," replied the one addressed, "I wrote the agent in Milwaukee,
stating the circumstances. He turned out to be a jolly good chap; for he
answered me and promised that if Clarence or Joe make inquiries he'll
put them on the wrong track."

"Bully for him!" ejaculated Nick. "We'll vote him thanks at our next
meeting, fellows, that's what, and call on him in a body as we go
through to the steamer when on our way."

"I wish the time was two weeks later," remarked Herb. "I don't see just
how I'm going to stand it until after the exams are over."

"Oh, well, the days manage to pass along; and this glorious victory
ought to make you feel that life is worth living," remarked Jack, with
mock seriousness.

"As for me," remarked Buster, taking in a long breath, as if in
anticipation. "I just dream of the bliss of cruising aboard a steady,
roomy boat like the _Comfort_. You can talk all you want, George, about
the delights of flying through the water at the rate of twenty-five
miles an hour; but me to the cozy home-like cruiser every time. Once is
out for me, you remember."

"Do we, boys?" jeered George, looking at the rest. "Well, will I ever
forget how Buster used to sit there in the stern of my flier, looking
like a stuffed pillow, with a cork life preserver belted around him all
the time, and trying to keep his balance. And the less said about his
cooking the better. It haunts me still."

"Oh! but I've improved in that respect, George, very much," the fat boy
hastened to exclaim. "Don't you worry about it, Herb. I'm taking lessons
from our colored cook right now, and expect to branch out as a real
prize box. You know when I once set my mind to a thing I generally get
there, even if it does take time. Great bodies move slowly, they say.
Didn't I learn to swim after all my disappointments; tell me that,
George Rollins?"

"Sure you did, thanks to Jack here," replied the other. "But all through
that trip you gave me the nightmare because you had lost some silly----"

"Hold on! you solemnly promised you'd never say another word about that
business and I'm going to keep you to it, George," cried Buster. "We did
have a glorious time of it, you know. And I can do a little once in a
while to help the crowd forget their troubles, can't I?"

"Why, to be sure you can, Buster, and I'm the last one to deny it,"
declared George. "I don't mean half I say. You know my weakness is a
quick tongue. And after the grand way you belted that ball today, I'd be
willing to forgive almost anything you'd ever done. Shake on that, old
partner of my joys and woes."

"The boats got off all right, that's a comfort," observed Herb.

"How do ye know?" demanded Jimmie.

"I saw them on the cars, and moving out of town, just in that ninth
inning, when things looked so black for us," was the reply. "You know my
position out in right gives me a chance to look across the big field to
the railroad. And as I was getting my breath, after chasing that tricky
ball Carson Beggs whacked out, with two on bases, I had a glimpse of a
freight passing, and counted all three boats on gondolas, fastened up in
their waterproof covers. It just seemed to give me heart to go in and
root harder than ever. It was a lucky omen, too, fellows."

"Well," Jack said, "of course they'll be waiting for us at Clayton when
we get there. And although we talked of taking the steamer ourselves, I
think, on the whole, it would be wise to go by train. In that way we'll
save a couple of days. Besides, some time we mean to cruise all through
the great lakes, and we'd better keep the trip until we can do it in our
own motor boats."

"That sounds good to me!" cried Nick.

"And I'm sure it hits my case to a dot, because it means less time to
wait," and Herb nodded his head in a way that plainly told how his mind
was made up.

"That settles the lake trip, then," laughed George, "because I never did
care much about going that way. Jimmie, how do you stand on it?"

"Wid both feet," replied the party addressed, emphatically. "The sooner
we kin arroive at the Thousand Islands, the better I'll be plazed."

"Oh! well, let's forget we ever mentioned going the other way," said
Jack. "But that won't prevent our passing through Milwaukee, stopping to
shake hands with that obliging agent, and finding if the boats got off
all right."

"You can learn that by writing in a few days, Jack," observed Herb,
sagaciously. "I only hope Clarence doesn't have a friend in Milwaukee
who would spy around and discover the truth, that's all."

"If he writes the agent you can make up your mind he hasn't," said Nick,
as the party came to a pause on a corner, where, as a rule, they were
accustomed to separating, each one heading for his own home.

"Wait a little, boys. I think I see Josh coming away back there,"
remarked Jack, when one of the others made some remark about "seeing you
later, fellows!"

"Looks like he was in a big hurry, too?" suggested Nick.

"Well, he is half running, to be sure," admitted George.

"And there he goes waving his hand to us," mentioned Herb. "I guess Josh
wants us to wait up for him here. Perhaps he's got something to tell
us."

"Or it may be he just wants to wring the hand of our friend Buster, and
tell him, with tears in his eyes, how delighted he was to have him save
the day for our team," and Jack, as he said this, winked at George; for
it was a notorious fact that Josh and the fat boy were forever playing
pranks on each other, and often saying disagreeable things; that,
however, ended in nothing harder than a little froth and bubble, since
it was only surface and make-believe animosity after all.

"Don't you believe it," declared the hero of the late game, shaking his
head in an aggressive way. "Josh was the next batter up, and I just know
he thinks I swatted that ball to cheat him out of the glory. For he had
his mind made up to send the horsehide over the fence for a home run."

"Well," laughed Jack, "never wait to see what the next batter is going
to do. When the chance comes you just poke that ball out into deep
center, and then roll down to first as fast as you can. Then perhaps
he'll bring you home with his big hit. But Josh is getting here, and
we'll soon know now what ails him."

"Don't you go to borrowing trouble too soon?" warned Herb. "I know Josh
pretty well, and how he likes to joke. He's a false alarm, that's what."

"But he looks serious enough right now," said George, with whom the
runner was to keep company on this new cruise they had planned; and who,
therefore, felt an especial interest in Josh.

The newcomer was a rather slender fellow, taller than any of the others,
and the best runner on the team. In times past Josh had been troubled
with indigestion; but the month and more spent during their memorable
Mississippi cruise had about cured him of this, so that he was looking
better than ever before in all his life. That was one reason why his
parents were only too glad to allow him the chance of getting in the
open again during the coming vacation; for they believed it would be the
making of the lad.

Josh stopped running when close to the others, as though husbanding his
wind so that he could communicate the news he bore.

"It's all up, fellows!" he cried, as he finally reached the corner,
where the other five gathered around him.

"What do you mean?" asked Jack, anxiously.

"Yes, explain, Josh. What's up?" demanded George.

"They know where our boats have gone!" gasped Josh, excitedly. "Somebody
must have leaked, that's what. And they're going to have their new motor
boat shipped to the Thousand Islands, too. Now, see what a peck of
trouble we're going to have this summer!"




CHAPTER II--CHUMS, TRIED AND TRUE


"Josh, hold up your hand, and look me in the eye!" said Jack, sternly.

"Oh! you don't believe me, do you? But I never was more serious in my
life!" exclaimed the newcomer, meeting Jack's look squarely.

"Then I'm sorry, that's all," declared the other. "If Clarence Macklin
has found out where we expect to cruise this summer, he'll lie awake
nights trying to lay plans how to give us all the trouble he can."

"How d'ye know all this, Josh?" demanded Nick, rather tremulously.

"I just happened to be near where Clarence and Joe were having their
heads together, and the idea came to me to listen. I only thought they
were explaining how the game was lost, and I wanted to hear Clarence say
how somebody sent a ray of sunlight into his eyes with a pocket mirror,
just when he was handing out that ball Buster knocked out in deep
center. You know his way, fellows, and how he squirms out of every hole
so smoothly?"

"Yes, yes, of course we do, Josh; but go on;" cried Herb.

"Don't you see you've got us keyed up to the breaking pitch? Let loose,
and tell what you heard!" exclaimed George, always nervous and anxious
to make speed.

"Well, it wasn't much, but it counted for a heap," replied the narrator.
"About as near as I can remember, and repeat, this was what Clarence
said: 'Never mind, Joe, we're going to get even soon. Wait till our
dandy boat gets to Clayton. Say, mebbe there won't be a lot of surprised
fellows then, as we cut circles around 'em, and make 'em wish they
hadn't blackballed us. You wait and see, that's all.'"

Various exclamations broke out from the other boys.

"Oh, yes, they must know, all right!" said Herb, bitterly.

"All I can say is it's mighty queer, after we've taken such pains to
keep everything a dead secret, so even our folks don't know yet where
we're going," Josh continued to say, meaningly.

Somehow or other, as if by mutual arrangement, every eye seemed to be
gradually focussed on poor Nick, who turned as red as a turkey cock.

"Oh! yes, look at me, won't you?" he exclaimed, spluttering more or less
as was his habit when unduly excited. "You think I'm the one who leaked,
just because I stopped to talk with Clarence the other day on the
street, and George saw me. He never even said a single word about boats,
but asked me something else. Look all you want too, but I tell you, once
for all, that if there _was_ a leak, it didn't come through me! I never
told a single soul!"

"Oh! nobody has accused you, Buster," said Jack, soothingly, for he was
fond of the good-natured fat boy.

"That's all right, but I guess I've got feelings, and I can tell what
every one of you is thinking," the other went on, in an aggrieved tone.

"Just forget it, Buster," Jack continued, for he knew only too well how
the fat boy liked to harp on anything that worried him, and in this way
make life miserable for the others of the club. "The mischief is done.
Like as not we may never know how it happened. And there's no need of
our bothering our heads now about spilt milk. The question is, shall we
change our plans, and go somewhere else this summer?"

"I say no!" exclaimed Herb, immediately and with firmness.

"That's my case, too," Josh echoed. "After we've made all our fine
arrangements, it would be cowardly to back down just because those two
mean skunks choose to tag after us and try to give us trouble."

"Niver give up the ship! Thim's my sintiments!" observed Jimmie,
aggressively. "And I say the same," remarked Nick. "Sooner or later
you'll find out how they learned our plans, and then you'll all be sorry
for putting it on me, that's what."

"Then it seems settled that we make no change," said Jack, with a stern
look on his face; "for I'm of the same opinion as the rest. We'll go to
the St. Lawrence, and if Tricky Clarence and Bully Joe try to upset our
plans, they'll find themselves barking up the wrong tree, that's all."

"And so he thinks he's got a wizard boat that will cut circles all
around my _Wireless_, does he?" said George, with the light of
anticipated rivalry in his black eyes. "All right. Perhaps Clarence has
got another guess coming. He'll find me on the job all right, and ready
to give him a warm run for his money."

"When did we start talking seriously for the first time about choosing
the Thousand Islands, and the St. Lawrence for our summer outing?" asked
Herb, who seemed almost as anxious as Nick to find out the truth
concerning the leak.

"I can tell you that," replied the fat boy, quickly. "It was that
afternoon when Jack asked us to stay after school, and meet him in the
clubroom for a little talk. Don't you remember, he read that letter he
had from Clayton, the first one; and we soon voted to make the St.
Lawrence our cruising ground this summer."

"Buster is right about that, for I remember it distinctly," remarked
Jack.

"That was the little room in school that Mr. Sparks allows the various
clubs and organizations to use when they ask permission--the one on the
second floor? Am I right, fellows?" Herb went on.

"Sure ye arre," declared Jimmie. "Doan't I just remember that we wint
till the door ivery two minutes to say if the inemy would be sphyin'
around in the hall."

"But there was no sign of them, you also remember that?" observed Jack,
quickly.

"Niver a wan," Jimmie hastened to reply.

"Then it would stand to reason that they didn't overhear us talking. I
know you couldn't in the next room, for I've been in there during
recitation, and the wall is dead. I only mention this, because that same
day, after I left the rest of you down-town, I found that I'd forgotten
a book I needed to study, and hurried back to the school. And I met
Clarence coming along the street. He said he had been kept in by Miss
Stryker to do a task. But it looks as though the leak could not have
been at that time."

"Somebody must have talked in their sleep," suggested Josh, humorously.

"Perhaps some one in the post office got on to Jack receiving a letter
from Clayton, and writing there," Herb put in.

"Well, now," remarked Jack, "there may be something in that idea; though
just now I can't think of anybody in the post office who would be that
mean. I know all the clerks, and none of them have ever been thick with
either Clarence or Joe."

"Suppose we give the matter a rest," said Herb, with an uneasy look
toward Nick; for the fat boy was to be his partner during the coming
cruise, and he feared lest Buster would get to brooding on the unjust
suspicions that had been directed toward him, with the result that he
must be forever speaking about it, and suggesting the most astonishing
explanations of the riddle.

"Agreed," Jack replied, readily, falling in with the idea. "After all,
the coming of these fellows may add some spice to our trip, who knows."

It certainly did, as will be made manifest shortly; but just then none
of the motor boat boys suspected what a strange series of exciting
adventures was to be their portion, all through the decision of their
rivals to choose the same cruising grounds for their summer outing, and
to be as malicious and troublesome as possible.

Nick seemed to have thrown aside the temporary gloom that had fallen
upon him, because of the unjust suspicions of his mates. He was
naturally so cheery that trouble and he could never hitch up together
for any great length of time.

"If those two cronies do chase after us," he said, "perhaps the long
standing trouble between Joe and myself may be settled. You know we've
been growling at each other for going on a year now. And some day
there'll be a surprise due him."

When Nick talked in that vein the others knew he was himself again, and
ready to joke. So Jack, pretending to be surprised, went on to remark:

"Why, Buster, do you mean to say you'd pick on that poor fellow, who has
never been able to whip more than three boys at a time in all his life?
I'm surprised to hear you talk so savagely."

"Oh! well, the thing is brooding, and bound to come off some day. Bully
Joe will go just a little too far, and get his. Why, there was one time,
not so long ago either, when I'd just about made up my mind to lick him
for keeps. And I give you my word, fellows, I'd have wiped up the ground
with him, only that I was grabbed from behind and held back!"

"Wow! listen to the war chief, would you?" exclaimed Josh, pretending to
shrink away from the belligerent fat boy, who was doubling up his pudgy
fists, and assuming a warrior's pose.

"He's sure got on his fighting togs today!" echoed Herb, soothingly.

"Say, Buster," remarked George, when Jack nudged him in the side, "tell
us who was so mean as to grab you that way, and hold you back!"

"Shucks! I just knew you'd never rest till you asked that!" cried the
other, as he pretended to show disgust. "Why, that was Joe, don't you
see!"

At that there was a howl; and Jimmie doubled up like a jack-knife in the
violence of his merriment.

"I can see Joe's finish, if he keeps on trying such tricks," whooped
George.

"Oh!" Buster went on, in a calm manner, "I'll try and be as easy with
him as any one could expect. Perhaps after he's had one good lesson, Joe
may reform. It's keeping bad company that's been his downfall. Clarence
Macklin has oodles of money; and his dad used to be a sporty sort of a
Wall street man they say, when he lived east; so he don't care much what
his hopeful does, so long as he keeps out of jail."

"Well, if he goes on much longer the way he has, I reckon he'll land
there after a bit," Herb remarked, soberly; for he had suffered on
several occasions at the hands of the vindictive Clarence, as was well
known to his chums.

"All right," Jack put in. "And now, if there's nothing further before
the house, I move we adjourn. For one I know I'm as hungry as a bear,
and ready to tackle a good dinner after all that hot work on the
diamond."

"Dinner!" exclaimed Buster, whose one weak point lay in his love of
eating. "Wow! don't you remember what bully good meals we had when we
all got together on that dandy Mississippi trip, and Josh here slung the
pots and pans? He's sure the best cook in seven counties. I hear he's
getting up a book on camp dinners. And right now I subscribe for the
first copy that's printed; if it don't cost over ten cents."

"Just you wait," returned Josh, with one of his wide grins. "It won't be
long now before you'll have to get up and hustle the tin pans and
things, whenever you have that longing for grub steal over you. No
sitting down to the table and cleaning up everything in sight for you
then. It's work before you can eat. Herb is going to keep you down to
brass tacks, ain't you Herb?"

"Oh! Buster and myself expect to get on first rate," the one addressed
hastened to say; for Herb was a lover of peace. "I'm ready to pitch in
and help him out on occasion. Everything is going to be lovely, and the
goose hang high, aboard the good, staunch old _Comfort_, when we sail
the stormy waters of the St. Lawrence, eh, Buster?"

"Well," remarked Josh, as he started away, "anyhow, I'm glad you've
decided to give our friend Buster the upper berth!"

A shout followed after him, and the last glimpse he had of the fat boy,
Buster was shaking both fists in his direction, and pretending to
display tremendous rage, though secretly chuckling with good-natured
laughter. Happy the boy who is so constituted that he can in the best of
humor take a joke that is leveled at himself; and that was Nick
Longfellow to a dot.

The rest of the bunch soon scattered, as their homes lay in various
directions; and this particular corner usually served as a gathering
point as well as the place where they separated.

Jack may have allowed the mystery of the suspected "leak" to crop up in
his active mind from time to time after that; but he knew just how
sensitive Buster really felt over it, and he always religiously
refrained from ever introducing the subject.

Some of the other boys of course must have discussed it as the days
slowly passed; but they too seemed desirous that their fat chum might
not have his feelings further injured, and nothing was said in his
presence. But all the same Buster did not forget, as Herb was fated to
learn to his sorrow.




CHAPTER III--A CHANCE CLEW


"Why, hello Jack!"

It was the first day of vacation, and being at the tail end of the week,
the motor boat club had wisely decided to defer their departure until
the following Monday morning, when they would say goodbye to the home
town, and start across the state for Milwaukee.

The speaker was no other than Clarence Macklin; and Jack had come face
to face with his bitter enemy upon the main street of the town, as he
passed out from a shop where he had been making a little purchase.

Clarence was smiling, after his usual manner; but there was always
something crafty about this look of his that made most boys suspicious.
Had he been given his choice in the matter Jack would have passed on
with a mere nod; for he did not believe in pretending to show anything
like friendliness toward this tricky lad, who had once tried to get into
the motor boat club, and been blackballed, a fact he had vowed to get
even for if it took him a year.

But Clarence evidently had a reason for wishing to talk with the other.
He even thrust himself squarely in Jack's way; and the latter saw no
reason why he should avoid an encounter.

"Well," continued Clarence, "I suppose you fellows are in high feather,
now that vacation has come, and you can break away?"

"Sure we are," replied Jack, trying to seem good-natured; though
secretly he was wondering what the other had concealed up his sleeve,
and why he insisted on stopping him in this way; for it happened that
just a day or so before Jack had been reading that good old precept of
warning, to "Beware of the Greeks bearing gifts."

"And I suppose, also, you mean to get away soon?" Clarence went on.

"Monday sees us off, unless something we don't look for detains us," was
Jack's response, as he watched the play of emotions on the face of the
other, and noted how the pretense of friendliness was fading away.

"Well," Clarence suddenly burst out with, "I just wanted to let you know
what me and Joe Brinker think of your sly trick in finding out where we
meant to go this summer, and then arranging to copy after us! It was
just what I'd expect such low-down sneaks as Herb Dickson and George
Rollins to do; but I am surprised to know how you fell in with such a
dirty game, that's what!"

Really, Jack never had a greater shock in all his life than when
Clarence said this. It seemed to almost take his very breath away.

"Now, do you know, Clarence," he said, steadily, watching that sarcastic
face, "the shoe seems to be on the other foot with us. To tell the
truth, we've been believing all this time that you'd copied after us. In
fact, poor Buster has been suspected of giving our secrets away, not
intentionally, of course, just because he was seen talking with you.
Queer, ain't it, how great minds often run in the same channel; and both
of us thought of going to the St. Lawrence this summer."

"Aw! now you're just trying to crawl out of a hole," the other sneered.
"But you needn't think you can spoil our summer fun for us, if you are
six to two. I told my dad about it, and he advised me to go on,
regardless. Just make up your minds to keep clear of Joe and me, if you
know what's good for you!"

Even while the other was saying this there suddenly flashed upon Jack's
mind the true reason for his being held up in this way by "Tricky
Clarence," as young Macklin had come to be known among the boys of the
town.

He wanted to rub it into Jack, and exult in the consternation which he
expected his declaration would cause in the other's mind. But there was
undoubtedly something more than this. If trouble did follow the meeting
of the rivals among the many channels of the Thousand Islands, Clarence
wished to make it appear that he and Joe were the aggrieved parties, and
that they had been actually set upon by the members of the motor boat
club, who had a grudge against them of long standing.

It was a clever bit of sharp practice, worthy of a shyster lawyer.
Perhaps Clarence may have inherited some of the shifty trickery by which
his respected father had laid the foundation to his big fortune in the
wilds of Wall street.

But Jack had no desire to stand there and enter into a wordy war with
Clarence, who had a ready tongue, and never cared very much where it led
him.

So instead of taking up the challenge, as Clarence doubtless wanted him
to, Jack simply elevated his eyebrows, and remarked:

"Oh! is that so? Well, I'm going to tell you just one thing for good and
all, Clarence. Neither myself, nor any one of the club, want to set eyes
on you or Joe; and if it rests with us, we'll not run across each other
all summer. But, understand me," and his eyes flashed dangerously, "we
mean to strike back, and if there's trouble it will have to be of your
seeking. You can have all you want of it. Now, that's enough. I'm done
talking."

Clarence hardly knew what to say. He looked at the other as though
tempted to blurt out the ugly things he had passing through his mind.
But somehow he realized that it would not be safe pressing Jack
Stormways too far. He was not the fighter Bully Joe had always been; for
as a rule he managed to get some one else to carry out his battles for
him. And Jack looked really dangerous just then.

"Pooh! words come cheap with some fellows," he muttered, as he turned
away. "But you'll find they cut no figure with my partner and me. As to
our keeping away from any particular spot you chumps choose to
patronize, that for your silly warning," and he derisively snapped his
fingers, for he was now twenty feet away.

Jack held himself in with an effort. He felt in a humor to have given
the exasperating Clarence the drubbing he deserved; but it would hardly
be nice to create such a disturbance of the public peace so soon before
they expected to leave home. If it seemed fated that he must teach this
contemptible fellow the lesson he so richly deserved it might be wise to
wait until they were far away from the town where they lived.

He was looking after the departing Clarence when he saw him take out his
handkerchief to wipe his forehead, for the day was warm.

Something fell to the ground, something that, even at that distance
reminded Jack of a yellow telegram blank. He could just as well walk
from the sporting goods store in the direction Clarence had gone as any
other way. And it was his full intention to call after the other, if the
paper seemed worth while.

So, in this spirit Jack bent down and secured possession of the crumpled
yellow paper.

Just as he had expected it was a telegraph blank, written on but not
signed. It seemed to be a message that some one had started, and upon
making a mistake in the wording had crammed in his pocket while he
started afresh.

That some one, of course, could only be Clarence, since the paper had
fallen to the ground at the time he took out his handkerchief.

Ordinarily Jack would not have been guilty of looking at a telegraph
message that had come into his possession under such circumstances. It
seemed excusable now. Clarence was a secret enemy, and had been plotting
to make trouble for the members of the motor boat club that had declined
to allow him and Bully Joe membership.

And the very first glimpse he had of the writing gave him a thrill; for
he read the address, which was:

"Jared Fullerton, Clayton, N. Y."

On the spur of the moment Jack changed his mind. Instead of calling out
after the departing Clarence, and notifying him that he had dropped
something, Jack just crammed the yellow paper in his pocket, and
wheeling, strode away.

He was considerably excited, and eager to learn what sort of
communication the other could be sending to Clayton that required the
use of the wires. And as he walked hurriedly away, with his nerves on
edge, he half expected to hear Clarence shouting after him, demanding
the return of his property.

"I never would be guilty of doing such a thing," Jack was saying to
himself, on account of the mean feeling he had, "only that sometimes
it's just necessary to fight fire with fire. If I'm wrong in my
suspicions then there's no harm done. But I must know what he's
telegraphing to Clayton. Who Jared Fullerton is I don't know from Adam;
but I bet he's cut from the same pattern Clarence and Joe were."

By then Jack had turned a corner. Unable to withstand the temptation any
longer, he looked around to make sure Clarence was not in sight; and
then drawing out the crumpled piece of paper, read what had been written
on the blank.

"Glad to hear boat arrived, and is such a corker. I'm bringing that
hundred with me, and hope you've earned it before we arrive. Don't get
in trouble for----"

Apparently Clarence did not like the way that last sentence looked, for
he had started to change it several times. Then, thinking he had better
write the whole message over again, he had doubtless thrust the first
draft into his pocket, and entirely forgotten it.

Jack read it over twice, and looked grave.

"Now what that snake's up to, I'd give something to know," he said to
himself, as he started to walk on, after placing the message away in his
pocket. "Some sort of dirty scheme has been mentioned in a letter, and
he's meaning to pay this Fullerton for doing the thing. What could it
be? He says it's to be done before he and Joe get there. A hundred
dollars is a lot of money. Oh! I wonder could he mean to have this other
scamp injure our boats in some way?"

It was a dreadful suspicion that beset him right then. How easy for any
one to put a lighted match to the canvas tarpaulins that covered the
three boats on the steamer's dock at Clayton. Why, they might be either
entirely ruined, or else so badly injured as to be useless for the whole
season.

Would Clarence be equal to conspiring to do such a serious thing as
this? Jack was sorry to admit that he believed the other was not past it
in the least. He had known him to play pranks that savored of the
criminal before now; and it had always been his rich father's money and
influence that had saved Clarence from getting the punishment he so
richly deserved.

Obeying a sudden inspiration Jack turned and chased back to the railroad
station where the telegraph office was located. He knew that the strict
orders of the operating company would prevent his seeing the message
that Clarence had finally given in, unless they were compelled to show
it by a decree of the court. But Jack had no desire to go that deeply
just then.

He knew the operator quite well, a young fellow who also sold tickets.

"Clarence Macklin was in here sending a message to Clayton, New York,
wasn't he, Bert?" he asked, trying not to appear at all excited.

"Yes, that's so, Jack," came the reply from the agent; who was really an
admirer of the young high school pitcher.

"How long ago was that--could I find him in town now, do you think?"

Note how cleverly this question was framed; and the operator fell into
the trap without even a suspicion that he was yielding up valuable
information.

"I reckon you might," he said, promptly, "because he went out of here
not more than fifteen minutes ago, after sending his message. Start on
Monday, I hear, Jack? Well, I only wish I was along. You fellows do have
the best times going; while some of the rest of us have to keep our
noses to the grindstone. Good luck to you all, and a bully trip on the
river," for Jack, having picked up all the information he wanted, had
turned abruptly on his heel and was leaving the station.

That settled it, then. Clarence had sent a message to the unknown Jared
Fullerton, that was presumably along the same lines as the one he had
first started. And doubtless that individual would be only too glad to
try and earn his hundred-dollar fee before Clarence and Joe arrived.

Since none of the motor boat boys would be in Clayton to be injured, the
only way in which he could do anything would be to scheme to bring some
miserable catastrophe upon the precious motor boats that had arrived and
were waiting to be claimed by their young owners at the steamboat docks.

It was surely a time for quick thinking, and action, unless they wished
to take the chances of having their whole summer outing spoiled.

And Jack, as he hurried home, was laying out a plan of campaign in his
mind calculated to outwit the miserable plotting of the reckless
Clarence and his equally unscrupulous crony, Bully Joe.




CHAPTER IV--BLOCKING A SLY MOVE


"Is that you, Jack?"

"No other. Say, George, can you come over here at once?" asked the boy
who was at the other end of the telephone wire; and there was that in
his voice to arouse the interest of George Rollins to fever heat.

"Why, sure I can. My wheel is handy, and you'll see me drop in on you
inside of a jiffy. But what's the row, Jack; no bad news about our boats
I hope? They haven't been dropped overboard in the middle of Lake Erie,
and sunk?"

"Oh, nothing half so bad; but I must see you," Jack went on saying. "And
George, start some of the rest along too, won't you?"

"Buster and Josh are on my way, and if they're home I'll jolly both into
coming. But you'd better try to poke out Herb over the wire," came the
reply.

"I will. So-long, George. Get a move on you now. Important!"

Then Jack put up the receiver, to sever connection; although a moment
later he was asking Central to give him the Dickson house. By great good
luck Herb happened to be up in his den, doing some packing; for this was
the last day he would have at home saving Sunday, and he was a very
careful fellow.

After hearing the "call of the wild," as Jack expressed it, Herb
consented to head for the Stormways domicile without any delay. He, too,
made use of his wheel to cover the intervening distance; and quite a
bunch of boys drew up in the yard about the same time.

Jack and Jimmie met them at the side door.

"Now, what under the sun has he got hold of, fellows?" queried George,
nervously, as they filed up to Jack's snug den; for the serious
expression on the faces of Jack and Jimmie gave him considerable
concern.

Nick was puffing like a steam engine. The little rush had winded him
more or less; but at the same time he also looked anxious. For, as they
were on the eve of starting out on their anticipated summer vacation,
this sudden summons to headquarters gave him a shock.

"I only hope it ain't anything about the boats," he remarked
plaintively, as he dropped down in a capacious chair that just suited
his stout figure to a dot, and was hence invariably appropriated by
Buster every time he came to see Jack.

"Well," remarked Jack, "I might as well admit right in the start that it
does concern our three motor boats."

"Don't tell me that any tragedy has happened to 'em, Jack?" pleaded
George, who was known to have a great affection for his _Wireless_, even
though the cranky speed boat did seem to delight in playing many cruel
tricks upon its skipper.

"No, not yet, I believe," came the answer.

"Good! You make me feel better already, Jack!" exclaimed George.

"But hold on!" cried Herb; "you noticed that he said 'not yet,' didn't
you, boys? Don't you see what that means? The boats are in danger; ain't
that so, Jack?"

"I've pretty good reason to believe so," replied the owner of the den;
and then he whipped out the crumpled telegraph blank. "Here, read that,
fellows, and tell me what you think. It fell from the pocket of Clarence
Macklin not half an hour ago. And I understand that he sent off a
message along these lines, after he had changed the wording a little."

Eagerly four heads were clustered above the yellow paper which he had
smoothed out on the chess table. Clarence wrote a plain hand, so that
there was no trouble in making out every word.

"Well, wouldn't that knock you?" gasped Nick, who had as yet failed to
entirely recover his wind after his quick passage on his wheel to Jack's
home, followed by the climb up two lights of stairs to the attic den.

"Jack, you're right; he means our boats!" ejaculated Herb, with a trace
of indignation and horror in his voice.

"Oh! the miserable skunk, what wouldn't I give for the fun of punching
his head for him. Just wait, the chance will come some fine day. Let
them dare do anything to my bully little _Wireless_! Why, Jack, they
could be sent to prison for a long term if they destroyed the boats."

Of course that was Skipper George, whose father being a lawyer, visions
of the stern hand of justice were always cropping up in the boy's mind.

"The way I look at it is this," Josh went on, deliberately; "Clarence
has a crony in Clayton, some fellow he knows by the name of Jared
Fullerton. Seems to me I've heard him mention that name, too, though I
don't remember anything about him. But he's meaning to hire this chap to
do something worth an even hundred. Fellows, we can give a quick guess
that something has to do with our three boats, which by now must be
lying on the steamboat dock there, waiting for us to arrive."

"You hit the nail on the head that time, Josh," declared Jack. "And I've
asked you all to come here so we could talk the matter over, and decide
what ought to be done."

An animated discussion followed. Some suggested one thing, which was
debated _pro_ and _con_; then another new idea would crop up, which they
eagerly seized upon, being deeply concerned about the safety of the
precious craft.

"Whatever do you suppose that sneak of a Fullerton could do, to put our
craft out of the running?" asked Nick, finally.

"Well, he might accidentally drop a lighted match under the tarpaulin
cover of one. You know it would flame up pretty quick, and might set the
whole bunch going like a pack of fire-crackers," Josh observed.

"Well, I hardly think any one would take such chances at that," Jack
remarked; "because, you see, they are lying on a public dock, and if a
big fire resulted it would mean the penitentiary for Jared. But no
matter, if a fellow only happened to be mean enough he could find lots
of ways to injure boats like ours. And for one, I don't propose to take
the chances."

"Tell us your plan, Jack; we'll stand by you," cried Buster.

"All right," said the other, quickly; "then listen. I propose that
George and myself go and see his father, and ask his advice. You fellows
make yourselves at home here; and after we've got things going we'll
come back to report. How does that strike you?"

"I say yes!" Josh hastened to cry.

As the others were of the same mind, Jack and George hurried away. It
being Saturday morning, George knew that his father would not be very
busy at his law office and could easily spare them a little time.

They found Judge Rollins without any client, which Jack considered
lucky, since haste was an element in their calculations just now. And
after he had heard the whole story, scanned the incriminating telegraph
blank, and asked numerous questions, the lawyer smiled, and said he was
ready to give his advice.

"Here is the address of a party I know in Clayton, and whose name just
came to me while you were talking, Jack," he observed. "Try and get him
on the long distance phone, and explain the circumstances to him as you
have to me. I feel sure that if you can reach Amos Spofford everything
will be all right."

Accordingly the two lads immediately hustled around to the central
station of the telephone company, where they could use the long distance
phone to better advantage than in a drug-store.

Having the local number of the party to whom the judge had referred
them, Jack, who had taken it upon himself to do the talking, because
George was apt to get excited, and splutter in a way that might
interfere with the carrying of his message to such a long distance,
asked to be connected with the Clayton office.

Of course, there was more or less delay, as usual, and the two boys
became quite nervous before there finally came a faint call.

When Jack learned that it was really Mr. Spofford who was at the other
end of the wire, he started to explain that it was Judge Rollins who had
told the boys to get in touch with the Clayton man.

Then as briefly as possible, for time was valuable, he told about the
trouble, and what they feared might happen. Happily, the man to whom he
was talking seemed capable of seizing on facts, and building a plan of
campaign instantly.

"Telegraph the agent of the steamboat Company to let me have the boats.
I happen to know him very well--his name is James Matthews. Then forget
all about the matter, boys. Depend on me! Your boats will be guarded,
day and night, every minute of the time until you arrive. That is all.
Goodbye!"

"Hurrah for Amos!" exclaimed George when his chum had related what the
man in Clayton had said. "He's all to the good! That was a bright
thought of yours, Jack, when you suggested going to ask my father's
advice!"

"But let's get back to the others," laughed Jack, as they paid the bill
and left the telephone office; "for they'll be burning up with anxiety
to know what's going on."

"Yes," grinned George, now as happy and light-hearted as he had
previously been gloomy, and oppressed with fears. "By now poor Buster
will have lost a pound or two in weight. He's the greatest fellow ever
to fret over things."

At that Jack fairly shouted.

"I know another of the same breed, George, and you can't deny it," he
said.

"Oh! well, what's the use?" admitted the other. "I know I do see
mountains often, that turn out to be ant hills when you get up close.
But I'm feeling particularly jolly right now. Bully for Amos. Won't we
shake him by the hand till he yells out for mercy. His name will be
emblazoned on the annals of our St. Lawrence cruise as the best friend
the motor boat club had, barring none."

Of course, they were set upon as soon as they entered the den in the top
story of the Stormways home, and made to tell what had happened. When
the balance of the club learned how neatly a spoke had been put in the
wheel of Clarence, they voted thanks to Mr. Edison for all he had done
in the interests of modern science.

And it can be set down as positive that those lads spent a much more
healthy Sunday than would have been the case had their minds still
wrestled with the problem of what the mysterious message sent by
Clarence stood for.

Then came the final morning when they were scheduled to leave the home
town, headed for the far distant Clayton, to begin their summer
vacation.

A score and more of boys were at the station to see them depart, besides
those persons who constituted the various families of the club members.
Their baggage was properly seen to, and then the last goodbyes said.
Clarence and his crony, Joe Brinker, came sauntering along, and stood
watching the passing of the expedition.

"He can't just help grinning all the time," Buster said aside to Herb,
as they were waiting at the car steps for Jack and George, still talking
with a group of friends.

"Sure he is," replied George, looking out of the corner of his eye, "and
every little while he says something to Bully Joe that tickles him to
beat the band. But we can afford to keep quiet, because we happen to
know how the game is going. I'm putting my faith in Amos right along;
he's going to make good."

"But why ain't Clarence and Joe starting, too?" demanded Nick at this
juncture.

"Oh! they're too sly for that, you see," George replied, knowingly, his
lawyer blood standing him in good stead. "Like as not they've got
through tickets right through Chicago, while we stop over in Milwaukee.
And even if they slip away this afternoon they could get to Clayton as
soon as we do."

"There's the conductor calling 'all aboard!' We're off, fellows!" cried
Buster, as he started to climb up the steps of the car, an operation
that required more labor on his part than in the case of more agile
lads.

The entire bunch grouped on the last platform of the parlor car at the
end of the train, and as they pulled out, waved their hats in salute to
the cheering of the crowd at the station.

Faster went the train, and presently a turn hid the home town from the
sight of the six vacationists. If any of them felt badly over parting
from loved ones they succeeded in concealing the fact as they passed
inside to take their seats, and while looking from the windows at new
scenes, lay delightful plans concerning the glorious time they
anticipated would be their portion when they got fully started on their
St. Lawrence river cruise.




CHAPTER V--THE GUARDIAN OF THE FLEET


"Well, here's the steamboat dock, all right; but I don't see anything of
our boats!" exclaimed George, as he and his five chums came to a full
stop close to the local office of the lake line running to Buffalo,
Milwaukee and Chicago.

"Oh! dear me, I hope we don't have trouble, after all," started Nick.

"Here, let up on that misery whine, Buster. Will you ever learn never to
squeal till you're hurt?" said Josh.

"Well, if you'd lost as much flesh as I have lately, you'd be a nervous
wreck too," replied the fat boy, aggressively.

"If I'd lost all you say you have, there wouldn't be anything more of me
left than a grease spot, and that's right!" grinned Josh.

"What shall we do, Jack?" and Herb turned to the one upon whom they
usually depended to steer them clear of the shoals.

"Well, here's the office right handy," replied Jack, smiling. "Suppose
we crowd inside, and make the agent give up some information. He ought
to know what's happened to our boats, because we understood they got
here safe."

"A bully idea, Jack; you're the goods when it comes to doing the right
thing!" Josh remarked.

Accordingly they fell in line, and rushed into the little office, where
a gentlemanly fellow, who was working at some freight accounts, in his
shirt sleeves, because of the heat of the day, glanced up in more or
less surprise.

"We're looking for some motor boats, sir, that arrived on the vessel
from the west. They were billed from Milwaukee by your line."

As Jack said this the agent smiled.

"Which one of you wired our Mr. Matthews?" he asked.

"I did. My name is Jack Stormways," replied that individual.

"You gave him authority to turn the three boats over to some party,
didn't you?"

"Yes, if that party's name was Mr. Amos Spofford," Jack replied.

"All right. We gave them into his keeping. Let me see, that was last
Saturday afternoon about one o'clock he was here," the other went on.

"But," Jack remarked, blankly, "we've been looking all around, and have
seen no sign of our boats on the wharf."

"And they couldn't have flown away like aeroplanes," put in Josh.

"I should hardly think so," laughed the other. "But have you looked
beyond the end of the dock, in the water?"

"No. Do you mean to say Mr. Spofford had the three boats launched?"
cried Jack.

"Well, there was something doing that way, I remember, on Saturday. He
had quite a gang of men working under him. That Mr. Spofford seems to be
something of a hustler. Over toward that point, boys."

They were already trooping across the big dock, as excited as any eager
lads could be. And no sooner had they reached a certain point than a
series of whoops burst from every throat.

"There they are, fellows! Don't they make a bully show, though, the
brave little boats? Say, ain't this like old times again?" cried Nick,
as he discovered the three craft anchored close together at a point
where they would not be in the way of any steamboat landing.

"There's somebody aboard, too!" exclaimed Jack, as a head was poked out
of the deck tent of the _Comfort_, which was the only one of the trio to
be thus honored, the others being in cruising trim.

"That must be Mr. Amos Spofford," declared Herb; "and he knows a good
sleeping boat when he sees it, too; for you notice he's camped in the
Old Reliable."

Jack waved his hand, and then called out.

"We're coming aboard. Are you Mr. Spofford?"

"That's my name. Glad to see you, boys. Come right along. You won't be
fired into the harbor if you try to get aboard!" came back the answering
hail.

"Gee! I wonder if that's what happened to Jared," remarked Nick, as the
party made for the landing, where a rowboat could be obtained in which
to paddle out to the anchored flotilla.

Every boy had his eyes glued on the boat that, to his mind, represented
all that was delightful. Many a happy day and night had they spent
aboard these same craft in times that were gone; and the future opened
up possibilities just as joyous.

One by one they climbed aboard the _Comfort_ and shook hands with the
jolly old gentleman whom they found there. None of the other boats could
have accommodated them as readily as the big launch.

"Glad you got here safe and sound, boys. I imagine this is Jack
Stormways. Introduce me to your chums, please, Jack. Told you not to
worry. Camped right here ever since getting your message. Would have
stayed a week if necessary, because you see I happen to be an old
bachelor, without any family ties. Greatest pleasure I've had for many a
year. Used to knock about myself, once upon a time, before I took on
flesh. And let me tell you, lads, you've got the greatest little
cruising outfits here I ever set eyes on. In my day we never knew such
comforts, any more than we did such bully boats."

In this fashion did Mr. Amos Spofford rattle on, for he was a great
talker, and a retired lawyer as well. He quite staggered poor Buster by
the immensity of his girth; for he was simply _tremendous_, and no
mistake.

"Gracious!" Nick whispered to Herb, when he found the chance; "you don't
think, now, I'll ever get to be like that, do you, Herb? Oh, if I
thought so I'd starve myself."

"Well, it would end your knocking about, just as it did his, so beware!"
answered the other; and chuckled to see poor Buster shiver.

All the time they were in contact with Mr. Amos Spofford Nick could not
keep his eyes off the wheezy old lawyer; and every now and then he would
shake his head and sigh most dismally. It was really an awful lesson for
Buster, as Josh often declared.

"Then you've really enjoyed camping here since Saturday afternoon, sir?"
asked Jack, as the party clustered around the guardian of the motor boat
fleet.

"Beyond measure," came the quick reply. "I haven't let the boats go
unwatched a minute of the time. On Monday I hired a man to stay aboard
while I finished up some little business that was pressing. Then I came
back in the afternoon with a new supply of grub, and determined to hold
the fort. Why, boys, it's been the happiest days of the last ten years
to me. And I've made up my mind that I'm going to throw business to the
dogs, have a boat like this, only larger, built especially for a heavy
man, and take to the water. I thank you for the opportunity you threw in
my way for this pleasure."

"And on our part we feel that you've been mighty kind to us, sir," said
Jack.

"Don't mention it. Besides, I'm only too glad to do something for Rube's
boy. He was good to me once upon a time, and helped me get back on my
feet."

"Perhaps our anxiety was all for nothing though?" remarked George; not
because he really believed what he was saying, but hoped it would tempt
Mr. Spofford to "open up," and tell anything he knew.

The stout lawyer chuckled until he shook like a bowl full of jelly. He
reminded Jack of Santa Claus around Christmas time, both with regard to
his white beard and the size of his paunch.

"Ah! that was a chip of the old block that spoke then," laughed Mr.
Spofford, "Rube for all the world; and a born lawyer, too. Follow in the
footsteps of your illustrious dad, George, and the world is yours. No,
to tell the plain, unvarnished truth, your anxiety _was_ well placed, I
have reason to believe."

He looked over the side at the water, and chuckled again.

"It is pretty wet in there for a fact, boys," he said, "and when a
fellow flops over with all his clothes on, he feels kind of squeamish, I
suppose."

"Do you mean to say, sir, that Jared Fullerton actually attempted to
come aboard in the night, and that you dumped him into the river?" asked
Herb.

"Oh! I didn't bother asking his name; and so far as I know he never had
the politeness to leave one of his visiting cards behind him," remarked
the big lawyer, still shaking, so that the staunch old _Comfort_
actually quivered in sympathy. "In fact, to tell the truth, he was so
set upon leaving in a hurry after he discovered that there was a tenant
ahead of him, that lots of things were sadly neglected."

"And you threw him overboard, sir?" asked Jack.

"That was the easiest part of it," replied the other, calmly. "You see I
used to be a great athlete in my day, when Rube knew me; and the fellow
wasn't anticipating running up against a lodger. I just gave him a neat
push, and you ought to have heard the splashing that followed."

"Wow! I'd have liked to, first rate!" declared Josh, in ecstacy.

"But he managed to climb out again, of course, Mr. Spofford?" Jack
asked.

"Oh! yes, after a lot of floundering around. I saw him climbing that
spile yonder, dripping at every move. And I've had no trouble since."

"Then we owe you a vote of thanks for helping us out in this way,"
declared George, warmly. "Only for your guardianship something serious
would have happened to our boats; and you can understand, sir, that they
are precious to all of us, after serving us so well on that Mississippi
cruise."

"I want to hear all about that at the first chance, boys. But now I'll
move out, and give the rightful owners possession. This is a very well
named boat, Herbert. I give you credit for knowing how to get full
enjoyment out of a trip. Now, that speed boat doubtless pleases George,
but you see it would hardly do for a fellow of my heft. I'm going to get
the builder of this outfit to put me one up that will be a dream, a fat
man's paradise."

"Hold on, Mr. Spofford," said Jack, who knew he was voicing the
sentiments of the entire club when he spoke as he did; "we are going to
stay around here until another morning, for we've got a lot to do,
stowing our stores, you know. And tonight, if you can do so, we invite
you to a little dinner, to be held on this boat. We hope you will please
us by coming; and let me tell you we've got the boss cook among us, who
can tickle your palate the best ever."

All eyes were turned toward Josh, who got up and gravely bowed, pushing
back Buster, who had impudently been in the act of accepting the honor
himself.

"I'll do it on one condition, boys," said the lawyer, as he started to
deposit his bulk in the boat Herb was holding to the side of the
_Comfort_.

"What is that, sir?" demanded Jack.

"That you promise to read to me the log of your last trip, when you went
down the big river; also tell me the many adventures that I'm sure must
have come your way during those glorious weeks."

"Done!" cried one and all, as they shook hands with the jolly retired
lawyer, and Herb started to paddle him to the dock.

"What time is dinner hour, fellows?" sang out Mr. Spofford, just as
heartily as though he might be one of the youngsters.

"Six sharp; but we'll wait for you any length of time you say, sir,"
replied Jack.

"Look for me before that time; and remember, boys, I'm a man of some
size, so be warned," laughed the other, waving his hand.

"Oh! we know all about that, sir; because, you see, we've got a shining
example of the same with us," called Josh, motioning toward Buster.

"That's so; but I'm afraid you mean a _horrible_ example; for we fat
fellows are to be pitied," floated back to their ears.

Nick sank back on his seat, looking plainly troubled.

"Oh! my, if I thought there was any danger of my ever getting like that
I'd--I'd, well, I don't know what I'd do; but something pretty
desperate--skip a meal once a week, perhaps," he remarked to George.

The other was already trying to draw his own boat alongside, so that he
might aboard; for naturally each skipper had thought of the craft that
was dearest to his mind; and Herb returning, both Jack and Jimmie used
the rowboat to reach the anchored _Tramp_.




CHAPTER VI--THE "FLASH"


For an hour or more the boys were busily engaged in rummaging.

Then they began to think about getting their luggage aboard, as well as
the necessary supplies. Jack had his lists made out to the fraction.
Previous experience would prove of considerable benefit to them now,
since they knew just what was most needed, and what things to leave
behind.

"I say, Jack!" called George, across the scant space that separated
their boats.

"Hello! what is it?" asked the skipper of the _Tramp_, looking up.

"We've all been so busy we haven't thought to look around," remarked
George; "and consequently missed seeing that dandy craft lying off there
a couple of hundred yards. Nobody seems to be aboard, as far as I've
noticed. My! but ain't she a beaut, though? Such graceful lines. I
warrant she can just skim the water, and make you _dizzy_ watching her.
Do you know what struck me, Jack?"

"That this might be the swift boat Clarence has had built, and which he
said was going to cut capers all around our fleet," replied the other,
promptly.

"Guessed it the first shot. Am I right?" asked George.

"Looks to me like a regular black, piratical craft," observed Josh.
"Just notice how low she sits in the water, would you? And there's
something sneaky in her whole make-up. Yes, that sort of a boat just
seems to fit in with a fellow like Clarence Macklin, 'Sneaky Clarence,'
you remember."

"There's a name in gold letters on her bow, but I can't quite make it
out. Here, Buster, just hand me my glasses, will you?"

A minute later George, having adjusted the marine glasses to his sight,
gave utterance to a low whistle.

"I've got the name all right, fellows," he remarked, "and what d'ye
think it is? Just the plain word _'Flash.'_ I guess that stands for
speed all right."

"It also stands for what Clarence and Bully Joe represent," Herb
observed.

Often, as they busied themselves during the balance of that day,
George's eyes would wander toward that long, narrow boat that sat upon
the heaving water with the grace of a black swan from Australia. George
believed he could see the times when it would be nip and tuck between
the _Flash_ and his own hitherto unbeaten _Wireless_; and he confessed
that perhaps the boast of the rival of the motor boat boys might not
have been without reasonable foundation.

Knowing how many times they must go ashore before the stores and
supplies were all aboard, the motor boat boys realized that it would be
a saving of time if they raised anchor, and moored alongside the dock.

This was accordingly done. As noon had come, they went in detachments to
the nearest hotel, and secured a meal; after which their baggage was
taken aboard. Then, leaving the others to stow it away, as on the
previous cruise, Jack, Herb and George went into town to purchase what
their long list called for.

Nick called out after them three times, begging them on each occasion to
be sure and not forget a certain thing of which he happened to be
particularly fond. Josh poked a whole lot of fun at the fat boy, and
warned him to beware lest he equal the enormous girth of Mr. Amos in a
short time if he did not curb that tremendous appetite.

"Oh! don't you fret about that," Nick answered. "In good time I expect
to gradually cut down my rations until I become as skinny as you. Then,
like enough, I'll want to jump overboard and end it all."

That was always Nick's way--_tomorrow_ he meant to start in regulating
his diet; but as usual with those who put off the evil day, tomorrow
never seemed to come.

That was a busy afternoon with them all.

Jack saw to it that the eatables were put up in three separate packages
all around, so that they could be handed over to the several boats
without division. This helped wonderfully, for there was no choosing,
and no ill feeling because one happened to get a better looking
assortment than the others.

"It's near stopping time, fellows!" called Nick, as he squatted on a
seat, like a big toad, Josh said, and wiped the perspiration from his
rosy face.

"Well, I guess everything's ready," added Jack.

"Ditto here," came from Herb. "And Josh is already rustling the kettles,
as if he meant business. So I move we pull out again and anchor. When
the gent comes we can get him aboard with the help of this rowboat he
hired for us."

That sort of talk seemed to satisfy every one; and accordingly they set
about working the motor boats to the positions they had occupied
previously, at the time their mudhooks were down.

Then began great preparations for a feast. Both the other boats handed
over their several batteries for cooking. Their previous experience had
taught George and Herb a lesson, so that they had discarded their
cumbersome oil lamps, and now each rejoiced in a fine new, brass Jewel
gas oil-stove, of the same reliable German brand as that which Jack
carried when on the famous Mississippi trip, now but a fond memory.

And they were surely a busy lot, every one working under the directions
of the head _chef_. Josh might play second, and even third fiddle, many
times; but when it came to cooking he was right there, as he himself
said, "with the goods." Some boys may seem gifted in one way, and a
comrade shine in another; it was the privilege of Josh Purdue to be a
natural born cook. He could throw together the most appetizing dishes
with apparently little effort. Everything he touched had a decidedly
delightful taste. And even Buster admitted that he stood without a peer,
monarch of all he surveyed.

So it came about that when Mr. Spofford arrived on the dock, and was
ferried across by Herb, he found some mighty fine odors wafting hither
and thither.

"My goodness!" he said, as he sniffed vigorously, "I hope dinner won't
be long delayed, boys, because you've just got me keyed up to a
desperate pitch, with all these joyful smells afloat."

"Ready right now, sir!" sang out Josh, who had donned a snow-white
baker's muslin cap, which he had fetched along with the intention of
coaxing Buster to wear, when engaged in his culinary tasks.

They were a jolly crowd gathered in the roomy _Comfort_, and discussing
the glorious dinner prepared under the direction of the head _chef_.

"Josh, you haven't forgotten how," observed Jack, as he started in on
the savory mess piled up on his pannikin.

"Which pleases me a whole lot," said George; "because you see, Mr.
Spofford, on this trip Josh sails with me in my _Wireless_."

"Alas! poor Josh! I see his finish. These are funeral meats, fellows,"
giggled Buster, already warmly engaged.

And so they laughed and joked as the meal progressed. Mr. Amos was as
merry as any one of the six boys. Again he seemed carried back to the
days when he loved this sort of life; and many times did they hear him
declare positively:

"You've opened up the fount that has been closed for many years, boys.
And after this it's me for the free life and the fresh air. Perhaps that
may reduce my overabundant flesh somewhat. Anyway, it will delight my
heart. Away with dull care; and from this time on I'm going to study
Nature again! And I have you to thank for opening my eyes. It was a
lucky day my old friend Rube thought of me, and put his boy in touch
with Amos Spofford."

"Perhaps you'd like to go out a few days, sir, with us," remarked Herb,
quite overwhelmed by the cordial ways of the retired lawyer. "This boat
is roomy, you see, and we might get along. The only difficulty would be
about sleeping quarters."

Poor Nick held his breath in suspense. If so be Mr. Spofford accepted,
he believed he saw his finish. But the other only laughed heartily.

"That's awfully kind of you, Herb, but I couldn't think of accepting,"
he said; and Nick breathed easy again. "When I go out, I shall have a
boat that is suited to my heft. Every time I move here, something seems
to groan, and threaten to give way. I guess you will have all you can
manage with my friend, Buster."

And after the hearty meal was finished they made themselves as
comfortable as possible, while Jack read the official log of the other
cruise, for the particular benefit of Mr. Amos.

The latter asked a thousand questions, and in this way managed to get a
comprehensive history of all the stirring adventures that had fallen to
their lot between their home town on the great river and the Crescent
City.

It was quite late when he left them, giving to each a squeeze of the
hand that would not soon be forgotten.

"If I can only find a boat suited to my size, boys," he said, as he left
them; "I'm going to get afloat this very season. But at any rate another
year will find me fully prepared for the season, with the greatest motor
boat you ever struck. Goodbye, you fine and dandy fellows! My heart will
be with you all along. Think of me sometimes, won't you, Buster?"

He chuckled as he fancied he heard a hollow groan from Nick; as if the
memory of Mr. Spofford's tremendous girth could ever long leave the
troubled mind of the fat boy.

A quiet night followed. Jack advised that they keep on the alert, lest
some peril drop in upon them; but fortunately his fears were not
realized, and morning coming found the little fleet all serene.

"Look, there he is!" said Nick, as they were gathered on the _Comfort_
enjoying one of Josh's little spreads, that included some of the
lightest flapjacks ever put before hungry campers.

"Clarence, as sure as anything!" ejaculated Herb.

"And wasn't I right about that boat?" asked Jack. "You can see he's
meaning to go out to it right now. But one good thing, we'll be likely
to have twenty-four hours' start of them. And on these broad waters they
may have some trouble looking us up."

"There's Bully Joe, too," remarked George. "See him look over this way
and scowl! Somehow the sight of our gallant little fleet doesn't seem to
please Mr. Brinker a whole lot. He'd be better satisfied if he could
only set eyes on them awash, with their decks level with the water."

Clarence did not seem to glance once toward the three motor boats. A
third party joined them, and it was not hard for Jack and his friends to
guess that this must be the unlucky Jared Fullerton, whom the stalwart
Mr. Spofford had dumped into the waters of the St. Lawrence when he
attempted to board the _Comfort_ one night not so very long since.

Just as soon as they were well through with breakfast, the motor boat
boys got ready to put out on the broad waters which were, from now on,
to serve them as a field of recreation.

Jack gave the signal, when he had learned that both the others were
ready. Immediately there was a tremendous amount of energetic popping,
as the motors once more got into service after their spell of idleness.

Clarence and the others aboard the long dark boat looked after the three
departing craft; and while none of our friends bothered waving a hand in
parting, Jack could see that the owner of the _Flash_ and his crony,
Bully Joe, were talking earnestly, as though laying some sort of plan
for the near future.

He even saw Clarence pointing after them, and then sweep his hand half
way around, as if declaring that no matter where the departing boats
might vanish, he would have little trouble in locating them if he wanted
to do so.

And to himself Jack was saying that there could be no doubt but that
Clarence, with that vindictive, cruel disposition of his, would put
himself to almost any trouble in order to get the laugh on those he
hated so bitterly.

The sun shone brightly as they pulled out of Clayton, and all of them
believed it was a good sign. The last they saw of the suspicious dark
boat with the contour of a river greyhound, Clarence was still talking
to his mates, and doing a great deal of pointing.

But before them was spread as lovely a stretch of water, with its green
and rocky islands, as ever a motor boat cruiser could wish to see. And
none of the boys believed on that glorious July morning that they could
wish for anything finer than fortune seemed to be placing at their feet.




CHAPTER VII--JOSH SCENTS TROUBLE


"What luck, Jack?"

It was just a week later. The three motor boats were anchored in a
little cove near one of the numerous rocky islands that give this part
of the wide St. Lawrence river its great reputation for summer outings.

Herb was leaning over the side of his boat, engaged in rubbing some
dingy part of the brass railing; and Jack at the time happened to be
approaching, seated in a little dinky or tender, which each larger boat
now trailed behind every time they made a move from one anchorage to
another; and which proved so useful in going ashore, fishing or
visiting.

"Oh! pretty fair," replied the one who handled the short oars, as he
turned in his seat to reach for something that lay in the bow of the
skiff. "We can have a fish dinner tonight, anyway."

Then he held up a monster muskalonge, that must have weighed all of
twenty pounds.

"Great Jupiter, what a sock-dollager!" cried George, who was taking it
easy in his boat; while Nick thrust up his head to shout:

"Bully for you, Jack! Now we won't starve to death! The country is
saved!"

"Well, I like that," said Herb. "To hear him talk you'd think I'd cut
him down to one meal a day, when to tell the truth he----"

"Stop right there, Mister Skipper!" cried the fat boy, threateningly.
"It's rank treachery to betray your boatmate to the common enemy. But
that is a dandy fish, Jack. Where did you catch him?"

"I think in the upper jaw," replied Jack, solemnly, at which there was a
shout.

"I see you did," replied Nick, bending over, "for there's a broken hook
sticking out of his mouth right now. Ugh! look at the cruel teeth, would
you? I'd hate to let him close his jaws on my finger. But if the gimp
snell gave way, how under the sun did you ever get him aboard, Jack?"

"I'll tell you," came the calm reply. "It happened that I had to play
this old pirate for nearly twenty minutes before I could tire him out.
You'd have laughed to see how he towed my little punkin-seed of a boat
around. But finally he seemed all but exhausted, and I kept reeling in
until I had him right up close, where I could bend over and touch him
with my hand."

"Wow! you couldn't hire me to do that now," exclaimed Nick, shuddering
as he gazed at that array of sharp, vicious looking teeth.

"I could see right then and there," Jack continued, quietly, "that the
gimp had been twisted until it was ready to break away. So I knew I
didn't dare try to lift him aboard by the line; and I had no gaff hook
along. So I just let my hand slide over his back until I reached his
opening and closing gills. Then I suddenly inserted several of my
fingers, and gave a quick fling. He came aboard all right; but the line
parted. So you see, Nick, it was a close shave for our supper, all
right."

Josh, having made sure the fierce-looking fish was actually dead, by
pounding it on the head several times with a piece of wood, started to
get it ready for the pan. It was really the first one of decent size
that they had thus far hooked; though several meals had been made of
small-mouth black bass, taken either by casting, or trolling with a
spoon.

"It strikes me as rather queer," remarked Jack, as he lay there resting,
"while Jimmie was starting to get supper for the two aboard the _Tramp_,
that so far we've neither seen nor heard a thing of Clarence and Joe."

"And haven't we had a great old week of it though?" George remarked.
"Outside of one stormy day the weather has been just prime; and even my
engine has given no trouble. I'm beginning to have hopes that it's
entirely cured of those tantrums that used to bother me so. Or perhaps
the Jonah has shifted to your boat, Herb."

"That ain't fair," called out Nick, from some unseen place, where he was
wrestling with the cookery department, and slyly taking peeps in his
notebook as to whether salt pork was used in frying fish, or butter.
"Tell the gentleman, Herb, that I never brought you the least bit of bad
luck. Why, we've been getting along here in a perfectly harmonious way,
haven't we?"

"Y--yes, I guess so," replied Herb, a little dubiously, "but I'd be a
heap happier if only you could forget that business about who leaked,
and let out our secret to the enemy. You ding-dong about that thing
morning, noon and night. And then you turn around to Mr. Amos, and fret
your head off because you're afraid some day you're going to be as much
of a whopper as he is."

"Well," grunted Nick, without even taking the trouble to poke his head
out, "you know right well this is a world full of trouble, fellows. If
it wasn't for my worrying the way I do, just imagine how I'd be taking
on flesh. I say, Josh, do you put the salt pork on first, and try it
out, before dusting the fish in cracker crumbs and dropping it in the
frying pan?"

It was not long before the appetizing odors that arose around the
anchorage of the motor boat fleet announced that supper was well under
way.

One thing pleased Nick; being the cook aboard the _Comfort_ he was in a
position to prepare a sufficient quantity to suit his generous ideas of
what constituted a meal for a healthy person's appetite; and
consequently there was no complaint about short rations. But when, as
was inevitably the case, the _Comfort_ had to borrow from the other
boats, the powerful effect of the fat boy's appetite became very
apparent.

"Say, Jack, did you have any particular reason in picking out this place
for our next stop?" asked George presently.

"Why, yes, lots of them," laughed the one addressed. "In the first place
it was an extra big island, and situated near the Canadian shore, you
see. Then again, the place looked kind of fishy, don't you know; and I
had an idea we might pick up some large muskies. From the fact that I
did bring in a dandy, first start, it seems as if my guess hit the
mark."

"It sure did," George went on. "But you don't know anything out of the
way about this heavily wooded island here, do you?"

"To be sure I don't, since I couldn't tell you right now what name it is
known under," answered Jack, who knew the other had some object back of
his questions, for George always led up to things, and never took
delight in springing a surprise on his chums, as most of the others
would invariably do.

"I just wondered if you could know any reason for it, that's all,"
George said.

"Reason for what? Now you've got me guessing; and that's probably just
what you wanted to do," observed Jack. "Speak up, and tell me what
you've noticed."

"Well, we seem to be objects of considerable curiosity to some people."

"Ashore, do you mean?" and Jack turned his head, to glance at the
frowning bank of the big island, the grim rocks of which were crowned
with a dense growth of trees and underbrush, so that it certainly looked
rather mysterious as the sun began to set.

"Well, no, I don't believe any of us have seen a living thing there,
except a coon, fishing on the edge; and a kingfisher flying from stump
to stump along the rim of the water. But three separate times a boat has
come along just out there, and the people in her would just stare at us
without saying a single word."

"Three, you say--the same boat and the same people?" Jack asked.

"Not at all," George replied. "That would not have seemed so queer, you
know; for I could believe that they happened to have an interest in this
cove, and disliked seeing us stop here; or else that the Canadian
authorities thought Yankees had no right to be fishing over on their
side of the broad river. It was the same boat."

"Three different boats, eh?" Jack mused. "And they looked unhappy at
seeing our fleet quartered here?"

"I thought they looked mad," Josh put in right then, popping his head up
like a jack-in-the-box; for he still persisted in wearing that white cap
while engaged in his department of the pots and pans.

"Were there any women or children aboard the boats?" Jack continued.

"How about that, fellows?" asked George.

"One boat had two men, another three, and the last one five," Herb
remarked, in his positive way.

"And they all stood off some distance, just looking at us. Perhaps there
are thieves in these waters, just as we found down on the Mississippi,"
Josh added.

"Maybe we'd better change our anchorage after supper, and hunt a new
place. There's going to be a bully moon tonight, fellows," from Nick,
still unseen.

"Oh! I don't think there's any call for us to run away--yet," Jack
laughed. "No doubt the men were from the Canada side, and there was some
reason why they looked at our little fleet so queerly."

"Well," Josh said, as if he had been worried more or less about the
matter, "I only hope one thing; that this blessed old island ain't
haunted, that's all!"

Jack laughed at that, it put such a new aspect on affairs. At the same
time he could not help thinking that superstitious Josh certainly had
some ground for allowing such an idea to seize hold of his mind; for the
island, with its dense vegetation, and its rough shore line, did look
out of the common. No doubt, when night dropped her blanket over the
broad river with its myriad of islands, both large and small, this
spooky place could easily be believed to shelter uncanny things.

"Don't give yourself any more uneasiness on that score, Josh," Jack
urged. "If there ever was a ghost anywhere near this place it took wings
long ago, when the thousands of summer tourists began coming here for
their vacations. What with the big hotels, and the hundreds of cottages
perched on the islands, small chance a poor spirit would have today."

While he said nothing more about the three boats with their unfriendly
crews, Jack did not entirely forget them. Perhaps there might have been
some deep reason for the strange actions of these men. Perhaps--but
then, without any foundation for a theory, what was the use bothering
himself forming any such?

The night came on; but even while they were eating supper a change had
begun to take place in the weather conditions. Nick's prediction of a
beautiful moonlight night gave promise of being far from the actual
fact; for clouds had drifted over the heavens, some of them dark and
threatening, though as yet broken.

"We may get a storm before morning," observed George, looking up.

"And I wager Jack foresaw that same thing when he picked out this cove
for our anchorage," declared Herb. "You notice that it is to the
eastward of the island; and don't you see about all the storms up here
come out of the west. In that way we will be protected against a heavy
blow."

Jack might have kept still, and allowed his chums to heap honors on his
unworthy head; but that was not his style.

"Hold on, you're doing me too much credit, boys," he observed frankly.
"I took to this cove just because it looked good to me, and never for a
minute thinking how it would serve us in case of a blow. But just as
Herb says, we are protected here, and that's another reason for not
changing, as Nick hinted we should do."

They ate supper before the dusk turned into night, and the whippoorwills
were calling from back on the wooded island, to be answered from the
further Canada shore.

The three boats were close enough together to allow the boys a chance to
exchange any remarks they wished.

"Better get ready in case we have a downpour tonight," remarked Jack, as
he cast a look upward to where the moon was just starting to peep out
from behind a threatening bank of clouds.

"For one I'm glad I got that hole in my tent mended in time," observed
Herb.

"Me too," spoke up Buster, "because, you see, it was so nicely fixed
right over my poor head. Think of a stream turned on while you slept!
Ugh! when I take my cold baths I'll choose my time."

"I've known when you didn't all the same," ventured George, chuckling.

"That's mean of you," Buster replied, reproachfully, "bringing up old
happenings. Yes, I did fall overboard into the river; but who wouldn't,
in that cranky speedy boat of yours, shivering and jumping to beat the
band. Why, hello! what ails Josh there?"

"Yes, what are you staring so hard at, Josh?" demanded George, turning
his head.

"Didn't any of the rest of you see it?" asked the other, eagerly.

"See what? Are you beginning on that ghost racket already?" insinuated
Herb.

"Ghost nothing," exclaimed Josh; "and yet truth to tell it did glide out
of sight behind the point yonder like a phantom boat. Then the moon went
under, and I lost it again!"




CHAPTER VIII--IN THE MIDNIGHT WATCH


Everybody sat up and took notice when Josh delivered himself after this
strange fashion. If it had been a mere glimpse of some white object
which he claimed to have seen ashore they might have smiled, and let it
go at that. But a boat was a different proposition. They were interested
in boats; and indeed, expecting sooner or later to be visited by a
certain dark craft, fashioned along a piratical type.

"Where did you see it, Josh?" asked George, hastily jumping to his feet;
and almost taking a header into the water; for his delicately balanced
speed craft did not allow such energetic movements with impunity.

"Well, give a feller a chance, won't you?" grumbled the other, as he
clutched the brass railing just in time to save himself. "I'm not in
such a hurry to go after the phantom boat as to want to _swim!_
Besides," he added, as an afterthought, "I haven't forgotten that savage
musky Jack brought in today. If they hang out around this region you
don't catch Josh Purdue doing any bathing, not much."

"But tell us, where did you see this queer boat that moves along as
silent as a specter?" asked Nick.

"Didn't you get on to what I said?" continued the other, impatiently.
"Around that point yonder it seemed to glide. I lost it in the shadows."

"Listen to him hedge, fellows!" cried Nick. "Now he says it 'seemed to
glide.' That is as much as saying he ain't sure whether he was awake or
dreaming."

"I tell you the boat was there," Josh persisted; "and if the mean old
moon hadn't just bobbed behind that cloud up yonder, all of you might
have had a chance to glimpse her."

"But you had one look at her, didn't you?" asked Jack.

"Sure I did. And because I didn't hear any noise of a motor I just had
to stare," came the ready reply.

"Was it a white pleasure boat?" continued Jack.

"Not much. I could have seen that sort right along, moon or no moon. I
know what you're thinking, Jack."

"All right. Was it a dark-colored launch, then?" the other demanded.

"This time it's yes--a long, low, narrow craft, that seemed to just spin
along like a shadow itself. But I know it was a boat, because I could
see the water curling over, where the bow cut through," Josh went on.

"You hear that, fellows?" Jack remarked. "And of course, you understand
what it means to us?"

"That boat was the _Flash_, and Clarence has found us out at last?" said
George; not without a trace of eagerness in his voice; for so well had
his speed launch been behaving of late that he was anxious to test her
against the newer craft of Clarence Macklin.

"Just like him to come sneaking around at night to see how he can do us
some rotten injury," grunted Nick.

"Lit him thry it, that's all," remarked Jimmie, popping his head up.
"I'm thinkin' the gossoon will be sorry for it, wan way or t'other."

"But that means we shall have to keep watch, doesn't it, Jack?"

Of course it was Herb who said this, for he might be set down as the
most timid of the six boys; though there had been times in the past when
even Herb had risen to the occasion, to prove that he could show valor.

"No doubt about that," returned the other, seriously. "You know the
benefit we found in being prepared when on that trip to Dixie land. It
pays to be ready for trouble. Meeting it half way often ends in victory.
Oh! yes, the squad will have to turn out, and take turns tonight."

All this had been carefully arranged beforehand. Jack knew his crowd,
and also what little failings they might be apt to develop. For
instance, he understood that it was hardly the part of wisdom to allow
Nick to stand his spell of sentry duty alone. However willing the fat
boy might declare himself he was apt to be overcome by drowsiness and
fall asleep at his post.

"Think we'd better move out a bit from the shore?" asked Josh, after
they had talked matters over for a further spell, and looked in vain for
the mysterious dark motor boat to appear again around the point of the
wooded island.

"What for?" asked George.

"Sure, the howlding's foine roight here," asserted Jimmie, who had
personally seen to it that the _Tramp's_ anchor was well placed; though
it could be readily tripped in case of a sudden need for a move during a
storm.

"But to tell the honest truth, fellows, I don't just like the looks of
this old island here," admitted the cook of the _Wireless_, boldly.

"I don't see anything the matter with it?" remarked George. "In fact,
simply because it seems deserted is no reason we ought to cut loose, and
change moorings. If it belonged to some millionaire, and had a cottage
perched on the rocks, the chances are ten to one we'd have been asked to
move long before now."

"I agree with George," Jack remarked. "And that was the main reason why
I determined to come here, where it looked so attractive. When fellows
are off on a little trip like this, the very places they should avoid
are those where too much civilization is found. Give me the wild spots
every time."

"Oh! well, I withdraw my motion then," grumbled Josh. "But don't blame
me if anything happens, that's all."

"Would ye be afther listenin' till him?" exclaimed Jimmie, hilariously.
"Sure he do be thinkin' still about that banshee. And Jack, since ye are
to sthand watch wid Josh, be warrned in toime, to look out for throuble.
If wishin' would bring ghosts it's me honest belafe Josh would raise a
whole raft of thim."

But in talking of many other things the boys soon seemed to forget about
these fears on the part of the one who confessed to a belief in
hobgoblins.

When several of the inmates of the gathered boats started to yawn at a
tremendous rate, word was given that they turn in.

"It's eleven o'clock, boys, just think of it?" said Herb, as he lighted
a lantern in order to make up his bed more comfortably; for Herb
believed in getting all the benefit possible out of things, even when on
a cruise.

"And we can count on broad daylight by four o'clock, though we needn't
get up till five," Jack observed. "So I've divided the six hours into
three watches. Josh and myself will stay on duty until one. Then Herb
and Jimmie will take our places, and at three they are to wake up George
and Buster. Understand that, fellows?"

"Yes," came the response, in some cases very sleepily.

"How about you, Josh; think you can stay awake two hours now?" Jack
asked.

"I drank more coffee for supper than usual," the other answered, "and
the way I feel now, I don't seem to care one bit whether I get a wink of
sleep tonight or not."

As things were reduced to a pretty good system by this time, with regard
to the making up of beds, it did not require much time to get these in
readiness. Herb was the only fussy one; and they were threatening to
call him an old maid, and get a cap and gown for him, if he kept on that
way. But Herb paid no attention to all this talk. When he had his mind
made up it required an earthquake to change it.

Finally his lantern went out, although Josh kept it within reach of his
hand, in case he needed light in a hurry while doing his trick as
sentinel.

He and Jack could converse in low tones without disturbing the sleepers,
should they care to do so. Jack meant to exchange a few words
occasionally, if only to convince himself that the other had not been
overtaken by drowsiness.

No longer did the moon peep out from the dark curtains above. The cloud
banks had effectually covered the face of the heavens as with a pall.
Still it did not rain, and thus far there were no other indications of a
brooding storm.

It was impossible to see for any distance around. Even out upon the
water objects were indistinct at fifty feet; and as for the nearby
island it rested there like a black hillock, above which the tips of the
inky pines could be seen outlined against the less opaque sky.

Now and then the night breeze moaned dismally through these treetops,
making a queer sound. Jack noticed that every time this happened there
would be a slight movement in the _Comfort_; and he understood that Josh
must be turning his head to stare toward the island. Josh, then, had not
entirely given up the idea of seeing a ghost; and this uncanny sound
made him remember his prediction.

It was impossible to note the passage of time by the stars, for they
were quite out of sight, and no clock striking could give warning; for
there was not a church within many miles of their anchorage.

So when Jack began to wonder how much longer he and Josh ought to hold
the fort, he had to strike a match and consult the little nickel watch
he carried.

"Gosh! how you scared me!" exclaimed the other sentry, as the match
crackled.

"Half past twelve," Jack remarked, in a low tone. "That means another
half hour for us, Josh. How are you feeling about now?"

"Well," admitted the other, "I guess I was near dozing that time.
Thought somebody shot at me when you scratched that match. How loud
everything sounds at this time of night. Wish that old bird would let up
on that screeching, over on the Canada shore. He makes me tired, for a
fact."

"Depends on the way you look at things," chuckled Jack. "Now, for my
part I rather like to hear a whippoorwill call. Never yet kept me awake
either, like some things would do. Have a bite of this gingerbread,
Josh. Keeping watch is hungry work, after all, I find. Besides, while
your jaws are working, you won't get sleepy."

Josh was nothing averse to a "snack," and so they sat there, eating, and
occasionally exchanging some remark, while the balance of the crowd
slept on.

The boats were anchored far enough apart to avoid striking should a wind
arise. But on account of his desire to keep in touch with Josh, Jack had
seen to it that the stern of each craft was drawn toward the other. In
this fashion then they could have shaken hands by leaning over the
intervening foot or so of water.

It so happened that while Jack was devoting most of his attention to the
watery expanse that stretched away toward the east, Josh on the other
hand found the neighboring island more interesting.

Each acted on his own idea as to the nature of the danger that might
come upon them. With Josh it was the peril that stalks during the middle
of the night, and frightens men through its connection with spectral
forms. Jack, on the other hand, suspected that Clarence and his crony,
Bully Joe, might be planning some sort of a mean raid, that would spoil
the pleasure of the motor boat club.

"Jack!" whispered the occupant of the _Comfort_ in a hoarse voice.

"Well, what do you want?" replied the other lad, serenely.

"I am sure I heard a suspicious noise ashore just then!" Josh continued.

"Oh! rats! You're always hearing things, Josh. Like as not it was only a
poor old 'coon, hunting around on the beach for a fish that has been
cast up. Get it off your mind. It's only a little time longer, and then
you to dreamland."

"There it goes again, Jack! Didn't you catch it that time? I tell you it
means something. Hark! now will you believe me?"

Josh was growing more and more excited. He even raised his voice above
the low tone in which up to now they had conversed. But small danger of
any of those sound sleepers being so easily awakened. It would require a
shaking to accomplish that.

Jack certainly did hear the sounds now. These consisted of a strange
clacking, the nature of which it was impossible to guess. Then would
come a plain, unmistakable groan! No wonder poor Josh shivered, and
turned cold with apprehension, considering what his recent belief had
been.

"Oh, my! there's sure something moving up there, Jack! Don't you see
it--over by that place where we saw the silver birch? Watch it, Jack!
There, look! look!" and as he spoke Josh raised his voice still more
until it almost became a shout.

Movements told that he had finally succeeded in arousing the sleep
squad. Nick was heard to yawn, and grumble, as usual; while Herb poked
his head out from the side curtains to ask what all the row meant.

"Didn't I tell you it would come?" shouted Josh suddenly. "Just look
there on that blamed island, and see what we get for sticking here! Now
laugh at me for believing in ghosts, will you? Herb, can't we cut the
anchor rope, and make a quick getaway? Please say yes, because I'm that
scared I'm shaking all over!"

And every eye was by this time glued upon the strange spectacle ashore
that had given poor Josh his fright.




CHAPTER IX--THE GHOST OF THE ISLAND


"Wow! it's sure a banshee!" whooped Jimmie.

"A-am I dreaming, fellows?" exclaimed Herb, rubbing his eyes
desperately.

"O-oh! look at it shake its fist at us, would you! It's ten feet high,
if it's one!" came from the quivering lips of Buster.

But Jack as yet had not said a word, though he was staring just as hard
at the remarkable sight ashore as any of them. It was something
different from anything that had ever before crossed his path. Perhaps
Jack might have felt a little chilly sensation as he looked; but he was
not at all frightened.

Up on the rise of the mysterious island there had appeared a dim figure
that seemed, just as Nick vowed, to be all of ten feet in height. At
first it was like a curling column of smoke, when a certain kind of wood
has been thrown on the fire. Then it seemed to take form, and change to
a flickering yellow glow.

The groaning sounds continued all the while, as though this disturbed
spirit from the other world might be in great pain. And certainly the
figure was waving one of its arms as though waving them off.

All of this Jack saw, yet no panic gripped him as it seemed to do the
rest, who were crouching there, staring, and gasping for breath.

"Jimmie, hand me my shotgun, and let's see if it can stand Number
Threes!"

Jack called this out in a loud, clear voice. Not that he wanted the gun
to any great extent; but he had an object in saying it.

But Jimmie really believed he meant what he said. While he groped for
the gun he was saying aloud:

"Sure, now, 'tis mesilf as doan't belave ye kin knock the daylight out
of that banshee wid little shots, Jack, darlint. But if so be ye mane to
thry, take the gun, while I shut me eyes."

"'Tain't any use," broke in George; "the thing's disappeared!"

And so it had, vanishing as mysteriously as it had come, and leaving
only a black void in front of them. Even that steady groaning had
stopped, proving conclusively that it had had to do with the appearance
of the spectre.

Jack laughed, to the utter astonishment of the rest.

"I don't see anything funny about this business," complained Nick.

"Well, p'raps you fellers will quit quizzing me after that experience!"
said Josh, with just a little ring of triumph in his unsteady voice.

"And will you please stop shaking that way?" remarked George. "For you
make the boat rock the worst kind. It was bad enough seeing that blessed
thing, without taking a header overboard right now."

"Jack, what makes you laugh?" asked quiet Herb, who knew that the other
would not have acted in the way he did unless with good and sufficient
cause.

"Do you really want to know?" asked Jack, quietly.

Somehow the fact that one of their number did not seem to be affected by
the panic that had swept over the rest began to make George and Jimmie
ashamed.

"Sure we do, Jack," remarked the latter, eagerly.

"I was laughing because it was so funny to see how our fine ghost bobbed
out of sight the very instant I called to Jimmie to hand me my Marlin,"
said Jack.

"Oh! I see now!" cried George; "you mean that ghosts needn't be afraid
of a handful of bird shot. Is that it, Jack?"

"That's what I meant. I've read lots of ghost stories, just like Josh
here; though I never believed them for one minute. But in every case the
fellow who tells the yarn declares that bullets have no effect at all on
real goblins. Am I right, Josh?"

"It's true, every word of it, Jack!" the other answered, promptly. "Why,
I've heard where a soldier whacked the head off a ghost, who coolly
picked it up and stuck it on again as neat as you please. Oh! no, they
needn't be afraid of little bird shot, not a bit of it."

"Well, this ghost was timid, you see," Jack proceeded. "He fell over
just as soon as I called out about my gun."

"Look here, you mean something by that, sure you do!" remarked Herb.

"Fellers, he's hinting that it was a job set up on us--that's what Jack
means," declared Nick.

"Out with it, Jack. Don't you see that we're all in a blue funk over
this queer deal? If you know anything, share it with your pards," said
Herb.

"That's it," observed Josh, who had by now somewhat recovered from his
fright; "put us wise old commodore. What d'ye think it was, now?"

"I'll tell you, boys," Jack said, impressively. "In my opinion, honest
Injun, now, somebody was trying to frighten us away from here."

"Say, it did wave its long, bony arm, all right!" exclaimed Josh.

"We all saw that," Herb put in; "but what do you suppose anybody would
want to make us move our anchorage so much as to go to all that fuss and
feathers to scare us?"

"Well," answered Jack, "that's a thing I can just tell--yet! You all
admit it did keep waving its arms. And you heard those lovely groans
stop just at the same time the thing disappeared. I thought I heard a
sound like something falling to the ground. Did anybody else get that?"

"I heard some noise," admitted George. "But, Jack, you certain must have
some little suspicion about who engineered this silly game, if it was a
set-up job?"

"Well, Josh saw a boat," calmly remarked the one addressed.

"Listen to that, would you?" exclaimed Nick. "He means that it was
Clarence who got up that cute game right now--Clarence, our old friend
of the baseball diamond. And perhaps the ghost that groaned was only
Bully Joe. Fellers, it sound good to me."

"Well, it would be just like Tricky Clarence, as sure as you live!"
admitted Herb, who had possibly been the least alarmed of the five.

"But why should he want us to vacate?" demanded Josh, who disliked very
much to give up his pet illusion, and believe that the ghost was only
the result of a clumsy trick on the part of some person or persons
unknown.

"Perhaps he wants this fine little cove himself," suggested George.

"That hardly fills the bill," Jack went on. "He might think to get even
for some of the times we've won out in the past. I tell you right now
I'm bothered to understand it."

"Do we clear out in the morning, then?" asked Herb.

"I hope you won't say yes to that, fellows. In the first place, it goes
against my grain to be chased away by Clarence Macklin or anybody else,
who has no right to order us around. And then again, there are some
things I'd like to look into connected with this queer affair."

When Jack talked like that he knew the others would fall in with his
wishes; for they had long ago come to look upon him as a leader.

"Oh! we'll stick it out if you say so, Jack," declared George. "But you
ought to tell us anything else you've got on your mind."

"There was one thing that puzzled me," Jack continued. "It happened
while Josh was dozing, or else looking somewhere else, for he didn't
seem to notice it. And I didn't say anything, because there was no use
waking the rest of you up then."

"But what was it, Jack?" questioned Kick.

"Why, we settled it in our minds that the old island was uninhabited,
didn't we boys?" asked the other.

"That's so," several hastened to declare.

"Well, about half an hour ago, as I chanced to turn my head and look
that way, I caught sight of a dim light moving along near the ground. It
would disappear, and then come in view again, all the while moving."

"Now, I've seen just such a funny light, when a man with a lantern was
walking through the woods," burst out Herb.

"Just what I settled it in my mind that was," chuckled Jack. "But it
wasn't so strange that some one should be ashore, and I didn't let it
bother me any. After what has happened, though, you can see it must have
meant something."

"That's a fact," admitted George. "And, fellows, I'm coming around to
Jack's way of thinking. I just bet Tricky Clarence was behind that
show."

"Oh! well, let's try to forget it for tonight," Jack observed; "and as
it's now just one o'clock, George and Nick will have to take their turn
on guard."

"Sure," replied Buster, cheerfully. "Sleep and me have parted company
for the rest of this night, after what I saw. So it's me for a four hour
stretch; Herb, you can snooze right along till sun-up, if you want."

"Oh! can I? Thanks," laughed the one addressed, with a touch of
skepticism in his voice; for he knew only too well what a difference
there was between Buster's promises and the keeping of them; he always
meant well, but found the flesh weak.

And it proved just as wise Herb supposed would be the case; when the
time came for George to go off duty he found Nick fast asleep; so that
Herb had to be aroused by repeated calls and punching of the side of the
_Comfort_.

Then daylight came; but according to Jack's arrangements no one was
aroused until the hour of five, when the sun was well up. July days are
long indeed in this northern clime, and the twilight lingers until
nearly nine in the evening.

"Who's going to try the fishing today?" asked Jack, as they were
partaking of their bacon and egg breakfast, a supply of the hen fruit
having been obtained on the previous day from a Canadian farmer, near
whose place the little fleet of motor boats had stopped.

"Why, Herb and myself talked of going, if so be you'd post us about the
best trolling ground," George remarked.

"Tell you all I know about it," replied Jack, readily enough. "But if
you are lucky enough to strike a big musky like the one I got, you'll
have your hands full. Better take the gaff hook along. I wished many
times yesterday I had it."

"Will we, George?" asked Herb, in a vein of sarcasm.

"Catch me putting my hand on a pirate like that while he's got an ounce
of fight left in him," the other declared. "Why, one snap of those jaws
and he'd take your whole paw off, sure. Yes, give us the gaff hook, or
we don't go."

"Then you don't intend to keep us company?" asked Herb of Jack.

"I think I'll just hang around here this morning, boys."

"Oh! all right. I can see with half an eye that you've got something up
your sleeve, Jack; but post us when the show comes off, won't you?"
George remarked, laughingly.

An hour later, long after the two ambitious fishermen had departed in
their little rowboats for a siege of trolling along the lonely shores of
the island, Jack quietly stepped into his own dinky, and paddled ashore.

"Now what can he be up to?" Nick asked Josh, as they looked after the
other.

"Give me something easy, will you?" replied that worthy. "But all the
same, I noticed that Jack was careful to take his gun along."

"But he can't shoot any game now; the law is on nearly everything, you
know. And up here the wardens are always on the lookout for poachers,"
Nick continued.

"Oh, shucks!" Josh complained, "you don't see through a millstone, even
when it's got a big hole in it. Can't you understand that Jack is bent
on looking up that ghost business? Wonder if it was Tricky Clarence at
the back of it. Gee! but when I first set eyes on the same I really
thought it was a dead sure spirit of some old Injun chief come back from
the Happy Hunting Grounds to warn us away."

"Huh! I noticed that you hung on to that same idea to the bitter end,"
Nick continued pugnaciously. "Right now, I bet you believe deep down in
your silly heart, it was a regular hobgoblin. Oh! I know you all right,
Josh Purdue; and you've got a scary heart all right. But I saw, just as
soon as Jack spoke up, how we'd been fooled by Clarence. Wait till he
comes back, and he'll prove it."

"I'd like to know how?" demanded Josh. "Expect him to interview that
_thing_, and get a written confession? I'm just wondering what we'll run
up against if we're bound to stay here in this cove another night."

"Piffle!" scoffed Nick. "What about guns, hey, tell me that? Ghosts
don't appear to like guns much, do they? Jack says not, and Jack, he
ought to know. Stay here? Of course we will; a week, two of 'em, if we
feel like it!"

"Oh! yes, how brave some people are in the middle of the day, when the
sun's shining," jeered Josh. "But wait; that's all! I expect to see you
get the scare of your life tonight, don't you know. If that _thing_ gets
real mad, and digs in for us you needn't bother worrying about taking on
any more fat, because you'll shake that hard you'll lose pounds and
pounds! But let's wait till Jack comes back, and find out what he's
discovered. I've got a good notion to follow him ashore, if I can pull
up the anchor and beach the _Comfort_. Watch how I manage it."




CHAPTER X--FOLLOWING A TRAIL


Josh found his little plan was not hard of accomplishment. All he had to
do was to push the _Wireless_ around, after letting out all the cable
connected with the anchor, when he was able to jump ashore.

He took with him another rope that was fastened to the stern of the
motor boat, and this he fastened to the nearest tree. Now, when he
wanted to go aboard, all he had to do was to unfasten this latter
hawser, climb over the side, and draw the _Wireless_ back to her
original anchorage.

"Good boy!" cried Nick, who had been a close observer of this clever
little game. "You go up head. When it comes to dodges like that, you
take the cake."

It was not often that Josh heard a compliment from this source, and he
had to stop and wave his hand toward the cook of the _Comfort_, before
following after Jack.

He had not gone twenty feet before he discovered the object of his
concern, who appeared to be bending over something that seemed to
greatly interest him.

"Hello! there, what've you found, Jack? Signs of a diamond mine, or
traces of the ice age they tell us about?" Josh demanded, as he reached
the side of the other.

"Hello yourself, Josh," replied Jack, looking up with a smile, as though
pleased because he was to have some one to talk to, and possibly confer
with. "Well, no, I can't just say that either of your guesses comes
anywhere near the truth. I'm only examining a trail."

"What's that? Then this old island hasn't always been as deserted as it
looks right now, if people sometimes drop ashore here?" remarked Josh,
his interest at once aroused.

"Look here and tell me what you see," the other lad continued, as he
pointed to the ground near his feet.

"Say, as sure as you live, it is, for a fact," exclaimed Josh. "Looks
like they'd done a heap of passing up and down this way, too. D'ye know,
Jack, I wondered what those marks on the little beach meant, and now I
understand. Boats, that's what; boats that have been drawn up there when
the water was higher than it is now."

"Yes, I saw them," said Jack, quietly. "In fact, I looked to find such
marks on the sand. And this broad trail began there, too."

"Oh! I'm beginning to tumble to a few things. I guess that in the
season, this same tight little island may be a place for duck shooters
to hold out. Perhaps we might even find an old deserted shanty somewhere
back yonder in which they camp out during the blustery fall months."

"Hold on, Josh," remarked Jack. "Is that all you know about signs?"

"Why, whatever do you mean?" asked the other, puzzled.

"Take another squint at these marks, and then tell me what you think,
Josh."

"Say, I tumble to what you mean!" exclaimed Josh, after he had bent down
once more. "You expect me to say that if these marks had been made
months ago, with a winter's ice and snow, and a summer's heavy rains,
they'd have been washed out long ago. And so they would, Jack, so they
would. You're right about it. They've been made lately! They look fresh,
for a fact!"

"Now you're tumbling to facts, Josh. Remember, we had a big downpour
just three days ago, don't you?" Jack went on.

"Sure I do. And you're on to that, too. But I grab your meaning now, all
right. There are marks here that must have been made since that rain."

"Well, what do you say about it now?" continued the boy who could read
signs.

"Instead of duck shooters they're fishermen," observed Josh, calmly.
"Yes, and you remember how those three boats came along, and the men in
each stared so hard at us? Jack, I see it all now. We just happened in a
favorite place of theirs, and they didn't like it for a cent. Why, they
even tried to scare us off with that silly ghost business that gave poor
old Pudding such a fright."

Jack only smiled.

"Well," he said, "suppose we follow this trail for a bit. I have an idea
it will lead us to the very place where I thought I saw a moving light,
like a swinging lantern, last night."

Josh was eager to keep step with him; but there was no trouble
experienced in picking up the trail, so plainly marked were the tracks.

"There it is, Jack!" exclaimed Josh, suddenly; for he had been looking
ahead all the time his companion kept his eyes fixed on the ground.

"It is a shanty of some sort, isn't it?" remarked Jack, without much
emotion; for he had been absolutely positive as to what they would
discover, so that the announcement did not excite him.

"Why, yes, a tumbledown sort of a shack," observed Josh, with a trace of
disappointment about his manner. "I'd pity the fellows who spent a rainy
day in such a rookery. Why, the roof is falling in at one end; and the
door hangs on one rusty hinge."

Jack saw all these things as quickly as did his companion, even though
he failed to cry out and express himself as vehemently as Josh took
pains to do.

"Old dilapidated cabin as it is, note one thing, will you," he remarked.

"You mean that the tracks lead up to the door, is that it, Jack?"

"Well, yes," the other continued, "but just notice that there's a rusty
padlock on the door. Stop and think if that doesn't look queer,
considering that if anybody wanted to get in, all they'd have to do
would be to knock that one hinge, and the whole door would drop flat?"

"Say, that makes me laugh, for a fact," Josh chuckled. "But it's just
what you'd expect to run across up among these simple people of the
border. They make me think of the ostrich. Don't you know we read the
silly thing just sticks its head in a little bush, and thinks because it
can't see anything that it's got a bully hiding place."

"Yes, that sort of covers the bill," said Jack. "I guess this padlock is
only meant to tell people who have no business here that they are not
wanted inside this shack. It stands as a warning. To enter after that
would be a breach of the rights to property, as Lawyer George would
say."

"Looky here, would you!" cried Josh, presently, while his companion was
prowling around, and peeping through a hole in the wall, as though
curious to know what the interior of the cabin looked like.

"What have you found now?" asked Jack, who was himself wondering why
that new single trail had been made, coming out of the dense bushes at
the back of the hut, and showing signs of recent passage, which somehow
he could not help connecting with the flash of that lantern on the
preceding night.

"The bally old lock don't hold even a little bit," announced Josh, as
though that circumstance added to his hilarity. "See, I can lift it off
with one finger. It's a fake, that's what it is, Jack. But while it
might fool ordinary people, it can't a live Yankee. Now what d'ye say to
going in?"

Jack laughed as though amused at the reasoning of his chum, and
remarked:

"I see you think we wouldn't be breaking the law of possession if we
walked in when the lock was out of gear. That sounds nice, Josh, but
many a chicken thief has found that such a plea didn't save him. But all
the same, I'm going to step in and look around a bit."

"Seems to me it smells fishy around here?" observed Josh, sniffing
eagerly.

"Oh! that's easy enough to explain," and Jack pointed to several heads
of black bass that lay near by. "Somebody has had a fish dinner, for
there is the ash bed of a fire. It may have been passing sportsmen from
one of the big hotels; then again, perhaps the people who made the trail
also cooked a meal or two here!"

Once inside the cabin he looked around. There was virtually nothing to
see. The place had not a sign of furniture of any description. Some
straw lay on the hard earthen floor, as though it might be made useful
in case one wished to pass the night there.

Josh almost doubled up with laughter.

"This is sure the greatest joke ever," he remarked. "To think of trying
to keep trespassers out of this old trap, just like it held all a
squatter's possessions. Jack, what d'ye think the silly donkey meant by
that padlock? Did he keep his stuff here once, and locked the door? I'm
all in a fog."

Jack said nothing, only "browsed" around, as he expressed it, kicking
the straw aside in places, only to replace it as he had found it, as
though not wishing to leave any signs that trespassers had invaded the
cabin of the mysterious island.

But all the while he was thinking deeply.

And once, after the laughing and scoffing Josh had stepped outside to
look about him again, Jack stooped down and picked some object up off
the earthen floor, which he seemed to examine with considerable
curiosity before stowing away in one of his many pockets.

"Seen all you want to of the strange palace of the Thousand Islands?"
asked the merry Josh, when his companion again appeared.

"Oh! yes, and I'll put the lock back just as we found it," replied the
other.

Then he started to follow the plain trail that led through the dense
thicket to the rear of the cabin. It took him nearly twenty minutes to
zigzag through the intricate growth, for all manner of obstacles caused
him to turn aside, even as they had the one who had come and gone this
way on the preceding night.

When he finally reached the shore it was far around the point that
jutted out above the cove where the motor boats were anchored. And after
Jack had stooped down to examine the sandy beach, he arose with a
peculiar smile, and a knowing shake of the head; but the only words he
used as he walked along the sandy stretch near the water's edge were:

"I thought I'd find where the keel of a boat landed on this beach!"




CHAPTER XI--BUSTER GETS AN IDEA


"Find anything new worth while, Jack?" asked the cook of the _Wireless_,
as he got up from the warm sand where he had been taking a sun bath,
while waiting for his companion to put in an appearance.

"Oh! I don't know," replied the other, in what seemed to be a careless
manner, calculated to put Josh off the track, and smother his curiosity.
"One or two little things that I'm going to puzzle my wits over. But
look here, the fishermen are in sight!"

"Good gracious! how you scared me, Jack!" exclaimed Josh, whirling
around to look. "Honest Injun, now, I thought you meant those rough men
in the three boats, and knowing how guilty we were about breaking into
their shack, I started to shiver, never having been arrested, you know.
But it's only George and Herb."

"They've been successful, I expect," observed Jack, wisely, "because
both seem to be trying to look disappointed; but can't help glancing
down in the bottom of the little dinkies. I reckon each has got a musky,
all right."

"Sure we have," remarked George, as the two small boats pulled in close;
"and dandies at that. Talk to me about pull; that pirate was a hummer."

"But, George, you know he didn't come up to mine," remarked Herb.

"Well, I rather guess not, Herb," grinned the other. "I suppose you
notice, fellows, that my comrade has been in swimming. Funny part of it
is, he never even bothered taking his clothes off when the notion struck
him."

"Well, it came right sudden, for a fact," laughed Herb. "That big
muskalunge was tearing around like the dickens, when swoop! he took a
turn under my boat, and in my haste to swing around, I upset."

"Wow!" cried Nick, "Oh, why wasn't I there to see the fun? I'm always
missing all the good things, seems to me."

"But you hung on to your rod, apparently," remarked Jack; "seeing that
you got your game in the end."

"That's just what he did," declared George with sincere admiration. "You
know our friend Herb has a touch of stubbornness in his make-up. No
measly old musky that ever swam in the St. Lawrence was going to get the
better of him in an argument. He hung to that rod even while he went
under. It was the greatest thing I ever saw, for a fact; but he managed
it fine, let me tell you."

"Tell us how?" begged Nick, breathlessly.

"All right," answered George. "You see, the little dinky had turned
turtle when it dropped Herb out; so there it was, floating beside him,
bottom-side up. Would you believe it, that fellow just climbed up over
the stern, and straddled the boat as he kept on playing that fish as
cool as you please."

"Great! Hurrah for our Herb! He's the champion fisherman; only, because
we haven't got a photograph of that game fight to show, be careful how
you tell the boys when we get home," remarked Josh.

"While he played the fish I picked up his paddle," George went on. "And
when he got the musky in where I could gaff him, we pushed ashore, so he
could turn his boat over again. Then, as each of us had a prize, we
thought we might as well quit for the day. What you doing ashore,
fellows?"

"Jack wanted to nose around, that's all," Josh hastened to say. "Found
an old shack up in the woods here. Guess that spook lives there when he
doesn't want to be seen. Funniest thing, though, he keeps an old rusty
useless padlock on the broken door. But there wasn't anything worth
while to be seen. Jack followed some tracks he found; that seemed to
amuse him."

Josh went aboard, pushed the _Wireless_ out, and presently the skipper
joined him.

"Any other news?" asked Nick.

"Oh, yes," said Herb, stopping in the act of changing his soaked clothes
for dry ones. "I forgot to say we saw that boat again."

"What's that? Do you mean the mysterious, dark, piratical craft that,
believe me, ought to be flying the skull and crossbones at her stern?"
demanded Nick.

"The same," Herb replied promptly. "She flashed by us while we were
trolling, though at some little distance. And, fellows, as sure as you
live, Clarence was at the wheel, though neither of us could see a thing
of Bully Joe. I thought Clarence looked scared, for he was awful white;
but George declared he was only in one of his mad fits. We know what
they stand for, don't we?"

"Did you call out to him?" asked Jack, quickly.

"I did," replied George, "and dared him to accept a challenge to race
the _Wireless_. I thought he was going to answer me; but he only turned
his head and stared. But it was Clarence, all right. I give you my word
on that."

"Now, what d'ye know about that?" observed Nick; "dodging around like
that, and declining to even speak! Generally Clarence is always ready
enough to get into a hot argument. And you'd just think he'd be wild to
take you up on that challenge business, George. It beats me all hollow,
now."

"And even that ain't all," added George.

"What! more adventures?" cried the chagrined Nick. "I tell you it ain't
fair for everybody to get in the lime light, and leave poor me in the
lurch. What have I done to deserve this? Say, I hope you fellows ain't
holding that silly thing up against me yet, about betraying our secrets
to the enemy, and all that rot, you know? That would be mean."

"Oh! shucks, cut it out, Buster," said Josh; "and let George tell us
what else happened. This mystery is getting on my nerves, I tell you,
boys. Go on, proceed, George, old chum. Give us the harrowing details."

"You won't find much to alarm you in this," laughed the other. "Only,
while we were fishing a boat came along, and it had two men in it. They
rowed up close, and we could see they had a fishing rod in action. The
one who held it kept watching us as sharp as the mischief. He spoke to
us pleasant like, and asked a few questions about our luck, how we
happened to be so far over toward the Canada side, if we expected to
move away soon to new grounds, and such things."

"Did you recognize the boat, or the men, George?" asked Jack, quietly.

"Herb and myself talked that over afterwards; until his tumble overboard
knocked it all out of our heads. And we thought that perhaps those men
were one of those couples we saw yesterday, passing here and staring in
at us."

"Say, perhaps they may have been Canadian custom officers, who patrol
the river to keep American fishermen off their side," suggested Nick.

"That might be," George said. "We thought of that; but they didn't give
us any warning. And besides, from the chart we've got we've learned that
this island is American territory all right, you know."

"Oh! well, what's the use of bothering our heads over it," declared
Herb, from inside the outing shirt he was pulling over his head.

"That's right!" cried Josh. "Fling away dull care while the sun shines,
and we've got enough grub left to keep Nick here from starving to
death."

When the fat boy was not looking, Josh reached down, and took hold of
some object he had smuggled aboard without the others noticing the fact.
It was a length of old tin waterpipe that he had found up alongside the
deserted shanty, and which had evidently been useful at some time in the
past, to convey the water from the roof to a spot where it would not
back into the cabin.

This old pipe was possibly six feet in length; and to the mind of a
practical joker like Josh it presented some alluring possibilities.

Swinging it upward when Nick was not looking, he managed to bridge the
watery gap between the _Wireless_ and the _Comfort_, and quickly called
in a sepulchral tone through the novel speaking-tube:

"Hello! down there! Give me connection with Buster Longfellow! I'm the
ghost that walks in the night. I want to have a heart-to-heart confab
with Buster!"

"What you trying to do, give me heart disease, or an attack of delirium
tremens?" exclaimed Nick, who had started violently upon hearing that
muffled sound so close to his ear. "Say, you don't know how queer that
does go. Talk about your megaphones! That tube carries sound to beat the
Dutch. I wonder now--gee!"

"Hello! What ails Pudding? Look, fellows, the poor fellow's got an idea,
and it seems so strange that he don't know what to do with it!" jeered
Josh.

"Huh! don't I?" replied the fat boy, whose face had turned pale, and
then rosy red. "You just wait and see. Perhaps you'll say it was an
inspiration some fine day. And no use to josh me about it, for I ain't
going to squeal one little bit. But, oh, my! I wonder if that could just
be so! This is the second time it's give me a start. If Aleck only does
what I asked him!"

He stuck to his word about saying no more; and although Josh kept on
teasing him for quite some time, Nick kept his lips resolutely closed on
that subject.

The balance of the day passed away without anything happening that
seemed out of the way. They saw nothing more of the mysterious dark
boat; nor did any small craft come prowling around to have the occupants
glower at them, as though begrudging them their pleasant anchorage just
on the edge of that little cove.

Supper was a great success. Josh fairly outdid himself in cooking the
fish, all of them going ashore on the beach to where he had made a camp
fire. And afterwards they sat around, telling stories, and singing many
of their favorite school songs, until the hour grew late.

When they went aboard, the night was dark; for it seemed to cloud up at
sundown almost every evening now. All of them were busily employed
getting their blankets arranged for sleeping, and the two who were to
keep first watch had even settled down comfortably in their places; when
to their ears came the sudden rapid popping that would indicate the
presence of a motor boat in the near vicinity.

"Oh! look, fellows!" exclaimed Nick, as from around the point a dazzling
glow suddenly shone, bearing down rapidly straight toward them.




CHAPTER XII--YANKEE STUBBORNNESS


The most tremendous excitement reigned aboard every one of the three
anchored motor boats, when it was seen that the bright white light was
headed straight for them.

"He's going to smash us!" whooped Josh.

"Hey, hold off there, Clarence! Don't be a fool!" shouted George.

Herb and Nick could not find their voices at all, to make the least
sign; and there was a cause for their feeling more alarmed than any of
the rest. It happened that in arranging their anchorage the _Comfort_
came further out than either of the other boats. Hence, she was more in
direct line with the swiftly advancing speed boat than either the
_Wireless_ or the _Tramp_.

But if Nick could not use his tongue he certainly could use his limbs;
and the way he threw himself over to the port side of the roomy
_Comfort_ was worth seeing. There he crouched, hugging the railing, and
ready for a plunge overboard should the expected collision take place.

But just when it seemed as though the sharp prow, which they fully
believed must belong to the _Flash_, was about to cut through the stern
of the helpless _Comfort_, the hand at the wheel must have diverted her
course just a trifle, for she shot past like an arrow, almost grazing
the varnished side of the broad-beamed launch.

While that dazzling glow from the acetylene searchlight shone in their
faces, none of the boys could make out anything with certainty. On
comparing notes afterwards they were unable to declare whether the dim
figure at the wheel was Clarence or some other; though Nick did say he
heard a low chuckling laugh as the phantom boat passed, which he knew
was a favorite way of expressing pleasure on the part of the Macklin
boy.

"That was a close shave, sure!" remarked Jack, as coolly as he could.

They could hear the rapidly retreating rattle of the exhaust of the
"pirate boat," as some of them liked to call the other craft; but as it
was circling around the island, apparently, all other signs of its
presence had vanished.

"Too close for comfort!" gasped Herb.

"Listen to him joking at such a time!" remarked Josh, thinking Herb
meant to apply his remark to the name of the boat, when, truth to tell,
that was the last thing to occur to him.

"Believe me, fellows, I confess that I'm quivering like a leaf," said
Nick, "and it ain't cowardice, either. Brave men tremble after the
danger is over, cravens before. You noticed that I wasn't paralyzed with
fright, didn't you? I could think, and lay out a plan of escape. That
proves I wasn't really scared then."

"But," declared Herb, indignantly, "whatever did they mean doing that?
Why, if that sharp nose of the _Flash_ had ever banged into us, going
like she was, we'd have been cut in two! It's criminal, that's what,
fellows!"

"Oh!" Jack remarked, "to tell the truth, I don't think Clarence would be
such a fool to take such chances as that. In the first place he might
kill one of us. And then again, you know, his boat would be sure to
suffer, too, and might be wrecked."

"That sounds reasonable, Jack," admitted George; "but whatever do you
suppose tempted him to do that crazy thing?"

"Well, he might think it a good lark," was the reply. "And then again,
there may have been some other reason pushing him on, which we don't
know anything about as yet. I'm going to try and think out an
explanation, and if I hit a hot trail I'll tell you about it, boys."

"That means Jack's got an idea," said Nick.

"All right," spoke up Josh, instantly. "Don't think you're the only one
in the bunch who can have such things, Buster."

"But what if they circle around the island, and come down booming at us
again?" ventured the nervous Herb.

"I don't believe that will happen," Jack replied, seriously. "But if you
feel anxious, just pull further into the cove, Herb, and he couldn't
strike you then."

"I tell you what I'm going to do," declared the impulsive George. "I'm
on the first watch, and I want you to let me have that Marlin
scatter-gun of yours, Jack. If that fool bursts out from behind that
point again, and heads for us at full speed, I declare to goodness if I
don't bang away, and touch him up with bird-shot a few. He deserves such
a lesson."

"But why should Clarence want to scare us away from here?" asked Nick.

That was what Jack was himself wrestling with, and he waited to find out
if any of his mates put forth an answer; but they seemed to be unable to
grapple with the puzzle, for no one spoke.

"My boat is heading that way, and I'm going to light my glim. Then if he
tries his funny business again, I'll spot him in good time," George
remarked.

It was some time before the excitement died away. Even after those who
were entitled to sleep had lain down, they would raise their heads at
the least suspicious sound. Did a wavelet lap the adjacent beach, Nick
was sure to bob up and look about him in alarm. When an owl started to
call out "Whoo! whoo!" from a tree on the dark island, he sat up
instantly, and seemed almost ready to crawl over the side of the boat
into the water.

But nothing happened, and gradually silence fell upon the three anchored
boats. George and Jimmie gave way to Jack and Nick when several hours
had passed; and finally Herb and Josh wound up the night.

When morning came, the boys joked one another over their red eyes,
showing that, after all, none of them could have secured much comforting
sleep.

"I suppose we're going to pick up our mudhooks today and climb out of
this?" suggested Josh, as they were enjoying breakfast.

All of them looked at Jack, who smiled.

"Suppose we put it to a vote, fellows," he said. "All those in favor of
scuttling out of this, like dogs with their tails between their legs,
simply because certain parties want us to move, signify it by raising
their hands."

Not one went up; even Josh, who had seemed inclined that way, upon
ascertaining that Nick declined to show the white feather, allowed his
half raised hand to drop again.

"Contrary, no, raise their hands!"

And six of them went up like a shot.

"Do we vacate?" asked the fat boy, sarcastically, turning on Josh.
"Nixey. And the more they try to scare us off, the closer we stick.
Ain't it so, fellows?"

"Millions for defense, not one cent for tribute!" spoke up George,
grandly.

"Remember the old story of the battle between the wind and the sun,
don't you?" asked Herb, who was always bringing into play fables and
yarns he had soaked in during his younger days.

"No; what was that, Herb?" asked Jack.

"Why, they got into a dispute as to which of them was the stronger, and
decided to settle it on a traveler. So the wind began to blow harder and
harder; but the traveler just wrapped his cloak the tighter about him.
Then the sun started to try, and as it got hotter and hotter, first the
traveler unfastened his cloak, and then threw it off altogether. So the
bully old sun won out, after all."

"Hear! hear!" cried George; "that is a good illustration, Herb. You see,
fellows, he means that we ain't going to be chased away by hard knocks
and bluffing; but if some one would come and ask us politely to vacate,
and give us a good reason why we ought to move along, we'd do it
willingly. That's the Yankee policy."

"Then, as we're going to be here for another day, anyhow, suppose Jimmie
and me take a turn after the muskies?" suggested Nick.

"It's only fair you should have a chance," Jack observed; "but you can
see what risk there always is in one of the clumsy little punkin-seed
boats, when handling a big fish."

"You forget that I can swim like a duck, Jack!" observed Buster,
proudly.

"All the same," Jack went on, seriously, "you know you're not quite as
spry as some of us; and I hope you will keep that life preserver on all
the time. This water is deep, and the current makes it treacherous."

"Oh! I promise that, sure," Nick assented. "Between us, believe me, I
meant to carry that bally old cork life preserver along, anyway. Jimmie
might take a crab while rowing, and upset. There's no telling, you know.
All right, us for the grand sport today, Jimmie. And now, post us about
the place, Jack, and just how you do the business."

"Wouldn't I just give a cookie to see Buster fast to a hustler like I
had on yesterday," chuckled Herb.

"Well," remarked the fat boy, coolly, "it would do you good, I guess.
You'd know how to manage, after that, so as not to let a measly fish
upset your boat. It takes brains to be a successful fisherman, Herb,
real brains."

Jack went ashore again a little later, but none of the others seemed to
care to accompany him, being satisfied to lie around, taking things
easy, and talking of their future plans; for a new idea had been
broached which had to do with an extended cruise up through the great
lakes, rather than knock around here on the St. Lawrence for two full
months; and all of them were full of suppressed excitement over it.

If Jack made any further discoveries during the time he was on the
island, he did not think to take the others into his confidence when he
came back; but that may have been because just then a noisy little motor
boat was heading straight toward the cove, and every one was guessing
what new developments were about to be sprung upon them.




CHAPTER XIII--THE GHOST HUNTER


"Wonder if this can be the same parties we met yesterday?" George
remarked, as they watched the approach of the bustling little motor
boat, which pushed over the water with a series of fierce explosions,
not unlike the discharge of a pack of giant fire-crackers.

"No, I don't think it is," Herb spoke up, in answer. "Fellow at the
wheel looks like a Canuck guide from one of the hotels, a full-blooded
Indian, and the man with the glasses and the fishing rod is more like a
college professor, I'd say."

"That was just what I thought," put in Jack.

"Anyway, we'll soon know, for they're coming in, as sure as anything,"
Josh added.

Inside of five minutes the noisy little boat swung close to where the
boys sat watching. The gentleman sitting holding the rod, and winding up
his reel with a clicking sound, waved a hand in cheery greeting.

"How d'ye do, boys?" he said, cordially; and somehow Jack rather liked
the tone of his voice, as he also did his looks.

"Any luck, sir?" he inquired, as is the custom at such a time.

"Had two fierce strikes; but I'm afraid I've lost my cunning, for I let
the beggars have a slack line, and lost both. Are you fishing any? I saw
two lads in little dinkies like that one yonder, fishing over by the
long island, and guessed that possibly they belonged to your party."

"Yes, they do," George replied; and went on to tell about what luck they
had had, with the usual pride of a successful fisherman.

Jack meanwhile was not saying much, but observing the gentleman. It
struck him that the other was trying to make himself very agreeable; and
somehow he could not help remembering the fable that Herb had spoken
about so recently. Having failed to scare the motor boat boys off by
stern means, were milder tactics about to be adopted now?

Presently the other thought he ought to introduce himself.

"I am Professor Herman Marshland, of Ann Arbor," he said, modestly.

So Herb started to tell just who they were, and how they happened to be
knocking around on the St. Lawrence at this time.

"Have you been stopping long in this cove?" asked the other, in what he
doubtless intended to have appear as a casual way; but Jack saw that he
seemed to set more store by the question than surface indications would
indicate.

"Why, sure, we have, Professor," George said. "We might have gone on
before now, but we just hate to leave under fire, you see."

"Excuse me, but I hardly grasp your meaning, I fear," remarked the
gentleman, with one of his winning smiles.

"Well, you see, some persons appear to have taken offense because we've
monopolized their dandy cove here. And they've been trying in all sorts
of ways to shoo us away. Last night they threatened to run us down with
a speed launch that came buzzing around that point of the island there.
And then, would you believe it, sir, they even went so far as to attempt
to scare up-to-date American boys, by setting up a silly ghost game on
us."

"What's that you say?" remarked the gentleman, interrupting George. "A
ghost? Now, that's right in my line, you see. I've been making a study
of all manner of strange and incomprehensible manifestations along that
line for five years. In that time I've investigated dozens of so-called
haunted houses. Why, you arouse my interest at once to fever heat, my
young friends."

"And did you ever discover a real, genuine bona fide ghost, sir?" asked
Josh.

Professor Marshland smiled.

"I never have," he replied, with a forlorn shake of the head; "but I
still live in hopes. What knows but what this may be the golden
opportunity I have waited for so long? You must tell me all about it,
boys. And afterwards I'll just drop off and take a little look around,
on my own responsibility."

Of course George and Herb were only too willing. Assisted by an
occasional word from Josh, they soon told the story. Then Josh in turn
related what he and Jack had found out when they investigated ashore.
The college professor seemed deeply interested in the forlorn cabin, the
dilapidated door of which was fastened by a broken padlock.

"They say ghosts are peculiar in many things," he remarked at the
conclusion of the little talk. "And that might account for the padlock.
It's all very interesting, boys. I only regret that I was not here when
the manifestation occurred. Perhaps, if I hung around tonight, the thing
might get up courage enough to show again. It would repay me for all my
trip here. I came for the fishing; but to catch a ghost in the act,
would be positively refreshing, I assure you."

Jack was still watching the professor. While he liked the other, somehow
he seemed to feel that there was something rather strange about him. He
seemed to be studying the four lads as though seeking to read them, and
make up his mind as to whether they were just what they claimed.

Could it possibly be that he was connected with those mysterious men who
seemed so bent on chasing the motor boat boys away from the lonely
island?

After chatting for some time, and making quite a favorable impression on
Herb, George and Josh, the professor remarked that if they would excuse
him he would step ashore, and take a look at the delightful old ghost
cabin.

Josh was just about to volunteer to accompany him, when he caught the
quick look Jack cast in his direction, accompanied by a negative shake
of the head.

"If he wanted us he'd have said so, Josh," came in a whisper.

A minute later the gentleman, having managed to land, vanished amid the
heavy growth of timber and brush.

Josh looked at Jack.

"Sure as you live, he's following that trail, Jack," he said.

"That's only natural," remarked the other, "because, you see, it was
mighty plain, as though lots of people had gone back and forth."

"Yes," observed Josh, simply, "if them chaps were camping in the cabin,
and going out fishing every day, of course they'd make a well-worn trail
down to this cove here, where their boats must have been tied up. I've
been thinking, Jack, that p'raps they're engaged in some sort of fishing
that's illegal, such as setting nets against the law. Say, wouldn't that
be an idea now? And if true, it must explain just why they watched us so
close. They thought we might be wardens getting on the track of their
business. How's that for a guess, fellows?"

"Sounds kind of fishy," remarked George.

"Scaly, I should say," Herb spoke up.

But Jack said nothing. He was thinking along the same line Josh had
suggested, but in an altogether different way from the lanky cook of the
_Wireless_.

To tell the truth, Jack would have been pleased could he have slipped
ashore to observe what the professor from Ann Arbor could be doing just
then; but he did not dare venture. It would look too much like
impudence. As he himself had said, if the gentleman had wished for their
company, he certainly must have asked them to go ashore with him.

As to his being deeply interested in ghosts, and a patient investigator
of remarkable manifestations for years, Jack took all that with a grain
of salt. Perhaps it might be so, but Jack believed he was not far wrong
in believing that Professor Marshland had only mentioned the fact to
excuse his evident desire to go ashore and look around.

He was gone a long while. Indeed, Jack guessed that perhaps the
gentleman could have explored the whole island in the time that elapsed
before he again showed up. Still, there was also a chance that he might
have been doing something in connection with the old cabin.

When he did appear he was smiling broadly.

"Sorry to say I couldn't find any evidence of the supernatural," he
remarked, in answer to the eager look Josh gave him as he clambered
aboard his stubby little boat once more. "And that inclines me to the
belief that some one who loves a practical joke was only trying to throw
you into a state of fright, boys. I regret, too, that I cannot remain
over a night with you, in the hope of being granted a look at this
wonderful spectre. If anything more remarkable occurs, I'd be very much
obliged if one of you would write an account of it and mail me at the
college."

"Sure, we will, Professor," said the willing Josh. "And if so be we
capture that flickering ghost, we'll send it to you by express, charges
collect."

"Do so," laughed the gentleman. "I won't object, I assure you. Well,
here's wishing you luck, boys. And thank you for all the information
you've given. It may be of more assistance to me in my calling than you
imagine. Start up, John. It's back to the hotel for us now."

So the noisy little motor went chugging away, passing around the point;
and by degrees the sound died out, as other islands came between.

"Say, let me tell you, I like that man," Josh up and said, without any
urging.

"He is a smart one, all right, and don't you forget it," remarked
George.

"Was he really trolling, do you suppose, in that horrible, noisy power
boat?" asked Herb, skeptically.

Jack himself had a suspicion that the rod and line were only being used
for a mask of some sort. Everywhere he looked, the mystery seemed to be
getting deeper. First the strange actions of the men in the rowboats;
then the appearance of that foolish ghost on the island; the questioning
of the fisherman whom George and Herb had met while away on the
preceding day; the peculiar things he himself had discovered ashore; and
now, last but not least, the coming of this pretended fisherman, who
asked skillful questions, and made out to be a genuine ghost
hunter--taking all these things together, and it can be seen that Jack
had about all he wanted to ponder over for the rest of that day.




CHAPTER XIV--A STRANGE RIDE


"Time those two fellows were showing up, don't you think, Jack?" asked
Josh, as the noon hour came around.

"Oh! I don't know," replied the other. "I noticed that Nick carried a
bundle with him, and guessed it might be a little snack to keep off
starvation, in case they were detained. Sometimes it's hard to give up,
when you are fishing, you know."

"Snack!" echoed Josh, with a sniff of scorn. "Well, I wish you'd seen
just what that elephant did roll up in that paper. Herb wasn't looking,
but I kept an eye on Buster. Snack! Say, take it from me, that he had as
much as I would eat in a week of Sundays."

"Well," laughed Jack, "you're prejudiced against poor Buster, you know,
Josh. Just because you have a bird's appetite, and he that of a hog, you
pick on him. His greed is his only weak spot. His heart is as big as a
bushel basket; and he'd go out of his way any time to do you a good
turn."

"Oh! I know it, all right, Jack," returned the other. "You mustn't take
everything I say for what it stands. But listen, fellows. Talk of the
angel, and you hear the rustle of its wings. Unless I miss my guess,
that's the tuneful voice of Buster right now. What in the dickens can he
be shouting that way for?"

All of them were on their feet by now, and listening to the yells.

"They seem to be coming from around the island," said Jack.

"I bet you it's Jimmie having some fun with poor Pudding. He does like
to hear him put up a howl," chuckled Herb.

"Well, I don't know about that, fellows. Just listen, and hear what he
seems to be saying. Perhaps, after all, there may be something crooked
about it. We seem to be up to our necks in all sorts of queer mysteries,
you know."

George was not smiling when he said this; indeed, all of them could now
realize that there was something of appeal and alarm in connection with
the lusty yells Buster was letting loose.

"Hey! stop it, you! What d'ye mean trying to drown me? Let up, I tell
you! Can't you give a feller a chance? Somebody head me off, won't you?
Help! help!"

"There he comes!" shouted Jack, pointing.

"Well, what under the sun is he doing?" cried Herb.

"Since when did Buster put a motor in his dinky?" asked George, feebly.

"And ain't he just making the time, though?" ejaculated Josh. "Just look
at the way the foam flies up before the blunt bow of the dinky!"

Jack looked again and then gave a shrill laugh.

"Motor!" he exclaimed. "The only motor Buster is dealing with now has
got fins and scales, and is in the water. Don't you see what he's doing,
boys? He got a whooping big muskalunge at the end of his line. In some
way Buster has got the line twisted around his body. And there he sits
in the dinky, bracing his feet against a knee of the boat, and holding
on for dear life, while the fish runs away with him."

Then the others burst into a loud laugh, seeing the comical side of it.
To Buster it was not so funny, however. He had been straining so long
now that he fancied he might be pulled over the side of the cranky
little snub-nosed craft any time; and with that cord wrapped around his
arms, drowned because of his inability to swim, despite the cork life
preserver.

"Quit your laughing, and chase after us, fellows," he bawled, as he shot
past the mouth of the cove; and at the same time sending a mute look of
appeal toward his mates.

"Why don't you get out your knife and cut loose?" shouted George, making
use of his hands in lieu of a megaphone.

"Can't move--got my arms tied down at my sides. Ouch! it hurts, for the
line is cutting into the bone of my wrists. Come and help me before it's
too late. You'll be sorry if I get drowned. Then you'll never learn the
truth of how our secrets leaked. I'm the only one who is on the track.
Hurry up, boys; I mean it!"

Jack saw that after all the situation was more desperate than might have
appeared at first sight. It must be an enormous fish, the grandfather of
all the muskies around the Thousand Islands, and powerful enough to
drown poor Nick, if once it succeeded in upsetting the boat, or dragging
him out of it.

Accordingly he immediately jumped over, and unfastened the cable that
held his anchor.

"Hold that for me, will you, Herb?" he said, tossing one end of the rope
over to the skipper of the _Comfort_.

Then without any further delay he started his engine with one energetic
fling of the wheel.

Immediately the boat started, amid a rattling fusillade of sharp reports
that told how responsive the well equipped motor was to the demands of
its master.

Of course, once Jack fairly started after the little dinky that was
being so vigorously towed by the captive fish, he had no difficulty in
overtaking it.

"Now keep a firm hold on your seat, Buster," he said. "I'm going to push
in ahead of you, and see if I can fasten on to that line myself. The big
thing can't well pull both boats. After that I'll free your arms. I want
you to pull him in by yourself, if possible."

"Not me!" cried Buster. "I'm done with the brute. Shoot him dead. Hit
him with a club. He's a villain, a desperate villain, because he wound
me up like this, and then tried his level best to yank me over. Jack,
bless you, I believe you've saved me from a watery grave. Have you got
him now? Are you real certain he can't jump into my little boat and take
a chunk out of my leg? Oh, my! what a puller! I was sure going a mile a
minute that time. Talk about Neptune and his sea horses, they can't ever
come up to a pesky muskalunge that feels the barb of the hook. I'm all
tired out, Jack. You finish him, please."

Jack saw that this was so; and having untangled the line from Nick's
body, he took the rod and proceeded to get in touch with the now sulking
monster.

Nick clambered aboard the motor boat in a hurry, as though really afraid
that the fish in its anger might leap into the shallow dinky to bite
him.

"Glory! just look at him jump and kick, would you?" shouted Nick, as the
baffled captive sprang from the water, shaking its massive head
furiously in an effort to dislodge the hook, which, however, was too
securely placed by this time in the hard bone of its mouth to be shaken
out. "He's trying to locate me, that's what! Let me have that gun of
yours, Jack. Next time he jumps I'm going to pot him sure."

And he did.

As a rule Nick was a poor shot. Whether luck entered into it, or his
fear that the big fish was meaning to climb in after him, stirred him to
unusual exertions, Jack never knew; but as he leaped into the air, not
twenty feet away, there was a tremendous bang close beside Jack, and he
saw the muskalunge drop back into the water as though fairly riddled
with shot.

Poor Nick also tumbled over backwards, and lay there grunting and
rubbing his head; for he had in his excitement pulled both triggers at
the same time, so that a double discharge had followed.

"D-d-did I g-get him, Jack?" gasped the fat boy.

"Deader than a door nail or Julius Caesar!" laughed the other, as he
began to draw in the line hand over hand; for there was no longer any
positive resistance from the object at the other end.

"Look out! Be careful, Jack," warned poor Nick, in fresh alarm. "You
don't understand how treacherous one of these muskies can be. 'Twouldn't
surprise me if he was playing 'possum right now. Throw him in the dinky
when he comes along. Let him bite a chunk out of that with his old teeth
if he wants to. I wouldn't touch him for anything now."

"Oh! you'll enjoy a steak from the same old hooker tonight, never fear.
But he's dead as a herring, Buster. And what a monster! None of the rest
of us are in it with you after this. I bet he weighs all of thirty-five
pounds!"

By degrees, when he really saw that the big fish was dead, Nick
recovered his courage; and by the time they drew up in the cove he was
swelling with importance over the wonderful degree of success that had
attended his maiden effort at capturing a muskalunge.

True, Josh was mean enough to elevate his eyebrows when Nick spoke of it
that way, and hint that he had imagined that the shoe was on the other
foot, in that the fish had captured Nick; but the other gave him a
withering look as he said scornfully:

"Now, what d'ye know about that, fellows? This simple guy actually
believes I was in earnest when I let that fine and dandy fish at the end
of my line tow me for half a mile. Why, silly, didn't you take notice
that I drove him like you might a horse? Didn't we come in a bee line
for this very cove? Give me a little credit, won't you? Be fair and
square. I know it's an effort for you, but when you're in the company of
gentlemen you ought to brace up and try hard to act like one, Josh."

Of course that took all the wind out of Josh's sails; he could only sit
there, mumbling to himself, shaking his head, and casting occasional
looks toward Nick, as though inclined to give him the banner when it
came to nerve.

Then came Jimmie, laboring furiously with his paddle, and excited
because he did not know whatever could have become of his fisherman
companion, whom last he saw flying off in a mysterious fashion, and
yelling for help as though the ghost of the island had indeed laid hold
of him; since Jimmie could not see what amazing power it was causing the
dinky to rush through the water five times as fast as he could urge his
own craft.




CHAPTER XV--ANOTHER NIGHT


Of course the whole story had to be told over again for the benefit of
Jimmie. The Irish lad found some little difficulty in swallowing Nick's
bold assertion that he might have been setting up a little game for the
amusement of his companions. He even went so far as to poke the defunct
fish in the side with his finger and pretend to ask the captive if it
were really so.

"But look here, Jack and Herb and George, let's have some lunch!"
finally remarked Josh, naming the three who had remained at home, with
malice in his manner.

Nick fell into the trap, sprawling.

"Now, I like that!" he observed with a deeply injured expression on his
red and fat face. "Just listen to him, would you? He cuts poor old
Jimmie and me out of the call. Say, don't you think we ever eat?"

Josh pretended to be astonished, and threw up his hands to indicate as
much.

"Eat?" he cried. "Well, what's to hinder you from getting out that big
lunch you took away with you? We can spare you a cup of coffee to wash
it down, I guess, hey, fellows?"

Then the two returned fishermen stared at each other.

"What are you talking about, Josh?" said Nick. "That little snack we
carried off with us, is it? Oh! say, you don't count that, do you? Why,
Jimmie and me, we got nippy about nine o'clock and punished that off.
Why, I'm just about starved right now, if you want to know it. Bring on
your grub, unless you want to see me faint dead away."

Josh had had his little fun, and knew that it would do no good to draw
it out any longer; so grumbling about the "rise in the cost of living,"
he proceeded to comply with the demand.

Of course there was enough; Josh had seen to that in the beginning.
Indeed, it would have been a highly dangerous proceeding for any one
entrusted with the cooking arrangements of the party not to consider the
enormous capacity of Nick and Jimmie, when laying out provisions for a
meal.

Naturally enough the conversation soon took on an interesting color.

"How long are we going to stick right here in this cove?" Josh asked, as
he sat curled up on a seat, enjoying a platter of Boston baked beans,
with which some frizzled dried beef had been heated up.

"Yes," added Herb, "that's a subject we ought to consider. It's all very
fine to be enjoying the fishing and the wonderful stunts of Buster at
harnessing the finny tribes as horses; but you know, fellows, we came
here to the St. Lawrence to cruise, not squat on our haunches. Jack,
it's up to you. Tell us."

"I've been thinking right along that it must be getting rather
monotonous to some of you," said Jack, slowly. "Only for the fact that
we've been badgered by some unknown parties who want to chase us off,
we'd have gone before now. But it does seem a shame to lose so much time
in this way. Tell you what I propose, boys."

"Glad to hear it. Let's know!" several of the others cried in unison;
for somehow what Jack thought right usually appealed to the rest;
because in the past as a leader he had often been tried and never found
wanting.

"All right," the other went on. "Suppose we put in just one more night
here in this anchorage. Then some time tomorrow, no matter what happens,
we'll pull out. How does that suit you, fellows?"

"I'm agreeable," George immediately replied.

"Suits me from the ground up," Herb put in.

Three others added their voices after the same fashion, so that in this
amiable way the question was settled without the least friction.

"That means another night of guard duty," mused Nick; whereupon Josh
burst out into a harsh laugh.

"Hear him, comrades all!" he remarked. "The poor fellow is worn out with
his arduous work. No wonder he drops off into slumber-land when on duty.
He is so near a living skeleton that even a poor lone little minnow can
pull him and his boat along by the mile. Some of us ought to volunteer
to take Buster's place, and let him get about fifteen hours of sleep. He
needs it."

Nick only grinned, not at all abashed.

"Fine!" he exclaimed. "Suppose you start the ball rolling then, Josh.
How long will you carry me on your stretch--half an hour? That would
count for something. I think I might gain an ounce of flesh on the
strength of that extra sleep."

"I think you would, all of it," said Josh. "The trouble with you,
Buster, is that you take life too easy. That's why you get so fat. Just
keep on and see where you land pretty soon. Remember Mr. Amos Spofford,
will you, and take warning."

"Now, that's what I call a mean dig on your part, Josh," complained
Nick. "Talk to me about the strenuous life; did you ever know anybody
have a bigger job than I did today, landing that giant muskalunge? When
I go in for anything I do it with my whole heart, don't I boys?"

"You sure do, Pudding," assented George, "and with your whole stomach,
too."

Nick only gave him a reproachful look, as though it pained him to
receive this unexpected blow in the house of his friends.

"Then it's settled we leave here tomorrow?" remarked Herb, meaning to
cast oil on the troubled waters; for Herb was by nature a peacemaker.

"Unless something unexpected crops up that might hold us back," said
Jack.

"What could do that?" asked Josh, uneasily, for he wanted to get away
from the vicinity of the haunted island as speedily as possible.

"Oh! one of the engines might break down, for instance," laughed the
other.

"Now I know that was meant for me," retorted George; "but, thank you,
the bully old _Wireless_ seems to be on her best behavior this trip.
Haven't had the least trouble up to now, and don't expect to. Wish I
could only get a chance to race that _Flash_ of Clarence's, though.
Never will be happy till I do, and find out whether his boat or mine is
the faster."

"Look out yonder, fellows," said Josh just then.

"A rowboat, and holding two men," remarked Jack. "Seems to me we've seen
those fellows before, eh, boys?"

"We certainly have," George spoke up. "They are some of the ones who
passed here the other day and scowled to beat the band. They're doing
the same right now, as if they'd like to order us away, but don't dare.
Guess they've come around to see if we show any signs of leaving. Look
at 'em talking together, and shaking their heads. Perhaps it means more
trouble for us tonight, boys."

"Mebbe the ould ghost has been patched up again for a sicond show!"
suggested Jimmie, grinning at Josh, who had turned a bit pale, and moved
uneasily.

"Well, there they go off without saying a single word to us. Talk about
your good manners, these fishermen along the St. Lawrence are a lot of
soreheads," and George mockingly waved his hand after the retreating
boat, though Jack considered his act as bordering on the reckless.

"George, suppose you and I go ashore after a while, and shoot at a mark
a few times with that rifle of yours?" Jack suggested later on.

"Now you've got some notion in your head, or you wouldn't say that,"
remarked George. "Tell us what it is, Jack."

"Only this," replied the other, without hesitation. "Some of those men
may be hanging about within earshot. We don't know but what they have a
camp on the island here or some other close by. It might be as well to
let them know we've got a gun and can shoot if necessary. Is that
straight?"

"It's what you would call good and sufficient warning, in law," George
replied. "And I call it a bright thought, Jack. Let's start now. I
challenge you to a trial of skill with my rifle. And Josh here can go
along to keep tally."

"Please excuse me," retorted the party mentioned. "But I've got plenty
to attend to right here. Try Nick; the exercise will do him good."

"All right!" exclaimed the fat boy, promptly. "I'm on deck every time.
You never knew me to shirk; even if some of you did allow terrible
suspicions to creep into your minds about my entire trustworthiness. But
in good time I expect to clear up that dark mystery of the past. I can
afford to wait my time; the triumph will be all the sweeter. Shall I
tumble into your dinky, Jack?"

So the three went ashore, and for some time the rivalry was keen, the
sharp reports of the rifle sounding at intervals, accompanied by more or
less shouting and merriment. As Jack said, they might as well notify
everybody within earshot of the fact that even the appearance of a ghost
had not frosted their spirits to any appreciable extent.

So the afternoon gradually passed away.

Josh often cast apprehensive glances toward the silent shore of the
nearby island as the shadows grew longer, with night coming on.
Sometimes he fancied he saw something moving amid the thick brush, and
was almost inclined to tell his comrades; only he feared their shouts of
derision, and the accusation that he allowed memories of that silly
ghost to haunt him.

And after all, it usually turned out that the moving object was some
innocent little denizen of the woods, a prowling 'coon perhaps, out
ahead of time in search of a supper; or possibly only a chipmunk
searching for tempting roots to satisfy its desire for food, while
waiting for the new crop of nuts to come along.

Night settled down at last, and this time the boys were pleased to note
that the heavens were almost clear, so that the moon would have a fair
chance to play hide and seek with the few floating white banks of
clouds.

Most of the boys seemed in high spirits. They laughed and joked as they
went about the usual duties of the evening hour. If Jack had anything
serious on his mind he failed to take his comrades into his confidence.
And yet, now and then he would smile, as though certain thoughts that
pushed themselves to the front amused him; and this seemed to be the
case more especially when he heard the others talking about the pleasant
professor from Ann Arbor.




CHAPTER XVI--JACK'S DARING VENTURE


Somehow no one suggested having supper ashore that night. There was
something chilling about the mysterious island that dampened the ardor
of the boys in this respect. Had it been anywhere else, they would have
looked upon the opportunity for having a jolly camp fire as too good to
be lost; but somehow all seemed satisfied that they remain aboard.

Josh for one was just as well pleased. He even neglected several golden
chances to give Nick those customary sly digs; and this was a most
unusual thing for Josh.

Nevertheless, even the proximity of a haunted island could not long hold
in check the natural bubbling spirits of a pack of healthy lads. After
supper, as they lay around in as comfortable attitudes as was possible,
some one started singing, and presently six voices took up the chorus,
so that a volume of sound welled up out of that cove calculated to
startle all the ghostly visitants that were ever known to gather there.

No one seemed to be sleepy; for even when the hour began to grow late
there was little talk of getting out the blankets. Stories were told,
jokes flew around, and taken in all they were a merry group, apparently
without a single care in the wide world.

George broke into this delightful harmony finally by saying:

"Now, I guess you fellows will tell me I'm hearing things that ain't so;
but, honest, I believe that was the chug-chug of a motor that came down
the wind. It was just as Nick was singing that funny song of his about
the Dutchman who didn't know his own name, because he and his twin
brother got mixed in the cradle, and the other fellow died. Did anybody
else get the sound, or are my ears the only sharp ones?"

"I thought I did," Jack spoke up; "but you see, Nick was leaning over
the side of his boat and sending his voice right at me, so I couldn't
make sure."

Herb also admitted that he had heard something, he couldn't say what.

"Now, don't laugh," George went on; "but it struck me I'd heard that
rackety chug before."

"Meaning the noisy engine of that stubby little boat the Ann Arbor
professor came in?" asked Jack, quietly.

"You hit it right at the first jump, Jack, for that was in my mind,"
George said.

"Well," remarked Nick, "don't you remember that he said he'd like to
spend one night with us here, in hopes of seeing our pet ghost. Perhaps
he's concluded to return and do it."

"Oh, rats;" exclaimed Josh, "We ain't going to see any more ghost.
What's the use of keeping that silly idea up? But I reckon all of us'd
like to see that gentleman again. He was good company, and he knows boys
from the ground up."

"He ought to, seeing that it's his business to be with boys and young
men all the time. I bet you he's a prime favorite at college," Nick
remarked; and then looked in surprise at Jack because the other actually
chuckled.

"I don't believe Jack takes much stock in Professor Marshland," said
George, who had also noticed this little demonstration.

"Oh; but you're very much mistaken there," the one indicated hastened to
say. "I admired him and hope some time to see more of him. I think we
shall before we leave the St. Lawrence cruising grounds."

George shook his head. He seemed to guess that there might be a hidden
meaning back of these words; but if so, it was beyond his capacity to
fathom it.

"But look here, if he's coming along, why don't we hear his old boat any
more?" Josh asked.

"That's so," declared George. "I wonder, now, if the engine could have
broken down."

At that everybody smiled, for in their Mississippi cruise it had been
George who was frequently in trouble through the inability of his motor
to stand the strain of great pressure. And consequently the subject was
usually one that was frequently on his mind.

"Oh! the chances are that he was just going past, and has gotten beyond
hearing. You know sometimes a flaw in the wind will carry a sound for a
mile or two," Jack remarked.

"That's so, on the water," George observed.

A little later, while the others were engaged in some wordy dispute,
Jack quietly slipped into the little tender attached to the _Tramp_ and
paddled softly off out of the cove.

"What d'ye suppose he's got on his mind?" asked George, looking after
the other.

"Give me something easy," replied Nick. "Jack always is a puzzle for me.
He has such bright thoughts I don't just seem able to grapple with 'em.
But depend on it, he's thinking of something right now."

"I guess he's worrying about those men," suggested Josh.

"Oh! I don't think so," George hastened to say. "They wouldn't dare try
attack us here, you know. It would be a breach of the law for which they
could be sent to prison for years. Jack's got some other notion in his
brain, believe me."

Meanwhile the object of all this speculation idly paddled a little
distance out on the moonlit water, and sat there in his small craft, as
though enjoying the silvery glow.

He looked around him on all sides, and particularly in that quarter of
the wind from whence had come the faint "chug-chug" of a motor's
eccentric pulsations. But nothing could be seen save the dim outlines of
the next island.

After a while, as a cloud covered the moon, Jack came back and clambered
aboard once more.

"Here, is this an all-night session of the club?" he asked. "Already
it's ten minutes after eleven. If you fellows want to get any sleep
tonight, better be turning in right now. Josh and myself have the first
two hour watch, you understand."

Accordingly there was a breaking up of the conference; goodnights were
exchanged, and those who had drawn the first spell of rest crept into
their comfortable blankets.

Of late their sleep had been somewhat broken, as we happen to know, what
with the coming of specters and such things. On this account every one
of the four soon dropped off asleep.

Jack could hear Jimmie breathing heavily in less than ten minutes.
Apparently Jack had something on his mind, for leaning over toward where
he could see Josh sitting he asked in a low tone:

"How is it there, Josh; is Herb asleep yet?"

"I guess he must be," came the answer; "because he's snoring to beat the
band, even if he don't make much noise."

"That's where you made a mistake, for it's Nick doing that. Listen
again, and you'll see I'm right. And George was yawning when he turned
in, so I reckon he's gone over the border, too."

"What do you want to know for?" asked Josh, aware that Jack must have
some reason for asking such a question.

"I'll tell you, Josh. I mean to go ashore soon," replied the skipper of
the _Tramp_.

"Thunder! do you really mean it, Jack?" queried Josh, taken aback; for
it would have to be something tremendous that could tempt him to set a
foot on that same island in the night time.

"Listen, Josh," Jack went on.

"I am, with all my ears, so go right on," the other sent back over the
few feet of water separating the two boats they occupied.

"I didn't say anything about it to the rest, Josh, but I think I saw a
gleam of that lantern ashore a while back. And I'd like to investigate a
little."

"Oh, my! you wouldn't catch me trying it," declared Josh, with an intake
of breath that told of suppressed excitement. "But will you take your
gun along?"

"Perhaps I'd better, though I don't really expect to use it," Jack
replied. "Because, you see, ghosts can't be reached with common lead
pellets. But I want you to help me Josh."

"Me? Oh! please don't ask me to go along, Jack. That lame foot of mine
has been hurting again like anything, and I'm that clumsy I might tumble
all over myself and give the thing away."

"Oh, shucks! I don't mean that," Jack replied. "But when that big cloud
sails over the moon I want to slip into my little dinky here, and paddle
quietly ashore. I'll hand you the rope I've got tied to the stern; and
when you feel that shake three times, pull the boat out again, and let
it float with yours. Understand?"

"Yes, yes. And I'll do it all right, never fear. If it wasn't for that
plagued lame foot, now, Jack."

"Let up on that, please. Now, look out, there she goes under."

Even as Jack spoke the moon said goodbye to the world for a short time,
and hid her smiling face behind a cloud that was darker than any that
had thus far sailed across the starry heavens on this particular night.

Being all ready, Jack crept into the small tender, gun in hand. He
pushed alongside the Wireless and managed to pass the end of a rope to
Josh, who was waiting to receive the same.

Gently the paddle was wielded, and the little "punkin-seed of a boat,"
as the boys sometimes termed the dinkies, was noiselessly wafted
shoreward. Landing, Jack shifted his person to the sand, and then gave
the requisite number of tugs at the rope, after which he shoved the boat
off.

He knew that Josh would attend to all that part of the business, and
gave it no further heed. Indeed, he had all he wanted to take care of in
following out the rather venturesome plan of campaign he had arranged.

For somehow Jack was of the opinion that the mystery of the island was
to be revealed to any one daring enough to go ashore and investigate,
which was just what he had determined to do.




CHAPTER XVII--THE SECRET OUT


Out came the moon again, sailing into a clear field.

But Jack no longer stood there on the little beach. He had taken time by
the forelock, and slipped among the rank growth; so that although Josh
strained his eyes to the utmost, not the faintest sign of his comrade
did he discover.

Jack's idea, of course, was to reach the vicinity of that tumbledown
shack. In his mind, that must be the central point of interest in the
game. He fully believed, though he had not mentioned the fact to the
rest, that the attempt to frighten the boys off with such a ridiculous
show of a pretended spirit waving them away, was meant to cover this
cabin.

What did it all mean? Why should any man, or set of men, wish to keep
others from prowling around that rickety building? Surely, any one with
common sense would hardly think to occupy it for a night's refuge. The
open air would be far more preferable in every way.

Still, Jack was positive that there was something in connection with
this same cabin that moved the unknown parties to endeavor to influence
an early departure on the part of the motor boys.

And he wanted to know what that mystery might be.

That was why he had come ashore so silently. It also accounted for his
creeping along through the bushes as carefully as he knew how, avoiding
the trail which he and Josh had followed on that other occasion.

It took him considerable time to draw near the vicinity of the cabin,
because he wanted to go without making any noise; and he was not
positive but that hostile eyes and ears might not be on the alert.

Twice some sudden little sound close by had sent a thrill of alarm
through his heart. But nothing followed, and he realized that these
noises must have been made by some little animal, disturbed in his
retreat by the creeping past of the intruder.

Jack had made a discovery before he was more than half way between the
beach of the cove and the cabin. There was a light inside the old
building! He could see little glimpses of it through what must be holes
in the walls, where the chinks between the logs were open, the mud
having fallen away in the process of decay.

And as Jack said to himself with a chuckle, ghosts did not, as far as he
knew, need lanterns in their business.

Finally the boy found himself close to the side of the cabin. With his
heart beating like a trip-hammer, he crept to the first little gap in
the wall, and glued his eyes to the aperture.

What he saw was nothing so very astonishing. A man stood inside the
cabin, holding a lantern. He was not doing anything, and seemed to be
waiting for some other person.

"One of the fellows in that boat today," was what Jack immediately said
to himself, as he fastened his eyes on the bearded face.

Even inexperienced as he was, Jack fancied that there was something of a
desperate type about the man's countenance. He did not seem to be such a
man as one was apt to trust on sight--like that jolly professor from Ann
Arbor, for instance.

But what on earth could the man be doing here? He did not seem to have
any sort of bundles with him, as might have been expected. Once Jack was
made to shiver just a trifle, when he saw the fellow take out a pistol,
and handle it with a grin of pleasure on his face.

Jack was beginning to see light. This could not be simply the ordinary
desire of some fishermen who disliked seeing strangers occupying a cove
they had come to look upon as theirs by right of previous use.

And this man he now saw had none of the characteristics of a rough
fisherman. He was rather nattily dressed, and would pass for a gentleman
in a crowd. The mystery seemed to grow more dense; but as it is always
darkest just before dawn, so Jack believed that he must be on the point
of seeing daylight appear in this matter.

By chance he raised his eyes a trifle. Perhaps some little movement may
have attracted him--he never knew. But again he was thrilled to discover
a face pressed against the broken pane of glass forming the sole window
on the opposite wall.

It was the strange gentleman who had claimed to be a college professor.
He did not wear his nose glasses now, and doubtless the look of culture
had given way to one of an entirely different nature; but Jack knew he
could not be mistaken.

Nor was he so very much surprised, come to think of it. He had half
anticipated something of this sort, at the time he heard what seemed to
be the peculiar chug! chug! of the noisy motor belonging to that
snub-nosed boat. The professor had indeed come back to the haunted
island; nor had he thought it advisable to inform his new boy friends of
his return.

Had Josh been there to see, he must have surely jumped to the conclusion
that it was his wild desire to set eyes on a ghost that had lured the
professor back.

Jack looked at the matter from an entirely different standpoint. He, for
instance, did not believe that the gentleman was one-half so much
interested in mysterious visitations from departed spirits as he was in
the movements of certain persons who might be engaged in a trade that
shunned the light of day, because it was by nature evil, and in defiance
to the laws.

And this party who stood there, holding that lantern and waiting, was
evidently something in the line of a leader.

Only for a brief space of time did the so-called professor remain at
that broken window; then he vanished from the view of the watching boy.
But it gave Jack considerable satisfaction and confidence just to know
that Herman Marshland was near by.

Already he had his hand upon the solution of the whole puzzle that had
been eluding his best efforts up to now. And just like Columbus
discovering America, it was so exceedingly simple, once you knew how,
that Jack silently laughed at himself for not having grasped the prize
answer before now.

Smugglers, that was what the rough-looking men in the boats were! This
must be a central point with them, where for some time they had secretly
landed the goods ferried over from the nearby Canadian shore. Here on
American territory they were perhaps secreted until such favorable
opportunity arrived to send them further afield into the sovereign State
of New York, when all trace of them would be lost to any government
agents who might be prowling around on the lookout for such
law-breakers.

Since coming to the St. Lawrence the boys had heard more or less about
such a class of persons, who made it their business to try and evade the
revenue men. In some cases it was Chinamen they shipped across the
border, receiving so much per head to get them into the protected
country. Then again it meant laces, diamonds, silks, anything that was
small in dimensions, but upon which the government at Washington levied
a heavy toll.

Pleased with having guessed the secret, Jack could not think of slipping
away. It might be none of his business what these bold and bad men were
doing; but somehow he could not help feeling a deep interest in the
movements of the man who had visited them that very afternoon, and made
such a hit with the boys.

Of course the pretended college professor must really be one of those
sagacious revenue men, engaged in running these rascals to earth.

Besides, the "professor" might need help, and Jack was of a mind to
render such a service if the chance came. A strange freak of fortune
seem to have thrown them in contact with these warring factions; and
while some timid people might consider it the height of folly for any
one of the boys to take sides, Jack's bold spirit would never allow of
his standing there and seeing the man who represented law and order
outclassed.

He half expected to see the "professor" step into the cabin through the
doorway, and call upon the unknown man to surrender. But then, as there
was as yet no evidence of crime, possibly a cautious revenue agent would
be apt to hold his horses and await further developments.

A sound came faintly to the ears of the crouching lad--voices of several
persons, and approaching the cabin at that.

Jack dared not keep his position, with his eye glued to the crack; there
was a chance that he might be discovered; and so, although he wanted to
look more than ever, he dropped flat upon the earth and waited.

At any rate, he had made no mistake about others approaching, for
presently he knew they had entered the cabin. After that he ventured to
look again. Yes, two rough-looking fellows had entered, and were already
conversing in low but eager tones with the one who had waited for their
coming.

Seeing was all very well, but just then Jack thought that if he could
only hear what was passing between these fellows he would have the last
bit of fog cleared away. To this end he clapped his ear against the side
of the cabin at the very point where the mud had fallen, leaving a hole
in the chinks between the logs.

Nor was he mistaken when he believed he might pick up some of the words
passing between the men. The two newcomers seemed more or less worried
about something, and kept urging delay; but the leader would have none
of it, apparently.

"Antoine," he said, gruffly, "you go and watch the three boats lying in
the cove. If there's any sign of life about them, come back and warn us.
We must get those goods ashore tonight. It's too risky holding them any
longer. And one of the cubs might break away, to inform on us. That
would ruin all. Bart, you be off and start things moving this way. I
know the new trail is rough and long, but it can't be helped. Next time
we'll have things back the old way again. These kids ain't going to hold
on much longer. Now, both of you be off!"




CHAPTER XVIII--THE ESCAPE


When the tall leader spoke in that stern voice, evidently his men knew
better than to put up any further complaint. They both passed out, and
Jack could hear Antoine making his way down the broad trail to gain a
point where, hidden himself, he could still watch the trio of modern
motor boats, and discover the first indication of any desire on the part
of the crews to come ashore.

It was surely growing very interesting. Jack felt that he was being
treated to a real life drama of the most thrilling description. When the
boys decided to come to the St. Lawrence river for their summer outing,
not one among them dreamed that before they left that region of many
islands they would have run up against a series of strange adventures
well worthy of being given a place in the log of the motor boat club.

Indeed, all the trouble they had anticipated was possibly frequent
ructions with Tricky Clarence and his side partner, Bully Joe Brinker.

At thought of the two a sudden idea seemed to flash through the mind of
Jack. He remembered the event of the dark boat, when Herb and Dick were
given such a fright. At the time he had wondered whether Clarence, on
his own account, could have ventured to dash by at full speed, and come
within an ace of smashing into the Comfort. The new idea was along the
line that perhaps the two boys might have fallen into the hands of the
smugglers, who were using the Flash to suit their evil purposes!

It was so stunning a thought that Jack felt his very breath taken away.
Yet after all was there anything utterly improbable about it? These men
must be daring after their fashion. They were being hunted all the time
by shrewd government agents; and consequently must adopt new methods of
carrying on their business.

And if it were indeed true, would it not account for many things--the
white face of Clarence at the time he passed the boys who were
fishing--his refusal to even answer the wave of the hand they gave
him--he may have been in no position at the time to appear jovial, or
even half-way friendly.

Voices again!

Jack moved up to his crack, prepared to see all there was going on. Such
a glorious opportunity did not come across the path of most fellows, off
on their summer vacation; and he ought to improve the golden chance to
the limit.

It would be folly not to admit that the boy was trembling as he crouched
there, for he never denied the fact himself. But after all it was more
the excitement of the adventure than any bodily fear on his part that
caused this.

He had hardly settled himself comfortably when through the doorway came
a stooping figure. It was a man bearing a package on his back. This he
deposited on the earthen floor, and turned to assist a second fellow
whose bundle seemed of even larger dimensions than the first.

One of them had also fetched a shovel along, which had a long handle.
This the leader seized upon eagerly, and commenced digging in a certain
corner, first removing the accumulated straw, which was apparently used
as a means for hiding signs of recent disturbance.

Jack's eyes grew hot with straining at the little crack; but he could
not draw himself away; it was all so thrilling, so picturesque, that he
must continue to look, no matter what the discomfort.

Now, the man with the shovel had succeeded in arriving at what seemed to
be the lid of a large box. He lifted this, and one of the men tossed his
bundle into a yawning aperture.

Here the stuff would lie unsuspected, until some time when the
opportunity seemed ripe to dispose of it, when the deal would be
completed.

Jack wondered what could be in those packages; undoubtedly something of
particular value, since these men would never venture to take such
chances of capture for a trifling gain.

He also found himself guessing whether the strange "professor," whom he
now knew to be a government agent, could be watching all these
operations from some other friendly crack across the way.

What would he do? Having witnessed all he wished, would the other
attempt to arrest these fellows? Since there seemed to be something like
half a dozen of the smugglers it hardly seemed likely he would go to
such extremes. Possibly he might be satisfied to capture the spoils,
after the men had departed; and trust to future good fortune to arrest
the delinquents later on.

One of the men left the cabin, probably to return to the upper end of
the island, where the boat lay from which these packages of goods had
been carried. He was in an ugly humor, judging from his manner. The
stubborn way in which the motor boat boys stuck to that cove was giving
these worthies a tremendous lot of unnecessary work; and it was no
wonder they felt badly disposed toward Jack and his chums.

Five minutes later the second man was sent off, leaving the leader there
to finish up the job of smoothing off the earth and replacing the broken
straw as before.

When he had finally completed his task it would require a practiced eye
to notice anything queer about the floor of the cabin.

Then he, too, prepared to depart. Jack saw him stoop down and take hold
of the lantern, which had all this while been resting on the ground. In
his other hand he carried the long-handled shovel with which the digging
had been done.

The tall man straightened up suddenly, and his manner was that of one
who had been startled. Jack knew why he should act in this way, for the
same sound that had come to the man's ears had also reached his.

It was a shrill whistle, twice repeated, and it came from the same
direction in which the two men had gone a short time before.

Undoubtedly it was a signal denoting urgent need of haste. The actions
of the tall smuggler would indicate as much; for he dashed out of the
cabin like a shot, and Jack heard the thud as he threw the shovel into
the shrubbery surrounding the lone hut.

Then followed the crashing of bushes as the man started by a circuitous
route toward the upper end of the island. He must know every foot of the
ground, and by taking to the open beach, could gain a given point much
sooner than one who kept to the thick undergrowth.

Jack saw the lantern had been hastily dropped, though it was still
burning. He was trembling with excitement, and feeling very much as
though he wanted to yell at the top of his voice as he picked up this
abandoned tool of the discovered smugglers.

He could hear the boys talking down there where the trio of motor boats
were anchored; and could imagine how they must be wondering what all the
racket on the island meant; while Josh would doubtless start in to tell
them how he, Jack, had persisted in going ashore.

Some one was coming, for Jack could hear quick footsteps near by. He
still held his Marlin gun, but was loath to even threaten to use it. Nor
was there any need, for a moment later the moving dim figure took form,
and proved to be no other than Professor Marshland.

At sight of Jack standing there, lantern in one hand and gun in the
other, the gentleman allowed something like a grim smile to creep over
his face, even as he came hurrying up, almost out of breath from his
exertions.

"Do you know what it all means, Jack?" demanded the other, as soon as he
reached the side of the boy.

Jack nodded his head eagerly.

"I was looking in through a crack, and saw what that man did. But I'm
sorry he got away from you, sir," he replied.

"I managed to capture the two fellows who left the hut!" the government
agent exclaimed. "My Indian has meanwhile overcome the chap who was sent
to watch your boats. But unless I can overtake the ring leader of the
bunch, I shall feel that my work has not been wholly a success."

"He headed for the upper end of the island," Jack put in.

"Yes, and I have reason to suspect that the other two men are there with
the boat. You will be surprised when I tell you that they actually
turned pirates and captured the speed launch which you told me belonged
to an acquaintance of yours."

"The _Flash_," echoed Jack. "No, I am not surprised, for I had begun to
suspect something like that. They must have made Clarence threaten to
run us down, hoping we would pull up anchor, and get away. But if that
is so, you could never hope to overtake them in that slow little boat of
yours."

"Well, I should say not!" declared the other.

"Now, if it were the _Wireless_, for instance, you might have some
chance," Jack went on.

"Which is just the point I wanted to put up to you boys," cried the
government agent, eagerly. "Would you be willing to assist me run that
clever scoundrel down? Do you think George would care to try conclusions
with the _Flash_?"

At that Jack laughed.

"Why, sir," he declared, "he's been just wild for the chance, ever since
we first set eyes on that narrow boat. He believes he can beat her out
in a race. Suppose you come down with me right now, and we'll ask him."

"Thank you, Jack; it was a lucky day for me when I ran across you boys.
But let us lose no time; for doubtless they'll be off as soon as they
can, knowing that the game is now up, and all that remains to them is
escape."

Nothing loth, Jack accompanied him as he started along the broad trail
leading down to the cove. He could readily understand now that the
revenue man must have investigated to some purpose that day while at the
cabin; and knowing there were no smuggled goods in the cache then, had
laid his plans to come back in the night, in the expectation of catching
the rascals in the act; which was just what he had done.




CHAPTER XIX--A RACE IN THE MOONLIGHT


"Hold on!" said the agent abruptly.

A dark figure had risen up before them; and as the moonlight fell upon
the man Jack saw that it was in truth the Indian guide who had been with
the "professor" in the noisy motor boat.

"Did you get him, Josh?" demanded the employer, eagerly.

"He lies under hemlock, tied hand and foot. No danger he get away," came
the confident reply.

"All right," said the other. "Come along with me, John. These boys will
guard the cabin and not let any one steal the hidden goods. We have
other work cut out for us. We want to get our hands on that head man,
Glenwood. So long as he is at large there can be no peace on the
border."

Great was the astonishment of the five boys when Jack and his companions
made their appearance on the shore, and the former called to have the
small boats pushed in, so that they might come aboard.

"Jack, what's all this mean?" asked George, greatly excited.

"Can't tell you everything just now, fellows," the other replied. "This
gentleman is a government revenue agent, and he's on the track of a band
of smugglers who have been using this island as a place to land goods
brought over from Canada. He captured three, but the leader got away.
George, he wants to borrow your boat."

"What?" gasped the other, astounded beyond measure.

"He and his man and myself will go with you, Josh changing over," Jack
continued. "While we're gone the rest of you keep on the watch and don't
let anybody come aboard, no matter who he is. These scoundrels have
captured the _Flash_."

"Now, what d'ye know about that?" exclaimed Nick, as he helped Josh over
the side of the big _Comfort_, so as to make room for the others who
were to go in the speed boat.

"But George, you haven't said yet whether you are willing to chase the
_Flash_, and try to overtake her?" said the energetic agent.

"Sure I am," came the ready response; "and I believe we can get her, if
nothing happens to my motor. I've had some hard luck with it when I
tried to push the thing to the limit. But tumble in here, and we'll be
off."

George was trembling with delightful anticipations. If anything in all
the world appealed to him it was a race. None of the others had the same
feeling, and, like Jack, they preferred comfort in a boat beyond speed,
though none were averse to making good time.

Everybody wanted to help, and as many hands make light work, the
_Wireless_ was in condition to start almost as soon as the two men
climbed aboard.

"Sit as near the middle as you can, please, to balance her," the others
heard the skipper say, as she shot away.

"Yes," called out Nick, derisively, "and be sure your hair is parted in
the middle, or it's all up with you. I know, because I was there for
some four weeks."

"Which way, sir?" asked George, wisely paying no attention to this
shout, which, after all, was Nick's only method for getting even, after
all the agony he had endured in that cranky narrow motor boat.

"Turn to port, and head for the upper part of the island. We haven't
wasted much time, and I hope to discover that boat somewhere," replied
the agent.

"If we do," said George, with firmness, "make up your mind the good old
_Wireless_ is going to hang on like a bulldog till she cuts down the
lead, and overhauls that _Flash_. Always said she had the look of a
pirate, and others thought the same thing, it seems, since those men
picked her out as the boat they could use."

"Just think of Clarence and Joe being in their hands all this time,"
remarked Jack, as they tore through the water. "Must seem like a pretty
tough vacation for those boys, all right."

"Oh! I don't suppose Glenwood has really harmed them," said the agent;
"but he's a hard man to deal with; and unless they knuckled down to him
perhaps they've felt his fist before now. I'm hoping that, perhaps, when
Clarence sees who is after him he may find some way to slow down and let
us overhaul him."

George only laughed at this and remarked:

"That's because you don't know Clarence, sir. He hates me like poison,
and sooner than have me beat him with my boat I believe he'd take the
chances of staying in the power of those smugglers for a month. Oh! no,
when he sees who is after him he'll put things at top-notch speed, and
try every trick he knows how to win out. But I'm not afraid, if only
things go right with my engine."

"Look yonder!" cried the eagle-eyed agent just then, the Indian having
pulled his coat sleeve and pointed ahead.

"Say, that's her, as sure as fate!" cried George, as he altered the
course of his own boat a little.

"And they know we're after them, too," remarked Jack.

"Then the race is on; and good luck attend the better boat," said the
government agent, coolly taking out a cigar, biting off the end, and
proceeding to apply a lighted match to the same.

They were fairly flying through the water. On either side the waves
parted, and rolled over smothered in foam; while in their wake a roller
kept following close on their heels.

"Twenty miles if anything?" the gentleman guessed.

"More than that, sir," replied the skipper, proudly; "but she can do
better still. I've got another notch to let out if I have to. Don't want
to take the chances unless it's positively necessary; because you see
the quivering rattles her so much. Are we holding our own, do you think,
Jack?"

"I am sure of that," came the reply. "And if you asked me again I'd say
we are gaining a little all the while."

"Bully old _Wireless!_" exclaimed George, his voice filled with pride.
"She can do the stunt all right if only something don't happen to throw
us out of our gear. She's a wonder, that's what, and I've always said
so. Talk about sprinting, did you ever go as fast as this in a small
boat, sir?"

"I certainly never have," replied the government agent; and from the way
he was staggering around, clutching hold of every object that promised
to keep him erect, it looked as though he might just as well have added:
"and Heaven deliver me from ever experiencing it again."

"Everybody keep a sharp lookout for rocks or anything of the sort," said
George; "because those men must know this region like a book, and it
would be just like 'em to lead us in a trap, so we'd be wrecked."

"Yes, you're correct there, George," observed the agent, "and I give you
credit for having a long head. That's the kind of chaps you're up
against right now, full of trickery; desperate men, whose one idea is
escape."

"This moonlight is all right as long as the other boat isn't any further
away than she is," remarked George a minute or two later.

"I'm sorry to state that you can't count on the candle up in the sky
much longer," remarked the gentleman; "for there is a suspicious bank of
black clouds hovering near, and at any time she's apt to be eclipsed."

"All right," and George laughed a bit hysterically, since he was
laboring under so great a strain of excitement. "Jack, would you mind
attending to my searchlight. Then we'll be ready for the trouble when
she comes."

And a couple of minutes later, when the dark mask did cover the face of
the moon, a long vivid white gleam reached out from the brass
searchlight on the forward deck of the quivering speed boat. It widened
as it extended in the distance; and plainly seen was the flitting craft
they pursued. The position of the _Flash_ could be detected better by
means of the white foam-tipped waves thrown aside by her swift passage,
rather than by viewing the boat itself.

"That's splendid!" remarked the government agent, as he looked along
this lane of illumination, and watched the desperate struggles of the
_Flash_ to outrun her determined pursuers.

"Still picking up on her, ain't we, Jack?" asked George, after a little.

"No doubt about that, I think," came the reply. "And I guess you were
right when you declared the good old _Wireless_ was the better boat. She
can certainly walk over the water some. I would enjoy this more if it
was day-time."

"I guess we all would," laughed the gentleman, still gripping hold of
the brass rail to make sure he might not be plunged overboard should
anything suddenly go wrong.

"If only the engine behaves half-way decent," sighed George. "She's
doing nobly right now, though, ain't she, Jack? But I hope they don't
toll us in among the rocks. If we ever come slap up against one at this
rate there's going to be some high vaulting, I tell you. Whew! did you
see that one sticking out of the water? I just swerved in time, though.
Keep watching, everybody, and tell me quick if you see anything ugly
ahead!"

Their pace was not abated a particle, even though George knew that new
perils were strewn in their course. If that other boat ahead could speed
through this same tortuous channel he believed he dared take the same
chances. And George had always been reckoned a daring boy by his
schoolmates, in football games or on the diamond; so that this
venturesome spirit was no new freak on his part.

It was only by the greatest effort that he refrained from throwing on
the last atom of speed, and hastening the overtaking of the fugitive
motor boat.

They were rushing on at this tremendous pace, and constantly gaining,
when George gave vent to a sudden loud exclamation.




CHAPTER XX--OVERHAULED


Jack had seen the same object that had given George such a start. Across
the white path of illumination thrown forward by the powerful little
acetylene searchlight, a shadowy, moving thing suddenly appeared.

It was a sailboat, beating up against a head wind, and aiming to reach
its home port while the possibility of moonlight lasted.

Whatever tempted the man at the tiller to try and cross between the
swift moving motor boats no one might ever know. But it was the nearest
to a collision, without an actual calamity, Jack had ever experienced.

He instinctively understood that the only thing that would prevent the
_Wireless_ from plunging into the luckless sailboat would be a prompt
reversal on the part of the skipper at the wheel. And such an action was
apt to endanger the working abilities of the _Wireless'_ engine, never
too trustworthy under a strain.

Had George failed, Jack stood ready to butt in and execute the speed
maneuver; for this was a case that would admit of no ceremony. Life and
death might be in the balance.

But, fortunately, George kept his head. He instantly did what was
necessary, and the tremendous forward movement of the rushing speed boat
was instantly checked.

Indeed, so astonishing was the change that the government agent came
near plunging headlong over the rail into the river. Jack stretched out
a hand and caught him just in time. As for the Indian, he sprawled on
all fours in the bottom of the craft, trying to keep his head from
bumping against some obstacle.

But Jack was delighted to see that the engine had actually redeemed
itself; for it still continued to work at the old stand.

The adventurous sailboat glided out of the way, so close that the sharp
bow of the _Wireless_ almost touched the boom that was hauled well in
during the tacking process. A couple of white, scared faces could be
seen for two seconds; and then the sailboat was engulfed in the shadows
that lay on either side, out beyond range of that searchlight radius.

"Bully for her!" gulped George, almost unable to articulate under the
tremendous strain, yet thinking only of the able work of his engine.

"Speed her up again, George; but not with a rush!" called Jack.

Looking ahead he saw that, just as he expected, the _Flash_ had managed
to take advantage of the momentary detention of her rival, and increased
the distance separating them.

"That was tough luck!" said the government agent; "but I owe you thanks
for saving me from a wet jacket, my boy."

"I guess we're fortunate not to have smashed into that silly crowd, and
played hob with everything," Jack remarked.

"But look where they are," groaned the anxious George. "Just about as
far ahead as in the start; and it's all got to be done over again. Oh;
what fools some men are when they get in a boat. All they had to do was
to come up in the wind till the procession passed. Instead, they tried
to butt in, and came near spoiling the whole game. What shall we do,
Jack?"

"Do you want me to say what I'd do if this was my boat?" asked the
other.

"Sure I do," George spoke up. "They've got some clever trick ahead, and
may lose us yet. You notice that they hardly make any noise, even while
the muffler isn't working. That boat was just made for a smuggler, or a
pirate. But go on, Jack, tell me."

"All right," said the other. "You see how well your engine is going.
She's had all the freak rubbed off her, I guess, and is now buckling
right down to business. And honestly, George, I believe you can trust
her with that reserve notch of speed! I'd try it, if I were you."

"Now, I'm glad to hear you say that, Jack," exclaimed the skipper,
eagerly. "For during that other trip my engine played so many pranks
that she got a black eye among my chums. If so be she's settled down to
a steady stage, the sooner I know it the better. I'll be delighted to
find it out. So here goes. Steady, all; hold on tight!"

The government agent, not knowing what to expect, for they were as near
flying now as he ever expected to get, thought the policy of his crafty
Indian helper worth imitating. So he simply dropped down in the body of
the boat and braced himself against a shock.

But there was none. When George applied that last little reserve bit of
power a slight jump forward resulted; and then after that the only
difference seemed to be that they drew up on the fugitive _Flash_ hand
over hand.

George was nearly wild with delight. To him the fact that his cranky
engine had finally determined to be good and do the duty which her
makers had meant she should, far outweighed all else. So far as he was
concerned it did not matter much whether the three men in the _Flash_
were captured or not; but it was an affair of exceeding importance that
the good, reliable old _Wireless_ should overhaul its rival in this
masterly manner.

"See her hump herself, Jack!" he ejaculated, as he balanced himself in
the swaying craft, and peered eagerly ahead toward the other boat.
"Ain't she coming up nobly, though? Talk to me about the _Flash_ making
circles around us; why, she ain't in the same class with this same old
_Wireless_. Oh! but this pays me for all the troubles I've had in the
past. I can hardly keep from yelling, Jack!"

"Better quit that monkey business, then," cautioned the other. "You need
all your wind and eyesight and everything else right now in handling
such a greyhound."

That just about finished George.

"Thank you, Jack, for giving her that fine name. But she deserves it,"
he said. "I understand what you mean; and, believe me, I'll try to hold
my spirits in check until the game is won. I'd hate to have any accident
happen now, I tell you."

And he did buckle down to business with new determination and grit,
grasping the vibrating wheel with all his strength, and watching to see
just what the tricky skipper of that other craft might do. For George
knew Clarence only too well, nor would he put anything past the other
when it came down to cunning.

They were now so close that it was easy to see everything taking place
on board the fleeing _Flash_. Clarence was at the wheel, and several
figures crouched along either side, evidently holding on for dear life.
One was in the stern, and Jack had little difficulty in making him out
as the tall man he had first seen in the old cabin, and whom the agent
had called Glenwood.

"Looks like we would run alongside in less than five minutes, sir,"
observed George, trying to steady his voice, but hardly succeeding, for
his nerves were tingling in a manner he had seldom if ever experienced
before.

"Keep just a little to the left, then," answered the agent. "And watch
out, for it is barely possible they may try to foul us at the last,
hoping to escape in the confusion."

Jack was changing his mind now about that same thing. He had an idea
that perhaps Clarence had played a trick on the men who held him in
custody; he may not have let out all the speed of which the _Flash_ was
capable. Besides, now that the race seemed virtually over, and the
_Wireless_ had proven the superior why should he want to bring about a
collision that would wreck both boats, as well as endanger the lives of
all the occupants?

"Steady, George, steady!" Jack cautioned, as he thought he saw a slight
change in the course taken by the boat ahead.

"Duck down, boys; he's going to try and scare us by firing!" suddenly
said the keen-eyed government agent.

Even George managed to partly drop, so as to be shielded by the forward
deck. And that the revenue man had guessed correctly was made evident
when there broke out the sharp report of a revolver. Jack even believed
he could hear the peculiar whine of the flying bullet as it passed over
the boat.

"Stay where you are!" cried the agent; "that was only one. He's got a
few more of the same kind to follow!"

There came other shots in rapid succession. Really, it would not be
surprising if George lost his head under such circumstances, for usually
it takes a veteran to preserve his coolness under fire. But, singular to
state, the nervous one of the motor boys now proved that he could shut
his teeth together and hold on tenaciously with bulldog courage.

The _Wireless_ may have wavered just a little, but still kept swiftly
on, diminishing the narrow lead of her rival with constant rapidity and
steadiness.

"That's all!" called the revenue man, as the sixth shot sounded; and
every one felt a perceptible thud, telling that this time the desperate
smuggler had lowered his aim, and that the bullet had struck the boat
somewhere. "And as it's a poor rule that won't work both ways, perhaps I
can have a little better luck in scaring some one. Watch out, George,
and be ready to stop short if he does!"

With that he threw out his arm, and instantly there was a flash and a
report.

"Oh!" exclaimed George, startled in spite of the warning.

Jack's heart was fluttering with excitement. He also felt something like
regret that Clarence was there in line with the fire. Though the agent
might be only seeking to frighten the boy at the wheel of the _Flash_,
still something serious was apt to happen. Jack wished in his soul that
it was all over and nobody injured.

The _Flash_ began to wabble badly, showing that Clarence was trying to
shield himself from the battery in the rear, something which he would
find it hard to do.

Jack stood ready to lend a hand in case of an emergency that George
might seem unable to manage alone.

And it was right at that critical moment, just when light was needed
most of all, that the fickle moon shot out from behind the bank of
clouds, illuminating the surface of the broad St. Lawrence, dotted still
with islands, upon which in many cases cottages could be seen.

Jack thought that was a good omen; but there was no time to spend in
reflection. Another sharp report close to his ear told that the revenue
man believed in following up a good thing. He knew that Clarence was on
the point of surrender, and intended to strike while the iron was hot.

"Look out, George!"

Jack shouted this warning in the ear of his chum, for the leading motor
boat had suddenly slackened her speed, the quick pulsation of her engine
having ceased to beat upon the air.

Instantly the motor of the _Wireless_ followed suit; and driven forward
by the impetus of her "push," she shot alongside the other craft, not
three feet away.

Jack breathed easier, for he saw now that a collision was not to follow.
The nerve of Clarence had possibly failed him at the climax; and his
last move had been to stop his engine, before dropping flat in the
bottom of his boat.

"Over into her, John! We must make prisoners here!" shouted the agent,
as he balanced on the rail of the _Wireless_, and in so doing almost
brought that side of the narrow-beam boat awash.

"There he goes, sir!" called Jack.

A big splash followed, as a figure sprang from the opposite side of the
other boat. Evidently the desperate smuggler, as a last resort, had
taken to the water, in the hope that he might yet baffle his pursuers,
and escape to the Canada shore.

Jack had snatched up a boathook with a brass knobbed end. This he
fastened to the rail of the _Flash_, and exerting all his strength,
began to draw the two boats closer together, so that the revenue agent
and his assistant might make the transfer safely.

He saw them leap across, and felt the boat rock violently under the
strain; but not for an instant did he let go his hold. There was
something of a rumpus going on aboard the _Flash_, as though the
government men might be struggling with the two smugglers whom they
found there, lacking in nerve to follow after their leader, or else not
knowing how to swim. But in another minute these sounds ceased, from
which he guessed that the pair had been subdued.




CHAPTER XXI--A CLEAN SWEEP


"Jack!"

It was the revenue man calling, and he appeared at the side of the other
boat.

"Yes, what is it, sir?" replied the lad who held the boathook.

"I'm coming over again," continued the other. "I hate to let that clever
rascal get away; and we must try to pick him up. Hold steady now."

The transfer was made without any accident, though both boats careened
wildly under the strain, thanks to their sharp keels, fashioned only
with an eye to making speed.

"I see him, sir!" cried George, as he once more started his engine, and
began to curve around the now stationary _Flash_.

Jack could also readily pick up the swimmer. Evidently Glenwood must
have kicked off his shoes, and divested himself of coat and vest, before
jumping overboard; for he was making splendid progress through the
water, using a hand-over-hand stroke.

This necessitated more or less churning of the water, however, and since
the moon persisted in playing into the hands of his enemies by staying
out steadily, his course was readily seen.

They bore down rapidly upon him, once the boat had been turned around.
But Jack knew only too well that a strong and desperate swimmer would be
apt to give his pursuers a hard pull before they could get him. If
Glenwood knew his business, as seemed evident, he would hold himself in
readiness to duck under, just when they thought to reach over and grasp
him.

"Now, steady while I nab him!" said the revenue man, leaning over the
bow.

"He's gone under, sir!" cried Jack, who was holding on to that
serviceable boathook, with the idea that possibly he might find a chance
to get it fast in the garments of the man in the water.

"Yes, I expected that," replied the other. "And of course we don't know
just where he'll come up again. Our only chance is to keep him going
until even his iron muscles weaken. We hold the advantage, boys. Look on
that side, Jack, and I'll take care of this. George, be ready to work
around or back up, as the case may be."

Ten seconds later and Jack called out:

"Here he is, on this side, George!"

Then began one of the queerest experiences Jack had ever participated
in. All of his hare and hound and paper chases must sink into
insignificance after this hunt; for a desperate man was seeking to
effect his escape.

Glenwood would wait until they were close upon him, meanwhile trying to
recuperate. Then, at the critical instant, he would sink out of sight,
and swim under water to the other side of the boat, or the rear, never
ahead. In this way he kept them guessing; and besides, after the boat
was started it was necessary for them to make more or less of a circuit
before they could bear down on the fugitive again.

"What does he hope to gain by all this, sir?" asked George, when they
had missed the swimmer for the fourth time, and were waiting for him to
appear again.

"Oh! Glenwood is a keen one," replied the government agent. "Depend on
it he has several irons in the fire. Perhaps he expects to get a chance
to land on the Canadian shore, where I could not very well chase him.
Then again he keeps hoping that our good friend, the moon, will kindly
hide again. That would give him all the opportunity he wants to come up,
get a breath, and vanish without being seen. There he is, George; back
up this time!"

So the merry chase continued--at least it may have seemed that to the
two boys, but must have assumed a more serious aspect with the man they
were after. Jack could not but admire the nerve and audacity of the
swimmer. He even secretly began to hope Glenwood might get away; for
after all it was none of their business, though the fellow was really a
criminal, in that he was breaking the laws of the land.

But George had entered heart and soul into the game, and was determined
to do all he could to assist the revenue man. He backed the boat so fast
that soon the swimmer had to duck again.

"He's getting weaker all the time, boys," remarked the agent, in a
satisfied tone. "We have only to keep this system of tactics up a little
longer, and Glenwood will be only too glad to come in out of the wet, or
drown."

"Oh! I hope that doesn't happen," said George.

"Little fear," replied the other. "Like most of us, Glenwood clings on
to life, and always has hopes of escaping. Do you see him yet, either of
you?"

"Not on this side," replied Jack.

"And I don't glimpse him here," George went on.

"But he's been under almost a full minute now, and that's a long time
for one as exhausted as he must be," the agent remarked, seriously.

"Oh! I hope he hasn't acted like I've known wounded ducks to do," said
George, "go to the bottom, and hold on to the eel grass until they
drown. That would be terrible."

"And if he'd only held out a few minutes more he might have had the
chance he was looking for, sir," said Jack; "for there's another bunch
of clouds making up toward the moon."

"Just so, Jack," remarked the revenue man, glancing aloft; "and I wager
Glenwood knew that fact, too."

"But where can he be, sir? It would be impossible for any one to stay
under so long. I'm something of a swimmer myself, and I know I
couldn't," George went on, anxiously.

"Sure he didn't bob up quietly, take a breath or two, and sink out of
sight again?" asked the other.

Both boys declared they were positive that such had not been the case.
The revenue man remained there for another minute, as though pondering.
Then Jack saw him look up and smile. He did not call out, but made a
mysterious motion with his hand that seemed to call for silence.

Then Jack saw him creeping slowly and cautiously toward the stern of the
boat. George stared with wide open eyes, as though the startling thought
had come to him that their passenger had suddenly gone crazy. But if so,
there was a method in his madness, and Jack had guessed it.

The stern of the _Wireless_ was not an over-hang, but the customary
square one of a speed boat. Still, any one in the water could hang on to
the rudder, keeping clear of the propeller; and while the boat was
stationary, be concealed from the view of those aboard, unless indeed,
some inquisitive person thrust his head far out over the edge.

Undoubtedly the cunning Glenwood had conceived this to be a good plan,
to rest, and wait for the cloud to cover the face of the moon, when he
could dip again, and pass away under the water beyond reach of their
limited vision.

Jack almost ceased to breathe, so intensely interested was he in
watching the advance of the revenue man. It was a case of diamond cut
diamond, apparently, and victory would go to the keener mind.

Now the agent was crawling over the stern, and evidently getting in
readiness to suddenly swoop his arm down, with fingers extended, to
clutch anything he might come in contact with there.

He made the movement with a celerity that reminded Jack of the swoop of
a hawk on a pigeon. And apparently he must have gauged his action
nicely; for immediately there arose a yell, and a threshing of the water
followed; while the agent held on desperately, calling to the others for
assistance.

Two hands were seen to clutch the brass rail; and then a head came into
view.

"No need to yank my hair out; I'm coming aboard all right, Carson!"
gasped the exhausted swimmer; but the government agent evidently looked
upon him as a slippery customer, for he declined to release his clutch
until the man had been pulled wholly into the boat, and stretched on his
back in the bottom.

Jack felt a queer chill when he heard something "click," and realized
that for the first time in all his life he saw a prisoner hand-cuffed.
But Glenwood did not appear to be very much cast down. He had faced this
situation a long time, and evidently discounted all its terrors. He even
laughed as soon as he got his breath.

"It was some fun while it lasted, Carson," he said.

"And you came near playing it on me for good," replied the other,
laughing in his turn. "I only fell to your smart trick by accident.
Seemed to me I felt something bump against the side of the boat, when
none of us chanced to be moving. And then I figured what I would do
myself in a similar case. That was how I came to hit on your game,
Glenwood."

"How about my friends; did they get away?" asked the other.

"George," the agent went on, "turn around, and we'll head back; if
you're in doubt I can tell you just where we'll find the other boat,
first of all, and then the island where your comrades are waiting."

Then he turned to his prisoner, saying:

"Neither of them took the dare you set, Glenwood; and we got the upper
hand of both in short order. Besides, there are three chaps with their
legs tied up, on the island."

"A clean sweep, you've made of it, then," remarked the smuggler,
disconsolately; "bagged the whole lot, and the stuff in the bargain.
Well, I knew how it would be when I heard they were sending you up here,
Carson. Sooner or later I guessed we'd be up against it, and meet with
our finish. But it came quicker than I expected."

He said nothing more, nor did the government agent seem disposed to
enter into further conversation just then. Keeping at the elbow of the
pilot, he watched him head the boat along toward where George thought
the _Flash_ would be found. And that his judgment was good they
presently saw, when in the moonlight the other motor boat was discovered
quite motionless on the river.

George gave a signal, which was immediately answered. When they drew
alongside it was to find that both Clarence and Bully Joe were awaiting
their coming with more or less eagerness.

"Thank goodness!" said the owner of the _Flash_; "now we'll get rid of
these ugly fellows. They just pounced down on us several days ago, and
we've had to do what they wanted ever since. I hope, sir, you won't
bother taking us along with you, because we've had nothing to do with
their games. We were prisoners, that's right. I was threatened with all
sorts of terrible things if I refused to run the boat as that man
wanted."

"Oh! I understand that, young fellow," said Mr. Carson, pleasantly. "All
I want you to do is to accompany us back to the island, carrying those
you have aboard. I'll relieve you of them there, and you can go about
your business. I have no call out for you. But next time I advise you to
be a little more careful whose company you accept. It got you into
trouble once, and may again."

"I declare I have no idea where our blooming old haunted island lies,"
admitted George, frankly; "and I'll have to ask you to stand by sir, to
tell me how to steer."

"That's easily done, George;" laughed the other. "And you've been a big
help to me, something I'll not soon forget either. Clarence, keep as
close by us as is safe; and we'll have no more racing as we return,
remember."

Clarence had something on his mind, nor could he keep from saying what
it was.

"Think you climbed up on me hand over fist, don't you, George," he
remarked, as the two speed boats got under way once more. "Well, you've
got another think coming, that's what. He ordered me to hit up my
hottest pace, and I told him I was doing it; but all the same I kept a
bit in reserve. The _Flash_ can do better; and some fine day you'll all
get your eyes opened, perhaps. I played my little game to get rid of
unwelcome passengers, leaving the question about which was the faster
boat to be settled some other time. See?"

"That's a likely story," sneered George, who would not think of letting
any one dim the glory that the dashing _Wireless_ had so gallantly won;
and least of all Clarence Macklin. "Tell that to the marines, will you?
But if the chance ever comes I'll try it all over with you for fair.
Meanwhile don't bother yourself boasting how you're going to cut figure
eight's around me, with that pirate boat of yours. She looks dangerous;
but in a race something besides looks counts. I've got it right here.
That'll be enough for you, Clarence," and George declined to exchange
any further words with the skipper of the defeated motor boat.




CHAPTER XXII--BUSTER'S HOUR OF TRIUMPH


It proved that Mr. Carson knew his St. Lawrence in the neighborhood of
the Thousand Islands by heart, so that even in the misty moonlight he
was able to guide the two speed boats back to the haunted island.

Their arrival was the signal for an outburst of cheers from those of the
motor boat boys who had been left behind.

Great was the excitement that took possession of the four when they
discovered that it was Clarence and Bully Joe who were now in charge of
the mysterious dark speed boat; and after finding out that three
smugglers lay in the bottom, with their ankles tied, and steel bracelets
on their wrists, Nick and Josh were so overwhelmed with amazement that
they could hardly speak for a brief time. And as the others realized,
when the tall lad lost his voice it must be something wonderful indeed
that had happened.

Mr. Carson meant to lose no time. He sent his Indian assistant across
the island to take the little canvas collapsible canoe, and cross over
to a neighboring piece of land, where their noisy motor boat had been
concealed earlier in the evening.

Of course the boys now understood that it had been this river craft
whose loud, rattling pulsations they had caught at the time George first
mentioned hearing the sounds.

When, a little later, the pilot returned, bringing the snub-nosed boat
with him, the three prisoners were transferred without much trouble.
After that the revenue man and his helper went ashore to complete the
job. One by one they brought off the trio of prisoners who had been left
there helpless.

Finally they carried aboard the large packs that Jack had seen hidden in
the cavity under the old straw in the cabin's earthen floor.

"I think that finishes the job," remarked the energetic agent, as he
wiped his wet forehead. "And I must admit that, taken as a whole, it's
about the most satisfactory piece of business I've handled for a long
time."

"Did you get them all, sir?" Josh asked, filled with admiration for the
man who could engineer a big scheme like this and bring it to a
successful close.

"The entire working force is now in custody, I believe," replied Mr.
Carson. "To be sure there are probably some persons connected with the
band whom we will never lay hands on; such as those who supplied the
funds, and shipped the goods across the border. But it may be possible
to catch some of the guilty receivers over on our side of the river.
When rogues find themselves fast in the toils, they frequently offer to
confess all they know in order to curry favor with the authorities. And
secretly, between us, I imagine Glenwood may yet be induced to turn
state's evidence."

"Are you going to leave us now, sir?" asked Jack, seeing that the other
was evidently preparing to cross over to his own well laden motor boat.

"Yes," came the reply. "The sooner I get this cargo behind the bars, the
better. But I want to shake hands with each one of you, and thank you
again most heartily for the assistance you have given me in this matter.
I don't mean to let it drop there; and you may expect to hear from me
again, since Jack Stormways has given me his address. Good night boys,
and may the balance of your vacation be as peaceful as the beginning has
been stormy."

"Oh! well, we've sure enjoyed it, Mr. Carson," said George, "and it was
worth a heap to me to have that chance to try conclusions with the
_Flash_."

"I've no doubt of it, George," laughed the agent, as he clambered over
the side of his stubby little launch. "And since I miss that same evil
looking boat, I surmise that our friend Clarence did not care to stay
here in your company any longer than he could help."

"He scooted off as soon as you had gone ashore for the prisoners, sir,"
observed Nick, who wanted to have a last word with the man he admired so
much.

And in another minute the Indian pilot had set his chatterbox of an
engine to beating a lively tattoo, upon which the stub-nosed launch
began to draw away. As long as it remained in sight in the moonlight the
boys cheered, and called goodbyes, so that if there chanced to be any
more ghosts lingering about that haunted island they must have taken
this for a clear defiance of their power, and concluded to remain in
hiding during the balance of the stay of the motor boat boys.

"Think we can pick up a few winks of sleep, fellows?" asked George, when
the clatter of the loud-voiced engine had been mellowed by distance.

"We ought to try, anyhow," said Jack, "Seems to me we've had our rest
pretty badly broken up lately. For one I'm going to forget it all for a
while."

But the chances were that none of them got any satisfactory sleep during
the balance of that eventful night.

On the following morning they prepared to vacate the cove that had been
their anchorage for so long. All of them first went ashore; for Nick and
Herb were very anxious to see the cabin, and the hole in the floor were
the smugglers kept their goods concealed after secretly bringing the
stuff over from the Canada mainland, waiting until a good chance opened
to scatter it through the state, free of duty.

"Well," declared Nick, as they prepared to get underway later in the
morning; "this has been a great experience all around, sure enough. And
it ended fine--that is for us boys, though I guess poor old Glenwood and
his fellow conspirators don't feel so very gay over it."

"And don't forget our friends, Clarence and Bully Joe, while about it,"
spoke up George. "Just stop and think what Macklin went through--held a
prisoner by those reckless men, and threatened with all sorts of trouble
if he so much as squeaked on 'em. Then forced to do whatever they
wanted. And last, but far from least, beaten in a fair race by this
dandy little meteor boat that he once sneered at. That's glory enough
for me, I'm telling you, shipmates."

"I guess we all enjoyed it," remarked Josh.

"Yes, so far as I'm concerned I'd be quite contented and happy right
now, if I only knew one thing," remarked Nick, looking doleful again.

"Here, don't you go to starting up your tune about that break," said
George, "we all agreed long ago that if you _did_ leak to Clarence, you
never would have done it on purpose. So forget it."

"But I tell you I can't," flashed back the fat boy. "I feel sore about
it; and I want to find out the truth so that every one of you'll get
down on your marrow-bones and ask my pardon. And something tells me the
time ain't so far away when that very thing is going to happen."

"Then speed the hour," grinned Herb; "after you've seen us in a row
asking forgiveness, perhaps we'll have peace, and you'll forget the
incident."

"Don't count too heavily on that," George said. "You don't know Buster
as well as I do. Just as like as not he'll turn out to be made up the
same way as that thirsty young woman in the sleeping car, you know."

"But perhaps we don't know, so suppose you tell us," Nick himself burst
out with curiosity consuming him.

"Oh! I thought it was a chestnut; but if you will have it, listen. A
traveling man, trying to go to sleep, heard some woman keep on saying
out loud in the berth next to him 'Oh! I am so thirsty! Oh! I am so
thirsty!' When he couldn't stand for it any longer he got up, went and
fetched a glass of water, and begged her to accept it. Then he went back
to his berth, thinking he would have peace. But soon he heard the same
woman saying over and over again: 'Oh! I was so thirsty! I was so
thirsty!' So look out Buster don't play that game on you, Herb."

There was a shout at this, in which Nick joined; for being a
good-natured chap in the main, he could take a joke that was leveled at
himself.

About nine o'clock the signal was given, and the three motor boats
forming the cruising fleet pulled out of the friendly cove. Those on
board looked back with more or less rejoicing and regret at the scene of
their recent adventures. They would not soon forget all that had
happened since first they dropped in there for a night's stay. And
Jack's entries in the official log would doubtless prove very
entertaining reading for the folks at home.

Upon examining the bow of his speed boat George had found where that
bullet had struck, that was fired last of all by the desperate smuggler,
in hopes of frightening the boy at the wheel of the pursuing craft.

It had made quite a hole, though fortunately doing no real damage. Later
on he could of course, have the aperture plugged; but for the present it
would stand as a mute witness to the truth of the adventurous story the
boys had to tell. If any one of their mates at home ventured to scoff at
the idea of their having been actually under a hot fire, he stood ready
to pry that bit of lead out of its lodgings, and thus confound the
skeptic.

They were now on the second week of their vacation, and of course had
lots of territory to cover still, before they could say they had
exhausted the pleasures of this wonderful cruising ground. But already
the motor boat boys were looking forward to another daring venture, and
all of them had written home to gain the consent of those who must be
consulted ere determining positively on their plans.

This included a long trip through lakes Ontario and Erie, up past
Detroit into Lake Huron, along the shore of this great body of water
until the wonderful Soo was reached at the head of the St. Mary's river;
and then possibly into Superior; winding up with a run down Lake
Michigan to Milwaukee, where the boats could be sent home the same way
they had left, via railroad.

Of course, being real boys, once a great undertaking like this had
formed itself in their minds they could talk of little else. And Jack
knew very well that if any determined opposition developed at home, that
would put a damper on the grand scheme, there would be a feeling of
gloom settle down over the whole expedition.

After leaving the haunted island the first object of the boys was to get
back to Clayton, and not only replenish their depleted supplies, but
gather up any mail that would, according to orders, be held for them at
the post office there.

Josh went ashore to get the mail, while Jack looked after the supplies.
Nick seemed unusually uneasy all the time they were gone; and upon their
showing up he demanded shrilly that the letters be distributed without
delay.

"Only one for you, Pudding," jeered the letter carrier, as he held it
up; "and seems to me I smell violet perfume on that. Must be a dainty
billet doux from Rosie Sinclair; but here, take it and go off by
yourself. It would make us all die of envy to see you reading such sweet
stuff, when we are forgotten by our best girls."

Nick eagerly snatched the missive from his hand, and with trembling
fingers tore it open. A minute later the others were astonished to hear
him give a loud whoop.

"What did I tell you, fellows?" he exclaimed, trying to dance around
like a wild Indian, and waving the open letter. "Mebbe I ain't something
of a detective myself? Come around here, every one of you now, and get
ready to do that marrow-bone act you promised."

"What's all this mean? Has he gone out of his mind?" asked George.

"Tell us, Buster," said Jack, who could suspect something of the nature
of the communication Nick had received.

"His dad has said he can take the northern cruise, that's what!"
remarked Josh, a bit enviously.

"Oh! you're away off there," cried the fat boy, derisively. "Why, you
couldn't guess the truth in a month of Sundays, Josh. It takes real
brains to figure out a solution to a mystery like that. And I did it,
all by my little self."

"Great governor!" ejaculated George, "listen to him, would you, fellows?
Honest now, if it don't sound as if he'd found out where that leak lay.
Here, Buster, it isn't fair to keep us on the ragged edge so long. Open
up now, and explain. Did anybody talk in their sleep? Who told Clarence
our plans?"

"You did, George; yes, and so did Jack and Herb and Josh--I guess Jimmie
and myself had a hand in it too!" laughed the fat boy, to their great
mystification!




CHAPTER XXIII--HAPPY DAYS--CONCLUSION


"Poor old Buster! He's sure getting weak in the upper story," said
George.

"It's going to be a strait-jacket for him before long!" sighed Josh.

But Jack spoke not a word; for he could somehow see further than the
rest of the boys, and understood that Nick held a strong hand.

"Oh! is that the way you're thinking?" said the fat boy, still trembling
with the violence of his excitement. "Just wait till I read this little
letter, and then if you're honest you'll do the right thing by poor old
Buster."

"He's going to read Rosie's little note to us, fellows!" cried Josh,
pretending to be horror-stricken at such a base betrayal of confidence.

"Who said it was from Rosie, or any girl at all?" demanded Nick,
indignantly. "Look at the name signed at the bottom, and you can read
Aleck. Yes, it's from my old friend, Aleck Sands. I wrote him a week
ago, when that bright thought first dazzled me. And you remember, when
Josh here gave me that start by talking through that old rusted tin
water pipe? Well, that made me believe harder than before that I'd got
on the track."

"Read the letter, plague take you, Nick!" roared impatient George;
"don't you see you're giving some of us heart disease right now, with
your everlasting slow way of getting at things."

So Nick, assuming a posture that, according to his mind signified the
attitude of a victor awaiting the laurel wreath, began in his slow way.

    "Dear Buster:

    "As soon as I got your interesting letter I hit it up for the
    school house. Found old Crusty Bill Edwards hard at work, and
    had to bribe him to let me get in. Went up to the little room
    where we hold our club meetings. Yes, you were right, Buster;
    the register from the furnace in that room does back into the
    cloak room. Found both of 'em shut, but got old Bill to stand in
    the club room while I opened the registers, and then listened in
    the cloak closet while he talked to himself. And Buster, why,
    say, I could near hear the old man _think_, every sound came
    through that hole so plain. If you fellows talked about your
    plans that day you were there, and Clarence was hiding in the
    cloak room, make up your mind, old chap, he heard every word you
    said; In a hurry so I'll ring off.


                                                     "Yours, Aleck."


As Nick read the last word he paused and looked expectant. His
motor-mates stared at one another as though for the moment rendered
incapable of speech. The cleverness of the fat boy's deduction was
stunning; had it sprung from Jack, now, they might not have considered
it so very wonderful; but to think that Buster, always so slow to grasp
anything, could have done it, fairly staggered them.

Jack was the first to recover. Laughingly he dropped on one knee beside
Nick, and seizing the fat hand of the victor he pretended to kiss it
with due humility.

The others entered into the spirit of the occasion; and right there on
the dock, regardless of the stares of passersby, the five clung around
the grinning Buster, begging him to forgive their thick-headedness, and
restore them to favor.

Nick of course, enjoyed the game most heartily, and laughed himself into
a fit of choking, as he raised his chums, one by one, and tapped them on
the head in token of his pardon.

"However did you come to think of it?" asked George, a little later, as
they were once more aboard their boats, and ready to start forth in
search of new adventures.

"I dreamed about it, and that's the truth," declared Nick, solemnly; nor
could they ever get him to change his assertion. "Woke me right up in
the middle of the night too. Thought I saw Clarence peekin' through a
hole, and laughing to beat the band; and then I saw the silly crowd in
the next room. That gave me an idea, and started me to thinking. I
believed I remembered that register, and had an idea there was another
one just back of it opening into that cloak room. Now you don't blame me
for wanting to get that letter, do you?"

"I should say not," declared George frankly. "Why you've just covered
yourself with glory, Buster. After this, when anything mysterious
happens, we'll turn to you to guess the answer. You ought to be a
lawyer, sure."

"Or a revenue man," suggested Herb.

"Guess Buster'd like to be the head steward on a big Atlantic liner best
of all," was the wicked remark of the envious Josh.

But the fat boy was in a jolly frame of mind, and could not be provoked
by any sort of fling just then. He turned to his tormentor, and smiling
sweetly, remarked:

"Josh knows my weak point; but then you fellows understand that it's
only green envy that makes him say such things. Right now he'd give
almost anything if only he had my honest appetite. I never make faces at
my meals. Why, I'm ready for one right at this present minute, fellows."

"Well," said Jack, "let's get off a few miles from Clayton before we
think to start the stoves going. Perhaps we'll find a nice quiet place
where we can go ashore, and do the cooking stunt. This place is too
thickly populated to make a show of ourselves to the gaping natives."

"Now, I know you mean me when you say that, Jack," observed Nick,
reproachfully. "But while I confess that I've got a bully good appetite,
I hope I don't disgrace the bunch when I join in the eating game. Herb,
are we ready to start? While we are moving along I'll try and hatch up a
new dish out of my new book here, that will make your mouths water."

"If Herb was wise he'd have drowned that cook book long before this,"
muttered Josh, as George gave his engine a fling and immediately started
away in the lead.

The three motor boats kept close company. George had apparently
experienced all the running on ahead he wished, during that previous
memorable cruise down the Mississippi; and was content after rushing
half a mile in the lead to slow down and let the others catch up with
him.

He was in great spirits this morning. That wonderful little race in the
moonlight on the preceding night, with its successful termination, had
made him fall in love with his cranky speed boat more than ever. He
could hardly talk intelligently about anything else; and finally the
others declared that he was even a worse sinner in that respect than
Nick had ever been.

The day was sunshiny, and everything around them seemed joyous, so it
was not to be thought strange that the motor boat boys were every little
while bursting out in snatches of song, or exchanging joking remarks as
the boats chanced to close up.

"Wonder if we'll ever hear from the gentleman again?" Herb was saying,
as they later on headed for a bit of lonely shore, where it seemed
inviting to campers.

"If you mean Mr. Carson," Jack replied, "I'm sure we will, for he gave
his promise; and a man like him never goes back on his word. I've an
idea he means to send us some little thing to put in our clubroom, to
remember the adventure by."

"As if we'd be likely to ever forget it?" laughed George, patting his
throbbing motor affectionately.

"I've thought up that new mess, fellows!" called out Nick, just then.

Everybody groaned in unison.

"You know we've always had Boston baked beans and coffee for lunch
whenever we got a chance to go ashore at noon. All right. I'm for
progress. I like to vary our meals some. Let's turn things upside down,
and right around. If you agree, then today let the bill of fare be
coffee and Boston baked beans."

"Bully for Buster! He's the one bright mind in the bunch!" laughed
George.

"We can have a new dish every day at that rate, fellows!" sang out Herb.

And so, joking and laughing in this way, they ran close in, found a deep
place to anchor the three motor boats, and began to get ashore with such
things as they needed for the meal.

The future looked very bright to those six jolly fellows just then, with
never a cloud in sight. Presently they hoped to be hearing the returns
from home, when they would know whether their plan for an extended
cruise was looked upon favorably by the powers that controlled their
destinies.

But no matter what the outcome of that proposition might be, they did
not mean to worry over anything. The great St. Lawrence was an ideal
cruising place, and doubtless if they were forced to stay there during
the balance of the summer they could find plenty of amusement in the way
of fishing, racing, and exploring.

Only Josh solemnly expressed the hope that in their "nosing around," as
he called it, they might not happen upon another haunted island. Once
spelled enough for him; and there was no telling but that on another
occasion the ghost might prove to be more real than the one manufactured
by Glenwood and his fellow smugglers, to frighten the owners of the
three motor boats away from their pet cove.

There was always the chance that sooner or later they would again run
across Clarence Macklin and his crony, Bully Joe Brinker. George would
be only too glad of another opportunity to test his beloved _Wireless_
against the very best that the _Flash_ could put forth.

"Make up your mind, George," said Jack, when his chum was mentioning
this thing one day. "You never would get that tricky Clarence to
acknowledge your boat to be better than his. If you beat him six times
he'd have six good excuses ready, and each one different from all the
rest. Whoever caught him with the goods on, and made him confess? A
fellow he didn't know stopped him and stuck the things in his pocket. He
was right then on the way to hand them over to the police. Don't you
remember when he said that? Well, you may have your race, and win out
handsomely, but don't expect Clarence to hand you an honest admission
that his boat ran second."

"I don't," grinned George; "but I'd like to race him all the same; and I
only hope the chance comes along, sooner or later."

Perhaps it would, for stranger things were likely to happen to the motor
boat boys than that they would run across Clarence again during their
outing days.

"I saw him in Clayton when ashore," remarked Jack. "He was talking with
a man who, from his soiled clothes, I'd take to be an engineer, or
something like that."

"Sure," laughed George, evidently pleased. "Knowing that in her present
condition the _Flash_ is no match for my bully boat, he's going to see
if she can't be improved somehow, so as to squeeze just a little more
speed out of her. Huh! perhaps I might do something of that kind myself.
But just wait and see, fellows. If there is another race between us it's
going to be for keeps."

When some time later their mail began to arrive from home it might be
judged from the excitement and congratulations to be heard that
favorable replies were coming in from headquarters. And that this was
really the fact, the reader who has been interested in the fortunes of
Jack and his chums thus far, will take for granted, when he learns that
the title of the next volume in this series, already published, and
ready for his enjoyment, is: "The Motor Boat Boys on the Great Lakes;
or, Young Pilots to the Rescue."


                                THE END.







*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MOTOR BOAT BOYS ON THE ST.
LAWRENCE ***




A Word from Project Gutenberg


We will update this book if we find any errors.

This book can be found under: http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/35728

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works to protect the
Project Gutenberg(tm) concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a
registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks,
unless you receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything
for copies of this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may
use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative
works, reports, performances and research. They may be modified and
printed and given away - you may do practically _anything_ with public
domain eBooks.  Redistribution is subject to the trademark license,
especially commercial redistribution.



The Full Project Gutenberg License


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg(tm) mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg(tm) License available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1. General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg(tm)
electronic works


*1.A.* By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg(tm)
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the
terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all
copies of Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works in your possession. If
you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

*1.B.* "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things
that you can do with most Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works even
without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph
1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic
works. See paragraph 1.E below.

*1.C.* The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of
Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works. Nearly all the individual works
in the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you
from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating
derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project
Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the
Project Gutenberg(tm) mission of promoting free access to electronic
works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg(tm) works in compliance with
the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg(tm) name
associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this
agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full
Project Gutenberg(tm) License when you share it without charge with
others.

*1.D.* The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg(tm) work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

*1.E.* Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

*1.E.1.* The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg(tm) License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg(tm) work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org

*1.E.2.* If an individual Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic work is
derived from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating
that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can
be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying
any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a
work with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on
the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs
1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg(tm) trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

*1.E.3.* If an individual Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic work is
posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and
distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and
any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg(tm) License for all works posted
with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of
this work.

*1.E.4.* Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project
Gutenberg(tm) License terms from this work, or any files containing a
part of this work or any other work associated with Project
Gutenberg(tm).

*1.E.5.* Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg(tm) License.

*1.E.6.* You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg(tm) work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg(tm) web site
(http://www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or
expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a
means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include
the full Project Gutenberg(tm) License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

*1.E.7.* Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg(tm) works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

*1.E.8.* You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works
provided that

  - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
    the use of Project Gutenberg(tm) works calculated using the method
    you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
    to the owner of the Project Gutenberg(tm) trademark, but he has
    agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
    Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
    within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
    legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
    payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
    Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
    Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
    Literary Archive Foundation."

  - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
    you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
    does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg(tm)
    License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
    copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
    all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg(tm)
    works.

  - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
    any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
    electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
    receipt of the work.

  - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
    distribution of Project Gutenberg(tm) works.


*1.E.9.* If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg(tm) trademark. Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3. below.

*1.F.*

*1.F.1.* Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg(tm) collection.
Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works, and the
medium on which they may be stored, may contain "Defects," such as, but
not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription
errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a
defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

*1.F.2.* LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg(tm) trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees.
YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY,
BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN
PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND
ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR
ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES
EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

*1.F.3.* LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

*1.F.4.* Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

*1.F.5.* Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

*1.F.6.* INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg(tm)
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg(tm) work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg(tm)


Project Gutenberg(tm) is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg(tm)'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg(tm) collection will remain
freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and
permanent future for Project Gutenberg(tm) and future generations. To
learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and
how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the
Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org .


Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state
of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue
Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is
64-6221541. Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf . Contributions to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the
full extent permitted by U.S.  federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official page
at http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation


Project Gutenberg(tm) depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where
we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside
the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways
including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate,
please visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic
works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg(tm)
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg(tm) eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg(tm) eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless
a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks
in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

    http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg(tm),
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
