The Project Gutenberg EBook of Reflections on War and Death, by Sigmund Freud

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Reflections on War and Death

Author: Sigmund Freud

Translator: A. A. Brill
            Alfred B. Kuttner

Release Date: April 15, 2011 [EBook #35875]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REFLECTIONS ON WAR AND DEATH ***




Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from scanned images of public domain material
from the Google Print project.)









REFLECTIONS
ON WAR AND DEATH




REFLECTIONS
ON WAR AND DEATH

_By_
PROFESSOR DR. SIGMUND FREUD, LL.D.

_Authorized English Translation By_

DR. A. A. BRILL and
ALFRED B. KUTTNER

[Illustration: colophon]

MOFFAT, YARD AND COMPANY
NEW YORK
1918

Copyright, 1918, by
MOFFAT, YARD, AND COMPANY


This book is offered to the American public at the present time in the
hope that it may contribute something to the cause of international
understanding and good will which has become the hope of the world.

THE TRANSLATORS.




REFLECTIONS
ON WAR AND DEATH




I

THE DISAPPOINTMENTS OF WAR


Caught in the whirlwind of these war times, without any real information
or any perspective upon the great changes that have already occurred or
are about to be enacted, lacking all premonition of the future, it is
small wonder that we ourselves become confused as to the meaning of
impressions which crowd in upon us or of the value of the judgments we
are forming. It would seem as though no event had ever destroyed so much
of the precious heritage of mankind, confused so many of the clearest
intellects or so thoroughly debased what is highest.

Even science has lost her dispassionate impartiality. Her deeply
embittered votaries are intent upon seizing her weapons to do their
share in the battle against the enemy. The anthropologist has to declare
his opponent inferior and degenerate, the psychiatrist must diagnose him
as mentally deranged. Yet it is probable that we are affected out of all
proportion by the evils of these times and have no right to compare them
with the evils of other times through which we have not lived.

The individual who is not himself a combatant and therefore has not
become a cog in the gigantic war machinery, feels confused in his
bearings and hampered in his activities. I think any little suggestion
that will make it easier for him to see his way more clearly will be
welcome. Among the factors which cause the stay-at-home so much
spiritual misery and are so hard to endure there are two in particular
which I should like to emphasize and discuss. I mean the disappointment
that this war has called forth and the altered attitude towards death to
which it, in common with other wars, forces us.

When I speak of disappointment everybody knows at once what I mean. One
need not be a sentimentalist, one may realize the biological and
physiological necessity of suffering in the economy of human life, and
yet one may condemn the methods and the aims of war and long for its
termination. To be sure, we used to say that wars cannot cease as long
as nations live under such varied conditions, as long as they place
such different values upon the individual life, and as long as the
animosities which divide them represent such powerful psychic forces. We
were therefore quite ready to believe that for some time to come there
would be wars between primitive and civilized nations and between those
divided by color, as well as with and among the partly enlightened and
more or less civilized peoples of Europe. But we dared to hope
differently. We expected that the great ruling nations of the white
race, the leaders of mankind, who had cultivated world wide interests,
and to whom we owe the technical progress in the control of nature as
well as the creation of artistic and scientific cultural standards--we
expected that these nations would find some other way of settling their
differences and conflicting interests.

Each of these nations had set a high moral standard to which the
individual had to conform if he wished to be a member of the civilized
community.

These frequently over strict precepts demanded a great deal of him, a
great self-restraint and a marked renunciation of his impulses. Above
all he was forbidden to resort to lying and cheating, which are so
extraordinarily useful in competition with others. The civilized state
considered these moral standards the foundation of its existence, it
drastically interfered if anyone dared to question them and often
declared it improper even to submit them to the test of intellectual
criticism. It was therefore assumed that the state itself would respect
them and would do nothing that might contradict the foundations of its
own existence. To be sure, one was aware that scattered among these
civilized nations there were certain remnants of races that were quite
universally disliked, and were therefore reluctantly and only to a
certain extent permitted to participate in the common work of
civilization where they had proved themselves sufficiently fit for the
task. But the great nations themselves, one should have thought, had
acquired sufficient understanding for the qualities they had in common
and enough tolerance for their differences so that, unlike in the days
of classical antiquity, the words "foreign" and "hostile" should no
longer be synonyms.

Trusting to this unity of civilized races countless people left hearth
and home to live in strange lands and trusted their fortunes to the
friendly relations existing between the various countries. And even he
who was not tied down to the same spot by the exigencies of life could
combine all the advantages and charms of civilized countries into a
newer and greater fatherland which he could enjoy without hindrance or
suspicion. He thus took delight in the blue and the grey ocean, the
beauty of snow clad mountains and of the green lowlands, the magic of
the north woods and the grandeur of southern vegetation, the atmosphere
of landscapes upon which great historical memories rest, and the peace
of untouched nature. The new fatherland was to him also a museum, filled
with the treasure that all the artists of the world for many centuries
had created and left behind. While he wandered from one hall to another
in this museum he could give his impartial appreciation to the varied
types of perfection that had been developed among his distant
compatriots by the mixture of blood, by history, and by the
peculiarities of physical environment. Here cool, inflexible energy was
developed to the highest degree, there the graceful art of beautifying
life, elsewhere the sense of law and order, or other qualities that have
made man master of the earth.

We must not forget that every civilized citizen of the world had created
his own special "Parnassus" and his own "School of Athens." Among the
great philosophers, poets, and artists of all nations he had selected
those to whom he considered himself indebted for the best enjoyment and
understanding of life, and he associated them in his homage both with
the immortal ancients and with the familiar masters of his own tongue.
Not one of these great figures seemed alien to him just because he spoke
in a different language; be it the incomparable explorer of human
passions or the intoxicated worshiper of beauty, the mighty and
threatening seer or the sensitive scoffer, and yet he never reproached
himself with having become an apostate to his own nation and his beloved
mother tongue.

The enjoyment of this common civilization was occasionally disturbed by
voices which warned that in consequence of traditional differences wars
were unavoidable even between those who shared this civilization. One
did not want to believe this, but what did one imagine such a war to be
like if it should ever come about? No doubt it was to be an opportunity
to show the progress in man's community feeling since the days when the
Greek amphictyonies had forbidden the destruction of a city belonging to
the league, the felling of her oil trees and the cutting off of her
water supply. It would be a chivalrous bout of arms for the sole purpose
of establishing the superiority of one side or the other with the
greatest possible avoidance of severe suffering which could contribute
nothing to the decision, with complete protection for the wounded, who
must withdraw from the battle, and for the physicians and nurses who
devote themselves to their care. With every consideration, of course,
for noncombatants, for the women who are removed from the activities of
war, and for the children who, when grown up, are to become friends and
co-workers on both sides. And with the maintenance, finally, of all the
international projects and institutions in which the civilized community
of peace times had expressed its corporate life.

Such a war would still be horrible enough and full of burdens, but it
would not have interrupted the development of ethical relations between
the large human units, between nations and states. But the war in which
we did not want to believe broke out and brought--disappointment. It is
not only bloodier and more destructive than any foregoing war, as a
result of the tremendous development of weapons of attack and defense,
but it is at least as cruel, bitter, and merciless as any earlier war.
It places itself above all the restrictions pledged in times of peace,
the so-called rights of nations, it does not acknowledge the
prerogatives of the wounded and of physicians, the distinction between
peaceful and fighting members of the population, or the claims of
private property. It hurls down in blind rage whatever bars its way, as
though there were to be no future and no peace after it is over. It
tears asunder all community bonds among the struggling peoples and
threatens to leave a bitterness which will make impossible any
re-establishment of these ties for a long time to come.

It has also brought to light the barely conceivable phenomenon of
civilized nations knowing and understanding each other so little that
one can turn from the other with hate and loathing. Indeed one of these
great civilized nations has become so universally disliked that it is
even attempted to cast it out from the civilized community as though it
were barbaric, although this very nation has long proved its
eligibility through contribution after contribution of brilliant
achievements. We live in the hope that impartial history will furnish
the proof that this very nation, in whose language I am writing and for
whose victory our dear ones are fighting, has sinned least against the
laws of human civilization. But who is privileged to step forward at
such a time as judge in his own defense?

Races are roughly represented by the states they form and these states
by the governments which guide them. The individual citizen can prove
with dismay in this war what occasionally thrust itself upon him already
in times of peace, namely, that the state forbids him to do wrong not
because it wishes to do away with wrongdoing but because it wishes to
monopolize it, like salt and tobacco. A state at war makes free use of
every injustice, every act of violence, that would dishonor the
individual. It employs not only permissible cunning but conscious lies
and intentional deception against the enemy, and this to a degree which
apparently outdoes what was customary in previous wars. The state
demands the utmost obedience and sacrifice of its citizens, but at the
same time it treats them as children through an excess of secrecy and a
censorship of news and expression of opinion which render the minds of
those who are thus intellectually repressed defenseless against every
unfavorable situation and every wild rumor. It absolves itself from
guarantees and treaties by which it was bound to other states, makes
unabashed confession of its greed and aspiration to power, which the
individual is then supposed to sanction out of patriotism.

Let the reader not object that the state cannot abstain from the use of
injustice because it would thereby put itself at a disadvantage. For the
individual, too, obedience to moral standards and abstinence from brutal
acts of violence are as a rule very disadvantageous, and the state but
rarely proves itself capable of indemnifying the individual for the
sacrifice it demands of him. Nor is it to be wondered at that the
loosening of moral ties between the large human units has had a
pronounced effect upon the morality of the individual, for our
conscience is not the inexorable judge that teachers of ethics say it
is; it has its origin in nothing but "social fear." Wherever the
community suspends its reproach the suppression of evil desire also
ceases, and men commit acts of cruelty, treachery, deception, and
brutality, the very possibility of which would have been considered
incompatible with their level of culture.

Thus the civilized world-citizen of whom I spoke before may find himself
helpless in a world that has grown strange to him when he sees his great
fatherland disintegrated, the possessions common to mankind destroyed,
and his fellow citizens divided and debased.

Nevertheless several things might be said in criticism of his
disappointment. Strictly speaking it is not justified, for it consists
in the destruction of an illusion. Illusions commend themselves to us
because they save us pain and allow us to enjoy pleasure instead. We
must therefore accept it without complaint when they sometimes collide
with a bit of reality against which they are dashed to pieces.

Two things have roused our disappointment in this war: the feeble
morality of states in their external relations which have inwardly acted
as guardians of moral standards, and the brutal behavior of individuals
of the highest culture of whom one would not have believed any such
thing possible.

Let us begin with the second point and try to sum up the view which we
wish to criticise in a single compact statement. Through what process
does the individual reach a higher stage of morality? The first answer
will probably be: He is really good and noble from birth, in the first
place. It is hardly necessary to give this any further consideration.
The second answer will follow the suggestion that a process of
development is involved here and will probably assume that this
development consists in eradicating the evil inclinations of man and
substituting good inclinations under the influence of education and
cultural environment. In that case we may indeed wonder that evil should
appear again so actively in persons who have been educated in this way.

But this answer also contains the theory which we wish to contradict. In
reality there is no such thing as "eradicating" evil. Psychological, or
strictly speaking, psychoanalytic investigation proves, on the contrary,
that the deepest character of man consists of impulses of an elemental
kind which are similar in all human beings, the aim of which is the
gratification of certain primitive needs. These impulses are in
themselves neither good or evil. We classify them and their
manifestations according to their relation to the needs and demands of
the human community. It is conceded that all the impulses which society
rejects as evil, such as selfishness and cruelty, are of this primitive
nature.

These primitive impulses go through a long process of development before
they can become active in the adult. They become inhibited and diverted
to other aims and fields, they unite with each other, change their
objects and in part turn against one's own person. The formation of
reactions against certain impulses give the deceptive appearance of a
change of content, as if egotism had become altruism and cruelty had
changed into sympathy. The formation of these reactions is favored by
the fact that many impulses appear almost from the beginning in
contrasting pairs; this is a remarkable state of affairs called the
ambivalence of feeling and is quite unknown to the layman. This feeling
is best observed and grasped through the fact that intense love and
intense hate occur so frequently in the same person. Psychoanalysis goes
further and states that the two contrasting feelings not infrequently
take the same person as their object.

What we call the character of a person does not really emerge until the
fate of all these impulses has been settled, and character, as we all
know, is very inadequately defined in terms of either "good" or "evil."
Man is seldom entirely good or evil, he is "good" on the whole in one
respect and "evil" in another, or "good" under certain conditions, and
decidedly "evil" under others. It is interesting to learn that the
earlier infantile existence of intense "bad" impulses is often the
necessary condition of being "good" in later life. The most pronounced
childish egotists may become the most helpful and self-sacrificing
citizens; the majority of idealists, humanitarians, and protectors of
animals have developed from little sadists and animal tormentors.

The transformation of "evil" impulses is the result of two factors
operating in the same sense, one inwardly and the other outwardly. The
inner factor consists in influencing the evil or selfish impulses
through erotic elements, the love needs of man interpreted in the widest
sense. The addition of erotic components transforms selfish impulses
into social impulses. We learn to value being loved as an advantage for
the sake of which we can renounce other advantages. The outer factor is
the force of education which represents the demands of the civilized
environment and which is then continued through the direct influence of
the cultural _milieu_.

Civilization is based upon the renunciation of impulse gratification and
in turn demands the same renunciation of impulses from every newcomer.
During the individual's life a constant change takes place from outer to
inner compulsion. The influences of civilization work through the erotic
components to bring about the transformation of more and more of the
selfish tendencies into altruistic and social tendencies. We may indeed
assume that the inner compulsion which makes itself felt in the
development of man was originally, that is, in the history of mankind,
a purely external compulsion. Today people bring along a certain
tendency (disposition) to transform the egotistic into social impulses
as a part of their hereditary organization, which then responds to
further slight incentives to complete the transformation. A part of this
transformation of impulse must also be made during life. In this way the
individual man is not only under the influence of his own contemporary
cultural _milieu_ but is also subject to the influences of his ancestral
civilization.

If we call a person's individual capacity for transforming his
egotistical impulses under the influence of love his cultural
adaptability, we can say that this consists of two parts, one congenital
and the other acquired, and we may add that the relation of these two to
each other and to the untransformed part of the emotional life is a
very variable one.

In general we are inclined to rate the congenital part too highly, and
are also in danger of over-valuing the whole cultural adaptability in
its relation to that part of the impulse life which has remained
primitive, that is, we are misled into judging people to be "better"
than they really are. For there is another factor which clouds our
judgment and falsifies the result in favor of what we are judging.

We are of course in no position to observe the impulses of another
person. We deduce them from his actions and his conduct, which we trace
back to motives springing from his emotional life. In a number of cases
such a conclusion is necessarily incorrect. The same actions which are
"good" in the civilized sense may sometimes originate in "noble"
motives and sometimes not. Students of the theory of ethics call only
those acts "good" which are the expression of good impulses and refuse
to acknowledge others as such. But society is on the whole guided by
practical aims and does not bother about this distinction; it is
satisfied if a man adapts his conduct and his actions to the precepts of
civilization and asks little about his motives.

We have heard that the outer compulsion which education and environment
exercise upon a man brings about a further transformation of his impulse
life for the good, the change from egotism to altruism. But this is not
the necessary or regular effect of the outer compulsion. Education and
environment have not only love premiums to offer but work with profit
premiums of another sort, namely rewards and punishments. They can
therefore bring it about that a person subject to their influence
decides in favor of good conduct in the civilized sense without any
ennobling of impulse or change from egotistic into altruistic
inclinations. On the whole the consequence remains the same; only
special circumstances will reveal whether the one person is always good
because his impulses compel him to be so while another person is good
only in so far as this civilized behavior is of advantage to his selfish
purposes. But our superficial knowledge of the individual gives us no
means of distinguishing the two cases, and we shall certainly be misled
by our optimism into greatly over-estimating the number of people who
have been transformed by civilization.

Civilized society, which demands good conduct and does not bother about
the impulse on which it is based, has thus won over a great many people
to civilized obedience who do not thereby follow their own natures.
Encouraged by this success, society has permitted itself to be misled
into putting the ethical demands as high as possible, thereby forcing
its members to move still further from their emotional dispositions. A
continual emotional suppression is imposed upon them, the strain of
which is indicated by the appearance of the most remarkable reactions
and compensations.

In the field of sexuality, where such suppression is most difficult to
carry out, it results in reactions known as neurotic ailments. In other
fields the pressure of civilization shows no pathological results but
manifests itself in distorted characters and in the constant readiness
of the inhibited impulses to enforce their gratification at any fitting
opportunity.

Anyone thus forced to react continually to precepts that are not the
expressions of his impulses lives, psychologically speaking, above his
means, and may be objectively described as a hypocrite, whether he is
clearly conscious of this difference or not. It is undeniable that our
contemporary civilization favors this sort of hypocrisy to an
extraordinary extent. One might even venture to assert that it is built
upon such a hypocrisy and would have to undergo extensive changes if man
were to undertake to live according to the psychological truth. There
are therefore more civilized hypocrites than truly cultured persons, and
one can even discuss the question whether a certain amount of civilized
hypocrisy is not indispensable to maintain civilization because the
already organized cultural adaptability of the man of today would
perhaps not suffice for the task of living according to the truth. On
the other hand the maintenance of civilization even on such questionable
grounds offers the prospect that with every new generation a more
extensive transformation of impulses will pave the way for a better
civilization.

These discussions have already afforded us the consolation that our
mortification and painful disappointment on account of the uncivilized
behavior of our fellow world citizens in this war were not justified.
They rested upon an illusion to which we had succumbed. In reality they
have not sunk as deeply as we feared because they never really rose as
high as we had believed. The fact that states and races abolished their
mutual ethical restrictions not unnaturally incited them to withdraw for
a time from the existing pressure of civilization and to sanction a
passing gratification of their suppressed impulses. In doing so their
relative morality within their own national life probably suffered no
rupture.

But we can still further deepen our understanding of the change which
this war has brought about in our former compatriots and at the same
time take warning not to be unjust to them. For psychic evolution shows
a peculiarity which is not found in any other process of development.
When a town becomes a city or a child grows into a man, town and child
disappear in the city and in the man. Only memory can sketch in the old
features in the new picture; in reality the old materials and forms have
been replaced by new ones. It is different in the case of psychic
evolution. One can describe this unique state of affairs only by saying
that every previous stage of development is preserved next to the
following one from which it has evolved; the succession stipulates a
co-existence although the material in which the whole series of changes
has taken place remains the same.

The earlier psychic state may not have manifested itself for years but
nevertheless continues to exist to the extent that it may some day again
become the form in which psychic forces express themselves, in fact the
only form, as though all subsequent developments had been annulled and
made regressive. This extraordinary plasticity of psychic development
is not without limits as to its direction; one can describe it as a
special capacity for retrograde action or regression, for it sometimes
happens that a later and higher stage of development that has been
abandoned cannot be attained again. But the primitive conditions can
always be reconstructed; the primitive psyche is in the strictest sense
indestructible.

The so-called mental diseases must make the impression on the layman of
mental and psychic life fallen into decay. In reality the destruction
concerns only later acquisitions and developments. The nature of mental
diseases consists in the return to former states of the affective life
and function. An excellent example of the plasticity of the psychic life
is the state of sleep, which we all court every night.

Since we know how to interpret even the maddest and most confused
dreams, we know that every time we go to sleep we throw aside our hard
won morality like a garment in order to put it on again in the morning.
This laying bare is, of course, harmless, because we are paralyzed and
condemned to inactivity by the sleeping state.

Only the dream can inform us of the regression of our emotional life to
an earlier stage of development. Thus, for instance, it is worthy of
note that all our dreams are governed by purely egotistic motives. One
of my English friends once presented this theory to a scientific meeting
in America, whereupon a lady present made the remark that this might
perhaps be true of Austrians, but she ventured to assert for herself and
her friends that even in dreams they always felt altruistically. My
friend, although himself a member of the English race, was obliged to
contradict the lady energetically on the basis of his experience in
dream analysis. The noble Americans are just as egotistic in their
dreams as the Austrians.

The transformation of impulses upon which our cultural adaptability
rests can therefore also be permanently or temporarily made regressive.
Without doubt the influences of war belong to those forces which can
create such regressions; we therefore need not deny cultural
adaptibility to all those who at present are acting in such an
uncivilized manner, and may expect that the refinement of their
impulses will continue in more peaceful times.

But there is perhaps another symptom of our fellow citizens of the world
which has caused us no less surprise and fear than this descent from
former ethical heights which has been so painful to us. I mean the lack
of insight that our greatest intellectual leaders have shown, their
obduracy, their inaccessibility to the most impressive arguments, their
uncritical credulity concerning the most contestable assertions. This
certainly presents a sad picture, and I wish expressly to emphasize that
I am by no means a blinded partisan who finds all the intellectual
mistakes on one side. But this phenomenon is more easily explained and
far less serious than the one which we have just considered. Students of
human nature and philosophers have long ago taught us that we do wrong
to value our intelligence as an independent force and to overlook its
dependence upon our emotional life. According to their view our
intellect can work reliably only when it is removed from the influence
of powerful incitements; otherwise it acts simply as an instrument at
the beck and call of our will and delivers the results which the will
demands. Logical argumentation is therefore powerless against affective
interests; that is why arguing with reasons which, according to
Falstaff, are as common as blackberries, are so fruitless where our
interests are concerned. Whenever possible psychoanalytic experience has
driven home this assertion. It is in a position to prove every day that
the cleverest people suddenly behave as unintelligently as defectives
as soon as their understanding encounters emotional resistance, but that
they regain their intelligence completely as soon as this resistance has
been overcome. This blindness to logic which this war has so frequently
conjured up in just our best fellow citizens, is therefore a secondary
phenomenon, the result of emotional excitement and destined, we hope, to
disappear simultaneously with it.

If we have thus come to a fresh understanding of our estranged fellow
citizens we can more easily bear the disappointment which nations have
caused us, for of them we must only make demands of a far more modest
nature. They are perhaps repeating the development of the individual and
at the present day still exhibit very primitive stages of development
with a correspondingly slow progress towards the formation of higher
unities. It is in keeping with this that the educational factor of an
outer compulsion to morality, which we found so active in the
individual, is barely perceptible in them. We had indeed hoped that the
wonderful community of interests established by intercourse and the
exchange of products would result in the beginning of such a compulsion,
but it seems that nations obey their passions of the moment far more
than their interests. At most they make use of their interests to
justify the gratification of their passions.

It is indeed a mystery why the individual members of nations should
disdain, hate, and abhor each other at all, even in times of peace. I do
not know why it is. It seems as if all the moral achievements of the
individual were obliterated in the case of a large number of people,
not to mention millions, until only the most primitive, oldest, and most
brutal psychic inhibitions remained.

Perhaps only later developments will succeed in changing these
lamentable conditions. But a little more truthfulness and
straightforward dealing on all sides, both in the relation of people
towards each other and between themselves and those who govern them,
might smooth the way for such a change.




II

OUR ATTITUDE TOWARDS DEATH


It remains for us to consider the second factor of which I have already
spoken which accounts for our feeling of strangeness in a world which
used to seem so beautiful and familiar to us. I refer to the disturbance
in our former attitude towards death.

Our attitude had not been a sincere one. To listen to us we were, of
course, prepared to maintain that death is the necessary termination of
life, that everyone of us owes nature his death and must be prepared to
pay his debt, in short, that death was natural, undeniable, and
inevitable. In practice we were accustomed to act as if matters were
quite different. We have shown an unmistakable tendency to put death
aside, to eliminate it from life. We attempted to hush it up, in fact,
we have the proverb: to think of something as of death. Of course we
meant our own death. We cannot, indeed, imagine our own death; whenever
we try to do so we find that we survive ourselves as spectators. The
school of psychoanalysis could thus assert that at bottom no one
believes in his own death, which amounts to saying: in the unconscious
every one of us is convinced of his immortality.

As far as the death of another person is concerned every man of culture
will studiously avoid mentioning this possibility in the presence of the
person in question. Only children ignore this restraint; they boldly
threaten each other with the possibility of death, and are quite capable
of giving expression to the thought of death in relation to the persons
they love, as, for instance: Dear Mama, when unfortunately, you are
dead, I shall do so and so. The civilized adult also likes to avoid
entertaining the thought of another's death lest he seem harsh or
unkind, unless his profession as a physician or a lawyer brings up the
question. Least of all would he permit himself to think of somebody's
death if this event is connected with a gain of freedom, wealth, or
position. Death is, of course, not deferred through our sensitiveness on
the subject, and when it occurs we are always deeply affected, as if our
expectations had been shattered. We regularly lay stress upon the
unexpected causes of death, we speak of the accident, the infection, or
advanced age, and thus betray our endeavor to debase death from a
necessity to an accident. A large number of deaths seems unspeakably
dreadful to us. We assume a special attitude towards the dead, something
almost like admiration for one who has accomplished a very difficult
feat. We suspend criticism of him, overlooking whatever wrongs he may
have done, and issue the command, _de mortuis nil nisi bene_: we act as
if we were justified in singing his praises at the funeral oration, and
inscribe only what is to his advantage on the tombstone. This
consideration for the dead, which he really no longer needs, is more
important to us than the truth and to most of us, certainly, it is more
important than consideration for the living.

This conventional attitude of civilized people towards death is made
still more striking by our complete collapse at the death of a person
closely related to us, such as a parent, a wife or husband, a brother or
sister, a child or a dear friend. We bury our hopes, our wishes, and our
desires with the dead, we are inconsolable and refuse to replace our
loss. We act in this case as if we belonged to the tribe of the Asra who
also die when those whom they love perish.[1]

But this attitude of ours towards death exerts a powerful influence upon
our lives. Life becomes impoverished and loses its interest when life
itself, the highest stake in the game of living, must not be risked. It
becomes as hollow and empty as an American flirtation in which it is
understood from the beginning that nothing is to happen, in contrast to
a continental love affair in which both partners must always bear in
mind the serious consequences. Our emotional ties, the unbearable
intensity of our grief, make us disinclined to court dangers for
ourselves and those belonging to us. We do not dare to contemplate a
number of undertakings that are dangerous but really indispensable, such
as aeroplane flights, expeditions to distant countries, and experiments
with explosive substances. We are paralyzed by the thought of who is to
replace the son to his mother, the husband to his wife, or the father to
his children, should an accident occur. A number of other renunciations
and exclusions result from this tendency to rule out death from the
calculations of life. And yet the motto of the Hanseatic League said:
_Navigare necesse est, vivere non necesse_: It is necessary to sail the
seas, but not to live.

It is therefore inevitable that we should seek compensation for the loss
of life in the world of fiction, in literature, and in the theater.
There we still find people who know how to die, who are even quite
capable of killing others. There alone the condition for reconciling
ourselves to death is fulfilled, namely, if beneath all the vicissitudes
of life a permanent life still remains to us. It is really too sad that
it may happen in life as in chess, where a false move can force us to
lose the game, but with this difference, that we cannot begin a return
match. In the realm of fiction we find the many lives in one for which
we crave. We die in identification with a certain hero and yet we
outlive him and, quite unharmed, are prepared to die again with the next
hero.

It is obvious that the war must brush aside this conventional treatment
of death. Death is no longer to be denied; we are compelled to believe
in it. People really die and no longer one by one, but in large numbers,
often ten thousand in one day. It is no longer an accident. Of course,
it still seems accidental whether a particular bullet strikes this man
or that but the survivor may easily be struck down by a second bullet,
and the accumulation of deaths ends the impression of accident. Life has
indeed become interesting again; it has once more received its full
significance.

Let us make a division here and separate those who risk their lives in
battle from those who remain at home, where they can only expect to
lose one of their loved ones through injury, illness, or infection. It
would certainly be very interesting to study the changes in the
psychology of the combatants but I know too little about this. We must
stick to the second group, to which we ourselves belong. I have already
stated that I think the confusion and paralysis of our activities from
which we are suffering is essentially determined by the fact that we
cannot retain our previous attitude towards death. Perhaps it will help
us to direct our psychological investigation to two other attitudes
towards death, one of which we may ascribe to primitive man, while the
other is still preserved, though invisible to our consciousness, in the
deeper layers of our psychic life.

The attitude of prehistoric man towards death is, of course, known to us
only through deductions and reconstructions, but I am of the opinion
that these have given us fairly trustworthy information.

Primitive man maintained a very curious attitude towards death. It is
not at all consistent but rather contradictory. On the one hand he took
death very seriously, recognized it as the termination of life, and made
use of it in this sense; but, on the other hand, he also denied death
and reduced it to nothingness. This contradiction was made possible by
the fact that he maintained a radically different position in regard to
the death of others, a stranger or an enemy, than in regard to his own.
The death of another person fitted in with his idea, it signified the
annihilation of the hated one, and primitive man had no scruples
against bringing it about. He must have been a very passionate being,
more cruel and vicious than other animals. He liked to kill and did it
as a matter of course. Nor need we attribute to him the instinct which
restrains other animals from killing and devouring their own species.

As a matter of fact the primitive history of mankind is filled with
murder. The history of the world which is still taught to our children
is essentially a series of race murders. The dimly felt sense of guilt
under which man has lived since archaic times, and which in many
religions has been condensed into the assumption of a primal guilt, a
hereditary sin, is probably the expression of a blood guilt, the burden
of which primitive man assumed. In my book entitled "Totem and Taboo,"
1913, I have followed the hints of W. Robertson Smith, Atkinson, and
Charles Darwin in the attempt to fathom the nature of this ancient
guilt, and am of the opinion that the Christian doctrine of today still
makes it possible for us to work back to its origin.[2]

If the Son of God had to sacrifice his life to absolve mankind from
original sin, then, according to the law of retaliation, the return of
like for like, this sin must have been an act of killing, a murder.
Nothing else could call for the sacrifice of a life in expiation. And if
original sin was a sin against the God Father, the oldest sin of mankind
must have been a patricide--the killing of the primal father of the
primitive human horde, whose memory picture later was transfigured into
a deity.[3]

Primitive man was as incapable of imagining and realizing his own death
as any one of us are today. But a case arose in which the two opposite
attitudes towards death clashed and came into conflict with each other,
with results that are both significant and far reaching. Such a case was
given when primitive man saw one of his own relatives die, his wife,
child, or friend, whom he certainly loved as we do ours; for love cannot
be much younger than the lust for murder. In his pain he must have
discovered that he, too, could die, an admission against which his whole
being must have revolted, for everyone of these loved ones was a part of
his own beloved self. On the other hand again, every such death was
satisfactory to him, for there was also something foreign in each one of
these persons. The law of emotional ambivalence, which today still
governs our emotional relations to those whom we love, certainly
obtained far more widely in primitive times. The beloved dead had
nevertheless roused some hostile feelings in primitive man just because
they had been both friends and enemies.

Philosophers have maintained that the intellectual puzzle which the
picture of death presented to primitive man forced him to reflect and
became the starting point of every speculation. I believe the
philosophers here think too philosophically, they give too little
consideration to the primary effective motive. I should therefore like
to correct and limit the above assertion; primitive man probably
triumphed at the side of the corpse of the slain enemy, without finding
any occasion to puzzle his head about the riddle of life and death. It
was not the intellectual puzzle or any particular death which roused the
spirit of inquiry in man, but the conflict of emotions at the death of
beloved and withal foreign and hated persons.

From this emotional conflict psychology arose. Man could no longer keep
death away from him, for he had tasted of it in his grief for the
deceased, but he did not want to acknowledge it, since he could not
imagine himself dead. He therefore formed a compromise and concealed his
own death but denied it the significance of destroying life, a
distinction for which the death of his enemies had given him no motive.
He invented spirits during his contemplation of the corpse of the
person he loved, and his consciousness of guilt over the gratification
which mingled with his grief brought it about that these first created
spirits were transformed into evil demons who were to be feared. The
changes wrought by death suggested to him to divide the individual into
body and soul, at first several souls, and in this way his train of
thought paralleled the disintegration process inaugurated by death. The
continued remembrance of the dead became the basis of the assumption of
other forms of existence and gave him the idea of a future life after
apparent death.

These later forms of existence were at first only vaguely associated
appendages to those whom death had cut off, and enjoyed only slight
esteem until much later times; they still betrayed a very meagre
knowledge. The reply which the soul of Achilles made to Odysseus comes
to our mind:

    Erst in the life on the earth, no less than a god we revered thee,
    We the Achaeans; and now in the realm of the dead as a monarch
    Here thou dost rule; then why should death thus grieve thee, Achilles?
    Thus did I speak: forthwith then answering thus he addressed me.
    Speak not smoothly of death, I beseech, O famous Odysseus,
    Better by far to remain on the earth as the thrall of another,
    E'en of a portionless man that hath means right scanty of living,
    Rather than reign sole king in the realm of the bodiless phantoms.

                     Odysseus XI, verse 484-491
                       Translated by H. B. Coterill.

Heine has rendered this in a forcible and bitter parody:

    The smallest living philistine,
    At Stuckert on the Neckar
    Is much happier than I am,
    Son of Pelleus, the dead hero,
    Shadowy ruler of the Underworld.

It was much later before religions managed to declare this after-life as
the more valuable and perfect and to debase our mortal life to a mere
preparation for the life to come. It was then only logical to prolong
our existence into the past and to invent former existences,
transmigrations of souls, and reincarnations, all with the object of
depriving death of its meaning as the termination of life. It was as
early as this that the denial of death, which we described as the
product of conventional culture, originated.

Contemplation of the corpse of the person loved gave birth not only to
the theory of the soul, the belief in immortality, and implanted the
deep roots of the human sense of guilt, but it also created the first
ethical laws. The first and most important prohibition of the awakening
conscience declared: Thou shalt not kill. This arose as a reaction
against the gratification of hate for the beloved dead which is
concealed behind grief, and was gradually extended to the unloved
stranger and finally also to the enemy.

Civilized man no longer feels this way in regard to killing enemies.
When the fierce struggle of this war will have reached a decision every
victorious warrior will joyfully and without delay return home to his
wife and children, undisturbed by thoughts of the enemy he has killed
either at close quarters or with weapons operating at a distance.

It is worthy of note that the primitive races which still inhabit the
earth and who are certainly closer to primitive man than we, act
differently in this respect, or have so acted as long as they did not
yet feel the influence of our civilization. The savage, such as the
Australian, the Bushman, or the inhabitant of Terra del Fuego, is by no
means a remorseless murderer; when he returns home as victor from the
war path he is not allowed to enter his village or touch his wife until
he has expiated his war murders through lengthy and often painful
penances. The explanation for this is, of course, related to his
superstition; the savage fears the avenging spirit of the slain. But the
spirits of the fallen enemy are nothing but the expression of his evil
conscience over his blood guilt; behind this superstition there lies
concealed a bit of ethical delicacy of feeling which has been lost to
us civilized beings.[4]

Pious souls, who would like to think us removed from contact with what
is evil and mean, will surely not fail to draw satisfactory conclusions
in regard to the strength of the ethical impulses which have been
implanted in us from these early and forcible murder prohibitions.
Unfortunately this argument proves even more for the opposite
contention.

Such a powerful inhibition can only be directed against an equally
strong impulse. What no human being desires to do does not have to be
forbidden, it is self-exclusive. The very emphasis of the commandment:
Thou shalt not kill, makes it certain that we are descended from an
endlessly long chain of generations of murderers, whose love of murder
was in their blood as it is perhaps also in ours. The ethical strivings
of mankind, with the strength and significance of which we need not
quarrel, are an acquisition of the history of man; they have since
become, though unfortunately in very variable quantities, the hereditary
possessions of people of today.

Let us now leave primitive man and turn to the unconscious in our
psyche. Here we depend entirely upon psychoanalytic investigation, the
only method which reaches such depths. The question is what is the
attitude of our unconscious towards death. In answer we say that it is
almost like that of primitive man. In this respect, as well as in many
others, the man of prehistoric times lives on, unchanged, in our
conscious.

Our unconscious therefore does not believe in its own death; it acts as
though it were immortal. What we call our unconscious, those deepest
layers in our psyche which consist of impulses, recognizes no negative
or any form of denial and resolves all contradictions, so that it does
not acknowledge its own death, to which we can give only a negative
content. The idea of death finds absolutely no acceptance in our
impulses. This is perhaps the real secret of heroism. The rational basis
of heroism is dependent upon the decision that one's own life cannot be
worth as much as certain abstract common ideals. But I believe that
instinctive or impulsive heroism is much more frequently independent of
such motivation and simply defies danger on the assurance which
animated Hans, the stone-cutter, a character in Anzengruber, who always
said to himself: Nothing can happen to me. Or that motivation only
serves to clear away the hesitations which might restrain the
corresponding heroic reaction in the unconscious. The fear of death,
which controls us more frequently than we are aware, is comparatively
secondary and is usually the outcome of the consciousness of guilt.

On the other hand we recognize the death of strangers and of enemies and
sentence them to it just as willingly and unhesitatingly as primitive
man. Here there is indeed a distinction which becomes decisive in
practice. Our unconscious does not carry out the killing, it only thinks
and wishes it. But it would be wrong to underestimate the psychic
reality so completely in comparison to the practical reality. It is
really important and full of serious consequences.

In our unconscious we daily and hourly do away with all those who stand
in our way, all those who have insulted or harmed us. The expression:
"The devil take him," which so frequently crosses our lips in the form
of an ill-humored jest, but by which we really intend to say, "Death
take him," is a serious and forceful death wish in our unconscious.
Indeed our unconscious murders even for trifles; like the old Athenian
law of Draco, it knows no other punishment for crime than death, and
this not without a certain consistency, for every injury done to our
all-mighty and self-glorifying self is at bottom a _crimen laesae
majestatis_.

Thus, if we are to be judged by our unconscious wishes, we ourselves
are nothing but a band of murderers, just like primitive man. It is
lucky that all wishes do not possess the power which people of primitive
times attributed to them.[5] For in the cross fire of mutual
maledictions mankind would have perished long ago, not excepting the
best and wisest of men as well as the most beautiful and charming women.

As a rule the layman refuses to believe these theories of
psychoanalysis. They are rejected as calumnies which can be ignored in
the face of the assurances of consciousness, while the few signs through
which the unconscious betrays itself to consciousness are cleverly
overlooked. It is therefore in place here to point out that many
thinkers who could not possibly have been influenced by psychoanalysis
have very clearly accused our silent thought of a readiness to ignore
the murder prohibition in order to clear away what stands in our path.
Instead of quoting many examples I have chosen one which is very famous.
In his novel, _Pere Goriot_, Balzac refers to a place in the works of J.
J. Rousseau where this author asks the reader what he would do if,
without leaving Paris and, of course, without being discovered, he could
kill an old mandarin in Peking, with great profit to himself, by a mere
act of the will. He makes it possible for us to guess that he does not
consider the life of this dignitary very secure. "To kill your mandarin"
has become proverbial for this secret readiness to kill, even on the
part of people of today.

There are also a number of cynical jokes and anecdotes which bear
witness to the same effect, such as the remark attributed to the
husband: "If one of us dies I shall move to Paris." Such cynical jokes
would not be possible if they did not have an unavowed truth to reveal
which we cannot admit when it is baldly and seriously stated. It is well
known that one may even speak the truth in jest.

A case arises for our consciousness, just as it did for primitive man,
in which the two opposite attitudes towards death, one of which
acknowledges it as the destroyer of life, while the other denies the
reality of death, clash and come into conflict. The case is identical
for both, it consists of the death of one of our loved ones, of a parent
or a partner in wedlock, of a brother or a sister, of a child or a
friend. These persons we love are on the one hand a part of our inner
possessions and a constituent of our own selves, but on the other hand
they are also in part strangers and even enemies. Except in a few
instances, even the tenderest and closest love relations also contain a
bit of hostility which can rouse an unconscious death wish. But at the
present day this ambivalent conflict no longer results in the
development of ethics and soul theories, but in neuroses which also
gives us a profound insight into the normal psychic life. Doctors who
practice psychoanalysis have frequently had to deal with the symptom of
over tender care for the welfare of relatives or with wholly unfounded
self reproaches after the death of a beloved person. The study of these
cases has left them in no doubt as to the significance of unconscious
death wishes.

The layman feels an extraordinary horror at the possibility of such an
emotion and takes his aversion to it as a legitimate ground for
disbelief in the assertions of psychoanalysis. I think he is wrong
there. No debasing of our love life is intended and none such has
resulted. It is indeed foreign to our comprehension as well as to our
feelings to unite love and hate in this manner, but in so far as nature
employs these contrasts she brings it about that love is always kept
alive and fresh in order to safeguard it against the hate that is
lurking behind it. It may be said that we owe the most beautiful
unfolding of our love life to the reaction against this hostile impulse
which we feel in our hearts.

Let us sum up what we have said. Our unconscious is just as inaccessible
to the conception of our own death, just as much inclined to kill the
stranger, and just as divided, or ambivalent towards the persons we love
as was primitive man. But how far we are removed from this primitive
state in our conventionally civilized attitude towards death!

It is easy to see how war enters into this disunity. War strips off the
later deposits of civilization and allows the primitive man in us to
reappear. It forces us again to be heroes who cannot believe in their
own death, it stamps all strangers as enemies whose death we ought to
cause or wish; it counsels us to rise above the death of those whom we
love. But war cannot be abolished; as long as the conditions of
existence among races are so varied and the repulsions between them are
so vehement, there will have to be wars. The question then arises
whether we shall be the ones to yield and adapt ourselves to it. Shall
we not admit that in our civilized attitude towards death we have again
lived psychologically beyond our means? Shall we not turn around and
avow the truth? Were it not better to give death the place to which it
is entitled both in reality and in our thoughts and to reveal a little
more of our unconscious attitude towards death which up to now we have
so carefully suppressed? This may not appear a very high achievement and
in some respects rather a step backwards, a kind of regression, but at
least it has the advantage of taking the truth into account a little
more and of making life more bearable again. To bear life remains, after
all, the first duty of the living. The illusion becomes worthless if it
disturbs us in this.

We remember the old saying:

            _Si vis pacem, para bellum._
    If you wish peace, prepare for war.

The times call for a paraphrase:

           _Si vis vitam, para mortem._
    If you wish life, prepare for death.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Compare Heine's poem, "Der Asra," Louis Untermeyer's translation, p.
269, Henry Holt & Co., 1917.

[2] Totem and Taboo, translated by Dr. A. A. Brill, Moffat, Yard & Co.,
1918.

[3] Totem and Taboo, Chapter IV.

[4] Totem and Taboo, Chapter IV.

[5] See Totem and Taboo, Chapter III.






End of Project Gutenberg's Reflections on War and Death, by Sigmund Freud

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REFLECTIONS ON WAR AND DEATH ***

***** This file should be named 35875.txt or 35875.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/8/7/35875/

Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from scanned images of public domain material
from the Google Print project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
