                           The Great Captain


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost
no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license.

Title: The Great Captain: A Story of the Days of Sir Walter Raleigh

Author: Katharine Tynan Hinkson

Release Date: April 17, 2011 [EBook #35896]

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT CAPTAIN: A STORY OF
THE DAYS OF SIR WALTER RALEIGH ***




Produced by Katherine Ward and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
at http://www.pgdp.net.

This file was produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.


                          _THE GREAT CAPTAIN._




              _A STORY OF THE DAYS OF SIR WALTER RALEIGH._






                                   BY
                        KATHARINE TYNAN HINKSON,




    _Author of "The Golden Lily," "The Queen's Page," "Her Father's
                            Daughter," etc._




                    _New York, Cincinnati, Chicago_:
                           BENZIGER BROTHERS,
                  _Publishers of Benziger's Magazine_


                Copyright, 1902, by _Benziger Brothers_.

                Printed in the United States of America



[Illustration: _"While I stood stammering and staring a lean finger was
pointed at me." (See page 24.)_]




CONTENTS.


  - I.--Of Myself, that Great Captain Sir Walter Raleigh, and how I
    became his Leal Man ............................................   7

  - II.--The Apparition of the Monk ................................  21

  - III.--Of My Secret, the Lord Boyle, and Other Matters ..........  37

  - IV.--The Dead Hand .............................................  52

  - V.--Of a Strait Place and a Quiet Time .........................  67

  - VI.--The Treasure-ship .........................................  83

  - VII.--Our Last Years Together ..................................  99

  - VIII.--An Unravelled Thread .................................... 113





CHAPTER I.--OF MYSELF, THAT GREAT CAPTAIN SIR WALTER RALEIGH, AND OF HOW
I BECAME HIS LEAL MAN.


I never knew my father and mother, having been born into a time like
that of the great desolation foretold by the Scriptures. They were the
days of what I have heard called the Rebellion of the Desmonds, when
that great league was made against the power of Eliza, the English
Queen, by the Irish princes, which went down in a red sunset of death
and blood. Indeed I myself had starved, like other innocents, on the
breasts of their dead mothers, had it not been for the pity of him I
must ever regard as the greatest of Englishmen, albeit no friend, but
rather the spoiler, of those of my blood and faith.

It was indeed while the end was not yet quite determined, for although
Sir James Desmond, the wisest and most skilled of their generals in the
art of war, was dead, there was yet the Seneschal of Imokilly and other
Geraldine lords fighting for their inheritance and their country. It was
on a day when Sir Walter Raleigh with a handful of troopers was
returning from a visit to the Lord Deputy at Dublin that he found me. He
had expected no ambush, and rode slowly, being fatigued by his journey,
through the great woods to the Ford of the Kine. Now the woods covered
many dead and dying, and as the Captain rode at the head of his men I
came running from the undergrowth, a lusty and fearless lad of three,
and held up my hands to the foremost rider. I had as like as not been
spitted on a trooper's sword but that the Captain himself, leaning from
his horse, swung me to his saddle-bow.

He had perhaps a thought of his own little Wat, by his mother's knee in
an English pleasaunce, for, as I have heard since, he talked with me and
provoked me to confidence. Nor was I slow to answer all he asked, being
a bright and bold child, which perhaps was the saving of me, since I
flung an arm round the great Captain's steel-clad neck, and perched by
him as bold as any robin that is housed in the frost.

But as we rode along in the summer evening, fearing no danger, though
danger there was, for my lord the Seneschal of Imokilly had word of our
coming, and as we forded the river was upon us from the further bank
with his kerns, three times our number. But the Captain rode at them
with his sword drawn, slashing hither and thither, and sorely I must
have hampered him, and much marvel it was that he did not loose me into
the stream. But that he held me shows what manner of man he was, that
being fierce and violent in battle he yet was of so rare magnanimity.
Little lad as I was then, I remember to this day the cold of his steel
and silver breastplate against my cheek.

And when he had hewed his way through them and was on the further bank
in safety, he looked back and saw one of his men, Jan Kneebone by name,
dismounted in the stream and in peril. Then, setting me down gently, he
rode back into deep water to his man's deliverance, and having slain two
kerns who had him in jeopardy he flung him upon his saddle-bow and rode
with him again up the steep bank. It was a great feat of arms, and might
well have cost the English this most splendid soldier; yet I have heard
Sir Walter say that the Desmond Lord of Imokilly might have slain him
had he willed it. "And think not, little Wat," he said to me years
after, speaking upon that day, "that chivalry departed from the world
with the glorious pagan, Saladin; for in many places I have found it,
nor least in this wild country of thine; and it is an exceeding good
thing," he added, "that men will forget their passions amid the heat of
battle, and will remember only that the enemy they fight against is
brave."

Wat, he called me from himself, because he loved me, and after his
little son. Indeed, he seemed in time to love me as fondly as any
father; and while I was yet a little one and learning from him swordplay
and fence, horsemanship, and other manly arts, I began to understand
that amid all his splendor he carried sadness beneath it, and was a
banished man. He had lost the Queen's favor--not because he had enemies
at court, for Eliza was not one to be misled by rumors or cunning, but
because he had clasped around the white neck of Mistress Throckmorton, a
dame of honor, the milky carcanet of pearls the Queen's vanity desired
to adorn her leanness, which in time the Queen might have forgiven, if
he had not privily married the same Mistress Throckmorton; for she would
have but one moon in the sky, and she liked not the gallantest man of
her kingdom to be her dame's satellite. So he was become a soldier of
fortune, and since he might not have his lady or his little son with him
in these wild times, they abode in his quiet English Manor-house, while
his sword slashed a way to fortune for them through the inheritance of
the great, unhappy Desmonds.

In later years, when I had become well acquainted with the character of
my lord, it hath seemed to me that he was not one for marriage; for
danger was his love, and he was homesick away from her smile. And yet no
more tender lord than he to the Lady Elizabeth might be found, and he
loved his little Walter greatly.

But presently, the war being ended and the last Desmond Earl slain by a
traitor in a cabin in the mountains, my lord sailed away from the harbor
of Youghall to London, to the end that he might win permission for
another expedition in search of treasure, and so regain the Queen's
favor. By this time I was a tall lad, and was fain to go with my lord,
but this he would by no manner of means permit. I hated so to live my
life without him, even for a time, that I had thought of hiding myself
aboard his ship, the Bon Aventure, but the fear which I had of him
besides my love held me back. I had never seen him angry with me, and I
prayed that I never should, so I heard him in silence when he bade me
stay. Taking me aside then, he said to me, lovingly:

"I wrong you not, Wat, because I go without you, for Queen's favor is
vain, and it may be I go to Traitor's Gate. You are no meat for the
Tower, lad."

Then I cried out that if he went to the Tower I should go with him; at
which he seemed pleased, patting my shoulder with great gentleness.

"It may be," he said, "that I return again to this Irish exile I weary
of. Or, in the greatest event of all, I shall fit out a fleet for the
Spanish Main, and make the Dons stand and deliver. That would be
happiest for us, boy, for indeed I make but a bad port-sailor."

"You sail in the Bon Aventure," I said; "it is of good omen."

"It is indeed," he replied, "and I thank you for reminding me of it."

He looked out to sea, where the English leopards flapped at the wind's
will on the mast of his ship, and I think I never saw such a longing in
a man's eyes: so great was it that my heart bled for him. I had thought
perhaps that he longed so much to see the Lady Elizabeth and his boy.
But he spoke, and I knew he was thinking of the free life of the rovers
of the sea, not of that lady whom he so tenderly loved.

"If we prosper," he said, "we shall sail for Guiana, and found there,
who knows, another Virginia. The spoil of half a dozen fat galleons and
a new country. These are things that even Gloriana need not disdain. Yet
Essex hath all her ear, and Essex is mine enemy."

"If you succeed, my lord--" I began.

"If I succeed I shall send for you. If I am sent to the Tower there are
certain matters concerning you to which Master Richard Boyle is privy,
and which he will impart to you. But it may be I shall be sent back to
rot here; if so, there is nothing more to be said."

So on a certain day of lusty summer my lord sailed away in the Bon
Aventure, with Master Edmund Spenser, whose company had so greatly
lightened his exile. The same carried with him two books of his poem,
_The Faery Queen_, which he designed to have printed in London. He was
bound to return, whether my lord came or not, for he had left at his
Castle of Kilcohnour his lady whom he had married at Cork, and his young
son. The same lady he made famous forever by the most beautiful of
marriage-songs, which thing I had come to know, young as I was, for my
lord would have me a scholar as well as a soldier, and I was become a
very excellent scribe, so that the fair copying of Master Spenser's
poems came to me.

I remember my last glimpse of them ere the Bon Aventure sunk over the
rim of ocean, and evening seemed all at once to settle on the world. My
lord was wearing a suit of black velvet over white, very finely
embroidered with seed-pearls. The plume of his hat was held in its place
by a clasp of diamonds. Beside him Master Spenser, in his black, looked
over-grave. But when did Sir Walter--whom I call here "my lord" out of
the love and loyalty I bore him--fail to shine before all the world by
the splendor of his apparel as well as by his manly beauty and the
greatness of his deeds?

After they had gone, set in the endless dusk of summer evening, I grew
tired of wandering about the gardens, so strange and sad without their
master. So I went within doors, where some one had set a starveling
rushlight in the chamber that was my lord's dining-hall, and there I sat
me down with my Latin grammar and the Virgil my lord had given me. At
this time I sat daily on the wooden benches of the College School at
Youghall, and had my learning of an old clerk Sir Walter had summoned
here from Devonshire to take the place of the doctors and singing-men
who had gone with the Desmonds. But my heart was heavy, and my head, and
I had pushed away from me untasted the supper a serving-wench had
carried to me.

Now all was very still in the house, so that the tap-tapping of a twig
by the window-pane seemed to me a little frightful, although I was a boy
of spirit. Outside was the black of an early summer night before the
moon has risen, and going to the window upon the tapping I could see no
star for the myrtle boughs. Yet sure I was that were I outside the
purple would be pierced by innumerable eyes of light, and I was greatly
tempted to return to the garden. Indeed, out in the night there would be
companionship, although every bird slept well within the boughs. It is
the houses men build that breed these phantoms of the brain, and not the
free air. But disregarding the temptation I went back to my book,
knowing full well the pleasure it would give my lord to learn that I had
been diligent in his absence. Wonderful it was that he was hardly less
in love with learning than with adventure. Indeed a man of such parts
was this knight and master of mine that there seemed to be nothing
admirable in which he did not excel. And if I am blind to his faults,
even to this day when I repent me of certain share of mine in his
adventures, let that be forgiven me, for surely I owed him all love and
loyalty.

As the night went I heard the scullions who had been disporting
themselves in the town return one by one, and the bolting and barring of
doors. The songs of the sailors which came up from the shipping in the
bay fell off and ceased. Silence fell on the town, a silence as unbroken
as that of the sleepers yon in St. Mary's yard, and presently drowsiness
overcoming me I too slept.




CHAPTER II.--THE APPARITION OF THE MONK.


The room in which I had studied and now slept was that to the right hand
as you entered the door of the Manor-house. It was lined stoutly with
oak, and it was dark because, though it had two fair windows, they were
much obscured by the myrtles my lord had planted, which had thriven
exceedingly in this mild air.

This room, as I have said, my lord used for a dining-hall. Else when he
was within doors he sat in the oriel of the pleasant room overhead; and
it was there that he and Master Spenser would sit and smoke or be
silent; and there, which is not to be forgotten, Sir Walter listened to
_The Faery Queen_.

For some reason or another this dining-hall, despite its purpose, seemed
a place of little cheer. The Manor-house had belonged to the warden of
the college, and owed its construction to him; and it was built after
the English manner, which need not be surprising, since the progenitors
of those church and abbey builders, the Munster Geraldines, were of
English blood and race. Not only was the dining-hall in itself low and
somewhat forbidding of aspect, but it smelt of earth and new graves, for
all the generous wine and meats that had been consumed within it. The
cause of the same my lord had never been able to determine, and it
stayed, although the chimney roared with logs of ships' timber, and the
brightness, the good cheer, the wit and gayety that met there were
enough to scare away any thought of death or the earth that shall
receive us.

I slept, I have said, and while I slept the moon had arisen. The low
light of it filled the chamber when I awoke with a start, smelling the
graves, and feeling very cold. On the myrtle tree without an owl hooted.
The rushlight had gone out, but this I hardly knew, only that an earthy
wind, smelling of damp and mildews, blew about my face, and I was stiff
from lying asleep upon my book.

But this I noticed vaguely, for as soon as my eyes were well open a
strange appearance in the room drew my gaze upon it. I was by this time
a stout lad of some sixteen years, and accustomed to fear nothing, yet I
will confess that the hair of my head stood up. The figure of a monk was
in the further corner from me. I knew it to be a monk, because of the
effigies, images, and portraits in St. Mary's Church and the library of
the college. Further, I knew the apparition to be of a white friar. The
cowl was over the face; the head was bent; a fold of white cloth hid the
hands. The stature of the monk was exceedingly tall, and of a great
leanness, as I could see where the belt of brown leather clasped the
white gown about the middle.

All this I saw clearly by the light of the moon, or was it by some
unearthly light of which the figure stood the centre? I know not, only
that I saw everything clear: and still the odor of graves was in my
nostrils.

While I stood stammering and staring a lean finger was pointed at me, so
lean that I know not if flesh covered it, or if it were the fleshless
finger of a skeleton. A voice, hollow and strange, came forth of the
cowl.

"Son of the Geraldines," it said, "why art thou here among their
murderers and despoilers?"

The voice constrained me to answer.

"Alas," I said, "I know not what you mean. I am a nameless boy, a dead
leaf drifted in the forests. Why do you call me a son of the Geraldines,
unless it be that I come of the humblest of the clan?"

"You are no kern's son, Walter Fitzmaurice, but of a noble house. How is
it that you eat the bread and run at the stirrups of the Sassenach who
is the destroyer of your race?"

I stretched my hands imploringly to the cowled figure.

"He rescued me from death," I cried; "he warmed me with his love. He has
taught me all a noble youth should know."

"You love him?"

"I love him."

"Listen, boy. They think they have destroyed the Desmonds, root and
branch, as a man might tread out under his heel a nest of vipers. Yet
hope is not dead. The line of the Geraldines is not destroyed. Return to
your own people and leave this evil knight."

"Alas, I cannot," I said, "for I love him."

"The blood of your kin is red on his hands."

"And yet I love him."

"He and his freebooters have wasted the country that was the portion of
your fathers. Whom he spared to slay famine and pestilence have slain."

"I should have died of the hunger," said I, "had he not delivered me."

"And you will follow him?"

"I will follow him."

"Wherever he goes?"

"To death."

"To death and evil. Very well, Walter Fitzmaurice, of the race of
Desmond, then your kindred's blood be on your hands, as they are on
those for which you have held basin and ewer that they might wash. Water
will not wash them clean, nor yours that share in the stain. He shall
die by violence as he has slain many another--and as for you, what
penance, what fast and prayer shall suffice to wipe out your sin? You
have chosen, Walter Fitzmaurice Fitzgerald. Take care that you have not
chosen forever."

The voice rose in a shriek of menace, and I caught sight of burning eyes
under the cowl. Suddenly through the hooting of the owl in the myrtles
there rang, shrilly as a trumpet, the crowing of a cock. The wind from
the grave rose in my nostrils and filled me with a great terror. I
turned giddy and swayed hither and thither, and the room went up and
down under my feet.

The next thing I knew was that the sun was in the room, and I was lying
with my cheek on the open page of the Virgil. Nothing was changed in the
room since last night, except only that the rushlight had dwindled to a
pool of cold fat; but how long it had been out I could not gauge.

Slowly the happenings of the night came back to me; but now in the warm
daylight who thought on ghosts and goblins, or was afraid of them if
they came? Where the owl had hooted over night a blackbird was singing,
bold and bright. The lawn of the Manor-house was under dew. As I looked
a peacock spread his tail in the sun, and his more sober mate stood to
admire him.

Sitting there I rubbed my eyes. Why, I had awakened just as I had fallen
asleep, worn out with the sorrow of loneliness, and the trial to fix my
discontented thoughts upon my book. I stood up and caught sight of
myself in a mirror. Then I realized that it is ill to sleep
full-dressed. I was pale, and my hair strayed in disorder. My doublet
looked as if I had had the habit to sleep in it, and my cloak was awry.
I had been no sight to please my lord, who loved daintiness, and
observed it himself in the strangest circumstances.

I would down to the Port-side and bathe in the morning waters. But ere I
did that, remembering the dream or vision of the night, I went towards
that place where I had seen the monk and carefully examined the same.
But nothing there was to give me clue. The room was stoutly panelled
with oak, every panel as like to his brother as two peas. Yet in that
corner of the room there was one thing that made me linger, for the
smell of earth, it seemed to me, was there stronger than elsewhere.

I sniffed and smelt like a terrier after a mouse; but sniff and smell as
I might found nothing. I was no stranger to sliding panels and the like,
at least by hearsay, but press and push as I might nothing came of it,
so that at last I was fain to desist.

As I made my way to the water-side in the glorious morning my thoughts
were full of the night's encounter. If it had been no dream but a true
happening I did not doubt now, with the sun risen, that the monk was no
ghost but a living man, albeit a spare one, for I recalled his lean
finger, and the burning eyes set in the hollow cheeks. His words had
been verily human, not ghostly at all: and had I been minded to leave my
great lord whom I loved, had he not been ready to bear me away with him?
Either the thing was a fantasy of a dream, every part of it exceedingly
sensible, and one part following another as I have not known it in
dreams, or else it were true, and he a living man who had stood before
me last night.

One thought made my heart leap up with a sharp throb of pleasure. The
monk had said I was noble--I, who had come from none knew where, a
nameless youth and treated courteously only because I was dear to my
lord, and myself very sharp in a quarrel and adroit in the practice of
arms.

After I had bathed and lain to dry in the sun I returned back hungry as
a hawk. In the blessed sun all was different from last night. My lord
would return, and would bear me away to court, and presently we should
have letters of marque, and should go sailing on the Spanish Main in
search of good fighting, salted with doubloons and pieces of eight; and
presently should make for the Treasure Islands, and find there, as I
imagined, jewels as large as plums, and gold and silver in great
portions. For I had read Maundeville and other travellers, and had
magnified in my credulity even the marvels they had told. I knew, too,
that my lord had brought home to the Queen's Majesty a necklace of
pearls whereof each stone was larger than a cherry. And we had heard of
Guiana that the very sands of the seashore sparkled with gold and
silver, and that in the workings the old inhabitants thereof had made,
that they might build their heathen temples, the walls were of gold,
while the idols were crusted with jewels so that no man might look on
them without winking.

So much in the sunlight. And yet again I had a cause for joy and pride
because the monk had declared me noble. How to prove it I knew not, but
resolved that when my lord was come hither again I would tell him all,
and he would somehow unriddle me the secret and I should be no longer
nameless.

My breakfast I had beneath the shade of Sir Walter's myrtles, where he
had made his favorite seat. It was brought thither by that good Sukey
who had nearly drowned my lord the first time she beheld him smoking
that weed called tobacco, which he had brought from his settlement in
Virginia. For she conceived him to be on fire, and half-drowned him that
she might put him out. I had my white manchet and roast beef and flagon
of ale, and had a fine hunger for it after my morning swim.

But when it had all vanished I strolled away to the stable-yard, where
Gregory Dabchick rubbed down one of my lord's horses, and hissed between
his teeth as is the manner of ostlers in the doing. He was a
shock-headed fellow, of slow wits, but honest, and loved my lord.

"It be lonely, Master Wat," he said, "since the master be gone."

"Gregory Dabchick," said I, "you were of Sir Walter's following the day
the Seneschal of Imokilly set upon him at the Ford of the Kine."

"Ay," he said, grinning, "and Jan was spilt in the water. He got up
dripping like a fish, and when the Captain haled him to dry land, and he
would mount his beast he overleapt him and a good horse galloped into
the forest and so became the goods of the Irishry. I wish," he added,
"that Margery May, at home in pleasant Devon, might have looked on Jan
then."

"I have nothing to do with your jealousies," I said, as haughty as
though I were my lord's son. "But tell me, Gregory, do you remember me
that day?"

"A brown babby, as fat as ever I see," Gregory answered, still rubbing
down his horse. "And as near being spitted by Dan'l Drewe as ever I wish
to see. I never liked that work myself, killing o' babes and sucklings,
and fair women, or leaving the babe to die on its mother's breast.
'Twere lucky for you, Master Wat, them that starved in the forest did
not eat you, ere ever you came the way o' Dan'l's mercy. Eh, what a fat
one you were!"

"But a comely, Gregory?" I asked anxiously. "A noble child? Was I that?
And clad in silk and fine woollen, as became my condition?"

"Why, no, Master Walter, but a fat, brown babe; eh, so fat! And nought
but rabbit-skins to cover you. You had been good eating for them in the
forest."

"You are rude and dull, Gregory," said I, leaving him in dudgeon. As I
looked back I saw that he had come to the stable door and stood watching
me with a gaping mouth. Plainly there was nothing to be learned from
Gregory Dabchick.




CHAPTER III.--OF MY SECRET, THE LORD BOYLE, AND OTHER MATTERS.


In the autumn of that year my lord came back, and in my joy at seeing
him again I hardly felt that he was sad. The Lord Essex had prevailed
against him with the Queen and he was returned to exile, although one of
his ships had brought in a Spanish galleon worth fifty thousand pounds.
It must be remembered of him that his passion for discovering the
unknown worlds swallowed up all the treasure he was able to discover; so
that the sea was never without his ships, and one expedition but led to
another.

Had he been differently framed this season at Youghall had been happy
enough. For now there was no fighting to be done he led that quiet and
pastoral life which might have won him Master Spenser's title for him,
_The Shepherd of the Ocean_. He delighted himself by planting the
strange seeds and roots he had brought from the ends of the earth and
seeing them thrive. All his garden ventures were fortunate. The kindly
Irish soil suited well with the tobacco, the myrtle, and the fuchsia. At
Affane, a little way up the Blackwater, he had his orchards, where
already the cherry grew abundantly. There, also, on sunny banks, he
sowed in long rows a strange fruit called the potato, whereof the fruit
is in the earth, and the leaves above it, and a very pleasant fruit to
eat when well boiled, being of a sweet flouriness within.

Another fruit from the Indies which he planted at Affane was called the
tomato--a great, smooth-skinned, scarlet fruit, over-heavy for its
branches, and of a strange half-sour flavor, which yet grew on one in
the eating. Another seed brought him by his captains was that of the
clove-gilly-flower, or wall-flower, a most sweet-smelling plant; and the
cedar also he planted.

He was as much set upon gardens as upon adventure and the search for new
countries. Those of his captains who had returned had brought with them
charts of the lands in which they had sailed, together with long reports
concerning the inhabitants, their manner of living, their food and
pursuits, the beasts and birds, the plants and ore, and all such
matters; over which my lord would sit and pore in the long winter
evenings, by the fire of driftwood, and smoking his long pipe. And
sometimes he would talk with Master Spenser concerning them; but more
often their talk ran on poetry and the arts. Master Spenser was working
at the later books of _The Faery Queen_, and had written also a very
pretty pastoral entitled _Colin Clout's Come Home Again_. Nor was my
lord's admirable pen silent. I went to and fro almost as a son; and I
can see my lord now in some gallant apparel, for he knew not what it was
to be slovenly, leaning back in his great chair, and reading from the
manuscript in his hand that lament he made for the death of the
stainless knight, Sir Philip Sidney, slain then at the battle of
Zutphen:

    England does hold thy limbs that bred the same;
    Flanders thy valour where it last was tried;
    The camp thy sorrow where thy body died;
    Thy friends thy want; the world thy virtue's fame.

Alas, if but Sir Walter had been content to be poet and gardener; but
whereas the one part of him was content the other tugged at his
heart-strings so that he was not happy. In gardening he had no rivals
except the Dutch, that great little republic of the water, since as
famous as England herself for great battles and adventures by sea.

Now, quiet as the time was, and I was often alone with my lord, it was
long before I found courage to speak to him of my birth. I know not why
I was so wary in approaching it, but somewhere in my heart I had a
warning that it would be unwelcome matter to him; so that often the
words rose to my lips and fell silent before I could say them. It was
indeed close upon a year from the time I had seen the monk that at last
I dared to touch upon the subject. It was one evening when we had been
gardening together, and tired after that pleasant toil we sat beneath
the myrtle trees. My lord's brow for a little while was unfurrowed with
care, and his eagle eyes looked at me softened through the mists of his
smoke.

"My lord--" I began, and then could go no further.

"What is it, Wat?" he asked kindly.

"My lord, I am troubled about the question of my birth. To be nameless
where every one hath a name is no light matter to bear."

"Hath any one reproached you?" he asked, and his eyes flashed.

"If any hath I should not have come even to you for redress," I said,
fingering my sword.

"Ah," he said, and he looked well pleased. "There spoke no nameless
boy!"

I breathed hard at the thought of what his speech meant. I was in act
indeed to ask him if I were truly a Fitzmaurice and of noble birth when
his next words held me, and, as it proved, the silence between us was to
last to the edge of the grave for one of us.

"Be content, boy, for a little while," he said, and his voice was of
great sweetness. "You are no nameless child; but let it be my secret for
a time. In time I shall reveal it. If I told you now it might mean that
we should part company."

"Never that," I said.

"Never that, I pray," he rejoined, adding--"because I love you, Wat."

Then after a few minutes of silence he went on:

"Your secret is left to no such blind chance as may befall such an one
as I. If aught happen to me, Master Boyle holds it safe, and will reveal
it in proper time."

"You will not tell me?" I broke out.

"To have it known would bring me some steps nearer the Tower," he said,
"and I wend that way already."

"Then keep it silent forever," I cried out.

"Nay; that would be hardly fair to you. Besides, you forget that Master
Boyle hath it."

"I like not Master Boyle."

"Nor do I, overmuch, Wat. He is one of your still, secret men, with the
lawyer's craft and cunning. What should there be between us?"

"I hate his peaked face and his yellow eyes, and the way he hath of
watching you and peering like a cat that sees in the dark."

"You are hard on Master Boyle, Wat. There is too much of the lawyer in
him, and he treads soft as a cat. Yet there is a man behind his greed
and his cunning. He is better framed for times like these than such an
one as I. I could never walk warily."

"He has your secret and can use it against you."

"He would do me no more harm than beggar me if he might so enrich
himself. My head would be no use to him, little Wat."

"'Tis a poor warranty for holding a secret," said I, bitterly.

"I am well-disposed to Master Boyle," my lord went on. "He is a man of
substance, Wat, and a useful friend for one like myself, who can keep
nothing. We shall not pluck the jewels from the gold-trees of Guiana
without money and ships. I am nearly sucked dry, and the Queen hath lost
faith in me."

Then I knew that my lord was not so contented as he had seemed of late,
and that further voyages were afoot. In the joy and excitement of the
prospect I forgot to fret about my namelessness. Besides, my lord knew
that I was noble; and Master Boyle knew it, and treated me with a
consideration which should have won my regard if it were not that I
distrusted his dealings with my lord.

And as the autumn of that year came on I noticed that my lord ceased to
care for his gardens and orchards and plantations, and would be forever
poring over maps and charts, and had long conversations with the master
of the Bon Aventure, which good ship lay yet in Youghall Harbor, and the
master did seem nigh as weary of idleness as Sir Walter himself. And
sometimes he had Master Boyle privily. Indeed, though I speak of him as
Master Boyle, 'tis from old habit; for about this time he had been
created my Lord Boyle for his services to the Queen's Majesty in the
better governance of Ireland.

At last the word came that we were to sail; and it was as if the quiet,
sleeping town of Youghall had started awake. Such a burnishing of arms
and armor; such a getting out of old materials of war; such a polishing
of decks and making of sails and mounting of guns on the good ship Bon
Aventure as never was known. All day long the singing of the sailors in
the harbor floated to us through the still air. And my lord's swarthy
face smiled once again as I had known it when I was a little lad, before
he was like a led eagle that is chained beyond hopping a little way.

My Lord Boyle had found us the funds; so much I knew, but liked him no
better. The evening before we were to sail there was a great banquet,
and many gentlemen came even from so far off as Dublin to wish the Great
Captain Godspeed. We were to sail at blink of the morning star, and
there was to be no sleeping for us till we were on shipboard. Never have
I seen my lord but once so magnificently clad. His doublet was of white
silk, so sewn with diamonds that the silk was hardly to be seen. His
hose were of white silk, his trunk-hose of silk with slashings of gold.
Over one shoulder he wore a short cloak of yellow velvet clasped with
diamonds; and the rosettes of his shoes were a blaze of diamonds. Seeing
his face in the midst of such splendor I marvelled how the Queen could
harden her heart against him--for never have I seen him in any
assemblage, however honorable, that he did not make the other gentlemen
seem mean and dull beside him.

When the gayety was at its highest and he feared not to be missed, I saw
him slip from the table with my Lord Boyle, and retire with him into the
oriel. The banquet had been set in the oriel-chamber because it was
lighter and more spacious.

When my lord had left the table I too went away. Looking at the horologe
my lord had given me, I saw that it lacked yet two hours of the time
when we should be aboard.

I went down stairs to the lower chamber, which was dark and silent. Once
more I thought I should endeavor to find the secret way through which
the death-damp came, and my midnight visitor of more than a year ago. If
he had sought me since he had not found me, for I had avoided being
alone there since that night.

There was neither moonlight nor rushlight in the room, so that I could
only grope with my fingers for the secret the panel must contain. For
some time I groped in vain. Then my nails seemed to have found a crack
in the wood, a mere notch in which they fitted. It gave me no promise,
for the oak had warped here and there, and had left a few furrows. I was
sure I had been over all the place before, yet now as I drew a little
way the whole panel began to move. I did not know then, nor could I see,
the cunning by which that door was devised so that none should discover
it. I have said that the chamber was quite dark.

Feeling now before me with my hands, I found a vacant square wide enough
for one to creep through. Through it the wind blew strongly, and it was
a cold, earthy, evil-smelling wind, such as I knew full well. Where
might it lead? There was a report amongst us that the house had secret
ways to the harbor; but it was no honest sea-wind, however confined and
far from its source, that blew my way, but something far more villanous.

I know not how it was that I seemed to forget that in less than two
hours we must embark. The present adventure held me to the exclusion of
all else. I stepped within the narrow passageway--crept within it, for I
had to go on hands and knees. I had no light nor aught else to guide me;
but if I thought at all it was that if the monk could come this way in
safety, I could go as he had come. But to leave a gaping panel was not
in my thoughts. Having entered I drew the panel to. Then feeling with my
hands I came upon a lock. Had I moved it by my touch, or had it been
left unlocked of design? There was no time for answering of riddles, and
having pushed the panel to I turned to pursue the adventure.




CHAPTER IV.--THE DEAD HAND.


After a little I found that I could stand upright in the passage.
Stretching up my hands I could feel a solid roof above my head. The
walls on either side of me were of earth, held back by stout balks of
timber. If one were to give way the passage had been a grave indeed; but
so far as I could feel with my feet the clay had not fallen at all. Else
indeed there could not have been so much air in the passage as to give
me breath; and I breathed freely enough, albeit with a certain
oppression, and a loathing of the dank smells.

For a time the passage went down into the bowels of the earth as it
seemed to me. I guessed by the direction it took from the dining-hall
that it must grope under the graveyard--and thinking on this I realized
how that indeed the wind that blew from it was a wind of death. And at
that time I was too ignorant and too vain to rebuke myself by the
thought that this was a burying-place of saints.

Presently my foot stumbled against a step, and much relieved I was to
find on ascending it that there was another step and yet another; for I
liked not this burrowing among graves like the mole; and the steps
seemed to promise a speedy end to my journey. Taking them in the dark
there seemed to me a prodigious number of them; yet I was not gone very
far when I perceived agreeably a lightening and sweetening of the air. I
could have taken but a little while in coming, for I had met with no
obstacles; yet it seemed long since the time I had plunged into that pit
of blackness ere I came up against a stout door, with a grating in it,
designed no doubt to give air to the passage.

To my great joy it was held only by a latch, and even before I had made
this happy discovery I felt the sweet air of heaven blow into my face;
and I think I never before knew how sweet it tasted.

Undoing the latch and drawing the door to me I stepped within a stone
tower. The moon had arisen on the eastward side of the tower, and
looking through the crumbling lancet window I saw below me, serene and
beautiful, the quiet, terraced graveyard of St. Mary's.

I could have laughed aloud to think that the journey had seemed to me so
long. In truth it had occupied some five minutes, as I discovered,
holding my horologe to the moon, and had not occupied so long if it were
not for my groping and pausing.

But the floor was solid under my feet. I had to think a minute before I
knew where I was. I was in that blind tower of St. Mary's to the
eastward corner, in the basement whereof were deposited the brooms and
pails for cleaning of the church.

Playing hide and seek therein with a boy's irreverence I had marvelled
why, since the tower was blind--nothing but a roof of stone above the
chamber--that they should have troubled to pierce it with lancets like
any honest belfry. The upper portion of the tower was in ruins, as you
could see from the graveyard without. Ah, and so the blind tower had its
uses; as a hiding-place it might be for some one who had lived in the
Manor-house in old wild days. For, as to any manner of egress from the
tower, that I could not see at all.

The chamber where I stood was full of the drifted leaves and the nests
of birds. Except for the shaft of light from the lancet it was in
blackness, and I began to wonder if the tower went no further.

I groped about the walls, however, till I came upon a staircase, which
went up, not in the middle, as is usual in towers, but at one corner, so
that each story formed a room.

'Twas three stories' climb to the upper room. Here it was that the ruin
had befallen the tower; for where the lancet had been there was a great
gap, and somewhat of the roof had fallen away.

I was now clear of the low trees, and the half-veiled moon looked within
the chamber. Then I saw to my amazement that at the side of it, yet
roofed over, there was a bed, a chair, a table, all of the rudest. But
little of this I saw till afterwards, for on the bed lay the figure of
that monk who had spoken with me, now nearly fifteen months ago.

His face was in shadow, yet I never thought for a moment that he slept.
One lean hand dangled from his great sleeve over the side of the bed; it
hung helplessly; and young as I was I had looked on death often enough
to know that this was the hand of the dead. The habit was composed
decently about the figure. Either the monk had so composed himself for
death or he had had some companion who had fled away leaving him to the
eye of heaven.

Standing there, a great awe and compassion fell upon me. Something of
yearning and tenderness afflicted me as though the dead man had been of
my blood: the tears rushed from my eyes, and I trembled so that I was
forced to my knees; yea, as though invisible hands had bent me. I knew
little of praying, but something of wordless petition to the Great
Father of us all stirred in my dull and proud spirit. In that moment I
had indeed the heart of a child.

When I had arisen from my knees I went to the side of the pallet and
looked upon the sleeper's face. In the shadow it gleamed like polished
ivory, and as I looked the moon, climbing higher, touched the still
mouth with a sweet and sanctified light, making it as though it smiled.
I touched the hand that swung by the side of the pallet. It was scarcely
cold. I knew not how I thought of such a thing, except that I was
familiar with the knights and ladies who sleep in stone in St. Mary's
Church, but I composed the sleeper's hands in the manner of Christ's
cross upon his breast; and afterwards turned away from the patient,
smiling mouth like one who hath sinned and been forgiven.

Then I did what I believed he would have me do: I made a search for any
letters and papers he might have left; for I could not think he had left
me ignorant of what he would have me know. I searched busily; and there
were not many places wherein to look. There was nothing anywhere. But my
search was not yet over till I had examined the monk's person. I went
back to his side, and with a prayer to him for forgiveness, I groped
gently in his habit for anything in the nature of papers, and doing so I
felt his body to be by wasting scarcely greater than a child's. Yet
'twas not starvation, I knew, for a loaf of bread and a pitcher of water
stood on the table.

I had not far to seek. The papers were within the folds of his habit,
where they met upon his breast, and were confined with the claspings of
his leathern belt.

I drew them forth and went to the full flood of the moonlight. By it I
read the superscription:

    "_To Walter Devereux Fitz-Hugo Fitz-Theobald Fitz-Maurice_"--

As I read it my heart leaped up. What a proud name it was, and telling
of a glorious ancestry!

    "--commonly known as Walter Munster, the ward and page of Sir
    Walter Raleigh."

When I had deciphered so far the tower seemed suddenly to rock. It was
the great clock in the neighboring tower striking of midnight; and I had
yet to ford the passageway between the graves! Already I might have been
missed. I read no more, but thrust the papers within my breast. Then I
bent and kissed the hands of the monk, feeling again that rush of
softness, and as I kissed the hands I noticed the great string of beads
which fell from the girdle, and that too I kissed, and the crucifix
dependent from it; and these things I did blindly, having then a hard
and ignorant heart, but being compelled I knew not how.

Then I stole from the tower-room and again down the winding staircase;
but first I had drawn the cowl over the face and hid the hands and feet
in the folds of the habit; and so left him to quietness and the night.

I made the return passage without any mishap; and though a fear assailed
me on the way lest I had locked myself within by closing the door, there
was no ground for it, for the panel opened simply enough, and was indeed
secured by a bolt on the passage side; which no doubt had prevented my
finding the opening before. For either the monk had left it undone now
by design, or being surprised by his last sickness, or else a companion
or companions of his had fled the house-way while we slept, leaving the
door unbarred. Yet I had seen no sign of any other inmate of the tower
save one; that is of visible folk, for I doubt not there were others,
ministering and invisible.

So I returned as I had come and went hastily to the banquet-hall. As I
entered my lord and the Lord Boyle were returning slowly to their
places. I caught a word of their speech. "You will remember the trust,"
said my dear lord; and I knew not it was of me they were talking. "Yea,"
said my Lord Boyle, and showed his yellow teeth; "let it be in my hands,
or else when Jamie succeeds some Scot will have it." And then he
laughed, rubbing his lean hands together.

Then my lord observed me, and calling me to him he put his hand upon my
shoulder and looked at me with surprise.

"Why, Wat," he said, "what spider's nest hath caught you?"

I looked down then at my brave apparel, and was confused to find that it
was gray with dust and cobwebs from my journey.

"He hath been ratting," said my Lord Boyle, "and hath pursued the quarry
even within their holes."

"It matters less," said my lord, "since it is the hour to put on soberer
attire. Be in good time, Wat,"--and so saying he released me. Then I
hurried to my chamber in the roof, and was right pleased that I had not
been questioned more closely. And when I had laid away my fine apparel
and all was ready for our journey, I took my paper to the candle-light
that I might decipher it.

It had been written for my hand and none other, and the writer thereof
was mine own father's brother. I was indeed of the illustrious Desmond
house, though of a younger branch; and yet in the havoc that had come
upon it I might well now be all that was living of the race. I had, it
seemed, my father being slain, been hidden with my mother in the forest
by a faithful clansman, who had provided us with what food he might; who
being out one day snaring rabbits in the forest had been caught by a
party of the enemy and borne away by them strapped to one of their
horses. He had escaped them by the mercy of God, and returned to the
place where he had left us, to find his lady dead of starvation and
myself gone. Doubtless that sweet mother of mine had starved through
giving all she had to her child. The man knew not if I had met an enemy
and been hacked or speared to death, or if the wolves had had me, or the
fierce eagles that yet infest the forest in search of tender prey. He
grieved to death not knowing. But the friar, Brother Ambrose, the last
of the White Monks of Youghall, and mine uncle, known to men as Roderick
Fitzmaurice, rested not till he had found if I were of this life, and at
last discovered me. Having written this history for mine eyes, he
wrestled with me further that I should come out from among the enemies
of my people. But to what end? I asked, having so much worldly wisdom,
since the Desmond clan was gone down in blood, and its inheritance with
strangers. Indeed, when I had come to the dead man's prayers, I folded
up the paper as one that will not listen and fears to be persuaded. Even
then there came from the harbor a ringing of bells and the shouts of the
sailors as they drew up the anchor of the Bon Aventure from its bed in
the sands. I therefore thrust my fine garments into my sea-chest and
shot the bolt; but mine uncle's message to me I put within my doublet.
As the ship swung round, and we headed her for eastward I turned my
thoughts away from the quiet sleeper in the church tower, and looked
rather to my lord's dark figure as he leant over the vessel's side,
gazing not the way she was going, but rather to westward. For though he
was the enemy of my race and my country, yet I loved him with such a
love that nothing could dissever my heart from him. And for his sake I
was not sorry even that I had not sooner discovered that poor kinsman of
mine--the very last it well might be--in his hiding-place. For no doubt
he had come many times to the room in which he had first found me, but
never found me again. And now he was dead and past caring any more.




CHAPTER V.--OF A STRAIT PLACE AND A QUIET TIME.


A few days later the Bon Aventure was lying in the river Thames, and we
had no more than cast anchor when my lord put on his richest clothes,
and bidding me to attend him, went by water to the steps leading to the
Queen's palace of Westminster. I remember that the way took us past
Traitor's Gate, the low and threatening portals by which prisoners are
brought within the Tower. As we passed my lord looked at me with a sad
smile. "I shall go that way yet, Wat," he said. And when I burst into a
passionate protest, he said to me: "Why, Wat, if you could look upon the
company which hath passed by way of that gate, you would see it to be of
the finest. I shall not blush to tread in their footsteps." But I could
not believe it, looking upon him in his garb of peach-bloom velvet laced
with silver, and the jewels of a king's ransom; and yet alas! he spoke
too truly.

I remember when we were come to those stairs of Westminster how the
people pressed to look upon him, and shouted for him, and flung their
caps in the air. If he was not in favor at the court, certainly he
lacked not favor outside it.

Even within the palace the pages and the maids of honor peeped at him,
and many courtiers thronged to welcome him, and the scullions and grooms
of the chambers looked through windows and down staircases to see him
pass, so that to me it was as though the tapestry wavered with whispers
and eyes. As we waited for an audience we saw many great men pass, but
not one fit to stand beside my lord. Then came the Queen, a shrunk,
tall, high-boned woman, in a blaze of diamonds, the ruff standing about
her spare, pale head like a setting sun, so thick it was with jewels,
and her farthingale and petticoat making a prodigious circle about her.
She had green eyes, and they were cold, and coldly she gave her hand to
my lord to kiss.

She had called him back because Spain threatened; but now he was come
she could not forget her anger. That was for the old affair of Mistress
Throckmorton. I heard the pages whispering that day that she had not
forgiven him; and one, a pert, bright lad, who won my heart because he
was so eager to see and hear of the Great Captain, told me how my Lord
Essex had in likewise nearly forfeited the Queen's favor. For he had
admired upon the person of the Lady Mary Howard a farthingale of cloth
of gold, sewn with seed-pearls, the which coming to the Queen's ears she
had demanded the garment for herself, saying that no subject should go
finer than the Queen's Majesty. But having acquired it she discovered
herself to be too tall and too broad for it, so that it misbecame her
mightily. Whereupon she cast it aside so that none should wear it since
she could not.

Of the same palace I grew sick to death. How long were we kept waiting
about its corridors till the Queen's favor should veer towards us again.
It suited not with a country lad like myself; and as for my lord, his
face grew lined and he seldom smiled: so that often, often, I longed
that the old gardening days in Youghall were come again. Nor had he yet
seen his wife and son. At last he grew restive, and declared that
Devonshire air consorted better with his humor than the dank fogs that
spread at evening about Westminster. But ere he could be gone he was
committed to the Tower on the Queen's warrant. So, sooner than we dreamt
were we come to Traitor's Gate.

I went thither with him, and together we passed the low arch. There I
was permitted to be in attendance on him, and listened often to his
cries and groans, for he could not endure the imprisonment while there
were so many glorious things in the world to be done. Sometimes he would
solace himself with philosophy and poetry. But at times his fury would
break forth so that the governor of the Tower feared for him lest he
should go mad. He well described his own sufferings.

"I am become like a fish cast on dry land," he wrote, "gasping for
breath, with lame legs and lamer lungs."

Indeed there were times when it seemed as if he would die from being so
imprisoned and confined. Trust in the Queen's pity he had not.

"There is no chance for me now, Wat," he said once, "unless it be that
one of my captains should bring home a treasure-ship to pour into her
lap, which might buy my freedom if she conceived that by that means I
might find her more. For she loves gold as other women love love,
wherefore is her face become yellower than a guinea."

It was for some such saying, doubtless, the Queen had had him cast in
the Tower. He was not one to learn guile; and, like his rival, Essex, he
was over-brave in speech as in other things.

However, that happened that one of his captains did bring home a
treasure-ship. He had been in the Tower two months, and had worn the
stone floors with his pacing of them, more restless than the lion. The
folk came to stare at him in the courtyard without. Then word came to us
that his ships were in from the Azores and had brought with them the
Spanish plate-ship, the Madre di Dios, which they had captured from the
Dons. Half a million, a million, there was no end to the guineas she was
worth. She was lined with glowing, woven carpets, sarcenet quilts, and
lengths of white silks and cyprus. She carried, in chests of sandalwood
and ebony, such stores of rubies and pearls, such porcelain and ivory
and crystal, such planks of cinnamon, and such marvellous treasures as
had never before been seen. Her hold seemed like a garden of spices, so
laden was it with cloves, cinnamon, ambergris, and frankincense.

But even then the Queen was not minded to deliver him. His chief captain
came from the mouth of the Dart, where the ship lay, to bring him his
reports; but no message came from the Queen. However, his freeing was
taken out of her hands and came not a whit too soon, for he had aged ten
years in those two months. It seemed that the usurers and dealers in
precious metals in London had flocked to the Dart upon the news of the
treasure. And vagrants from all the winds flocked thither. And between
those vultures and my lord's own seamen and men of Devon there was soon
riot and bloodshed. Then, since all means of restoring the peace seemed
to have failed, at last they took my lord from the Tower that he might
make peace.

It seemed that half the world was about the treasure-ship, and my lord's
ships. There came to greet us at our journey's end that Lord Cecil of
whom I had heard so much. I trusted him not, and I was rejoiced that he
should see the passion of welcome which awaited my lord from his men of
Devon. It was well that it was so, for my Lord Cecil reported upon it to
the Queen.

"I assure you," he wrote, "all his servants and his mariners came to him
with such shouts of joy as I never saw a man more troubled to quiet them
in all my life. But his heart is broken, and whenever he is saluted with
congratulation for liberty he doth answer, 'No, I am still the Queen of
England's poor captive.' But I vow to you his credit among the mariners
is greater than I could have thought it."

My Lord Cecil was well disposed to my lord, albeit his cunning eyes and
old, wise face made my youth feel of a sudden cold. The Queen harkened
to him, and we were returned no more to the Tower; yet those two months
of impatient fretting had set their mark upon my lord.

After this we sailed up the Dart to that Manor-house where the Lady
Raleigh dwelt with her son. And again there was a very sweet interval of
peace. I have now but to close my eyes and see again the red-brick ivied
house, with its chimney-stack dark against the sky. The swallows are
wheeling overhead, shouting and playing with one another. The rooks are
coming homeward across the evening sky. On the green and velvety bowling
green young Walter and I are playing at bowls. There are roses on the
terrace and a peacock spreading his tail. Below these is the garden with
its box borders, its roses and pinks and pansies; its fountain where the
goldfish swim round and round, and its mossy dial. Further yet is the
orchard, and beyond it the deer feeding amid the trees, and further
still the river, and apple-orchards, with maids and men a-gathering
apples for the cider brew. But I look not so far. My eye rests with my
heart upon my lord, when he goeth between the box-borders in sweet
converse with his lady-wife; and I watch him till young Walter rallies
me as a poor comrade and player at the game.

Often my lady would take me apart, and bid me tell her of my lord when
he was in Ireland. Of those years she was never tired of hearing; and
when my tongue or my thoughts would grow slack she would grow impatient
with me. Yet I think my love for her lord pleased her. She was a little
lady, and the brightest ever I saw, with cream-pale cheeks and the
liveliest of black eyes. I could not wonder that for a time she lulled
to sleep my lord's desires for America. Very pitiful she was towards the
havoc their long parting and the trouble and the imprisonment had
wrought in him, and would stand a-tiptoes to smooth the wrinkles out
with her dainty finger.

The Lord Cecil was now my lord's friend at court, and to him she writ
beseeching that there might be no more voyages, at least for the time.

"I hope for my sake," she writ, "that you wilt rather draw Walter toward
the East than help him forward toward the sunset, if any respect to me
or love to him be not forgotten."

So we remained in peace, and young Walter and I flew our hawks and
played at the ball, and fished and swam to our hearts' content. And
dearly as I loved my lord, I came to love his son hardly less. He was a
brave lad of Devon, this Walter Raleigh, tall as his father, and nigh as
comely, yet innocent and quiet, with the country innocence and quietude,
because by reason of the Queen's displeasure he had abode all his years
in those sequestered ways; yet skilled in all such manly and courtly
arts as became the son of his father; so that he was as good with a
sonnet as at swordplay, and could dance the pavane as prettily as he
could loose his goshawk. And for all his innocence was not unfit to face
a rough world; and for all his quiet kindliness was as brave and as
quick to fight as any gallant ever I saw.

My lord looked on at our comradeship well pleased. I heard him ask my
Lady Raleigh one day if we did not make a gallant couple, at which my
lady pouted, and said he was loving me in Ireland when she and her Wat
were forgotten. "Nay," said he, "that never was, Sweetlips; but he
comforted me something in my loneliness without wife and son." Then my
lady called me to her, and kissed me like a mother, and vowed that she
loved me for what I had been to her lord in those Irish years. She
changed quickly in her pretty humors; but there was no change in her
constancy and kindness towards me any more than in her lord's love.

After that we went eastward for a season to the village of Bath, to
drink at its springs, which had been discovered to be sovereign remedy
for many ills. It was my Lady Raleigh's will to make her lord well
again. "As though, Bess," he said, "you could turn backward the years we
have been parted."

And I left the Manor-house with grief and pain, for never again, I
feared, should we have a season of such peace. My lord was not one to
abide long in peace; and certainly the Bath waters as they restored his
strength restored also his passion for adventure and turmoil, so that my
Lady Raleigh in healing him but defeated her desire of keeping him with
her. For after a time he seemed no longer quiet and well-content. And he
had yet not only his share of the treasure-ship, though I doubt not the
greater part was poured in the Queen's lap, but he had also my Lord
Boyle's purse to draw upon.

Then as he was becoming restive, yea, straining as a hound strains at
the leash, and declaring that he would sail before the mast if he might
none other way, one of his captains, Popham by name, and a stout old
sea-dog from the harbor town of Plymouth, brought him letters writ by a
Spanish captain to the King of Spain, and captured by the English ship.
Reading them my lord seemed as he would choke with fury. I knew how my
lord's heart turned to Guiana, the golden country. And these letters
reported that the Governor of Trinidad had annexed this same wondrous
land in the name of King Philip. Then, even my Lady Raleigh saw that it
was no use seeking to hold her lord any longer; and she bade him go,
with so sweet a grace and so high a spirit that she proved herself even
a worthy mate for the Great Captain.




CHAPTER VI.--THE TREASURE-SHIP.


We left my Lady Raleigh alone in the spring of the year. It was February
the sixth, and the snowdrop and crocus were up in the garden-beds of the
Manor-house, and the blackbirds and thrushes singing nigh as sweet as
they sing in Ireland, when we put out from Plymouth with five ships and
a motley company. It was a stolen expedition in a manner of speaking;
for we hoisted our flag for Virginia, yet I think the meanest scullion
aboard knew that Guiana was our port. For it was not politic to flout
too openly Philip of Spain; though we might fly the Jolly Roger and
overhaul his treasure-ships on the high seas. For the Queen of England,
as she grew older grew craftier; and would have any cat's-paw to draw
her chestnuts out of the fire, and bear the brunt of it as well, while
she went free.

We two Wats sailed with Sir Walter. 'Twas time, he said, his son should
see the world; and indeed it would have gone hard with us to be left
behind.

It is wonderful to me now to recall how I had learnt--yea, as though I
had been English-born--to hate the Spaniard, as though he had been a rat
or some such thing, and no evil but merit in the slaying and despoiling
of him. And therein was shown the folly and vanity of my youth; for not
only was the Spaniard a grave and majestic foe, but he was of the faith
my fathers had died to defend. Yet of this I thought not at all at the
time, being indeed little better than a heathen; for my lord, albeit he
was religious at heart, yet showed little of it in his life, and
troubled not at all about it in others. Indeed, it is a strange thing to
me now to reflect that all who led that wild life had yet some measure
of religion; for then the days of the cold-heart and the mocker had not
yet begun.

I remember as we made the voyage how Wat and I used to gather at night
about the mast to hear the sailors tell stories and sing songs. There
was one, Jonas Tittlebat, of Devizes, who was our favorite story-teller
of them all, and I doubt not our favorite stories were of the slaying of
Spaniards and sacking of their ships. It was as though one should inure
a tender child to the shambles. For we grew to love the talk of blood,
and to desire to see and smell and taste it; and I remember how at the
end of the recitals Wat and I used to sit and pant, facing each other
like a pair of tiger-cats, with the lust of blood in our hearts. For
though we had been brought up simply and innocently the evil was there,
only awaiting the breath that should fan it to a flame, and the
fostering hands that would not let it go out.

Many weeks, even months, were we sailing till we came in sight of land,
and for some days before this the southwesterly wind had brought us many
an earnest of the beautiful country, brilliant and strange leaves, and
plumes, and shells, and flowers, drifting to us over the phosphorescent
water which at night made the sea a dance of silver.

Of my lord we saw little during the voyage. He was ever busy with his
maps and charts in the cabin, observing the motion of his compasses, and
studying the stars by night. Or else he was writing; and often it made
me wonder to see how he, so greatly in love with action and energy,
could yet content himself so many hours with the pen.

As we sailed up the river the beauty of it struck us dumb. I saw my lord
stand in the bows of the vessel and drink in hungrily the beauty of that
land. Exceedingly fertile it seemed, nor can I describe it better than
in his own words.

"I never imagined a more beautiful country nor more lively prospects,"
he wrote; "hills so raised here and there over the valleys; the river
winding into divers branches; the plains adjoining without bush or
stubble, but all fair, green grass; the deer crossing in every path; the
birds towards the evening singing on every tree with a thousand several
tunes, cranes and herons of white, crimson, and carnation, perching on
the river's side; the air fresh with a gentle easterly wind, and every
stone that we stooped to take up promised either gold or silver by his
complexion."

We sailed even into the golden city of Manoa, and there saw the houses
with their strange carvings, and their cups and drinking-vessels of
precious metal; and the marvellous temple with its hundred images of
beaten gold, the eyes of diamonds, and with necklets of rubies large as
pigeon's eggs, and garments sewn with pearls and emeralds.

The poor Indians who possessed these treasures were a mild and gentle
race, ignorant of how greatly men's passions were inflamed by gold and
gems, which to them were common matters. They were no savages, but a
nation with a certain knowledge of the arts and a civilization after
their own manner; and it was touching to see how kindly and sweetly they
welcomed the white man among them, although indeed in the ships were to
be found some of the worst rascals that ever sailed out of Plymouth.
However, fear of my lord kept this rascaldom in check; for he loved the
Indians, and made it a matter with the Queen that in any expedition to
the Guianas there should be no ill-treatment of the gentle race. Indeed
he believed honestly that he were better their master than Spain, and so
had less compunction in seeking their treasures.

But now a larger expedition was needed, and one that would have the
Queen's sanction; and so having feasted our eyes on the delights of this
enchanting country we turned our ships for home, bearing with us gifts
of gems and gold with which the Indians had loaded us, and also great
stores of roots and plants and many strange matters.

We were not bent on any adventure, for my lord thought only of gaining
the Queen's ear, displaying to her the earnest he brought of the
treasures of Guiana, and returning thither as fast as might be after
fitting out a large fleet of ships; and then of taking possession in the
Queen's name. For greater even than his passion for adventure were his
love of England and hatred of Spain; and the new policy of pleasing King
Philip he loathed with all his heart.

The homeward voyage therefore he spent in writing for the Queen's eye an
account of Guiana, which afterwards he magnified into his book "_On the
Discovery of the large, rich, and beautiful Empire of Guiana, with a
relation of the great and Golden City of Manoa, which the Spaniards call
El Dorado, and the Provinces of Emeria, Arromaia, Amapaia, and other
Countries, with their Rivers adjoining_."

So we were left again to the story-telling about the mast; and this grew
more violent and rank with blood, as though the sight of so much
treasure as we had left behind us had inflamed the minds of the tellers.
Yea, we ate and drank blood, it seems to me, now looking back on those
recitals; and were thus prepared for what followed.

For lo, one evening we saw far off upon the waters the shape of a great
ship. Her poop was high out of the water, and apart from her size she
was easy to be seen, for as the night gathered she blazed with candles
so that she was like a fiery thing upon the waters.

Then there was such a confusion and excitement on the ships as never
have I seen surpassed. My lord had left his books, and standing by the
prow of the Bon Aventure gazed through his telescope upon that far-away
vision that hung like a great golden bird against the purple of the
after-sunset. There was no doubt in any mind that she was a Spanish
galleon by her high poop and her great decks above the water. She was
indeed none other than the famous treasure-ship, Nuestra Senora del
Pilar, and she was riding without any escort.

We extinguished every light we had aboard the ships, and in cover of the
darkness we crept upon her. She was big as a little town, it seemed to
me; and for all she was so gayly lit she slept well, for we crept up
under her stern, and there was no cry from her lookout. At last we were
so near that I could see the image of the Holy Virgin at her masthead,
and the lamp burning before it. But the image said nothing to me then.

The great ship was almost motionless on the dark water. Indeed I
wondered if she had cast anchor, so still she was; yet how cast anchor
in so many fathoms of water?

With much care and muffling of our oars we now took to the boats, and as
fast as the boats filled they rowed towards the ship. The boat in which
I was came up by the poop. I looked above me in wonder at all the rows
of carven saints and angels, as it were the hierarchy of heaven. Over
the side a rope swung noiselessly, as though it had been left there for
our purpose. We clambered up it one after another and stood on deck,
where was not a living soul, and this puzzled us not a little. But the
bulwarks were set round with carven images in little niches, and each
had its lamp, and the like on every deck; and that was how the
illumination had come.

I looked round on the shipmen in the light of the many shrines. Some had
the brown and wholesome faces of seamen, and though they looked fierce
and blood-thirsty enough, were yet no worse than any fighting man. But
others were no better than Algerine pirates, and carried a knife in
their teeth and their pistols at full cock, and were as ready to slay
and murder as any evil beast. For my lord had sailed with but a handful
of his own men amid the scum of Plymouth rascaldom.

Yet even these did the silence of the great ship somewhat appal. And for
myself, though I was as ready for murder and rapine as any, yet was I
given pause; and hearing my lord's whisper at my elbow, I turned and
looked at him. "What do you make of it, Wat?" he asked. "Do you think it
is a trap?"

But ere I could answer him a figure came up the stairway from the cabin.
It was an old man, very tall, and in the garb of a white friar, just
such another as I had left sleeping in St. Mary's Tower. The likeness
sent a thrill of terror through me. The old man saw us not. He carried a
taper in his hand; he was going round doubtless to replenish the lamps
if they had gone out. The light from the taper showed a face of much
benignancy--an old, kind face. The cowl had fallen back, and the silver
tonsure gleamed in the light.

Suddenly some one stirred in our midst, and all at once he knew that we
were there. He opened his lips as though to speak. Then some of those
pirates were upon him. I saw him lift the great crucifix that hung by
his side between them and him. Then he was down, and the knives were
hewing him. I thought no more on it, though it turned me sick an
instant.

The ship now swarmed with our men rushing hither and thither in search
of treasure. Some were seizing the silver lamps before the shrines,
others were tearing down the images. A rush of men swept me from my feet
and down the cabin stairs, and I grasped my sword tighter. But here was
no enemy. Only rich garments flung hither and thither in the silk-hung
rooms, and many signs of the ship having been deserted in haste.

I would have gone further, leaving the place to those who were tearing
it to pieces, dragging down the hangings, kicking open the cedar-wood
lockers, and pouring the precious wine they found there down their
throats; I would have gone further had not my lord prevented me.

"Come up on deck, Wat," he said; "there is a scent of death here that
sickens me. I am glad I left my boy on the Bon Aventure."

He dragged me with him. We were hardly up in the pure air before there
was a scream from the mad herd below that turned one cold to hear; and
as though the devil pursued them they came clambering up the hatches and
staircases white as death, and sobered, and began flinging themselves
off the sides of the vessel into their boats.

"They would leave us here, Wat, to the terror, whatever it may be," said
my lord, "if I had not had with me by good fortune a handful of mine own
shipmates. Ah, Gregory Dabchick"--seizing one--"what white devil hast
thou seen below-stairs?"

"If you please, none, Captain," cried Dabchick, his breath sobbing; "but
a worse thing. There are half a dozen corpses below there, dead of the
smallpox. 'Tis a floating pest-house, my lord, and the place reeks with
death."

"Ah," said Sir Walter, as we stood waiting for the mob to get off the
ship, "the monk would have told us so if those dogs had not murdered
him. Doubtless he remained behind when the others fled away, to nurse
the living and bury the dead, and solaced himself, poor soul, by setting
candles to his saints."

Ere we were put into Plymouth town again there were eighty of our
hundred dead of the smallpox; and I was carried ashore more dead than
alive, to be nursed back to health by the Lady Raleigh's ministering
hands.




CHAPTER VII.--OUR LAST YEARS TOGETHER.


I came out of that illness no longer the youth I had been; for God used
the things that had happened me to make a change in my heart. I went
very near to death, and I came back to life very grievously disfigured,
yea, as though I had been slashed criss-cross with swords, and the sight
of one of mine eyes gone. Nevermore should I ruffle it with gallants;
and indeed it seemed a bitter and cruel thing to the boy, this ruin of
comeliness, so that for long the bitterness was greater than death, yet
since then the man has learned to thank the Hand that wielded that most
merciful rod.

I was yet but a moping thing, creeping up heavily from death to life,
when my lord sailed on that expedition to Cadiz with the Lord Admiral
Thomas Howard and his old-time enemy the Lord Essex, which brought such
glory to the English name. I think there was but one part of my old self
remained alive in me, and that was my love for Sir Walter, which is
wrought so inextricably within the chords of my being that nothing shall
disentangle it.

I had been sick to death during that time when Sir Walter had wrestled
vainly with the Queen for an expedition to Guiana, and been discomfited.
For truly her will was brass and iron; nothing for man, however great,
to prevail against, and for long her face had been turned away from him,
and seemed like to remain so.

I was getting well, with no heart to recover, when the reports came of
the Cadiz expedition. It was glorious summer weather, and my Lady
Raleigh, whose patience was more than human with me, would have me
carried to the lawn under shade of trees; and there laid on my pillows I
would listen to her proud recitals of her lord's heroic deeds.

It was on the 21st of June that the fleet entered Cadiz Harbor. My lord
was on board the Water Sprite; and he had no sooner entered than he
received the fire of seventeen great galleons. But as though she had
been indeed spirit and not body, the Sprite went unharmed. Raleigh blew
his trumpets upon them in a great blare of defiance. Near at hand lay
the St. Philip and the St. Andrew, the two ships foremost in that attack
on the Revenge in which the brave Sir Richard Greville had fallen.
"These," wrote he, "were the marks I shot at, being resolved to be
revenged for the Revenge, or to second her with my own life.... Having
no hope of my fly-boats to board, and the Earl and my Lord Thomas having
both promised to second me, I laid out a way by the side of the Philip
to shake hands with her, for with the wind we could not get aboard;
which when she and the rest perceived they all let slip and ran aground,
tumbling into the sea heaps of soldiers as thick as if coals had been
poured out of a sack in many parts at once, some drowned and some
sticking in the mud. The Philip burned itself, the St. Andrew and the
St. Matthew were recovered by our boats ere they could get out to fire
them. The spectacle was very lamentable, for many drowned themselves;
many, half-burned, leaped into the water; very many hanging by the
rope's end by the ship's side, under the water even to the lips; many
swimming with grievous wounds, and withal so huge a fire and so great a
tearing of ordnance in the great Philip and the rest, when the fire came
to them, as if a man had a desire to see Hell itself it was there most
lively figured. Ourselves spared the lives of all after the victory, but
the Flemings, who did little or nothing in the fight, used merciless
slaughter, till they were by myself, and afterwards by the Lord Admiral,
beaten off."

"The poor Spaniards!" cried my Lady Raleigh with tears, even while she
was proudest; but as for me, I had no heart to rejoice or to be sorry,
being so marred myself, and scarce anything alive in me except my love
for her lord, and even that pulsed faintly.

He came home to be hailed with such cheers and shouts by the common
people as pleased the Queen but little, for she liked not to be eclipsed
by a subject. Besides, the victory gave her little treasure; and she
grew more and more miserly. Though my lord was glorious with wounds, she
even refused to look upon him, which led me to say, as I have said often
since, that the greatness of those Tudors lay chiefly in their hard
usage of those who made them great. However, there was to gauge a deeper
depth when the Stuart came to England's throne.

I had feared my lord's face when he came to look on me in my
disfigurement, for he loved beauty, so that I scarcely dared to lift my
one sound eye to his. Yet when I had found courage to do so I found
nothing but love in his regard, and he embraced me as a father might,
kissing my seamed cheek and calling me his dear lad. And young Walter
likewise; for in the years that followed, during which we continued the
tender friendship that had sprung up between us at the first, I have
never once seen in his manner that pity which I could not have borne.

But the end of our misfortunes was not yet. Elizabeth died, and the son
of Mary of Scotland succeeded; and now my lord anticipated no more ill
than came, for the Stuart truckled to King Philip as never a Tudor had
done, and 'twas like the Spaniard's first demand would be that the most
glorious of his enemies should be laid away beyond power of annoying him
more. So it was that presently my lord was accused of being joined with
the Lord Cobham in a plot to bring the Lady Arabella Stuart to the
throne, and was cast into the Tower.

Then began that long martyrdom which is the everlasting disgrace of the
meanest of Kings. He had made friends with his mother's slayer. What was
to be looked for from him? But to shut an eagle in a cage, to clip a
sea-bird's wings, to confine in a little space the noblest, freest
spirit that lived, and the loyalist to England! This remained for Mary
Stuart's son to do.

There was no end to that imprisonment. Again I went with him to the
Tower; while my lady had a lodging without the walls. Young Walter still
fought, as his father had before him, the battles of England by land and
sea. And I was my lord's squire in the Tower, and had as much glory and
love in it as though 'twere the Field of Cloth of Gold.

For now I was to witness the greatness of his spirit. When it had been
borne in upon him that this imprisonment was like to have no end, he
fretted not as he did in those two months long ago, but solaced his
heart by the writing of that great _History of the World_ which remains
his monument. Also religion came sweetly to his aid, for that which had
been out of sight in his wild, seafaring days now leaped up like a
flame. Indeed never have I seen a greater tranquillity. He also occupied
himself with the distilling of sweet waters and medicinal herbs; and the
Governor of the Tower, who loved him, permitted that his still should be
set up in the Governor's garden, where also he took up again his old
gardening ways. Indeed he kept his pain as being a captive out of sight
after the first, and contented himself heroically; although his lady,
poor soul, deafened the court with her prayers for her brave Wat, as
though it were not the Spaniard who had turned the key upon him.

Nor yet was he forgotten by his old lovers, the common people. They
waited in crowds to see him walk upon the terrace. The sailors shouted
for him as the ships came up the river. As the years passed, and his
feats became a legend, ladies and cavaliers came praying from the
lieutenant of the Tower a word with the lion-heart. Still he wore his
velvets and silks and damasks; still he blazed with jewels: no dusty
prisoner, but a splendid knight, pacing the terrace while summers and
winters went.

Even the Queen came thither with her young son begging his "strawberry
water" to cure her of an ailment; and if the mother returned not it was
not so with the son. The young Prince Henry came again and again, and
being a youth of high and generous spirit, loved my lord in time near as
well as we did, who had seen his glories. "None save my father," he
quoth bitterly, "would have kept such a bird in a cage."

His relation with my lord came in time to be as that of master and
pupil, for he would pace with him for hours while my lord discoursed on
the arts of peace and war and the duties of a prince to his subjects. So
great grew the tenderness between them that I doubt not if the young
Prince had lived my lord would have stood at his right hand. But that
was not to be: he died untimely, and the last prayer on his lips was for
the freeing of his friend.

The dead Prince's prayer was forgotten; but presently when the King
wanted money he remembered the treasures of Guiana and those gifts my
lord had brought to Queen Elizabeth. 'Twas as mean a bargain as ever was
made. My lord was to have his liberty. He was to find the money for the
ships and the men; but whatever treasure the gold mines in the Orinoco
yielded was to fall to the King. On these conditions, and that he was
not to meddle with the Spaniards, my lord set out. I went with him; and
young Walter also sailed. He who had been a noble and gallant youth was
now become a noble and gallant man, and my lord had great hopes of him;
but, alas, Death mows down the fairest and the most promising.

From the first the thing was ill-fated. We were not so far sailed when
fever broke out and ravaged the ships. Now there is nothing like a
pestilence for breaking the heart and reducing the spirit in men; and
ere ever we reached Guiana shores there was grumbling a-shipboard and
mutiny in the air. And when we were come there it was to find the
Spaniards, with forces of ships and men guarding the mouth of the river;
for all our secrets had been betrayed to them.

Nor would it matter what force the Spaniards had, nor would any murmur
have arisen if but the Captain had been at our head. But he, alas, was
laid low by the sickness; and his men without him as a shepherdless
flock that is driven hither and thither and blown upon by winds of
confusion. For when they found the Spanish defences they cried out that
they had been betrayed, and would go no further.

Then young Walter, that inheritor of all braveries, leaped to the front
and offered to creep ashore, past the line of the Spaniards, and reach
the mines if so he might, and return with reports upon them. Also
Captain Keymis, one of the bravest of Raleigh's seamen, would go with
him. With tender embracings and partings did father and son say
farewell, that never were to look on each other in this life again. For
a party of Spaniards did set upon our dear Wat and his brave companion,
together with the little force that went with them; and shouting to his
men to come on, Wat fell, hacked to pieces by Spanish swords.

Captain Keymis escaped to bring back the tale of disaster and a report
that there was no gold to be had at the mines now, whatever had been. So
the men murmured more; though my lord, sick as he was, would himself go
in search of the mines and in pursuit of the Spaniards that had slain
his son. But none would follow him.

Then, broken-hearted, the lion of England at last turned his back on his
promised land and set sail for England to meet his death at last. He had
better have died fighting the Spaniards, yet that his men would not
permit; and I think none of them guessed that they brought him home to
his death.




CHAPTER VIII.--AN UNRAVELLED THREAD.


Once again we were in the dolorous Tower, and this time there was no
returning. They arrested him at Plymouth on the moment of his landing.
As though they could never slay him fast enough, he was put on his trial
and found guilty of abusing the King's confidence and injuring the
subjects of Spain, and condemned to death on the old sentence.

Perhaps they thought if they were not speedy that the people would not
suffer it. To kill a Raleigh was better sport than witch-burning, yet
they hardly paused from their torture of innocent crones and helpless
girls to see the lion die. One grace they gave him--that his body was to
be spared the last indignities and to be handed over to his wife for
burial where she would. "It is well, Bess," he said to her, rallying
her, "thou mayst dispose of that dead which thou hadst not always the
disposal of when living."

The last night he lived he spoke with me of my birth. I then told him
that I had held the secret all those years. "Yet you stayed, Wat," he
said gently, "though I was the enemy of your people."

"But ever my most dear and admired lord," I made answer.

Then he told me how he had always intended that I should have his
portion of the Desmond inheritance, together with certain jewels and
plate which he had hidden in a secret place in the garden at Youghall;
but he had been obliged by sore necessity to give six thousand acres to
the Lord Boyle, who was now Earl of Cork. Another six thousand the Lord
Boyle was to hold in trust for me. "The deeds are safe," he said, "and
he is bound fast. If he will not disgorge, you must even make him."

"Alas, to what end?" I asked, "seeing that by my name I am an outlawed
man."

"You might be the King's Fitzmaurice," he said, hesitatingly.

"My dear lord," I made answer, "tomorrow morn I am done with earthly
hopes. Am I one to go to court, or to present myself to my people, if
people I yet possess?"

"Why, Wat," he said gently, "I think others might love that seamed face
of yours since I do so greatly. What will you do? Will you comfort my
lady?"

"If she needs me," I made answer.

"I think she will go to her own folk," he said.

"Then I shall be free to do what I will."

"And that, Wat?"

"Seek out a hermitage far from the world."

"It is truest wisdom," he said. "I was not born to be quiet or else I
might wish that I had found wisdom in my time."

But he asked me nothing more of what I meant to do, although he placed
the deeds in my hands to carry to the Lord Boyle. I think he had so done
with this world that but for his lady's sake he had been glad his doom
was at hand. Think on it! He had been twelve years in that Tower, who
could never abide the least shackle, however gentle.

While yet I was with him he writ this verse and gave it me with a smile:

    Even such is He that takes in trust
      Our youth, our joys, our all we have
    And pays us but with earth and dust;
      Who in the dark and silent grave,
    When we have wandered all our ways
    Shuts up the story of our days;
    But from this earth, this grave, this dust,
    My God shall raise me up, I trust.

The next morning I helped to caparison him as for his wedding. Such gay
trappings for death were never seen, such rose-pink silk, bediamonded,
such white velvet, such white leathern shoes with rosettes of rubies.
Then once again I saw my lord young and glad, and so full of jests that
it grieved the good Dean of Westminster to hear him, for he thought it a
light spirit in which to meet death.

Throngs of people crowded the palace-yard of Westminster to see him for
the last time. He smiled upon them happily while he spoke his farewells
to them.

"I thank God," he said, "that He hath brought me into the light to die,
and hath not suffered me to die in the dark prison of the Tower, where I
have known a great deal of misery and sickness. And I thank God that my
fever hath not taken me at this time, as I prayed Him it might not, that
I might clear myself of some accusations laid to my charge unjustly, and
leave behind me the testimony of a true heart both to my King and
country." Then he held the crowd spellbound while he spoke in his
defence, and when he had finished, none moved, but they all pressed
closer to him as though they could not bear to leave him.

At last he sent them away himself. "I have a long journey to go," he
said, "therefore must I take my leave of you."

Afterwards he tried the temper of the axe, passing his finger along the
edge. "'Tis a sharp medicine," he said; "but one that will cure me of
all my diseases."

The sheriff asked him which way he would lay himself upon the block. "So
as the heart be right," he said, "it matters not which way the head
lies." Then he laid himself down; and since the headsman feared to
strike, and well he might fear, my lord himself hurried him. "Strike,
man, strike!" he cried; and in an instant the noblest head in England
rolled upon the ground.

So ended the glorious Sir Walter Raleigh; and musing on that end and on
the wrongs he suffered at the hands of Queen Elizabeth, I am often led
to wonder that men should raise kings and queens over them to work such
ill. For it seems to me that the great days of England were not made by
Elizabeth Tudor or Harry, her sire, but by the great men who stood
around them, and whom so often they sent to their death. Raleigh
followed Essex by a space of less than a score years, both suffering
execution; and I pray that in another world these two are friends who
jostled each other in this, but came alike to the headsman's block. The
Tudors were too fond of beheading; but they, at least, sent their
friends to the block and took the shame. I notice in these Stuarts
something more treacherous--that they permit the slaying, and then will
rend their garments.

However, what have I to do with bitterness? No sooner was my lord laid
in the grave than I set out to visit my Lord Boyle; and being a great
man now, his name carried me safely where I had not gone without. He
received me with great honor as a friend of Sir Walter Raleigh, and
entertained me well; but never a word he spoke concerning that trust.
However, I will not wrong him, for I left him after all without saying
farewell. I was little minded to dispute with him the possession of
those acres; but I paid a visit by stealth to the garden of the
Manor-house, and there dug up the treasure of which Sir Walter had
warned me, and conveyed it privily on board my vessel.

It had to be done piecemeal, for I trusted none but myself; but when my
sea-chests held all those chalices and monstrances and golden
candlesticks, we weighed anchor one night of storm, and sailed from
Youghall without so much as farewell to my Lord Boyle. However, it
comforted him doubtless that I never spoke of the trust, but disappeared
from his world that stormy night as though I had gone on a witch's
broomstick.

I had fain given mine uncle's bones burial, but that might not be; so I
left him in the consecrated place where he had lain so many years--to
the birds of heaven and the angels.

But for myself, I and my sea-chests were put ashore at a little French
town, from whence in due time I made my way to Douai, and restored the
treasure to Her from whom it had been taken. And since Tyburn Tree had
so greatly added to the glorious throng of the martyrs, and the ranks
were thinned of those who would follow in their footsteps, I asked the
Fathers of the English College to accept me among them, which of their
graciousness they did; for I was grown sick of the world. And who cares
that Father Walter is pock-pitted and hath one blind eye?

Once I had cared only to be of the flower of knighthood. Now all my
dream is that I might some day earn that greeting of St. Philip to my
forerunners in these gray halls--_Salvete, flos martyrum_!


                PRINTED BY BENZIGER BROTHERS, NEW YORK.







*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT CAPTAIN: A STORY OF
THE DAYS OF SIR WALTER RALEIGH ***




A Word from Project Gutenberg


We will update this book if we find any errors.

This book can be found under: http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/35896

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works to protect the
Project Gutenberg(tm) concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a
registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks,
unless you receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything
for copies of this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may
use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative
works, reports, performances and research. They may be modified and
printed and given away - you may do practically _anything_ with public
domain eBooks.  Redistribution is subject to the trademark license,
especially commercial redistribution.



The Full Project Gutenberg License


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg(tm) mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg(tm) License available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1. General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg(tm)
electronic works


*1.A.* By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg(tm)
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the
terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all
copies of Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works in your possession. If
you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

*1.B.* "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things
that you can do with most Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works even
without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph
1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic
works. See paragraph 1.E below.

*1.C.* The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of
Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works. Nearly all the individual works
in the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you
from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating
derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project
Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the
Project Gutenberg(tm) mission of promoting free access to electronic
works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg(tm) works in compliance with
the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg(tm) name
associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this
agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full
Project Gutenberg(tm) License when you share it without charge with
others.

*1.D.* The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg(tm) work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

*1.E.* Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

*1.E.1.* The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg(tm) License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg(tm) work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org

*1.E.2.* If an individual Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic work is
derived from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating
that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can
be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying
any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a
work with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on
the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs
1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg(tm) trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

*1.E.3.* If an individual Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic work is
posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and
distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and
any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg(tm) License for all works posted
with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of
this work.

*1.E.4.* Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project
Gutenberg(tm) License terms from this work, or any files containing a
part of this work or any other work associated with Project
Gutenberg(tm).

*1.E.5.* Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg(tm) License.

*1.E.6.* You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg(tm) work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg(tm) web site
(http://www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or
expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a
means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include
the full Project Gutenberg(tm) License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

*1.E.7.* Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg(tm) works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

*1.E.8.* You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works
provided that

  - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
    the use of Project Gutenberg(tm) works calculated using the method
    you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
    to the owner of the Project Gutenberg(tm) trademark, but he has
    agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
    Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
    within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
    legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
    payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
    Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
    Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
    Literary Archive Foundation."

  - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
    you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
    does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg(tm)
    License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
    copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
    all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg(tm)
    works.

  - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
    any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
    electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
    receipt of the work.

  - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
    distribution of Project Gutenberg(tm) works.


*1.E.9.* If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg(tm) trademark. Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3. below.

*1.F.*

*1.F.1.* Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg(tm) collection.
Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works, and the
medium on which they may be stored, may contain "Defects," such as, but
not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription
errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a
defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

*1.F.2.* LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg(tm) trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees.
YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY,
BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN
PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND
ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR
ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES
EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

*1.F.3.* LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

*1.F.4.* Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

*1.F.5.* Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

*1.F.6.* INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg(tm)
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg(tm) work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg(tm)


Project Gutenberg(tm) is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg(tm)'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg(tm) collection will remain
freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and
permanent future for Project Gutenberg(tm) and future generations. To
learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and
how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the
Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org .


Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state
of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue
Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is
64-6221541. Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf . Contributions to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the
full extent permitted by U.S.  federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official page
at http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation


Project Gutenberg(tm) depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where
we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside
the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways
including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate,
please visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic
works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg(tm)
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg(tm) eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg(tm) eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless
a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks
in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

    http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg(tm),
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
