The Project Gutenberg EBook of Fiscal Ballads, by Harry Graham

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Fiscal Ballads

Author: Harry Graham

Release Date: May 5, 2011 [EBook #36038]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FISCAL BALLADS ***




Produced by Mark C. Orton, David E. Brown and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









FISCAL BALLADS




  FISCAL BALLADS

  BY

  HARRY GRAHAM

  ('COL. D. STREAMER')

  AUTHOR OF
  "BALLADS OF THE BOER WAR," "RUTHLESS RHYMES FOR HEARTLESS
  HOMES," "PERVERTED PROVERBS," "MISREPRESENTATIVE
  MEN," ETC., ETC.

  LONDON
  EDWARD ARNOLD
  41 & 43 MADDOX STREET, BOND STREET, W.

  1905

  [_All rights reserved_]




  TO
  P. L.


  Beneath your roof I chanced to write
  These Ballads of the Fiscal Fight,
            A somewhat scant selection;
  So do not deem me indiscreet
  If I should 'dump' them at your feet,
            And ask for your Protection!
  Whate'er you be, or Fair or Free,
  Be still, as ever, fair--to me!




NOTE


Many of these 'Fiscal Ballads' have appeared in the columns of the
_Westminster Gazette_, and are here republished by permission.




CONTENTS


                                 PAGE

  FOREWORD                          1

  PROTECTION                        4

  RETALIATION                       8

  THE COLONIES                     12

  PREFERENTIAL TREATMENT           17

  BRITISH TRADE                    22

  CONTROVERSIAL ENTERTAINMENT      28

  'STATISTICS'                     33

  'CONTROVERSIAL METHODS'          39

  A MESSAGE FROM BROADMOOR         42

  THE TURNING TIDE                 45

  ENVOI                            49




FISCAL BALLADS




FOREWORD


  I'm only a common workin'-man,
    With a eye to my vittles an' beer,
  But afore I puts my money on Joe,
  There's a thing or two as I'd like to know,
    Which 'e 'asn't a-made quite clear.

  I admit as it sounds attractive-like
    For to shut them furriners out,
  But every Board School nipper knows
  As there's things wot only a furriner grows
    As we couldn't well do without.

  There's sugar, an' rice, an' cocoa-nibs,
    There's cawfy an' tea as well,
  As we never could raise, suppose we tried,
  And we _'as_ to buy 'em somewheres outside,
    And the furriners 'as to sell.

  But they don't give nothin' for nothink--
    Which you can't dispute the fac'--
  An' we're sending 'em hevery bit as much
  Of our cotton-goods, an' our coal, an' such,
    As 'll pay the beggars back.

  An' the less we buys o' them furrin goods,
    The less of our own's returned;
  Which it's plain to see as the more they take,
  The more our firms 'as a chance to make,
    An' the 'igher the wages earned.

  For it's British Labour as pays the price
    O' them goods as crosses the sea,
  An' suppose as the furrin imports fail,
  It's the case of a empty dinner-pail
    For the workin'-man like me.

  Let the furriner send 'is foodstuffs in--
    Lor' bless you, I ain't afraid!
  For the more we markets with other lands,
  The more employment for British 'ands,
    An' the better for British trade!

  I 'asn't no love for the German man,
    Nor yet for the 'eathen Turk,
  But I ain't a fool as 'll shut the door
  In the face of even a blooming Boer,
    If the beggar can give me work.

  For it's work I wants, an' it's wages too,
    An' I'm lookin' afore I leap;
  I won't go chucking a job away,
  On the chance of a possible rise o' pay,
    While food's to be 'ad so cheap.

  I'm only a workin' artisan,
    But the truth I'd like to know;
  I ain't for takin' no risks, myself,
  Of a empty grate an' a empty shelf--
    No, thanks, sir, not for Joe!

  'E says as 'e'll 'sweep the Country'!
    And 'e'll do it too, maybe;
  If the workin'-men don't 'ave a care,
  They'll find as there ain't no Country there,
    When 'e's swep' it--into the sea!




PROTECTION


  I've got the dumpophobia bad,
    As is easy for to see;
  (When a little lad I was bit by a mad
    Manufacturin' man, maybe!)
  An' I simply goes clean off my chump
  If anyone 'appens to mention 'dump.'

  For it's 'Out wi' they furriner folks!' sez I;
    Will we take it 'lying down,'
  When they dumps cheap goods (as we wants to buy)
    Into every British town?
  (Tho' per'aps it's a thing as they wouldn't do
  If we 'adn't a-given 'em orders to!)

  But there's good times coming, an' thanks to Joe,
    When the Hempire 'll stand on 'er own;
  We'll be quit o' the food them furriners grow,
    An' rely on ourselves alone.
  For us, an' the Colonies too, I lay,
  Can grow it as good an' better'n they!

  We're a British race, an' we'll soon depend
    On the produc's o' British soil;
  No more of our 'ard-earned wage we'll spend
    Upon cheap American oil;
  Them dazzlin' lamps is a big mistake,
  While there's tallow candles o' British make!

  We've the finest coal in the 'ole wide earth,
    Which we used for to sell abroad;
  But now as we knows 'ow much it's worth,
    We'll save it, an' 'old it, an' 'oard.
  (Tho' the pitmen 'll 'ave a word to say
  When the mines shuts down an' they're turned away!)

  No more o' the Roosian's corn we'll touch,
    Nor the South American wheat;
  An' we'll gladly pay, if it's twice as much,
    To 'ave _British_ loaves to eat!
  (For the English working-man, these days,
  'E must learn for to live on Colonial maize.)

  If there's less to eat it'll taste more sweet,
    When the Britishers all combine;
  We'll 'ave tinned an' frozen Noo Zealand meat,
    Washed down with Australian wine!
  (Which it ain't so terrible bad to drink,
  If you fancies honions mixed with ink.)

  No more o' your Roosian sable cloaks
    For the gentry, nor Paris 'ats;
  They're buying their bunnets at Sevenoaks,
    An' the trimmin's is 'Ounsditch cats;
  An' that furrin' jewelry's just a sham,
  They can sell you as good in Birming'_am_.

  Them Italian organs 'll 'ave to go,
    An' the ice-cream barrers as well,
  When we're buying a 'alfpenny glass o' snow
    From some smart Canadian swell.
  An' no more o' your music from Germanee,
  When our motto is 'Bands acrost the sea!'

  When the furriner's foodstuffs out we shuts,
    We'll still 'ave the run of our teeth
  On the cocoa we makes off o' cocoanuts
    As they grows upon 'Ampstead 'Eath!
  An' o' British pluck we can surely brag,
  When we're smoking the 'omegrown Irish shag!

  We're a-buyin' our food too cheap, sez Joe
    (If you listens to 'is advice);
  The cost o' the loaf's too small, an' so
    'E's a-trying to raise the price!

         *       *       *       *       *

  This 'ere Pertection's a splendid plan--
  But it's werry 'ard lines on the workin'-man!




RETALIATION


  I've 'ad a quarrel with 'Enery Slade,
    'Oo keeps our only village inn;
  'E said as 'is shoes was badly made,
    An' I said as 'is 'alf-an'-'alf was thin.
  'No more o' _your_ boots I'll buy,' sez 'e,
  'An' no more o' _your_ beer,' sez I, 'for me!'

  Nex' time as 'is shoes was out o' repair,
    'E took 'em to Lunnon, 'Enery did;
  An' wot wi' the bill an' the railway fare,
    Why, it cost 'im werry near 'alf a quid.
  If 'e'd stayed at 'ome an' give _me_ the job,
  'E wouldn't 'a paid but a couple o' bob!

  Now, tinkering boots is a thirsty trade,
    Which them as 'as tried it won't deny,
  But I wouldn't get beer orf o' 'Enery Slade,
    An' there wasn't no other's as I could buy;
  An' so, for a month very near, I think,
  I was starving a'most for the lack of a drink.

  But at last to a comperimize we come,
    An' 'e said as my boots was right enough,
  An' I told 'im--arter I'd tasted some--
    As 'is beer wasn't really 'alf bad stuff;
  So we both shakes 'ands on the village green,
  An' we seed what a couple o' fools we'd been.

  But there wasn't no good come out o' the fight,
    An' we're both worse off than we was before;
  Tho' I sits in 'is private bar of a night,
    An' 'e gives me 'is shoes to mend once more;
  For Slade's lost 'is temper, an' eight bob clear,
  An' I'll _never_ catch up wi' that three weeks' beer!

  Now if England quarrels with Roosia, say,
    Or them aggrannoying United States,
  She can tax their imports, an' make 'em pay
    More 'eavier dooties an' 'igher rates;
  But suppose as we taxes the goods they sell,
  It's likely as they'll tax ours as well.

  An' o' manufactured goods, an' such,
    We're sendin' three times as much as they;
  So I can't see as 'ow we'll be gaining much,
    With a three times 'eavier tax to pay.
  (It's a game as two can play, you see,
  An' they'll be a-suffering less than we!)

  For the balance o' goods as they sells to us
    Is the corn, an' the grain, an' the foods we eat;
  An' it's likely the working class 'll cuss
    If we levies a tax on the furrin wheat,
  Which 'll merely fall on the poor man's 'ead,
  By a-raising the price of 'is loaf o' bread.

  This Retaliation's a tom-fool game;
    If we taxes the furriner's barley 'ere,
  We shall only be 'aving ourselves to blame
    When we 'as to pay more for our dinner-beer!
  Free Food is the best for British Trade,
  --An' for you, an' for me, an' for 'Enery Slade!




THE COLONIES


          I've been 'earing, round the pubs,
          As the British Lion's cubs
      Is a gettin' out of 'and, and stubborn-'earted;
          For the Colonies, they say,
          Is a driftin' right away,
      From the Motherland wot seed 'em safely started.
  But it's only Little Englanders, Protectionists, an' such,
  Keeps a-'owling an' a-crying as the Empire's 'out o' touch.'

          There was Canada, I know;
          Kipling said as she 'ad snow,
      Which (o' course) was met with angry contradictions;
          Then Haustralia come next,
          An' one Guv'nor found a text
      To remind 'em of their ancestors' convictions.
  It's unfortunit, but still we must admit it for a fact,
  As we Englishmen is hev'rvwhere notorious for tact.

          But wotever folks may shout
          An' make grievances about,
      There's uncommon little grounds as they can go on;
          For the strength o' Hempire lies
          More in sentimental ties
      Than in any 'business interests' an' so on;
  An' there's feelings of affection an' o' kindness as is worth
  Twice as much as all them there 'commercial interests' on earth.

          An' our Colonies 'll stand
          By the good ole Motherland,
      Tho' she may per'aps at times be rather trying;
          For they knows as well as we
          That there's nowheres 'alf so free
      As them countries where the British flag's a-flying.
  An' with kindly eyes they looks acrost (wot poets calls) the foam
  To that distant little island as they still considers ''ome.'

          An' they'll stick, if they are wise,
          To them sentimental ties--
      Never mind if they can't value 'em in dollars;
          For they're independent blokes,
          An' they wouldn't stand no yokes,
      Nor they doesn't 'old with wearin' chains an' collars.
  (Even dawgs an' such 'll love you more, I've not the slightest doubt,
  If you turns 'em loose, an' keeps 'em free, an' lets 'em run about.)

          If them Colonies _did_ drift,
          For theirselves they'd 'ave to shift--
      It's a case o' 'stand alone' or 'annexation';
          Tho' their lads is sterling stuff,
          Still, they're 'ardly big enough
      For to 'old their own agin' some furrin nation;
  An' their armies o' militia-men is hexcellent--but small,
  While o' navies to defend their coasts they 'asn't none at all!

          Yes, they knows, as well as we,
          As it's Hengland rules the sea,--
      (Tho' per'aps it ain't for me to go and say it!)--
          An' it's Henglishmen as pays
          For the Navy, nowadays,--
      (Any'ow it ain't Canadians as pay it!)--
  So they gives to us the priv'lege of defendin' of 'em 'ere,
  If we lets 'em run their own concerns an' doesn't interfere.

          We've a market, as they knows,
          For the produce wot they grows,
      Which commercially's a quite sufficient fetter;
          An' so long as they can trade
          At the present prices paid,
      Why, they don't want nothink easier nor better.
  An' a preference won't make 'em no more loyal than before,
  For they've proved their bloomin' loyalty a 'undred times and more.

          If we likes to pay 'em 'igh
          For their foodstuffs as we buy,
      Well, it's natural as 'ow they must applaud it;
          But they wants no preference
          At the Motherland's expense,
      If she ain't in no position to afford it;
  An' they knows, as well as we do, 'ow that any bounties paid
  Must be 'ard on British workin'-men, an' bad for British trade.

          For they showed us, in the war,
          They was loyal to the core,
      An' they're ready for to 'elp us when we flounders;
          An' tho' 'ere and there, per'aps,
          There's some discontented chaps,
      As 'll grumble, like them there Alaskan Bounders;
  Still, they're British to the backbone when the dawgs o' war is loosed,
  An' they'll stick by Mother England till the cows comes 'ome to roost!




PREFERENTIAL TREATMENT


  We was always a hintimate family,
    An' we doted on one another;
  I was genuine fond o' my Uncle Fred,
  And o' Cousin Jim I've a-often said
    'E was more like my own born brother;
  An' a feeling of 'earty affection I 'ad
  For Kate, wot 'ad married my eldest lad.

  Now, my Uncle Fred keeps the 'Dumpshire Arms,'
    An' Jim's in the grocery trade;
  While Kate 'as a little front-window shop,
  Where she sells stone-bottles o' ginger-pop
    An' sweets as is all 'ome-made;
  And _I_ earns enough for my board an' booze,
  A-makin' an' mendin' o' boots an' shoes.

  Last winter it were, when times was bad,
    That Jim 'ad a 'appy thought;
  'Ow fine it'd be if we'd all agree
  On a kind of a mutual trade, sez 'e,
    For our things as we sold an' bought;
  We'd 'elp one another (which sounded nice),
  An' be getting our goods at a lower price.

  I'd tinker the boots o' the family cheap,
    An' get 'ome on my uncle's beer,
  Nor I wouldn't be 'avin' to strain my means
  A-buying expensive pertaters an' greens
    Orf o' Cousin Jim, no fear!
  An' for luxuries, such as the missus eats,
  I could get 'em 'alf-price orf o' Katie's sweets.

  But it didn't work. For my Uncle Fred
    'E treated me crool unfair;
  I sold 'im some shoes, starvation price,
  But I 'adn't a-tasted 'is beer but twice
    When 'e said as I'd drunk my share!
  Then I mended a couple o' pairs o' Kate's--
  But sweets is a thing as the missus 'ates.

  Tho' for Cousin Jimmy I took an' made
    A set o' new 'eels and soles,
  I was paying for greens at a 'igher rate
  Than 'e charged to my Uncle Fred, or to Kate,
    An' 'is cheeses was full of 'oles!
  ('E was getting 'is liquor 'alf-price, no doubt,
  While _I_ 'ad to bally well go without!)

  Now, I 'aven't spoke to my Uncle Fred
    For nigh on six months or more,
  An' I've ceased to 'ave dealings with Cousin Jim
  (For at 'eart I'd a-often suspected 'im),
    An' I never won't darken 'is door;
  An' I've 'ad quite enough o' that rubbish o' Kate's,
  Wot was always the kind of a woman I 'ates.

  Yes, family ties is a splendid thing
    If it's _sentiment_ keeps 'em there;
  When it comes to a question o' gold and gain,
  They turns at once to a hirksome chain,
    Such as nobody wants to wear;
  When matters of money appears on the floor,
  Them family feelings walks out at the door!

  If England's a-going to 'aggle an' fight
    For Colonial Preference,
  If the love of 'er sons for the Motherland
  Is a kind of a feeling as only can stand
    On a basis o' shillings an' pence,
  That sort o' foundation won't last overlong,
  An' there's something, I lay, must be 'opelessly wrong.

  When the Colonies 'eld out their 'ands to us,
    It wasn't for British gold;
  But who 'll vouch for the love o' the Britisher-born,
  When 'e bargains 'is honour for tariffs on corn,
    An' 'is loyalty's bartered an' sold?
  (A 'appy 'armonious fam'ly we'll make,
  A-arguing who shall 'ave most o' the cake!)

  We shall 'ave them Australian Governments
    A-striking for better terms,
  An' there's sure to be plenty o' grumbling when
  The Canadian manufacturing men
    Is competing wi' Henglish firms;
  An' each separate part o' the Hempire 'll feel
  As the others is 'aving the best o' the deal.

  From which, if you follows my meaning through,
    There's a obvious moral to draw:
  Let's consider the Motherland's future, afore
  We allows 'er to risk being Mother no more,
    An' becoming the Mother-in-law!
  For if loyalty's paid for, it ain't worth a thought,
  An' affection's a fraud if it 'as to be bought.




BRITISH TRADE


  Oh, why was I born a English lad,
    In a island all shut in by sea?
  Wot a much better chance I might 'ave 'ad
    If I'd only been 'made in Germanee'!
  Oh, why was I thus unwilling 'urled
  On the blooming 'dust-'eap o' the world.'

  No doubt as the German artisan
    Don't get very much in the matter o' pay;
  But 'e works on the seven-days-weekly plan,
    With a haverage thirteen hours a day.
  An' 'e 'asn't no time for to sit an' think,
  Nor money enough to take to drink!

  Then give me a permanent German job,
    With nothink at all but work to do;
  With weekly wages o' sixteen bob,
    For to keep myself an' the missus too;
  A-makin' them gimcrack German toys
  For poor little English gals an' boys.

  To my London 'ome I'll say good-bye,
    For I 'asn't no use for a open port,
  Where the workin' wage is a deal too 'igh,
    An' the workin' hours is far too short;
  Where a workin'-man 'as time to sleep,
  An' food's to be 'ad so rotten cheap.

  A German factory's more my taste,
    With none o' them lazy English ways,
  Where there ain't no money or time to waste
    On ridic'lous 'beanos' an' 'olidays;
  An' the workin' classes can just contrive
  To earn sufficient to keep alive.

  When I slaves all day at a German trade,
    A-makin' them goods as they dumps down 'ere,
  When I'm overworked an' I'm underpaid,
    Till I feels as weak as that German beer,
  I'll think o' my English 'ome maybe,
  Where everythink (but the drinks) is free!

  When I gets back 'ome of a Sunday night,
    With a supper o' nice black bread to eat,
  I'll 'ave such a 'ealthy appetite,
    I never won't need no butcher's meat;
  For 'unger, o' course, is the finest sauce,
  When you're swollerin' sausages made of 'orse!

  An' I begs to state, when I comes 'ome late,
    With a 'ungry kind of a look in my eye,
  If I 'as to wait, with a hempty plate,
    Till the blooming cat's-meat-man comes by,
  I'll think wi' scorn o' the old 'dust-'eap,'
  Where mutton an' beef's to be bought so cheap.

  For we don't know nothink o' 'orse-flesh 'ere,
    But Joe 'e'll learn us to eat it, when
  'Is tariff makes British meat too dear
    For the pockets o' British workin' men;
  An' they're 'aving their Little Marys lined
  With a diet o' maize an' bacon rind!

  When the price goes up of our meat and bread,
    By a grand Imperial scheme o' Joe's,
  We'll get cheap sugar and tea instead,
    An' we'll buy no food orf o' Britain's foes;
  For we'll 'ave no need o' the furriner's crops
  When we're living on sweets washed down wi' slops!

  There's lessons to learn from German trade,
    In spite o' this foolish fiscal fuss;
  Tho' their peoples ain't no better paid,
    Nor near as well orf for food as us;
  For, wotever the German workman's lot,
  'E knows 'ow to use wot brains 'e's got!

  An' if _our_ employers 'd only learn
    A few o' they furrin commercial ways,
  To make the business their first concern,
    An' not be so set upon 'olidays,
  They wouldn't be always a-'urrying orf,
  For the sake of a afternoon at gorf!

  With the wants o' the trade they'd keep in touch,
    An' 'd sometimes stay at the orfice late;
  If their business methods ain't up to much,
    They, at any rate, could be up-to-date!
  For there isn't no need of a fiscal fence,
  If you've henergy coupled wi' common-sense!

  We English ain't a-doing our best,
    An' that's the reason we loses ground;
  It's time as we took more interest,
    An' the chance 'as come to buck-up all round.
  No need for to put it in doggerel rhymes,
  To see as we're right be'ind the times.

  For it's Heducation we wants, that's all,
    To make us the country we ought to be.
  If we rides for a fall at a tariff wall,
    We'll very soon find ourselves at sea.
  (Which the simile's somewot mixed, you'll say,
  But the meanin's clear as the open day!)

  Then 'ere's a 'ealth to the Motherland,
    For all as they says she's goin' to pot;
  Ole England's 'wooden walls' 'll stand
    When the fiscal fences is all forgot!
  An' she'll 'old 'er own, by land or sea,
  So long as 'er sons an' 'er trade is free!




CONTROVERSIAL ENTERTAINMENT


  On Saturdays I often goes
    An' spends a evenin' in the pit
  At one of them vari'ty shows,
    An' makes a 'appy night of it;
  But since this fiscal row begun,
  I've 'ad to look elsewheres for fun.

  I'm partial to a music-'all,
    But when last week I chanced to go,
  I 'eard some low-necked blighter bawl
    A Jingo song in praise o' Joe;
  'No more will England,' sez this crank,
  'Trade with the German an' the Yank!'

  At furrin countries, o'er the sea,
    A lot o' silly jeers 'e 'urled;
  Thinks I, where would ole England be
    Without the market o' the world?
  We'd make a living, I suppose,
  A washin' of each other's clo's!

  Nex' come the cinematograph,
    An' Joe, I needn't say, was there;
  A picture of 'is upper 'alf,
    A-settin' smilin' in a chair.
  (There's no photographer in town
  Would dare to 'take _'im_ lying down!')

  Then a play-actress come along,
    A saucy bunnet on 'er 'ead;
  She didn't sing no fiscal song,
    She spoke a fiscal pome instead.
  'These is,' she 'astened to explain,
  'The words o' Joseph Chamberlain!'

  I 'eard that Yankee lady's rhyme,
    An' then I took my coat an' 'at;
  I've read some drivel in my time,
    But nothink quite so bad as that.
  (She was a Himport, I suppose,
  Dumped down by foes o' poor ole Joe's!)

  I took the kids to Drury Lane,
    An' 'eard a lion comic sing
  A song as told us once again
    To keep 'Protecting' hev'rything.
  Thinks I, 'ullo! but if that's so,
  Can't we protect ourselves from Joe?

  I ain't bad-tempered, 'Eaven knows;
    A peaceful life is wot I'd choose;
  If people likes this scheme o' Joe's,
    They're more than welcome to their views;
  They loves dear food, I've not a doubt,
  An' any'ow that's their look-out.

  But when I seeks the gall'ry door
    At one of them there public shows,
  I doesn't pay a bob or more
    To 'ear about this plan o' Joe's;
  I simply wants to get away
  From controversies of the day.

  We 'as enough o' argument
    At 'ome, on 'bus-top, tube, or train;
  An' most on us 'll be content
    If 'entertainments' entertain;
  But Joe's as bad as the perlice,
  'E won't give no one any peace.

  An' seems to me, as plain as day,
    It's actors' business to amuse;
  If they can't no'ow keep away
    From giving us their fiscal views,
  Why should the public be denied
  A chance to 'ear the other side?

  I 'opes it won't be very long
    Afore George Robey lets us 'ear
  A really fust-class fiscal song
    Wrote by the Dook o' Devonsheer;
  While on the biograph we sees
  Them comic cuts o' F.C.G.'s.

  If Ruddy Kipling would but write
    A Free Trade ballad, or a glee,
  Which Arthur Roberts could recite,
    Or Dunville sing with Mr. Tree,
  I'd pay my money at the door,
  Nor wouldn't ask for nothin' more.

  But while the music-'alls descend
    To nothing but Protection 'turns,'
  There's other better ways to spend
    The little money that I earns.
  I only asks to see fair-play,
  An', failin' that, I'll stop away.




'STATISTICS'


  I likes my glass of 'arf-an'-'arf,
    Nor needn't make no bones about it;
  But still I ain't the bloke to chaff
    Them fellers as can do without it;
  I pities 'em, but I respex
  Toteetallers o' heither sex.

  I used to be the same myself,
    Would never touch a thing but water,
  Nor 'ave no bottles on my shelf
    Containin' wot they didn't oughter.
  (O' water now I 'ates the sight,
  Except to wash in, Sunday night).

  An' wot cured me o' temperance
    Was neither tracts nor indigestion,
  But simply that I read, by chance,
    Some dry statistics on the question,
  Which proved to me, beyond a doubt,
  That lamps as wasn't oiled went out!

  In them dark moments o' the war--
    Of Nineteen 'Undred now I'm writing--
  My country raised a mounted corps,
    As seed a deal o' gallant fighting;
  An' nigh a third of all that lot
  Was touched by fever, shell or shot.

  Of the toteetallers as went,
    Wot boasted o' their sober 'abits,
  As much as _thirty-five per cent._
    Took fever bad, an' died like rabbits;
  While, out o' them as liquored free,
  We didn't lose but twenty-three!

  When them statistics first I 'eard,
    Nobody could 'a hacted quicker;
  I 'urried to the 'George the Third,'
    An' simply dosed myself wi' liquor.
  (Since then a many 'armless orgies
  I've 'ad wi' them there Royal Georges.)

  An' only yesterday I 'ears
    The state o' things as 'ad existed:
  O' them _toteetal_ volunteers
    There wasn't only _three_ enlisted!
  When _one_ fell sick, an' orf 'e went,
  'E made that Thirty-five per cent.!

  Yes, figures proves you hanythink,
    To suit your private way o' thinking,
  They proves the blessedness o' drink,
    Or else they proves the curse o' drinking;
  An', if you manages 'em right,
  They proves a'most that black is white!

  They proves that British Industries
    Is being ruined by the 'dumper';
  They proves this year (as ever is)
    To be wot people calls a 'bumper.'
  An' when on exports they begin,
  Lor! wot a muddle they gets in!

  They proves as 'ow the iron trade
    Is prosperous (or else declining);
  That more (or less) was never made
    By them as is engaged in mining.
  (We gets a varied mental meal
  Served up to us on plates o' steel!)

  They proves, without the slightest doubt,
    Our manufacturies is growin';
  They proves we're being quite cut out,
    Or else that our 'ome trade's a-goin'.
  (In which, per'aps, they ain't so wrong--
  It _is_ a-goin', goin' strong!)

  But there's some undisputed fac's--
    An' even figures won't gainsay it:
  One is, if you puts on a tax,
    Someone or other _'as_ to pay it.
  ('We'll tax the poor man's corn,' says Joe;
  'But touch 'is bread? Oh dear me, no!')

  If England needs our pounds an' pence,
    An' taxes of our food to raise 'em,
  It don't require much common-sense
    To see as the consumer pays 'em;
  The thing I'm anxious for to learn
  Is wot does _'e_ get in return?

  When prices they goes up a bit,
    The rich exchequer of the nation
  Is bound in honour to remit
    Somethink by way o' compensation.
  (Tho', all the same, I'd like to see
  The bloke as talks of _tea_ to _me_!)

  An' that's a ticklish game to win;
    We'll stay exactly where we are if
  Them blooming furrin goods comes in,
    In spite of our protective tariff!
  'Ha! but we'll keep 'em out,' sez you.
  Then where's our promised revenoo?

  If that's the price as must be paid
    To forward Joe's Imperial mission;
  If we must bolster up our trade,
    An' not allow no competition,
  By taxing them as 'as to buy,
  'Gawd 'elp our British trade!' sez I.




'CONTROVERSIAL METHODS'


  It doesn't matter if I goes
    Inside our local Workman's Club
  To 'ave a game o' dominoes,
    Or drops into the nearest pub;
  In 'arf a moment in 'll walk
  Some bloke as starts a fiscal talk.

  An' if I ever tries, per'aps,
    To criticise this scheme o' Joe's,
  There's always some excited chaps
    As leads from arguments to blows.
  An' then we throws the things about,
  Till someone calls the chucker-out.

  They states that England's gone to pot,
    That ev'ry trade is lost to 'er;
  An' if I dares to say it's not,
    They calls me 'Little Englander'!
  (On one I 'ad to use my fist:
  'E said I was a 'hoptimist.')

  Nor yet it ain't no furrin foes
    As thus belittles Britain's fame;
  It's partisans o' good old Joe's
    As brings discredit on 'er name,
  By shouting out to ev'ryone
  That little England's day is done.

  One night Jim Adams sez to me,
    'Ole England's rotten to the core!'
  An' when 'e finds I don't agree,
    'E ups an' calls me a pro-Boer!
  (I 'ad a word or two with 'im;
  'E's still in 'orspital, is Jim!)

  If them so-called Imperialists
    Is blokes as runs their country down,
  Upon 'er ruined state insists,
    An' tries to blacken 'er renown,
  Then I for one 'ud much prefer
  To be a 'Little Englander.'

  If wot their politicians styles
    The 'patriotic' point of view
  Is saying that these British Isles
    'As lost their trade an' credit too,
  I ain't a patriot no more:
  I'm just a hoptimist pro-Boer!

  I'm not the sort o' chap as blames
    Them folks as don't agree wi' me,
  But when they calls me silly names
    Because my fiscal views is Free,
  It don't require no further flaws
  To see the weakness o' their cause.




A MESSAGE FROM BROADMOOR


  Altho' my brain is sound and well,
    An' mentally I've nothing wrong,
  They've locked me in a padded cell,
    An' watches me the 'ole day long;
  'Ow did I get in such a fix?
  'Twas all along o' politics.

  I'd studied Joe's Protection plan,
    An' thought I'd see what I could do
  To benefit my fellow-man
    By practisin' 'is 'opeful view
  That Exports is the all in all,
  And Himports should be nil--or small.

  So, when I stayed with Uncle Bill
    (My visit ain't improved 'is manners),
  I managed, when I left, to fill
    My pockets with 'is best 'Avannahs;
  The cigarettes I left be'ind
  Was quite the cheapest I could find.

  Yet Uncle Bill 'e couldn't see
    That since 'is Exports far exceeded
  'Is Himports--thanks, o' course, to me--
    That was exactly what he needed
  To make 'im prosperous again;
  'E merely said I was insane!

  'E couldn't understand, wot's more,
    ('E was a Cobdenite, an' still is),
  Why, when I traded at the door
    'Is hovercoat for Weary Willie's,
  'E, not the tramp, 'ad been the gainer;
  And yet--could anythink be plainer?

  One day a foreign merchant fleet
    Was anchored orf a British pier;
  The cargo, mostly Russian wheat,
    Designed for himportation 'ere;
  True to my principles, that night
  I blew it up with dynamite.

         *       *       *       *       *

  The jury was a set o' twelve
    Old fossils o' the Asquith school;
  The judge was one they ought to shelve;
    My counsel was a bloomin' fool;
  'E talked o' my 'disordered brain,'
  An' never mentioned Chamberlain!

  So now they've sent me to a spot
    Congenial to my fiscal notions,
  Which, as I needn't say, is not
    The same as Devonsheer's or Goschen's.
  But I'm not mad, I must insist:
  I'm merely a Protectionist!




THE TURNING TIDE


  Jim 'Icks was a Tory, ten years back;
    An' 'e cheered at each Tory win.
  An' 'e'd stand an' argue as white was black,
    For to 'elp them Tories in.
  But times (an' parties) is changed since then,
  An' 'e's wishful to 'elp 'em out agen.

  'Rat!' sez you? Maybe that's true.
    Nor 'e ain't the only one
  As 'eard wot them Tories _said_ they'd do,
    An' as seed wot them Tories _done_;
  An' 'e don't feel noways bound, don't Jim,
  To blokes as 'as broke their word with 'im.

  'E nursed 'is party a many a year,
    An' 'e swollered their party tricks.
  Just draw up a cheer to the fire, an' 'ear
    Wot they promised the likes of 'Icks.
  An' I'll tell you arterwards, if I can,
  Wot the Tories _done_ for the workin'-man.

         *       *       *       *       *

  Chamberlain, 'e was the fust to speak,--
    An', o' course, 'e spoke cocksure,--
  Of a pension of 'arf a crown a week
    For the old, 'ard-workin' poor.
  (An' many a cap was raised to Joe,
  When 'e made that promise, ten year ago.)

  Balfour nex' to the 'ustings comes,
    With a scheme for to 'elp improve
  Them dwellin'-'ouses in crowded slums,
    Where there warn't no room to move.
  (An' many a 'ope was kep' alive
  By the thought o' that promise o' '95.)

  Then come a plan for to keep away
    Them furriners orf our shores;
  We 'asn't no use for the likes o' they,
    Wi' the crowds at our poor-'ouse doors.
  (But our English workmen is still denied,
  An' our English waiters can wait--outside!)

         *       *       *       *       *

  Ten year ago, that were. To-day
    Such schemes is a trifle flat.
  'Twas Election-time, as I needn't say,
    When they promised the likes o' that.
  An' our Unemployed in their thousands swarm,
  An' our Poor Law waits for the pledged Reform.

  Ten year ago, that were; an' yet
    We're a-watchin', with 'opeless eye,
  Our slum-choked women-folk starve an' sweat,
    An' our stunted children die.
  An' late an' early, early an' late,
  The old men waits at the work'us gate.

  I wouldn't be 'ard on them Tory chaps--
    No doubt as they done their best;
  But I can't 'elp thinkin' some'ow, per'aps,
    They'd be none the worst of a rest.
  That 'undred majority makes 'em slow,
  Let alone all the trouble they've 'ad with Joe.

  It's easy to sneer when you once begins,
    An' it's easy to badger an' blame;
  When the 'ins' is 'outs,' and the 'outs' is 'ins,'
    Very like they'll be just the same!
  No better, per'aps, but at least no wuss;
  An' they can't very well do _less_ for us!

  Wot can this Guv'ment show to-day
    But them promises throwed aside?
  An' a country's confidence washed away
    On the ebb of a Tory tide?

         *       *       *       *       *

  Ten long years since they fust began!
  Ten good years for to plot an' plan!
  An' wot 'a they done for the workin'-man?




ENVOI


  PROTECTIONIST! (if you exist)
  Whose sympathies I can't enlist,
        Be sparing of your curses!
  Ah, don't abuse my Fiscal VIEWS,
  But, out of pity for the Muse,
        Look only at my VERSES!

  FREE TRADER, too, I beg of you,
  Whatever else you think or do,
        My lack of skill excuse. Ah!
  No doubt my VERSE could not be worse,
  And weak the rhymes that I rehearse;
        But, then, how sound my VIEWS are!

  (Thus may I strengthen--or convert,
  And no one's feelings need be hurt!)


BILLING AND SONS, LTD., PRINTERS, GUILDFORD




_BY THE SAME AUTHOR._


  RUTHLESS RHYMES
  FOR
  HEARTLESS HOMES,

  By COL. D. STREAMER.

  ILLUSTRATED BY 'G. H.'

  Oblong 4to. 3s. 6d.

  'It is impossible not to be amused by some of the "Ruthless
  Rhymes for Heartless Homes," by Colonel D. Streamer, nor can
  anyone with a sense of humour fail to appreciate the many amusing
  points in the illustrations.'--_Westminster Budget._

  '"Ruthless Rhymes for Heartless Homes" is the name of a really
  charming little book of rhymes. The words are by Colonel D.
  Streamer, and the illustrations by "G. H.," and 'tis hard to say
  whether words or pictures are the cleverer.... The book is one
  which must, however, be seen to be appreciated; to properly
  describe it is impossible.'--_Calcutta Englishman._

  'Wise parents will, however, keep strictly to themselves
  "Ruthless Rhymes for Heartless Homes," by Col. D. Streamer. The
  illustrations, by "G. H." are very amusing, and especially happy
  is that to "Equanimity," when

    "Aunt Jane observed the second time
      She tumbled off a 'bus,
    'The step is short from the sublime
      To the ridiculous.'"'

                    --_Daily Telegraph._

  'Another charming whimsicality published by Mr. Edward Arnold is
  "Ruthless Rhymes for Heartless Homes," by Colonel D. Streamer,
  illustrated by "G. H."'--_Sydney Morning Herald._

  'The veriest nonsense, possessing the quality that makes it akin
  to Carroll's work.'--_New York Bookworm._

  'It is difficult to see the humour of--

    "Philip, foozling with his cleek,
    Drove his ball through Helen's cheek.
    Sad they bore her corpse away,
    Seven up and six to play."'

                   --_The Scotsman._

  LONDON: EDWARD ARNOLD, 41 & 43 MADDOX ST., W.




_BY THE SAME AUTHOR._


  BALLADS OF THE BOER
  WAR.

  Fcap. 8vo., buckram. 3s. 6d. net.

  LONDON: GRANT RICHARDS.

  (_Second Edition._)

  'There is unquestionably a good deal of human nature in the book,
  and as an expression of sentiments which have remained hitherto
  inarticulate, as a revelation not always edifying, but often
  illuminating, of the heart of the man in the ranks, this little
  volume is a distinct addition to the literature of the
  war.'--_Spectator._

  'Racy expressions of Tommy Atkins' feelings in Tommy Atkins'
  language.... "Coldstreamer's" verses in their kind are as good as
  any we have seen.'--_Academy._

  'These colloquial rhymes express the private soldier's views in
  his own language.'--_The Times._

  'These racy ballads make a book which many will read with
  interest and sympathy.'--_Scotsman._

  'As good as anything yet done in the vernacular of Mr. Thomas
  Atkins. A book for every friend of the army.'--_Outlook._

  'Vigorous Kiplingesque verses, with sound common-sense and
  genuine feeling. Well worth reading and buying.'--_To-day._

  'One of the liveliest books of light verse we have come across
  for a long time. "Coldstreamer's" verses are always
  distinctive.'--_County Gentleman._




_BY THE SAME AUTHOR._


  MISREPRESENTATIVE MEN.

  ILLUSTRATED BY F. STROTHMAN.

  NEW YORK: FOX, DUFFIELD AND CO.

  (_Second Edition._)

  OPINIONS OF THE AMERICAN PRESS.

  'One of the most amusing books of the year. Mr. Graham is a
  fluent and ingenious rhymester, with an alert mind and a
  well-controlled sense of humour.'--_The Times_ (New York).

  '"Misrepresentative Men" shows so high-spirited a mastery of
  words and metre (the result, we take it, of laborious days) that
  it will be read with pleasure by the most fastidious lover of
  what is amusing.'--_The Nation_ (New York).

  'Mr. Graham's verses are exceedingly clever, and Mr. Strothman's
  illustrations add to their cleverness.'--_The Bookman_ (New
  York).

  'A very amusing little book, by that cleverly humorous versifier
  "Col. D. Streamer," whose "Ruthless Rhymes for Heartless Homes"
  has had such a deserved vogue.'--_Town Topics_ (New York).

  'The most amusing biographical caricatures of celebrities that we
  have read for a long time. There is not a dull line in the entire
  collection.'--_The Bookseller_ (New York).

  'These satirical verses have the same ingenious humour as the
  writer's previous rhymes. The book is altogether
  refreshing.'--_Town and Country_ (New York).

  'The hit of the season.'--_The Lexington Herald._

  'A most attractively humorous work.'--_The Pittsburg Despatch._

  'A little book of really clever verse.'--_The Milwaukee
  Sentinel._




_BY THE SAME AUTHOR._


  PERVERTED PROVERBS.

  THE BABY'S BAEDEKER.


NEW YORK: HARPER AND BROS.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Fiscal Ballads, by Harry Graham

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FISCAL BALLADS ***

***** This file should be named 36038.txt or 36038.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/0/3/36038/

Produced by Mark C. Orton, David E. Brown and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
