The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Flowers of Evil, by Charles Baudelaire

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Flowers of Evil

Author: Charles Baudelaire

Translator: Cyril Scott

Release Date: May 13, 2011 [EBook #36098]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FLOWERS OF EVIL ***




Produced by Andrea Ball and Marc D'Hooghe at
http://www.freeliterature.org (From images generously made
available by the Internet Archive)





THE FLOWERS OF EVIL

by

CHARLES BAUDELAIRE


TRANSLATED INTO

ENGLISH  VERSE


BY

CYRIL SCOTT


LONDON

ELKIN MATHEWS, VIGO STREET

M CM IX




DEDICATED TO ARTHUR SYMONS




  CONTENTS

  Benediction
  Echoes
  The Sick Muse
  The Venal Muse
  The Evil Monk
  The Enemy
  Ill-Luck
  Interior Life
  Man and the Sea
  Beauty
  The Ideal
  The Giantess
  Hymn to Beauty
  Exotic Perfume
  La Chevelure
  Sonnet XXVIII
  Posthumous Remorse
  The Balcony
  The Possessed One
  Semper Eadem
  All Entire
  Sonnet XLIII
  The Living Torch
  The Spiritual Dawn
  Evening Harmony
  Overcast Sky
  Invitation to a Journey
  "Causerie"
  Autumn Song
  Sisina
  To a Creolean Lady
  Moesta et Errabunda
  The Ghost
  Autumn Song
  Sadness of the Moon-Goddess
  Cats
  Owls
  Music
  The Joyous Defunct
  The Broken Bell
  Spleen
  Obsession
  Magnetic Horror
  The Lid
  Bertha's Eyes
  The Set of the Romantic Sun
  Meditation
  To a Passer-by
  Illusionary Love
  Mists and Rains
  The Wine of Lovers
  Condemned Women
  The Death of the Lovers
  The Death of the Poor




   Benediction


    When by the changeless Power of a Supreme Decree
    The poet issues forth upon this sorry sphere,
    His mother, horrified, and full of blasphemy,
    Uplifts her voice to God, who takes compassion on her.

   "Ah, why did I not bear a serpent's nest entire,
    Instead of bringing forth this hideous Child of Doom!
    Oh cursed be that transient night of vain desire
    When I conceived my expiation in my womb!"

   "Yet since among all women thou hast chosen me
    To be the degradation of my jaded mate,
    And since I cannot like a love-leaf wantonly
    Consign this stunted monster to the glowing grate,"

   "I'll cause thine overwhelming hatred to rebound
    Upon the cursed tool of thy most wicked spite.
    Forsooth, the branches of this wretched tree I'll wound
    And rob its pestilential blossoms of their might!"

    So thus, she giveth vent unto her foaming ire,
    And knowing not the changeless statutes of all times,
    Herself, amid the flames of hell, prepares the pyre;
    The consecrated penance of maternal crimes.

    Yet 'neath th' invisible shelter of an Angel's wing
    This sunlight-loving infant disinherited,
    Exhales from all he eats and drinks, and everything
    The ever sweet ambrosia and the nectar red.

    He trifles with the winds and with the clouds that glide,
    About the way unto the Cross, he loves to sing,
    The spirit on his pilgrimage; that faithful guide,
    Oft weeps to see him joyful like a bird of Spring.

    All those that he would cherish shrink from him with fear,
    And some that waxen bold by his tranquility,
    Endeavour hard some grievance from his heart to tear,
    And make on him the trial of their ferocity.

    Within the bread and wine outspread for his repast
    To mingle dust and dirty spittle they essay,
    And everything he touches, forth they slyly cast,
    Or scourge themselves, if e'er their feet betrod his way.

    His wife goes round proclaiming in the crowded quads--
   "Since he can find my body beauteous to behold,
    Why not perform the office of those ancient gods
    And like unto them, redeck myself with shining gold?"

   "I'll bathe myself with incense, spikenard and myrrh,
    With genuflexions, delicate viandes and wine,
    To see, in jest, if from a heart, that loves me dear,
    I cannot filch away the hommages divine."

   "And when of these impious jokes at length I tire,
    My frail but mighty hands, around his breast entwined,
    With nails, like harpies' nails, shall cunningly conspire
    The hidden path unto his feeble heart to find."

   "And like a youngling bird that trembles in its nest,
    I'll pluck his heart right out; within its own blood drowned,
    And finally to satiate my favourite beast,
    I'll throw it with intense disdain upon the ground!"

    Towards the Heavens where he sees the sacred grail
    The poet calmly stretches forth his pious arms,
    Whereon the lightenings from his lucid spirit veil
    The sight of the infuriated mob that swarms.

   "Oh blest be thou, Almighty who bestowest pain,
    Like some divine redress for our infirmities,
    And like the most refreshing and the purest rain,
    To sanctify the strong, for saintly ecstasies."

   "I know that for the poet thou wilt grant a chair,
    Among the Sainted Legion and the Blissful ones,
    That of the endless feast thou wilt accord his share
    To him, of Virtues, Dominations and of Thrones."

   "I know, that Sorrow is that nobleness alone,
    Which never may corrupted be by hell nor curse,
    I know, in order to enwreathe my mystic crown
    I must inspire the ages and the universe."

   "And yet the buried jewels of Palmyra old,
    The undiscovered metals and the pearly sea
    Of gems, that unto me you show could never hold
    Beside this diadem of blinding brilliancy."

   "For it shall be engendered from the purest fire
    Of rays primeval, from the holy hearth amassed,
    Of which the eyes of Mortals, in their sheen entire,
    Are but the tarnished mirrors, sad and overcast!"




   Echoes


   In Nature's temple, living columns rise,
   Which oftentimes give tongue to words subdued,
   And Man traverses this symbolic wood,
   Which looks at him with half familiar eyes,

   Like lingering echoes, which afar confound
   Themselves in deep and sombre unity,
   As vast as Night, and like transplendency,
   The scents and colours to each other respond.

   And scents there are, like infant's flesh as chaste,
   As sweet as oboes, and as meadows fair,
   And others, proud, corrupted, rich and vast,

   Which have the expansion of infinity,
   Like amber, musk and frankincense and myrrh,
   That sing the soul's and senses' ecstasy.




   The Sick Muse


   Alas--my poor Muse--what aileth thee now?
   Thine eyes are bedimmed with the visions of Night,
   And silent and cold--I perceive on thy brow
   In their turns--Despair and Madness alight.

   A succubus green, or a hobgoblin red,
   Has it poured o'er thee Horror and Love from its urn?
   Or the Nightmare with masterful bearing hath led
   Thee to drown in the depths of some magic Minturne?

   I wish, as the health-giving fragrance I cull,
   That thy breast with strong thoughts could for ever be full,
   And that rhymthmic'ly flowing--thy Christian blood

   Could resemble the olden-time metrical-flood,
   Where each in his turn reigned the father of Rhymes
   Phoebus--and Pan, lord of Harvest-times.




   The Venal Muse


   Oh Muse of my heart--so fond of palaces old,
   Wilt have--when New Year speeds its wintry blast,
   Amid those tedious nights, with snow o'ercast,
   A log to warm thy feet, benumbed with cold?

   Wilt thou thy marbled shoulders then revive
   With nightly rays that through thy shutters peep?
   And--void thy purse and void thy palace--reap
   A golden hoard within some azure hive?

   Thou must, to earn thy daily bread, each night,
   Suspend the censer like an acolyte,
   Te-Deums sing, with sanctimonious ease,

   Or as a famished mountebank, with jokes obscene
   Essay to lull the vulgar rabble's spleen;
   Thy laughter soaked in tears which no one sees.




   The Evil Monk


   The cloisters old, expounded on their walls
   With paintings, the Beatic Verity,
   The which--adorning their religious halls,
   Enriched the frigidness of their Austerity.

   In days when Christian seeds bloomed o'er the land,
   Full many a noble monk unknown to-day,
   Upon the field of tombs would take his stand,
   Exalting Death in rude and simple way.

   My soul is a tomb where--bad monk that I be--
   I dwell and search its depths from all eternity,
   And nought bedecks the walls of the odious spot.

   Oh sluggard monk! when shall I glean aright
   From the living spectacle of my bitter lot,
   To mold my handywork and mine eyes' Delight?




   The Enemy


   My childhood was nought but a ravaging storm,
   Enlivened at times by a brilliant sun;
   The rain and the winds wrought such havoc and harm
   That of buds on my plot there remains hardly one.

   Behold now the Fall of ideas I have reached,
   And the shovel and rake one must therefore resume,
   In collecting the turf, inundated and breached,
   Where the waters dug trenches as deep as a tomb.

   And yet these new blossoms, for which I craved,
   Will they find in this earth--like a shore that is laved--
   The mystical fuel which vigour imparts?

   Oh misery!--Time devours our lives,
   And the enemy black, which consumeth our hearts
   On the blood of our bodies, increases and thrives!




   Ill Luck


   This heavy burden to uplift,
   O Sysiphus, thy pluck is required!
   And even though the heart aspired,
   Art is long and Time is swift.

   Afar from sepulchres renowned,
   To a graveyard, quite apart,
   Like a broken drum, my heart,
   Beats the funeral marches' sound.

   Many a buried jewel sleeps
   In the long-forgotten deeps,
   Far from mattock and from sound;

   Many a flower wafts aloft
   Its perfumes, like a secret soft,
   Within the solitudes, profound.




   Interior Life


   A long while I dwelt beneath vast porticoes,
   While the ocean-suns bathed with a thousand fires,
   And which with their great and majestic spires,
   At eventide looked like basaltic grottoes.

   The billows, in rolling depictured the skies,
   And mingled, in solemn and mystical strain,
   The all-mighteous chords of their luscious refrain
   With the sun-set's colours reflexed in mine eyes.

   It is there that I lived in exalted calm,
   In the midst of the azure, the splendour, the waves,
   While pregnant with perfumes, naked slaves

   Refreshed my forehead with branches of palm,
   Whose gentle and only care was to know
   The secret that caused me to languish so.




   Man and the Sea


   Free man! the sea is to thee ever dear!
   The sea is thy mirror, thou regardest thy soul
   In its mighteous waves that unendingly roll,
   And thy spirit is yet not a chasm less drear.

   Thou delight'st to plunge deep in thine image down;
   Thou tak'st it with eyes and with arms in embrace,
   And at times thine own inward voice would'st efface
   With the sound of its savage ungovernable moan.

   You are both of you, sombre, secretive and deep:
   Oh mortal, thy depths are foraye unexplored,
   Oh sea--no one knoweth thy dazzling hoard,
   You both are so jealous your secrets to keep!

   And endless ages have wandered by,
   Yet still without pity or mercy you fight,
   So mighty in plunder and death your delight:
   Oh wrestlers! so constant in enmity!




   Beauty


   I am lovely, O mortals, like a dream of stone,
   And my bosom, where each one gets bruised in turn,
   To inspire the love of a poet is prone,
   Like matter eternally silent and stern.

   As an unfathomed sphinx, enthroned by the Nile,
   My heart a swan's whiteness with granite combines,
   And I hate every movement, displacing the lines,
   And never I weep and never I smile.

   The poets in front of mine attitudes fine
   (Which the proudest of monuments seem to implant),
   To studies profound all their moments assign,

   For I have all these docile swains to enchant--
   Two mirrors, which Beauty in all things ignite:
   Mine eyes, my large eyes, of eternal Light!




   The Ideal


   It could ne'er be those beauties of ivory vignettes;
   The varied display of a worthless age,
   Nor puppet-like figures with castonets,
   That ever an heart like mine could engage.

   I leave to Gavarni, that poet of chlorosis,
   His hospital-beauties in troups that whirl,
   For I cannot discover amid his pale roses
   A flower to resemble my scarlet ideal.

   Since, what for this fathomless heart I require
   Is--Lady Macbeth you! in crime so dire;
   --An AEschylus dream transposed from the South--

   Or thee, oh great "Night" of Michael-Angelo born,
   Who so calmly thy limbs in strange posture hath drawn,
   Whose allurements are framed for a Titan's mouth.




   The Giantess


   I should have loved--erewhile when Heaven conceived
   Each day, some child abnormal and obscene,
   Beside a maiden giantess to have lived,
   Like a luxurious cat at the feet of a queen;

   To see her body flowering with her soul,
   And grow, unchained, in awe-inspiring art,
   Within the mists across her eyes that stole
   To divine the fires entombed within her heart.

   And oft to scramble o'er her mighty limbs,
   And climb the slopes of her enormous knees,
   Or in summer when the scorching sunlight streams

   Across the country, to recline at ease,
   And slumber in the shadow of her breast
   Like an hamlet 'neath the mountain-crest.




   Hymn to Beauty


   O Beauty! dost thou generate from Heaven or from Hell?
   Within thy glance, so diabolic and divine,
   Confusedly both wickedness and goodness dwell,
   And hence one might compare thee unto sparkling wine.

   Thy look containeth both the dawn and sunset stars,
   Thy perfumes, as upon a sultry night exhale,
   Thy kiss a philter, and thy mouth a Grecian vase,
   That renders heroes cowardly and infants hale.

   Yea, art thou from the planets, or the fiery womb?
   The demon follows in thy train, with magic fraught,
   Thou scatter'st seeds haphazardly of joy and doom,
   Thou govern'st everything, but answer'st unto nought.

   O Loveliness! thou spurnest corpses with delight,
   Among thy jewels, Horror hath such charms for thee,
   And Murder 'mid thy mostly cherished trinklets bright,
   Upon thy massive bosom dances amorously.

   The blinded, fluttering moth towards the candle flies,
   Then frizzles, falls, and falters--"Blessings unto thee"--
   The panting swain that o'er his beauteous mistress sighs,
   Seems like the Sick, that stroke their gravestones lovingly.

   What matter, if thou comest from the Heavens or Hell,
   O Beauty, frightful ghoul, ingenuous and obscure!
   So long thine eyes, thy smile, to me the way can tell
   Towards that Infinite I love, but never saw.

   From God or Satan? Angel, Mermaid, Proserpine?
   What matter if thou makest--blithe, voluptuous sprite--
   With rhythms, perfumes, visions--O mine only queen!--
   The universe less hideous and the hours less trite.




   Exotic Perfume


   When, with closed eyes, on a hot afternoon,
   The scent of thine ardent breast I inhale,
   Celestial vistas my spirit assail;
   Caressed by the flames of an endless sun.

   A langorous island, where Nature abounds
   With exotic trees and luscious fruit;
   And with men whose bodies are slim and astute,
   And with women whose frankness delights and astounds.

   By thy perfume enticed to this region remote,
   A port I see, laden with mast and with boat,
   Still wearied and torn by the distant brine;

   While the tamarisk-odours that dreamily throng
   The air, round my slumberous senses intwine,
   And mix, in my soul, with the mariners' song.




   La Chevelure


   O fleece, that foams down unto the shoulders bare!
   O curls, O scents which lovely languidness exhale!
   Delight! to fill this alcove's sombre atmosphere
   With memories, sleeping deep within this tress of hair,
   I'll wave it in the evening breezes like a veil!

   The shores of Africa, and Asia's burning skies,
   A world forgotten, distant, nearly dead and spent,
   Within thy depths, O aromatic forest! lies.
   And like to spirits floating unto melodies,
   Mine own, Beloved! glides within thy sacred scent.

   There I will hasten, where the trees and humankind
   With languor lull beside the hot and silent sea;
   Strong tresses bear me, be to me the waves and wind!
   Within thy fragrance lies a dazzling dream confined
   Of sails and masts and flames--O lake of ebony!

   A loudly echoing harbour, where my soul may hold
   To quaff, the silver cup of colours, scents and sounds,
   Wherein the vessels glide upon a sea of gold,
   And stretch their mighty arms, the glory to enfold
   Of virgin skies, where never-ending heat abounds.

   I'll plunge my brow, enamoured with voluptuousness
   Within this darkling ocean of infinitude,
   Until my subtle spirit, which thy waves caress,
   Shall find you once again, O fertile weariness;
   Unending lullabye of perfumed lassitude!

   Ye tresses blue--recess of strange and sombre shades,
   Ye make the azure of the starry Realm immense;
   Upon the downy beeches, by your curls' cascades,
   Among your mingling fragrances, my spirit wades
   To cull the musk and cocoa-nut and lotus scents.

   Long--foraye--my hand, within thy heavy mane,
   Shall scatter rubies, pearls, sapphires eternally,
   And thus my soul's desire for thee shall never wane;
   For art not thou the oasis where I dream and drain
   With draughts profound, the golden wine of memory?




   Sonnet XXVIII


   With pearly robes that wave within the wind,
   Even when she walks, she seems to dance,
   Like swaying serpents round those wands entwined
   Which fakirs ware in rhythmic elegance.

   So like the desert's Blue, and the sands remote,
   Both, deaf to mortal suffering and to strife,
   Or like the sea-weeds 'neath the waves that float,
   Indifferently she moulds her budding life.

   Her polished eyes are made of minerals bright,
   And in her mien, symbolical and cold,
   Wherein an angel mingles with a sphinx of old,

   Where all is gold, and steel, and gems, and light,
   There shines, just like a useless star eternally,
   The sterile woman's frigid majesty.




   Posthumous Remorse


   Ah, when thou shalt slumber, my darkling love,
   Beneath a black marble-made statuette,
   And when thou'lt have nought for thy house or alcove,
   But a cavernous den and a damp oubliette.

   When the tomb-stone, oppressing thy timorous breast,
   And thy hips drooping sweetly with listless decay,
   The pulse and desires of mine heart shall arrest,
   And thy feet from pursuing their adventurous way,

   Then the grave, that dark friend of my limitless dreams
   (For the grave ever readeth the poet aright),
   Amid those long nights, which no slumber redeems

   'Twill query--"What use to thee, incomplete spright
   That thou ne'er hast unfathomed the tears of the dead"?--
   Then the worms will gnaw deep at thy body, like Dread.




   The Balcony


   Oh, Mother of Memories! Mistress of Mistresses!
   Oh, thou all my pleasures, oh, thou all my prayers!
   Can'st thou remember those luscious caresses,
   The charm of the hearth and the sweet evening airs?
   Oh, Mother, of Memories, Mistress of Mistresses!

   Those evenings illumed by the glow of the coal,
   And those roseate nights with their vaporous wings,
   How calm was thy breast and how good was thy soul,
   'Twas then we uttered imperishable things,
   Those evenings illumed by the glow of the coal.

   How lovely the suns on those hot, autumn nights!
   How vast were the heavens! and the heart how hale!
   As I leaned towards you--oh, my Queen of Delights,
   The scent of thy blood I seemed to inhale.
   How lovely the sun on those hot, autumn nights!

   The shadows of night-time grew dense like a pall,
   And deep through the darkness thine eyes I divined,
   And I drank of thy breath--oh sweetness, oh gall,
   And thy feet in my brotherly hands reclined,
   The shadows of Night-time grew dense like a pall.

   I know how to call forth those moments so dear,
   And to live my Past--laid on thy knees--once more,
   For where should I seek for thy beauties but here
   In thy langorous heart and thy body so pure?
   I know how to call forth those moments so dear.

   Those perfumes, those infinite kisses and sighs,
   Are they born in some gulf to our plummets denied?
   Like rejuvenate suns that mount up to the skies,
   That first have been cleansed in the depths of the tide;
   Oh, perfumes! oh, infinite kisses and sighs!




   The Possessed One


   The sun is enveloped in crape! like it,
   O Moon of my Life! wrap thyself up in shade;
   At will, smoke or slumber, be silent, be staid,
   And dive deep down in Dispassion's dark pit.

   I cherish thee thus! But if 'tis thy mood,
   Like a star that from out its penumbra appears,
   To float in the regions where madness careers,
   Fair dagger! burst forth from thy sheath! 'tis good.

   Yea, light up thine eyes at the Fire of Renown!
   Or kindle desire by the looks of some clown!
   Thine All is my joy, whether dull or aflame!

   Just be what thou wilt, black night, dawn divine,
   There is not a nerve in my trembling frame
   But cries, "I adore thee, Beelzebub mine!"




   Semper Eadem


   "From whence it comes, you ask, this gloom acute,
   Like waves that o'er the rocky headland fall?"
   --When once our hearts have gathered in their fruit,
   To live is a curse! a secret known to all,

   A grief, quite simple, nought mysterious,
   And like your joy--for all, both loud and shrill,
   Nay cease to clamour, be not e'er so curious!
   And yet although your voice is sweet, be still!

   Be still, O soul, with rapture ever rife!
   O mouth, with the childish smile! Far more than Life,
   The subtle bonds of Death around us twine.

   Let--let my heart, the wine of falsehood drink,
   And dream-like, deep within your fair eyes sink,
   And in the shade of thy lashes long recline!




   All Entire


    The Demon, in my lofty vault,
    This morning came to visit me,
    And striving me to find at fault,
    He said, "Fain would I know of thee;

   "Among the many beauteous things,
    --All which _her_ subtle grace proclaim--
    Among the dark and rosy things,
    Which go to make her charming frame,

   "Which is the sweetest unto thee"?
    My soul! to Him thou didst retort--
   "Since all with her is destiny,
    Of preference there can be nought.

    When all transports me with delight,
    If aught deludes I can not know,
    She either lulls one like the Night,
    Or dazzles like the Morning-glow.

    That harmony is too divine,
    Which governs all her body fair,
    For powerless mortals to define
    In notes the many concords there.

    O mystic metamorphosis
    Of all my senses blent in one!
    Her voice a beauteous perfume is,
    Her breath makes music, chaste and wan.




   Sonnet XLIII


   What sayest thou, to-night, poor soul so drear,
   What sayest--heart erewhile engulfed in gloom,
   To the very lovely, very chaste, and very dear,
   Whose god-like look hath made thee to re-bloom?

   To her, with pride we chant an echoing Hymn,
   For nought can touch the sweetness of her sway;
   Her flesh ethereal as the seraphim,
   Her eyes with robe of light our souls array.

   And be it in the night, or solitude,
   Among the streets or 'mid the multitude,
   Her shadow, torch-like, dances in the air,

   And murmurs, "I, the Beautiful proclaim--
   That for my sake, alone ye love the Fair;
   I am the Guardian Angel, Muse and Dame!"




   The Living Torch


   They stand before me now, those eyes that shine,
   No doubt inspired by an Angel wise;
   They stand, those God-like brothers that are mine,
   And pour their diamond fires in mine eyes.

   From all transgressions, from all snares, they save,
   Towards the Path of Joy they guide my ways;
   They are my servants, and I am their slave;
   And all my soul, this living torch obeys.

   Ye charming Eyes--ye have those mystic beams,
   Of candles, burning in full day; the sun
   Awakes, yet kills not their fantastic gleams:

   Ye sing the Awak'ning, they the dark oblivion;
   The Awak'ning of my spirit ye proclaim,
   O stars--no sun can ever kill your flame!




   The Spiritual Dawn


   When the morning white and rosy breaks,
   With the gnawing Ideal, upon the debauchee,
   By the power of a strange decree,
   Within the sotted beast an Angel wakes.

   The mental Heaven's inaccessible blue,
   For wearied mortals that still dream and mourn,
   Expands and sinks; towards the chasm drawn.
   Thus, cherished goddess, Being pure and true--

   Upon the rests of foolish orgy-nights
   Thine image, more sublime, more pink, more clear,
   Before my staring eyes is ever there.

   The sun has darkened all the candle lights;
   And thus thy spectre like the immortal sun,
   Is ever victorious--thou resplendent one!




   Evening Harmony


   The hour approacheth, when, as their stems incline,
   The flowers evaporate like an incense urn,
   And sounds and scents in the vesper breezes turn;
   A melancholy waltz--and a drowsiness divine.

   The flowers evaporate like an incense urn,
   The viol vibrates like the wailing of souls that repine.
   A melancholy waltz--and a drowsiness divine,
   The skies like a mosque are beautiful and stern.

   The viol vibrates like the wailing of souls that repine;
   Sweet souls that shrink from chaos vast and etern,
   The skies like a mosque are beautiful and stern,
   The sunset drowns within its blood-red brine.

   Sweet souls that shrink from chaos vast and etern,
   Essay the wreaths of their faded Past to entwine,
   The sunset drowns within its blood-red brine,
   Thy thought within me glows like an incense urn.




   Overcast Sky


   Meseemeth thy glance, soft enshrouded with dew,
   Thy mysterious eyes (are they grey, green or blue?),
   Alternately cruel, and tender, and shy,
   Reflect both the languor and calm of the sky.

   Thou recallest those white days--with shadows caressed,
   Engendering tears from th' enraptured breast,
   When racked by an anguish unfathomed that weeps,
   The nerves, too awake, jibe the spirit that sleeps.

   At times--thou art like those horizons divine,
   Where the suns of the nebulous seasons decline;
   How resplendent art thou--O pasturage vast,
   Illumed by the beams of a sky overcast!

   O! dangerous dame--oh seductive clime!
   As well, will I love both thy snow and thy rime,
   And shall I know how from the frosts to entice
   Delights that are keener than iron and ice?




   Invitation to a Journey


       My sister, my dear
       Consider how fair,
   Together to live it would be!
       Down yonder to fly
       To love, till we die,
   In the land which resembles thee.
       Those suns that rise
       'Neath erratic skies,
   --No charm could be like unto theirs--
       So strange and divine,
       Like those eyes of thine
   Which glow in the midst of their tears.

   There, all is order and loveliness,
   Luxury, calm and voluptuousness.

       The tables and chairs,
       Polished bright by the years,
   Would decorate sweetly our rooms,
       And the rarest of flowers
       Would twine round our bowers
   And mingle their amber perfumes:
       The ceilings arrayed,
       And the mirrors inlaid,
   This Eastern splendour among,
       Would furtively steal
       O'er our souls, and appeal
   With its tranquillous native tongue.

   There, all is order and loveliness,
   Luxury, calm and voluptuousness.

       In the harbours, peep,
       At the vessels asleep
   (Their humour is always to roam),
       Yet it is but to grant
       Thy smallest want
   From the ends of the earth that they come,
       The sunsets beam
       Upon meadow and stream,
   And upon the city entire
       'Neath a violet crest,
       The world sinks to rest,
   Illumed by a golden fire.

   There, all is order and loveliness,
   Luxury, calm and voluptuousness.




   "Causerie"

   You are a roseate autumn-sky, that glows!
   Yet sadness rises in me like the flood,
   And leaves in ebbing on my lips morose,
   The poignant memory of its bitter mind.

   In vain your hands my swooning breast embrace,
   Oh, friend! alone remains the plundered spot,
   Where woman's biting grip has left its trace:
   My heart, the beasts devoured--seek it not!

   My heart is a palace pillaged by the herd;
   They kill and take each other by the throat!
   A perfume glides around your bosom bared--

   O loveliness, thou scourge of souls--devote
   Thine eyes of fire--luminous-like feasts,
   To burn these rags--rejected by the beasts!




   Autumn Song


   I

   Shortly we will plunge within the frigid gloom,
   Farewell swift summer brightness; all too short--
   I hear already sounding with a death-like boom
   The wood that falls upon the pavement of the court.

   The whole of winter enters in my Being--pain,
   Hate, honor, labour hard and forced--and dread,
   And like the northern sun upon its polar plane
   My heart will soon be but a stone, iced and red.

   I listen trembling unto every log that falls,
   The scaffold, which they build, has not a duller sound,
   My spirits waver, like the trembling tower walls
   that shake--with every echoing blow the builders pound.

   Meeseemeth--as to these monotonous blows I sway,
   They nail for one a coffin lid, or sound a knell--
   For whom? Autumn now--and summer yesterday!
   This strange mysterious noise betokens a farewell.


   II

   I love within your oblong eyes the verdant rays,
   My sweet! but bitter everything to-day meseems:
   And nought--your love, the boudoir, nor the flickering blaze,
   Can replace the sun that o'er the screen streams.

   And yet bemother and caress me, tender heart!
   Even me the thankless and the worthless one;
   Beloved or sister--unto me the sweets impart
   Of a glorious autumn or a sinking sun.

   Ephemeral task! the beckoning the beckoning empty tomb is set!
   Oh grant me--as upon your knees my head I lay,
   (Because the white and torrid summer I regret),
   To taste the parted season's mild and amber ray.




   Sisina


   Imagine Diana in gorgeous array,
   How into the forests and thickets she flies,
   With her hair in the breezes, and flushed for the fray,
   How the very best riders she proudly defies.

   Have you seen Theroigne, of the blood-thirsty heart,
   As an unshod herd to attack he bestirs,
   With cheeks all inflamed, playing up to his part,
   As he goes, sword in hand, up the royal stairs?

   And so is Sisina--yet this warrior sweet,
   Has a soul with compassion and kindness replete,
   Inspired by drums and by powder, her sway

   Knows how to concede to the supplicants' prayers,
   And her bosom, laid waste by the flames, has alway,
   For those that are worthy, a fountain of tears.




   To a Creolean Lady


   In a country perfumed with the sun's embrace,
   I knew 'neath a dais of purpled palms,
   And branches where idleness weeps o'er one's face,
   A Creolean lady of unknown charms.

   Her tint, pale and warm--this bewitching bride,
   Displays a nobly nurtured mien,
   Courageous and grand like a huntsman, her stride;
   A tranquil smile and eyes serene.

   If, madam, you'd go to the true land of gain,
   By the banks of the verdant Loire or the Seine,
   How worthy to garnish some pile of renown.

   You'd awake in the calm of some shadowy nest,
   A thousand songs in the poet's breast,
   That your eyes would inspire far more than your brown.




   Moesta et Errabunda


   Oh, Agatha, tell! does thy heart not at times fly away?
   Far from the city impure and the lowering sea,
   To another ocean that blinds with its dazzling array,
   So blue and so clear and profound, like virginity?
   Oh, Agatha, tell! does thy heart not at times fly away?

   The sea, the vast ocean our travail and trouble consoles!
   What demon hath gifted the sea with a voice from on high,
   To sing us (attuned to an AEolus-organ that rolls
   Forth a grumbling burden) a lenitive lullabye?
   The sea, the vast ocean our travail and trouble consoles!

   Oh, carry me, waggons, oh, sailing-ships, help me depart!
   Far, far, here the dust is quite wet with our showering tears,
   Oh, say! it is true that Agatha's desolate heart,
   Proclaimeth, "Away from remorse, and from crimes, and from cares,"
   Oh, carry me, waggons, oh, sailing ships, help me depart!

   How distant you seem to be, perfumed Elysian fields!
   Wherein there is nothing but sunshine and love and glee;
   Where all that one loves is so worthy, and lovingly yields,
   And our hearts float about in the purest of ecstasy,
   How distant you seem to be, perfumed Elysian fields!

   But the green paradise of those transient infantile loves,
   The strolls, and the songs, and the kisses, and bunches of flowers,
   The viols vibrating beyond, in the mountainous groves,
   With the chalice of wine and the evening, entwined, in the bowers,
   But the green paradise of those transient infantile loves.

   That innocent heaven o'erflowing with furtive delight,
   Than China or India, is it still further away?
   Or, could one with pityful prayers bring it back to our sight?
   Or yet with a silvery voice o'er the ages convey
   That innocent heaven o'erflowing with furtive delight!




   The Ghost


   Just like an angel with evil eye,
   I shall return to thee silently,
   Upon thy bower I'll alight,
   With falling shadows of the night.

   With thee, my brownie, I'll commune,
   And give thee kisses cold as the moon,
   And with a serpent's moist embrace,
   I'll crawl around thy resting-place.

   And when the livid morning falls,
   Thou'lt find alone the empty walls,
   And till the evening, cold 'twill be.

   As others with their tenderness,
   Upon thy life and youthfulness,
   I'll reign alone with dread o'er thee.




   Autumn Song


   They ask me--thy crystalline eyes, so acute,
   "Odd lover--why am I to thee so dear?"
   --Be sweet and keep silent, my heart, which is sear,
   For all save the rude and untutored brute,

   Is loth its infernal depths to reveal,
   And its dissolute motto engraven with fire,
   Oh charmer! whose arms endless slumber inspire!
   I abominate passion and wit makes me ill.

   So let us love gently. Within his retreat,
   Foreboding, Love seeks for his arrows a prey,
   I know all the arms of his battle array.

   Delirium and loathing--O pale Marguerite!
   Like me, art thou not an autumnal ray,
   Alas my so white, my so cold Marguerite!




   Sadness of the Moon-Goddess


   To-night the Moon dreams with increased weariness,
   Like a beauty stretched forth on a downy heap
   Of rugs, while her languorous fingers caress
   The contour of her breasts, before falling to sleep.

   On the satin back of the avalanche soft,
   She falls into lingering swoons, as she dies,
   While she lifteth her eyes to white visions aloft,
   Which like efflorescence float up to the skies.

   When at times, in her languor, down on to this sphere,
   She slyly lets trickle a furtive tear,
   A poet, desiring slumber to shun,

   Takes up this pale tear in the palm of his hand
   (The colours of which like an opal blend),
   And buries it far from the eyes of the sun.




   Cats


   All ardent lovers and all sages prize,
   --As ripening years incline upon their brows--
   The mild and mighty cats--pride of the house--
   That like unto them are indolent, stern and wise.

   The friends of Learning and of Ecstasy,
   They search for silence and the horrors of gloom;
   The devil had used them for his steeds of Doom,
   Could he alone have bent their pride to slavery.

   When musing, they display those outlines chaste,
   Of the great sphinxes--stretched o'er the sandy waste,
   That seem to slumber deep in a dream without end:

   From out their loins a fountainous furnace flies,
   And grains of sparkling gold, as fine as sand,
   Bestar the mystic pupils of their eyes.




   Owls


   Beneath the shades of sombre yews,
   The silent owls sit ranged in rows,
   Like ancient idols, strangely pose,
   And darting fiery eyes, they muse.

   Immovable, they sit and gaze,
   Until the melancholy hour,
   At which the darknesses devour
   The faded sunset's slanting rays.

   Their attitude, instructs the wise,
   That he--within this world--who flies
   From tumult and from merriment;

   The man allured by a passing face,
   For ever bears the chastisement
   Of having wished to change his place.




   Music


   Oft Music possesses me like the seas!
           To my planet pale,
   'Neath a ceiling of mist, in the lofty breeze,
           I set my sail.

   With inflated lungs and expanded chest,
           Like to a sail,
   On the backs of the heaped-up billows I rest--
           Which the shadows veil--

   I feel all the anguish within me arise
           Of a ship in distress;
   The tempest, the rain, 'neath the lowering skies,

           My body caress;
   At times, the calm pool or the mirror clear
           Of my despair!




   The Joyous Defunct


   Where snails abound--in a juicy soil,
   I will dig for myself a fathomless grave,
   Where at leisure mine ancient bones I can coil,
   And sleep--quite forgotten--like a shark 'neath the wave.

   I hate every tomb--I abominate wills,
   And rather than tears from the world to implore,
   I would ask of the crows with their vampire bills
   To devour every bit of my carcass impure.

   Oh worms, without eyes, without ears, black friends!
   To you a defunct-one, rejoicing, descends,
   Enlivened Philosophers--offspring of Dung!

   Without any qualms, o'er my wreckage spread,
   And tell if some torment there still can be wrung
   For this soul-less old frame that is dead 'midst the dead!




   The Broken Bell


   How sweet and bitter, on a winter night,
   Beside the palpitating fire to list,
   As, slowly, distant memories alight,
   To sounds of chimes that sing across the mist.

   Oh, happy is that bell with hearty throat,
   Which neither age nor time can e'er defeat,
   Which faithfully uplifts its pious note,
   Like an aged soldier on his beat.

   For me, my soul is cracked, and 'mid her cares,
   Would often fill with her songs the midnight airs
   And oft it chances that her feeble moan

   Is like the wounded warrior's fainting groan,
   Who by a lake of blood, 'neath bodies slain,
   In anguish falls, and never moves again.




   Spleen


   The rainy moon of all the world is weary,
   And from its urn a gloomy cold pours down,
   Upon the pallid inmates of the mortuary,
   And on the neighbouring outskirts of the town.

   My wasted cat, in searching for a litter,
   Bestirs its mangy paws from post to post;
   (A poet's soul that wanders in the gutter,
   With the jaded voice of a shiv'ring ghost).

   The smoking pine-log, while the drone laments,
   Accompanies the wheezy pendulum,
   The while amidst a haze of dirty scents,

   --Those fatal remnants of a sick man's room--
   The gallant knave of hearts and queen of spades
   Relate their ancient amorous escapades.




   Obsession


   Great forests, you alarm me like a mighty fane;
   Like organ-tones you roar, and in our hearts of stone,
   Where ancient sobs vibrate, O halls of endless pain!
   The answering echoes of your "De Profundis" moan.

   I hate thee, Ocean! hate thy tumults and thy throbs,
   My spirit finds them in himself. This bitter glee
   Of vanquished mortals, full of insults and of sobs,
   I hear it in the mighteous laughter of the sea.

   O starless night! thy loveliness my soul inhales,
   Without those starry rays which speak a language known,
   For I desire the dark, the naked and the lone.

   But e'en those darknesses themselves to me are veils,
   Where live--and, by the millions 'neath my eyelids prance,
   Long, long departed Beings with familiar glance.




   Magnetic Horror


   "Beneath this sky, so livid and strange,
    Tormented like thy destiny,
    What thoughts within thy spirit range
    Themselves?--O libertine reply."

    --With vain desires, for ever torn
    Towards the uncertain, and the vast,
    And yet, like Ovid--I'll not mourn--
    Who from his Roman Heaven was cast.

    O heavens, turbulent as the streams,
    In you I mirror forth my pride!
    Your clouds, which clad in mourning, glide,

    Are the hearses of my dreams,
    And in your illusion lies the hell,
    Wherein my heart delights to dwell.




   The Lid


   Where'er he may rove, upon sea or on land,
   'Neath a fiery sky or a pallid sun,
   Be he Christian or one of Cythera's band,
   Opulent Croesus or beggar--'tis one,

   Whether citizen, peasant or vagabond he,
   Be his little brain active or dull. Everywhere,
   Man feels the terror of mystery,
   And looks upon high with a glance full of fear.

   The Heaven above, that oppressive wall;
   A ceiling lit up in some lewd music hall,
   Where the actors step forth on a blood-red soil;

   The eremite's hope, and the dread of the sot,
   The Sky; that black lid of a mighty pot,
   Where, vast and minute, human Races boil.




   Bertha's Eyes


   The loveliest eyes you can scorn with your wondrous glow:
   O! beautiful childish eyes there abounds in your light,
   A something unspeakably tender and good as the night:
   O! eyes! over me your enchanting darkness let flow.

   Large eyes of my child! O Arcana profoundly adored!
   Ye resemble so closely those caves in the magical creek;
   Where within the deep slumbering shade of some petrified peak,
   There shines, undiscovered, the gems of a dazzling hoard.

   My child has got eyes so profound and so dark and so vast,
   Like thee! oh unending Night, and thy mystical shine:
   Their flames are those thoughts that with Love and with Faith combine,
   And sparkle deep down in the depths so alluring or chaste.




   The Set of the Romantic Sun


   How beauteous the sun as it rises supreme,
   Like an explosion that greets us from above,
   Oh, happy is he that can hail with love,
   Its decline, more glorious far, than a dream.

   I saw flower, furrow, and brook.... I recall
   How they swooned like a tremulous heart 'neath the sun,
   Let us haste to the sky-line, 'tis late, let us run,
   At least to catch one slanting ray ere it fall.

   But the god, who eludes me, I chase all in vain,
   The night, irresistible, plants its domain,
   Black mists and vague shivers of death it forbodes;

   While an odour of graves through the darkness spreads,
   And on the swamp's margin, my timid foot treads
   Upon slimy snails, and on unseen toads.




   Meditation


   Be wise, O my Woe, seek thy grievance to drown,
   Thou didst call for the night, and behold it is here,
   An atmosphere sombre, envelopes the town,
   To some bringing peace and to others a care.

   Whilst the manifold souls of the vile multitude,
   'Neath the lash of enjoyment, that merciless sway,
   Go plucking remorse from the menial brood,
   From them far, O my grief, hold my hand, come this way.

   Behold how they beckon, those years, long expired,
   From Heaven, in faded apparel attired,
   How Regret, smiling, foams on the waters like yeast;

   Its arches of slumber the dying sun spreads,
   And like a long winding-sheet dragged to the East,
   Oh, hearken Beloved, how the Night softly treads!




   To a Passer-by


   Around me thundered the deafening noise of the street,
   In mourning apparel, portraying majestic distress,
   With queenly fingers, just lifting the hem of her dress,
   A stately woman passed by with hurrying feet.

   Agile and noble, with limbs of perfect poise,
   Ah, how I drank, thrilled through like a Being insane,
   In her look, a dark sky, from whence springs forth the hurricane,
   There lay but the sweetness that charms, and the joy that destroys.

   A flash--then the night.... O loveliness fugitive!
   Whose glance has so suddenly caused me again to live,
   Shall I not see you again till this life is o'er!

   Elsewhere, far away ... too late, perhaps never more,
   For I know not whither you fly, nor you, where I go,
   O soul that I would have loved, and _that_ you know!




   Illusionary Love


   When I behold thee wander by, my languorous love,
   To songs of viols which throughout the dome resound,
   Harmonious and stately as thy footsteps move,
   Bestowing forth the languor of thy glance profound.

   When I regard thee, glowing in the gaslight rays,
   Thy pallid brow embellished by a charm obscure,
   Here where the evening torches light the twilight haze,
   Thine eyes attracting me like those of a portraiture,

   I say--How beautiful she is! how strangely rich!
   A mighty memory, royal and commanding tower,
   A garland: and her heart, bruised like a ruddy peach,
   Is ripe--like her body for Love's sapient power.

   Art thou, that spicy Autumn-fruit with taste supreme?
   Art thou a funeral vase inviting tears of grief?
   Aroma--causing one of Eastern wastes to dream;
   A downy cushion, bunch of flowers or golden sheaf?

   I know that there are eyes, most melancholy ones,
   Wherein no precious secret deeply hidden lies,
   Resplendent shrines, devoid of relics, sacred stones,
   More empty, more profound than ye yourselves, O skies?

   Yea, does thy semblance, not alone for me suffice,
   To kindle senses which the cruel truth abhor?
   All one to me! thy folly or thy heart of ice,
   Decoy or mask, all hail! thy beauty I adore!




   Mists and Rains


   O last of Autumn and Winter--steeped in haze,
   O sleepy seasons! you I love and praise,
   Because around my heart and brain you twine
   A misty winding-sheet and a nebulous shrine.

   On that great plain, where frigid blasts abound,
   Where through the nights, so long, the vane whirls round,
   My soul, more free than in the springtime soft,
   Will stretch her raven wings and soar aloft,

   Unto an heart with gloomy things replete,
   On which remain the frosts of former Times,
   O pallid seasons, mistress of our climes

   As your pale shadows--nothing is so sweet,
   Unless it be, on a moonless night a-twain,
   On some chance couch to soothe to sleep our Pain.




   The Wine of Lovers


   To-day the Distance is superb,
   Without bridle, spur or curb,
   Let us mount on the back of wine
   For Regions fairy and divine!

   Let's, like two angels tortured by
   Some dark, delirious phantasy,
   Pursue the distant mirage drawn
   O'er the blue crystal of the dawn!

   And gently balanced on the wing
   Of some obliging whirlwind, we
   --In equal rapture revelling--

   My sister, side by side will flee,
   Without repose, nor truce, where gleams
   The golden Paradise of my dreams!




   Condemned Women


   Like thoughtful cattle on the yellow sands reclined,
   They turn their eyes towards the horizon of the sea,
   Their feet towards each other stretched, their hands entwined,
   They tell of gentle yearning, frigid misery.

   A few, with heart-confiding faith of old, imbued
   Amid the darkling grove, where silver streamlets flow,
   Unfold to each their loves of tender infanthood,
   And carve the verdant stems of the vine-kissed portico.

   And others like unto nuns with footsteps slow and grave,
   Ascend the hallowed rocks of ancient mystic lore,
   Where long ago--St. Anthony, like a surging wave,
   The naked purpled breasts of his temptation saw.

   And still some more, that 'neath the shimmering masses stroll,
   Among the silent chasm of some pagan caves,
   To soothe their burning fevers unto thee they call
   O Bacchus! who all ancient wounds and sorrow laves.

   And others again, whose necks in scapulars delight,
   Who hide a whip beneath their garments secretly,
   Commingling, in the sombre wood and lonesome night,
   The foam of torments and of tears with ecstasy.

   O virgins, demons, monsters, and O martyred brood!
   Great souls that mock Reality with remorseless sneers,
   O saints and satyrs, searchers for infinitude!
   At times so full of shouts, at times so full of tears!

   You, to whom within your hell my spirit flies,
   Poor sisters--yea, I love you as I pity you,
   For your unsatiated thirsts and anguished sighs,
   And for the vials of love within your hearts so true.





   The Death of the Lovers


   We will have beds which exhale odours soft,
   We will have divans profound as the tomb,
   And delicate plants on the ledges aloft,
   Which under the bluest of skies for us bloom.

   Exhausting our hearts to their last desires,
   They both shall be like unto two glowing coals,
   Reflecting the twofold light of their fires
   Across the twin mirrors of our two souls.

   One evening of mystical azure skies,
   We'll exchange but one single lightning flash,
   Just like a long sob--replete with good byes.

   And later an angel shall joyously pass
   Through the half-open doors, to replenish and wash
   The torches expired, and the tarnished glass.




   The Death of the Poor


   It is Death that consoles--yea, and causes our lives;
   'Tis the goal of this Life--and of Hope the sole ray,
   Which like a strong potion enlivens and gives
   Us the strength to plod on to the end of the day.

   And all through the tempest, the frost and the snows,
   'Tis the shimmering light on our black sky-line;
   'Tis the famous inn which the guide-book shows,
   Whereat one can eat, and sleep, and recline;

   'Tis an angel that holds in his magic hands
   The sleep, which ecstatic dream commands,
   Who remakes up the beds of the naked and poor;

   'Tis the fame of the gods, 'tis the granary blest,
   'Tis the purse of the poor, and his birth-place of rest,
   To the unknown Heavens, 'tis the wide-open door.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Flowers of Evil, by Charles Baudelaire

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FLOWERS OF EVIL ***

***** This file should be named 36098.txt or 36098.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/0/9/36098/

Produced by Andrea Ball and Marc D'Hooghe at
http://www.freeliterature.org (From images generously made
available by the Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
