The Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch, or the London Charivari, Vol. 105,
August 12th 1893, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Punch, or the London Charivari, Vol. 105, August 12th 1893

Author: Various

Editor: Sir Francis Burnand

Release Date: May 19, 2011 [EBook #36140]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH, OR THE LONDON ***




Produced by Lesley Halamek, Malcolm Farmer and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






PUNCH, OR THE LONDON CHARIVARI

VOLUME 105, August 12th 1893

_edited by Sir Francis Burnand_




THE CLOSURE AT HOME.

Paterfamilias entered the drawing-room at ten minutes to six o'clock,
and found the family still undecided. There was a pause in the
conversation when he made his appearance.

"Where are we to go?" he asked, taking out his watch. "You have been
quarrelling for the last week, and I have given you till this hour. So
get through your amendments as fast as you can."

"I prefer Paris," said Materfamilias, "and I am supported by all the
girls. We are decidedly in a majority."

"Paris is simply awful at the end of July!" cried the eldest son.
"Give you my word, mother, the place is impossible."

"Venice would certainly be better," said his younger brother.
"Charming place, and you get a very decent _table d'hote_ at
DANIELI'S."

"Oh, Venice is too dreadful just now!" exclaimed Aunt MATILDA. "If
_we_ are to go with you, we certainly can't travel there. Besides,
there's the cholera all over the Continent. Now Oban would be nice."

"Are you speaking seriously?" asked Cousin JANE. "Scotland never
agrees with me, but Cairo would be perfect."

"Do you think so, my dear girl?" put in Uncle JOHN. "I fancy you
are making a mistake. Egypt is very well in the winter, but it
is fearfully hot in August. Now they tell me Killarney is simply
delightful at this season."

"Ireland! No, thank you!" exclaimed REGINALD. "We have had enough of
Home Rule on this side of the Channel to go across to find it on the
other. No; give me Spain, or even Russia."

The hands of the clock were close upon the hour, but still there was a
minute or so to spare.

"Russia indeed!" snapped out PRISCILLA. "Who ever would go to Russia?
But people do tell me that Chicago is well worth seeing, and----"

At this moment the clock struck six.

"Time's up," cried Paterfamilias. "We will all go to Herne Bay."

And they did.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE TEST OF TRUE GENIUS.

_Pictor Ignotus Number One._ "YES; I RATHER FLATTER MYSELF THERE ARE
PRECIOUS FEW OF MY CONTEMPORARIES WHO CARE ABOUT _MY_ WORK!"

_Pictor Ignotus Number Two_ (_not to be beaten_). "BY JOVE! I RATHER
FLATTER MYSELF I'VE GOT THE PULL OF YOU _THERE_, OLD MAN! WHY, THERE'S
_NOBODY_ CARES ABOUT _MINE_!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

The New Atomic Theory.

(_According to the New Journalism_).

  Mankind are debtors to two mighty creditors,
  Omniscient Science, and infallible Editors.
  Nature is summed in principles and particles;
  The moral world in Laws and Leading Articles!

       *       *       *       *       *

CRICKET ACROSS THE CHANNEL.

[Illustration]

We believe that our lively neighbours, the French, having seen that
there is a chance of some alteration being made in the rules of
cricket in England, have determined to suggest some changes on their
own account. We give the first list of proposals:--

1. The ball in future is to be made of india-rubber.

2. Armour to be allowed to the striker, so as to prevent accidents
from the ball.

3. The umpires to be henceforth experienced surgeons, so that their
medical services may be available for the wounded.

4. Camp-stools to be permitted to the long-stop, and other hard-worked
members of the field.

5. Fielders expected to run after a rapidly-driven ball, to be allowed
to follow the object on bicycles.

6. The wicket-keeper to have a small portable fortress in front of him
to keep him out of danger.

7. The bats to be made of the same materials as those used in
lawn-tennis.

8. The game to commence with the "luncheon interval," to be employed
in discussing a _dejeuner a la fourchette_.

9. The uniform of the cricketer in future to consist of a horn, a
hunting-knife, jockey-cap and fishing-boots, in fact the costume of
the earliest French exponent of the game.

10. The outside to have the right to declare the game closed when
fatigued.

11. A band of music to be engaged to play a popular programme. A
flourish of trumpets to announce the triumph of the striker when he
succeeds in hitting the ball.

12. Those who take part in the great game to be decorated with a
medal. All future matches to be commemorated with clasps, to denote
the player's bravery.

Should these reforms be adopted by the M. C. C., there seems little
doubt that the national game of England will receive a fresh lease of
popularity in the land that faces Albion.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LATEST CRISIS.

    [Mr. BARTLEY protested in the House of Commons against Mr. W.
    O'BRIEN'S conduct in dining in the House with strangers at
    a table reserved for Members. Mr. O'BRIEN explained that Mr.
    AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN had taken a table which he (Mr.
    O'BRIEN) had previously reserved. The question is under the
    consideration of the Kitchen Committee.]

  A crisis! A crisis! The man is a fool
  Who desires at this moment to talk of Home Rule.
  Though we know that in Egypt a something is rotten,
  The intrigues of young ABBAS are straightway forgotten;
  And we think just as much of the woes of Siam
  As we care for that coin of small value--a _dam_.
  For a crisis has come, and the House is unable
  To detach its attention from questions of table.
  Their tongues and their brains all the Members exhaust in
  Discussing the rights of O'BRIEN and AUSTEN.
  They debate in an access of anger and gloom
  As to who took from which what was kept, and for whom.
  The letters they wrote, the retorts they made tartly
  Are detailed--gracious Powers preserve us--by BARTLEY,
  Who can bend--only statesmen are formed for such feats--
  His mind, which is massive, to questions of seats,
  And discuss with a zest which is equal to TANNER'S,
  The absorbing details of a matter of manners.
  Mr. BARTLEY you like to be heard than to hear
  Far more, but, forgive me, a word in your ear.
  Though we greatly rejoice when all records are cut
  By your steam-hammer mind in thus smashing a nut,
  Yet we think it were well if the Kitchen could settle
  In private this question of pot _versus_ kettle.
  And in future, when dog-like men fight for a bone,
  Take a hint, Mr. BARTLEY, and leave them alone.

       *       *       *       *       *

LATEST FROM THE NATIONAL BOXING SALOON (_with the kind regards of the_
SPEAKER).--"The nose has it, and so have the eyes!"

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: SAINT IZAAK AND HIS VOTARIES.

_Mr. Punch's Tercentenary Tribute to the Author of "The Compleat
Angler."_

    [August 9th this year is the 300th anniversary of the birth,
    in the ancient house at Stafford, of IZAAK WALTON.]
]

  Good IZAAK of the diction quaint,
    The calendar holds many a fellow
  Less worthy to be dubbed a saint
    (For gentle heart and wisdom mellow)
  Than thou, the Angler's genial guide
  By wandering brook and river wide.

  "I care not, I, to fish in seas,"
    So chirped WILL BASSE, thy favourite singer,
  "Fresh rivers best my mind do please."
    Bard-loving quoter, brave back-bringer
  Of England's pastoral scenes and songs,
  All England's praise to thee belongs.

  Thy Book bewitches more than those
    Who are sworn "Brothers of the Angle."
  Scents of fresh pastures, wilding rose,
    All trailing flowers that intertangle
  In England's hedgerows, seem to fill
  Its pages and our pulses thrill.

  We see the stretch "up Totnam Hil,"
    Toward the "Thatcht House" that fresh May morning;
  We hear VIATOR praise the skill
    That he was first inclined to scorning;
  We mark the Master's friendly proffer
  Change him to votary from scoffer.

  Those "many grave and serious men,"
    He chid as "men of sowr complexions,"
  If they resist his graphic pen,
    His pastorals sweet, his quaint reflections,
  Must have indeed mere souls of earth,
  To beauty blind, untuned to mirth.

  The "poor-rich-men" he pitied so
    All Anglers, and wise hearts, must pity.
  His song's queer "trollie lollie loe,"
    Sounds cheerily as the blackbird's ditty,
  To men in populous city pent,
  Who know the Angler's calm content.

  And even those who know it not,
    Nor care--poor innocents!--to know it,
  Whom ne'er the Fisher's favoured lot
    Has thrilled as sportsman, fired as poet,
  May love to turn the leaves, and halt on
  The quaint conceits of honest WALTON.

  The man whose only "quill" 's a pen,
    Who keeps no rod and tackle handy,
  May hear thy "merry river" when
    "It bubbles, dances, and grows sandy."
  May sit beneath thy beech, and wish
  To catch thy voice, if not thy fish:

  May love to sit or stroll with thee,
    Amidst the grassy water-meadows;
  The culverkeys and cowslips see,
    Dancing in summer's lights and shadows;
  And watch yon youngster gathering stocks
  Of lilies and of lady-smocks:

  To hear thy milkmaid, MAUDLIN, troll
    Choice morsels from KIT MARLOW sweetly;
  And MAUDLIN'S mother,--honest soul,
    Whose "golden age" has fled so fleetly!--
  Respond with RALEIGH'S answering rhyme
  Of wisdom past its active prime:

  To take a draught of sound old ale--
    What tipple wholesomer or sweeter?--
  At the old ale-house in the vale,
    With CORYDON and brother PETER;
  And share the "Musick"'s mellow bout,
  As they at supper shared the trout.

  Then to that cleanly room and sweet--
    After a gay good night to all--
  Lavender scent about the sheet,
    And "ballads stuck about the wall,"
  And fall on sleep devoid of sorrow,
  With fair dreams filled of sport to-morrow.

  What wonder WALTON'S work has charmed
    Three centuries? That his bait has captured
  The grey recluse, the boy switch-armed,
    The sage, the statesman, bard enraptured,
  Gay girl--are fish her only spoil?--
  And grave Thames-haunting son of toil!

  Thy votaries, good Saint IZAAK, are
    "All who love _quietnesse_, and _vertue_."
  Is there on whom such praises jar?
    Well, join for once--it scarce can hurt you--
  In _Punch's_ Tribute; fortune wishing
  To gentle souls who "go a-fishing!"

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: GUESSES AT TRUTH.

_Mr. Laidislaw._ "HANDSOME WOMAN OUR HOSTESS--DON'T YOU THINK? BY THE
BYE, WHAT DO YOU SUPPOSE HER AGE IS?"

_Miss St. Cyr._ "WELL, I SHOULD FANCY, WHAT THE ILLUSTRATED
BIOGRAPHIES CALL 'PRESENT DAY!'"]

       *       *       *       *       *

"HERE'S TO THE CLIENT."

  Here's to the client who makes his own will,
    And here's to his friends who dispute it;
  Here's to the case which is drawn up with skill,
    And the time that it takes to refute it.

  Here's to the felon whose crimes are a score,
    And here's to the wretch with but one, Sirs;
  Fraudulent trustees, directors galore,
    And the various things that they've done, Sirs.

  Here's to the costs which will mount up apace,
    When the action comes on for a hearing,
  "Retainers," "refreshers," and all of their race,
    Which they lavish on us for appearing.

  Here's to the Law, with its hand just and strong,
    Which has grown from the earliest ages;
  And here's to this lay, which we hope's not too long
    For _Punch_ to put into his pages.

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW VERSION OF AN OLD SAYING (_adapted for exclusive swells who cannot
enjoy even a Sport when it becomes "so common, don't-cha!"_).--What is
Everybody's pleasure is Nobody's pleasure!

       *       *       *       *       *

TO A SWISS BAROMETER.

  Oh, optimistic instrument,
    No other ever seeks
  To raise one's hopes--benevolent
    You always show _Beau fixe_!

  Though meteorologic swells
    Predict wet days for weeks,
  Your well-intentioned pointer tells
    Of nothing but _Beau fixe_.

  How sweet, when in the dewy morn--
    So dewy!--up the peaks
  We start through drizzle all forlorn,
    To read again _Beau fixe_.

  It makes us think of sunny lands,
    Where weather has no freaks,
  To see, they're always so, your hands
    Both point to that _Beau fixe_.

  And though we're sodden to the skin,
    Through coat and vest and breeks,
  You did not mean to take us in
    In spite of your _Beau fixe_.

  We tramp, expecting soon to see
    In that grey sky some streaks;
  Ah no, it's fixed as fixed can be,
    As fixed as your _Beau fixe_.

  No matter, we get used to rain,
    And mop our streaming cheeks,
  Quite sure, when we get home again,
    You cannot say _Beau fixe_.

  At last, all soaked, we stagger in--
    One's clothing simply leaks--
  And still you say, through thick and thin,
    Unchangeably _Beau fixe_.

  We change, although you don't; no thread
    Is dry on us; small creeks
  Form where we stand, all drenched from head
    To foot. Blow your _Beau fixe_!

  This beastly weather might have riled
    The philosophic Greeks;
  It makes us simple Britons wild,
    Combined with your _Beau fixe_.

  We tell the landlord we must go--
    Poor man, he rather piques
  Himself upon the weather, so
    Incessantly _Beau fixe_.

  "_Ah, non, ca va changer ce soir!_"
    Thus hopefully he speaks,
  "_Si Monsieur voulait bien voir
    Le barometre--Beau fixe!_"

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: AN AUTHORITY ON THE THEORY AND PRACTICE OF THE "BUFFER
STATE"!!]

       *       *       *       *       *

Adapted.

(_To the Unionist Needs of the Moment._)

  Other men have many faults,
      Mr. GLADSTONE has but two;
  There's nothing wise that he can say,
      and nothing right that he can do.

       *       *       *       *       *

In a recent case, Mr. LANE, the magistrate, is reported to have
informed an inquiring husband, "If your wife turns you out she is not
bound to find you a home; but if _you_ turn your wife out you _are_
bound to find _her_ a home." This suggests a new Charity, "The Home
for Turned-out Wives." These ladies would be seen driving out in
well-appointed traps, and gain a new status in Society as being
"uncommonly well-turned-out" wives.

       *       *       *       *       *

ANOTHER SCENE AT THE PLAY.

(_That never should be tolerated._)

SCENE--_Auditorium of a Fashionable Theatre. Vast majority of the
audience deeply interested in the action and dialogue of an excellent
piece. Enter a party of Lady Emptyheads into a Private Box._

_First Emptyhead (taking off her wraps)._ I told you there was no
necessity to hurry away from dinner. You see they are getting on very
well without us.

_Second Empt. (seating herself in front of the box)._ Yes. And it's so
much pleasanter to chat than to listen. This piece, they tell me, is
full of clever dialogue--so satisfactory to people who like that sort
of thing.

_Third Empt. (looking round the house with an opera-glass)._ Why
scarcely a soul in the place we know. Well, I suppose everybody is
leaving town. Stay, is that Mrs. EVERGREEN TOFFY?

_Fourth Empt. (also using her glasses)._ Why, yes. I wish we could
make her see us.

_First Empt._ Haven't you noticed that you never can attract attention
when you want to? Isn't it provoking?

_Second Empt._ Oh, terribly; and there is Captain DASHALONG. Why, I
thought he was at Aldershot.

_Third Empt._ Oh, they always give them leave about this time of the
year.

_Rest of Audience (sternly)._ Hush! S-s-s-h-s-h!

_Fourth Empt._ I wonder what's the piece about.

_Third Empt._ Oh, it doesn't in the least matter. Sure to be
sparkling. Do you like that woman's hair?

_Fourth Empt._ Scarcely. It's the wrong shade. How can people make
such frights of themselves!

_First Empt._ I wonder if this is the Second Act, or the First!

_Third Empt._ What does it matter! I never worry about a piece, for I
know I shall see all about it afterwards in the papers.

_Rest of Audience (with increased sternness)._ Hush! S-s-s-h-s-h!

_Second Empt._ I always come to this theatre because the chairs are
comfortable. What is the good of going to the play unless you can
enjoy yourself?

_Third Empt._ Quite so. And it's much better fun without one's
husband, isn't it?

_First Empt._ Of course. I never bring mine, because he always goes to
sleep! So disrespectful to the actresses and actors!

_Second Empt._ Yes. Of course, one ought to listen to what's going on,
even if you don't care what it's all about.

_Fourth Empt._ Quite so. Not that it isn't pleasant to look round the
house.

_Rest of Audience (angrier than ever)._ Hush! S-s-s-h-s-h!

_Third Empt._ Yes, I often think that this side of the curtain is
quite as amusing as the other.

_Fourth Empt._ I wonder what they are doing on the stage? Oh, I see
that the Act is nearly over! Well, I daresay it has been very amusing.

_Rest of Audience (furious)._ Hush! Hush! Hush!

_First Empt._ There descends the curtain! By the way, what a noise
those people in the pit have been making! I wonder what it was all
about?

_Second Empt._ I haven't the faintest notion. However, when the
play begins again, I hope they won't make any more noise. It is so
disrespectful to the Audience.

_First Empt._ And the Company. Why can't people behave themselves in a
theatre?

_Second, Third, and Fourth Empt. (in chorus)._ Ah yes! Why can't they?

[_Scene closes in upon a renewal of chatter upon the raising of the
Curtain on another Act._

       *       *       *       *       *

"GIVE A _DAY_ A BAD NAME AND----."--It is stated that the day of the
disgraceful Donnybrook in the House of Commons has been nicknamed
"Collar Day," because Mr. HAYES FISHER seized Mr. LOGAN by the collar,
and Mr. CHAMBERLAIN "collared" Mr. O'BRIEN'S table in the dining-room.
This is all very well in its way, but would not "_Choler_ Day" be more
appropriate and intelligible?

       *       *       *       *       *

A DREAM-BOOK

_For Would-be Travellers._

If you dream of--

_Antwerp._ Remember the Reubens and forget the passage over.

_Boulogne._ Remember the Casino and forget the Port.

_Calais._ Remember the Restaurant at the station and forget the dull
surroundings.

_Dieppe._ Remember the Plage and forget the occasional gales.

_Etretat._ Remember the sands and forget the prices.

_Florence._ Remember the pictures and forget the heat.

_Geneva._ Remember the lake and forget the city.

_Heidelberg._ Remember the castle and forget the climbing.

_Interlachen._ Remember the Jung Frau and forget the tourists.

_Japan._ Remember the interesting associations and forget the length
of the journey.

_Lisburn._ Remember that it is little known and forget that it is not
worth seeing.

_Madrid._ Remember that you can get there in two days and forget that
you will regret the time you spend upon the trip.

_Naples._ Remember that you should see the Bay and forget that you are
expected to die immediately afterwards.

_Paris._ Remember that it is always pleasant and forget that the
exception is during August.

_Quebec._ Remember it's in Canada and forget that it's the least
pleasing place in America.

_Rome._ Remember its objects of interest and forget its fever.

_Strasbourg._ Remember that it has a Cathedral and forget that the
clock is a fraud.

_Turin._ Remember that it might be quite worth the journey and forget
that it isn't.

_Venice._ Remember its canals and forget its odours.

_Vichy._ Remember that there is a good hotel and forget that you have
been there a dozen times before.

_Wiesbaden._ Remember the glories of its past and forget the sadness
of its present.

_Zurich._ Remember that it is completely abroad and forget that
there's no place like home.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: GOOD RESOLUTIONS.

_Blenkinsop (on a Friend's Yacht) soliloquises._ "I KNOW ONE THING,
IF EVER I'M RICH ENOUGH TO KEEP A YACHT, I SHALL SPEND THE MONEY IN
HORSES."]

       *       *       *       *       *

ONLY THEIR PLAY!

  Abnormal natures, morbid motives! Yes!
  These things, upon the stage, perhaps impress.
  Monstrosities, not true men's hearts, nor women's.
  Trolls, with a touch of the _delirium tremens_,
  Neurotic neurospasts, puppets whose wires
  Are pulled by morbid dreams and mad desires;
  Not men and women 'midst our world's temptations,
  But fevered phantasy's bizarre creations.
  Despite _Solness_ and _Mrs. Tanqueray_,
  "People don't do these things"--except _in play_!

       *       *       *       *       *

AS IN A GLASS DARKLY.--Grubby and grovelling "Realists" boast that
they only "hold the mirror up to Nature." Perhaps! But when their
particular "mirror" happens to be--as it commonly is--dirty and
distorting, Nature, like the victim of a bad looking-glass at a
country inn, is taken at a disadvantage. There are mirrors which make
a man look a monster, but then the monstrosity is not in the man but
the mirror.

       *       *       *       *       *

TIMON ON BIMETALLISM.

(_Adapted from Shakspeare._)

    ["He advocates bimetallism with the passionate ardour of a
    prophet promulgating a new revelation. On most subjects he is
    cool, analytical, _and perhaps a little cynical_; but on this
    subject he is an enthusiast."--_The Times on Mr. Balfour's
    Speech about Bimetallism._]

_Timon of London, loquitur_:--

                          The learned pate
  Ducks to the golden fool; all is oblique;
  There's nothing level in our currency
  But monometallism! Gold doth lord
  Great lands, societies, and throngs of men.
  That the sun rounds the earth, that earth's a disc,
  Are foolish fads that TIMON much disdains
  As duping dull mankind. But will they rank
  _My_ fad--Bimetallism--along with such?
  I seek a dual standard; gold alone
  Is a most operant poison! What is here?
  Gold? yellow, precious, glittering gold? No, gods,
  I am no aureate votarist. Silver seems
  To me, and to wise WALSH, a fair twin-standard
  Fit to set up, that variable values
  May find stability in dual change,
  _With_ a fixed ratio, which the world must find,
  Or our one standard, like a pirate's flag,
  Will lead us to disaster. Monometallism
  Is--Monomania. This yellow slave
  Will break, not knit, our Commerce. I can be
  Cool, analytical, even cynical
  On trifles--such as Separatism's sin,
  Or County Council Crime; but this thing stirs
  My tepid blood, e'en as Statistics warm
  The chilly soul of GOSCHEN. Come, curst gold,
  Thou common ore of mankind, that putt'st odds
  Among the rout of nations, I will make thee
  Take thy right place! Thou mak'st my heart beat quick,
  But yet I'll bury thee: thou'lt go, strong thief,
  Orthodox keepers of thee cannot stand
  Against a passionate prophet's promulgation
  Of a new economic revelation.
  "Put up your gold!" But put up silver, too,
  (As WALSH, and GRENFELL, and Sage CHAPLIN urge),
  Or banded Europe--some day--shall smash up
  Our City to financial chaos. Aye!
  I may talk lightly about trivial things,
  And cynically smile on twaddle's trifles,--
  Union of hearts, optimist ecstasies,
  Fervours, and faiths, the breeks of prisoned Pats,
  Coercion's bondage and such bagatelles--
  But on this Titan theme--Bimetallism--
  TIMON is in hot earnest!

       *       *       *       *       *

A Short Way with Wasps.

  A plague of wasps infests the South
    In consequence of the hot season!--
  Humph! Is it torrid heat and drouth
    Deprive our Commons of cool reason?
  A plague of wasps infests the House!
    Its managers the matter mull, for
  They have not (like poor HODGE) the _nous_
    To smoke pests out with (moral) sulphur!
  To check HAYES FISHER'S style, or TIM'S tone,
  MELLOR tries treacle; he needs brimstone.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A LESSON.

_Father_ (_on receiving Bill for Luncheon at one of our very modern
London Restaurants_). "HALLO! WHAT!! OVER TWO GUINEAS FOR MERELY----!
WHY, HANG IT----!"

_His Son_ (_small Etonian_). "OH, WELL NEVER MIND, FATHER. IT'S A
THING TO DO _ONCE_, AND WE WON'T DO IT AGAIN!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE STORMY PETREL.

    ["This bird has long been celebrated for the manner in which
    it passes over the waves, pattering with its webbed feet
    and flapping its wings so as to keep itself just above the
    surface. It thus traverses the ocean with wonderful ease, the
    billows rolling beneath its feet and passing away under the
    bird without in the least disturbing it."--_Wood's Popular
    Natural History._]

  Only a Petrel, I,
  Telling the storm is nigh;
  Fleet o'er the waves I fly,
    When skies look stormy.
  When things are calm and slow,
  I 'midst Brum rocks lie low;
  But when wild breezes blow
    Men may look for me.

  Lured from my Midland home,
  When gales begin to roam
  Proudly I skim the foam,
    Flappering and pattering!
  I with the airiest ease
  Traverse the angriest seas
  Round the wild Hebrides
    Bellowing and battering.

  But the wild Irish coast
  Suits my strong flight the most.
  Breeze-baffling wings I boast,
    Nothing disturbs me.
  Cool 'midst the tempest's crash,
  Swift through the foam I dash,
  Wind flout or lightning flash
    Scares not, nor curbs me.

  Sea-birds are silly things,
  Squat bodies, stunted wings.
  Where is the bard who sings
    Penguin or puffin,
  Grebe, guillemot, or gull?
  Oh, the winged noodles, null,
  In timid flocks and dull,
    Squattin' and stuffin'!

  I, like the albatross,
  Love on the winds to toss,
  Where gales and currents cross
    My fodder finding.
  Let Gulls and Boobies rest
  Safe in a sheltered nest,
  I'm bold the breeze to breast
    Tamer fowl blinding.

  Only a Petrel, I,
  Calm in a calm I lie,
  But when 'neath darkening sky
    Strife lifteth her face,
  When the red lightnings glare,
  Then, from my rocky lair
  Darting, I cleave the air,
    Skimming sea's surface.

  Some swear the storm I raise;
  That's superstition's craze;
  But on tempestuous days,
    Wild, wet, and windy,
  Herald of storm I fly.
  Only a Petrel, I,
  But when my form you spy,--
    Look out for shindy.

       *       *       *       *       *

"BENEFITS FORGOT."--This is the title of a serial in _Scribners'_.
Many over-strict persons will not read it, being under the impression
that the story is essentially theatrical. A natural mistake. Nothing
in an actor's life could give occasion for more bitter reflection than
the memory of "Benefits Forgot," especially after they had been got up
and advertised at great personal expense.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO A FINE WOMAN.

(_By a Little Man._)

  "Can my eyes reach thy size?"
    Asked the Lilliputian poet,
  As I've read. Can my head
    Reach your shoulder? It's below it.

  Women all are so tall
    Nowadays, but you're gigantic;
  One so vast, sweeping past,
    Makes my five feet four feel frantic.

  Each girl tries exercise,
    Rows, rides, runs, golf, cricket, tennis,
  Games for an Olympian--
    Greek Olympia, not "Venice."

  Stalks and shoots, climbs in boots
    Like a navvy's not a dandy's,
  Ice-axe takes, records breaks--
    If not neck--on Alps or Andes.

  Alps in height, girls affright
    Men, like me, of puny figure;
  They are too tall, but you
    Are preposterously bigger.

  At this dance, if I glance
    Round the room, I see I'm smallest;
  You instead are a head
    Over girls and men, you're tallest.

  As a pair, at a fair,
    Any showman might produce us;
  Dwarf I'd do, giant you----
    What! They want to introduce us?

  Can I whirl such a girl?
    Calisthenics could not teach it.
  I, effaced, clasp your waist?
    I'll be hanged if I can reach it!

[Illustration: THE STORMY PETREL!]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE ADVENTURES OF PICKLOCK HOLES.

(_By Cunnin Toil._)

No. I.--THE BISHOP'S CRIME.

I was sitting alone in my room at 10.29 on the night of the 14th of
last November. I had been doing a good deal of work lately, and I
was tired. Moreover, I had had more than one touch of that old Afghan
fever, which always seemed to be much more inclined to touch than to
go. However, we can't have everything here to please us; and as I had
only the other day attended two bankers and a Lord Mayor for measles,
I had no real cause to complain of my prospects. I had drawn the old
armchair in which I was sitting close to the fire, and, not having
any bread handy, I was occupied in toasting my feet at the blaze
when suddenly the clock on the mantelpiece struck the half hour, and
PICKLOCK HOLES stood by my side. I was too much accustomed to his
proceedings to express any surprise at seeing him thus, but I own
that I was itching to ask him how he had managed to get into my house
without ringing the bell. However, I refrained, and motioned him to a
chair.

"My friend," said this extraordinary man, without the least preface,
"you've been smoking again. You know you have; it's not the least use
denying it." I absolutely gasped with astonishment, and gazed at him
almost in terror. How had he guessed my secret? He read my thoughts,
and smiled.

"Oh, simply enough. That spot on your shirt-cuff is black. But
it might have been yellow, or green, or blue, or brown, or
rainbow-coloured. But I know you smoke Rainbow mixture, and as your
canary there in the corner has just gone blind, I know further that
bird's-eye is one of the component parts of the mixture."

"HOLES," I cried, dropping my old meerschaum out of my mouth in my
amazement; "I don't believe you're a man at all--you're a devil."

"Thank you for the compliment," he replied, without moving a single
muscle of his marble face. "You ought not to sup----" He was going
to have added "pose," but the first syllable seemed to suggest a
new train of thought (in which, I may add, there was no second class
whatever) to my inexplicable friend.

"No," he said; "the devilled bones were not good. Don't interrupt me;
you had devilled bones for supper, or rather you would have had them,
only you didn't like them. Do you see that match? A small piece
is broken off the bottom, but enough is left to show it was once
a lucifer--in other words, a devil. It is lying at the feet of
the skeleton which you use for your anatomical investigations, and
therefore I naturally conclude that you had devilled bones for
supper. You didn't eat them, _for not a single bone of the skeleton is
missing_. Do I make myself clear?"

"You do," I said, marvelling more than ever at the extraordinary
perspicacity of the man. As a matter of fact, my supper had consisted
of bread and cheese; but I felt that it would be in extremely bad
taste for a struggling medical practitioner like myself to contradict
a detective whose fame had extended to the ends of the earth. I picked
up my pipe, and relit it, and, for a few moments, we sat in silence.
At last I ventured to address him.

"Anything new?" I said.

"No, not exactly new," he said, wearily, passing his sinewy hand over
his expressionless brow. "Have you a special _Evening Standard_? I
conclude you have, as I see no other evening papers here. Do you mind
handing it to me?"

There was no deceiving this weird creature. I took the paper he
mentioned from my study table, and handed it to him.

"Now listen," said HOLES, and then read, in a voice devoid of any sign
of emotion, the following paragraph:--"This morning, as Mrs.
DRABLEY, a lady of independent means, was walking in Piccadilly, she
inadvertently stepped on a piece of orange-peel, and fell heavily
on the pavement. She was carried into the shop of Messrs. SALVER AND
TANKARD, the well-known silversmiths, and it was at first thought she
had broken her right leg. However, on being examined by a medical man
who happened to be passing, she was pronounced to be suffering
from nothing worse than a severe bruise, and, in the course of
half-an-hour, she recovered sufficiently to be able to proceed on her
business. This is the fifth accident caused by orange-peel at the same
place within the last week."

[Illustration: "The Bishop was in his night-gown, and the sight of two
strangers visibly alarmed him."]

"It _is_ scandalous!" I broke in. "This mania for dropping orange-peel
is decimating London. Curiously enough I happen to be the medical man
who----"

"Yes, I know; you are the medical man who was passing."

"HOLES," I ejaculated, "you are a magician."

"No, not a magician; only a humble seeker after truth, who uses as a
basis for his deduction some slight point that others are too blind
to grasp. Now you think the matter ends there. I don't. I mean to
discover who dropped that orange-peel. Will you help me?"

"Of course I will, but how do you mean to proceed? There must be
thousands of people who eat oranges every day in London."

"Be accurate, my dear fellow, whatever you do. There are 78,965, not
counting girls. But this piece was not dropped by a girl."

"How do you know?" I asked.

"Never mind; it is sufficient that I do know it. Read this," he
continued, pointing to another column of the paper. This is what I
read:--

"MISSIONARY ENTERPRISE.--A great conference of American and Colonial
Bishops was held in Exeter Hall this afternoon. The proceedings opened
with an impassioned speech from the Bishop of FLORIDA----"

"Never mind the rest," said HOLES, "that's quite enough. Now read
this":--

"The magnificent silver bowl to be presented to the Bishop of Florida
by some of his English friends is now on view at Messrs. SALVER
AND TANKARD'S in Piccadilly. It is a noble specimen of the British
silversmith's art." An elaborate description followed.

"These paragraphs," continued HOLES, in his usual impassive manner,
"give me the clue I want. Florida is an orange-growing country. Let us
call on the Bishop."

In a moment we had put on our hats, and in another moment we were in
a Hansom on our way to the Bishop's lodgings in Church Street, Soho.
HOLES gained admittance by means of his skeleton key. We passed
noiselessly up the stairs, and, without knocking, entered the Bishop's
bedroom. He was in his night-gown, and the sight of two strangers
visibly alarmed him.

"I am a detective," began HOLES.

"Oh," said the Bishop, turning pale. "Then I presume you have called
about that curate who disappeared in an alligator swamp close to my
episcopal palace in Florida. It is not true that I killed him. He----"

"Tush," said HOLES, "we are come about weightier matters. This morning
at half-past eleven your lordship was standing outside the shop of
SALVER AND TANKARD looking at your presentation bowl. You were eating
an orange. You stowed the greater part of the peel in your coat-tail
pocket, but you dropped, maliciously dropped, one piece on the
pavement. Shortly afterwards a stout lady passing by trod on it and
fell. Have you anything to say?"

The Bishop made a movement, but HOLES was before-hand with him. He
dashed to a long black coat that hung behind the door, inserted his
hand deftly in the pocket, and pulled out the fragmentary remains of a
large Florida orange.

"As I supposed," he said, "a piece is missing."

But the miserable prelate had fallen senseless on the floor, where we
left him.

"HOLES," I said, "this is one of your very best. How on earth did you
know you would find that orange-peel in his coat?"

"I didn't find it there," replied my friend; "I brought it with me,
and had it in my hand when I put it in his pocket. I knew I should
have to use strong measures with so desperate a character. My dear
fellow, all these matters require tact and imagination."

And that was how we brought home the orange-peel to the Bishop.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ben Trovato.

  A penny-a-liner heard--with a not unnatural choler--
    That he of all invention was apparently bereft;
  And so he up and told them that a smart left-handed bowler,
    "Manipulates the leather with the left!"
  That's very chaste and novel, and alliterative too;
  As a sham Swinburnian poet we should think that man might do!

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: EDUCATED.

(_From a Yorkshire Moor._)

_Keeper (to the Captain, who has missed again, and is letting off
steam in consequence)._ "OH DEAR! OH DEAR! IT'S HAWFUL TO SEE YER
MISSIN' OF 'EM, SIR; BUT"--(_with admiration_)--"YE'RE A SCHOLARD I'
LANGWIDGE, SIR!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

CRICKET CONGRATULATIONS.

  843! Well done! Well played! Well hit!
  It opens _Mr. Punch's_ eyes a bit
  To see our friends of the Antipodes
  Pile up their hundreds with the utmost ease.
  BRUCE leads the way, and shows Blues--Dark and Light--
  Left-handed men may play the game aright.
  Then BANNERMAN, safe as a GUNN is he,
  Exceeds the Century by thirty-three,
  While five more than a hundred runs are due
  To TRUMBLE, whom his friends call simply "HUGH."
  Well played, Australia! Banks may fail--they do,
  And, truth to tell, you _have_ lost one or two,
  But this at any rate's a clear deduction--
  Your Cricket Team can need no reconstruction!

       *       *       *       *       *

ESSENCE OF PARLIAMENT.

EXTRACTED FROM THE DIARY OF TOBY, M.P.

_House of Commons, Monday, July 31._--No one who chanced last
Thursday to see HAYES FISHER and LOGAN engaged in controversy on
Front Opposition Bench would suspect them of essentially retiring
disposition. This conclusively proved to-night. Decided on further
consideration that something must really be done in direction of
modifying effects of Thursday's riot. Someone must apologise. This
put to HAYES FISHER, who delighted WALROND with swiftness, even
enthusiasm, of acquiescence.

"Right you are, dear boy," he cried. "I have thought so from the
first. Indeed I have publicly placed the matter in its true light.
Daresay you read my little affidavit written within an hour of what
I quite agree with the SPEAKER in alluding to as 'the regrettable
incident.' Here's what I said: 'To put a stop to his (LOGAN'S)
aggressive conduct, I immediately seized him by the neck and forcibly
ejected him on to the floor of the House. That began the scrimmage.'
Then I go on to point the moral, though indeed it points itself.
This is where you and I particularly agree. 'In my opinion the
responsibility for the discreditable scene rests even more with Mr.
GLADSTONE than with Mr. LOGAN.' Yes, WALROND, you are quite right in
what you are about to say. I have shown clearly that Mr. G. was at the
bottom of the whole business, and he should apologise. Don't you think
he'd better be brought in at the Bar? And if he spent a night or two
in the Clock Tower it would have most wholesome effect, vindicate
dignity of House, and prevent recurrence of these regrettable scenes."

WALROND'S face a study, whilst HAYES FISHER, carried away by
enthusiasm of moment, rubbed his hands and smiled in anticipation of
the scene.

The Opposition Whip had tough job in hand. To FISHER'S logical mind
the proposal that _he_ should apologise was a _non sequitur_. Why,
what had he done? As he told House later, seeing LOGAN come up and
sit down on bench below him, he thought he was going to strike him.
Natural attitude for a man meaning to let out straight from the
shoulder at another is to sit down with back turned towards intended
victim. FISHER'S quick intelligence taking whole situation in at
glance, he promptly proceeded to take in as much as his hands would
hold of the back of LOGAN'S neck, with intent to thrust him forth.
That, as he wrote, "began the scrimmage." In other words, Mr.
GLADSTONE was responsible for the whole business, even more so than
LOGAN, who had wantonly brought the back of his neck within reach of
FISHER'S hand.

However, there were reasons of State why the guilty should go
unpunished. Not the first time Innocency has been sacrificed that
Guilt might stalk through the land unfettered. FISHER would apologise;
but here again the untameably logical mind asserted itself. LOGAN must
apologise first. It was he who had been forcibly ejected. On Thursday
night FISHER had come up behind him; _argal_, he must follow him
now. Thus it was settled, or so understood. But when critical moment
arrived, House waiting for someone to speak, hitch occurred. FISHER
waited for LOGAN; LOGAN, in excess of politeness, hung back. Awkward
pause. SPEAKER observed he had certainly understood something might be
said by the two gentlemen. Another pause. LOGAN and FISHER eyed each
other across the floor.

  Lord CHATHAM, with his sword drawn,
  Stood waiting for Sir RICHARD STRACHAN;
  Sir RICHARD, longing to be at 'em,
  Stood waiting for the Earl of CHATHAM.

[Illustration: "THE HAPPY FAMILY."

(_By Our Artist in Fret-Work._)]

At length PRINCE ARTHUR interposed; gently, but firmly, drew the coy
FISHER to the front. His apology followed by one from the lingering
LOGAN. Scene ended amid mutual tears.

"Yes, it's all very well," said FISHER, wringing his
pocket-handkerchief and glaring angrily at Mr. G. "But, after all, the
real criminal has escaped, and logic, as applicable to events of daily
life, has received a staggering blow."

_Business done._--ACLAND explained English Education Estimates in
speech admirable alike in matter and manner.

[Illustration: Another Injustice to Ireland.]

_Tuesday._--Some men are born to trouble as the sparks fly upwards.
Of these is WILLIAM O'BRIEN. It would seem that fate had expended its
malignity when PRINCE ARTHUR deprived him of his breeches. Now JOSEPH
has appropriated his dinner-table. The lynx eye of BARTLEY detected
the irregularity which disclosed existence of this fresh outrage.
BARTLEY favourably known in House as guardian of its honour and
dignity. From time to time spirit moves him suddenly to rise and point
fat forefinger at astonished Mr. G., whom he has discovered in
some fresh design upon stability of the Empire or symmetry of the
Constitution. At stated hours, formerly on Thursdays ten o'clock now
generally on stroke of midnight, he is seen and heard shouting "Gag!
gag!"

"Odd," says Member for Sark, "how phrases change in similar
circumstances though at different epochs. When Closure first invented,
put in motion by dear OLD MORALITY, and supported by BARTLEY, HANBURY,
JIMMY LOWTHER, and the rest, it used to be spoken resentfully of
as 'pouncing.' Now it is 'gagging.' But it is precisely the same,
inasmuch as the minority of the day, against whom it is enforced,
denounce it as iniquitous, whilst the majority, who took that view
when they were on other side of House, now regard it as indispensable
to conduct of public business. BARTLEY having lived through both
epochs is useful illustration of this tendency. When OLD MORALITY
pounced on Irish members his lusty shout of approval used to echo
through House with only less volume than now his roar of anguish goes
up to glass roof when OLD MORALITY'S original thumbscrews are fitted
on him and his friends. A quaint, mad world, my TOBY."

To-night BARTLEY not so well-informed on subject as usual. Thought
it was JOHN DILLON, who, acting the part of AMPHITRYON, piloted his
guests within preserves of members' private dining-room. Turned out it
wasn't DILLON at all, but WILLIAM O'BRIEN, who in most tragic manner
tells how, having secured in advance a table for his guests, found
when the dinner-hour struck JOSEPH and his Brethren seated thereat,
merrily profiting by his forethought. Straightway O'BRIEN led his
guests to the table in members' room which Unionist Leaders have
marked for their own. This he appropriated, and there, regardless of
surprised looks from ex-ministers at adjoining table, he truculently
dined.

"Well, at any rate," said TIM HEALY, that Man of Peace, "I'm glad it
wasn't mere English or Orangemen who were thus treated. If JOSEPH had
appropriated SAUNDERSON'S table, the Colonel would have taken him in
his arms, dropped him outside on the Terrace, and, returning to his
seat, ordered a fresh plate of soup." _Business done._--BARTLEY adds
fresh dignity to Parliamentary debate.

_Thursday._--Was it this day week the House was in volcanic upheaval,
with HAYES FISHER--or was it Mr. GLADSTONE?--clutching LOGAN by
the back of the neck, a mad mob mauling each other round the white
waistcoat of EDWARD OF ARMAGH? According to the almanack this is so;
according to appearances an eternity and a hemisphere divide the two
scenes.

In Committee on Vote on Account; average attendance from twenty to
thirty. Orders bristle with amendments; papers read in support
of them; occasionally a Member follows with observations on topic
suggested; sometimes he doesn't; then next gentleman who has prepared
paper takes the floor; the audience turns over; goes to sleep again;
wakened by Chairman putting question "that Amendment be withdrawn."
Isn't even vigour sufficient to induce a division.

Only person free from somnolent influence of hour is Mr. G. Has
nothing to do in this galley; looks on wistfully whilst LOWTHER
(not JIMMY) talks about Vitu and the Pamirs; JIMMY (_lui meme_) is
sarcastic on subject of Board of Trade engaging in experiments
in journalism; and DICKY TEMPLE wants to know all about reported
modifications in constitution of St. Paul's School by the Charity
Commissioners. Mr. G. liked to have offered few remarks on one or all
these subjects. TOMMY BOWLES nearly succeeded in drawing him. Dropping
lightly out of Siam, _via_ Morocco, upon question of Collisions at
Sea, TOMMY brought MUNDELLA into full focus and fairly floored him
with a problem.

"Suppose," he said, "the right hon. gentleman were at sea, and the
whole fleet bore down upon him on the weather bow. What would he do?"

MUNDELLA nonplussed. Mr. G. knew all about it; would have answered
right off and probably silenced even TOMMY with proposition of counter
man[oe]uvre. But MARJORIBANKS kept relentless eye on him. Vote on
Account must be got through Committee to-night. The less speaking
the better; so with profound sigh Mr. G. resisted the temptation
and composed himself to listen to LENG'S paper on the prohibition
of importation of live cattle from Canada. Here was opportunity of
learning something which Mr. G. gratefully welcomed. Gradually, as
the new knight went on reading extract after extract in level voice,
remorselessly deliberate, Mr. G.'s eyes closed, his head drooped, and
in full view of the crowded Strangers' Gallery he fell into peaceful,
childlike slumber.

_Business done._--Vote on Account passed Committee.

[Illustration: Reading the G. O. M. to sleep.]

_Friday._--Morning sitting devoted to miscellaneous talk around
Ireland. Evening, a long STOREY about iniquities of House of Lords.
The evening and the morning a dull day. Had time to look over Mr. G.'s
letter about retention of Irish Members. "What do you think of it?" I
asked the Member for Sark. "Haven't read it," he said. "When I saw
it was a column long, I knew Mr. G. didn't want to say anything
that would be understood. When he does, a few lines suffice; when he
doesn't, nothing less than a column of print will serve."

_Business done._--Vote on Account through Report Stage.

       *       *       *       *       *

FRANCE AND SIAM.--The situation at Bangkok will probably result in
further Develle-opments.

       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's Note:

Page 64: 'barometre' corrected to 'barometre'. "Le barometre--Beau
fixe!"

Page 65: 'Jung Frau' ... the author may have had something else in
mind, besides the mountain (Jungfrau)?

"_Interlachen._ Remember the Jung Frau and forget the tourists."

Page 69: 'measeles' corrected to 'measles'. "attended two bankers and
a Lord Mayor for measles,"







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch, or the London Charivari, Vol.
105, August 12th 1893, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH, OR THE LONDON ***

***** This file should be named 36140.txt or 36140.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/1/4/36140/

Produced by Lesley Halamek, Malcolm Farmer and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
