The Project Gutenberg EBook of History of the Dewitt guard, company A,
50th regiment National guard, state of New York, by Unknown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: History of the Dewitt guard, company A, 50th regiment National guard, state of New York

Author: Unknown

Release Date: May 23, 2011 [EBook #36200]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORY OF THE DEWITT GUARD ***




Produced by Moti Ben-Ari and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)







    HISTORY

    OF THE

    DEWITT GUARD,

    COMPANY A,

    50th Regiment National Guard,

    STATE OF NEW YORK.


    PUBLISHED BY THE COMPANY.


    ITHACA, N. Y.:
    ANDRUS, McCHAIN & CO., STEAM PRINTERS.
    1866.




PREFACE.


Our object in giving to the public a full, true, and concise history of
Company A, 50th Regiment National Guard, State of New York, better known
to the citizens of Ithaca as the DeWitt Guard, is to show as honorable a
record as can be produced by any similar organization--so far as the
membership of this Company was connected with the army and navy of the
United States during the late rebellion. We shall show that the total
membership of the Company from the time of its organization, in
December, 1851, to the present time, has been two hundred and two, of
which eighty-two served either in the army or navy during the war
against eighty-eight who did not; twenty-nine names appear on the
Company roll, of whom it is not known to the writer whether they were or
were not in the army, and nine who died previous to the war. We have
undertaken a brief personal history to each, which we believe will be
interesting to the reader.

We also wish to show that the Company has been, from the time of its
organization to the present, a self-supporting and self-sustaining
institution, until recently receiving nothing from the State but arms,
and that the individual members have contributed the sum of two thousand
seven hundred and twenty dollars and fifty-six cents, to which amount
should be added a liberal percentage for disbursements which do not
appear on Company records.

We propose to give the name of each member of the DeWitt Guard from its
organization, the date of his enlistment, his profession, with such
incidents as we think will be of interest to the reader, after which we
shall give the history of the Company collectively. There may be those
who have belonged to the Company whose names will not appear in these
pages. This must be attributed to the fact of their not signing the
muster-roll of the Company, as every name there recorded is introduced
in the following history.




HISTORY.


ARCH. H. MCNEIL, Merchant, enlisted November 5th, 1851. At the first
election of company officers McNeil was chosen second Lieutenant, which
position he honorably and creditably filled to the time of his death,
which occurred November 28th, 1855. To Lieutenant McNeil the Company
were much indebted. To him more than any other one man, belonged the
credit of organizing the Company.

He was loved, respected, and honored by both officers and men, and his
death caused a breach not easily repaired. Upon receiving intelligence
of his death, the Company were immediately called together and the
following resolutions unanimously adopted:

    _Resolved_, That in the death of Lieutenant A. H. McNeil the
    members of this Company have not only lost a commissioned
    officer in whom a zealous, lively and effective interest for the
    welfare of the Company always prevailed, but an officer whose
    military bearing commanded our respect, and a fellow soldier
    whose conduct and kindness has merited and won our esteem. That
    we deeply feel his loss, and mourn his untimely departure from
    our midst,

    _Resolved_, That we tender to the widow and relatives of our
    deceased officer our sincere condolence in this their great
    affliction.

    _Resolved_, That we accompany the remains of our late officer to
    the depot on the morrow, and that a delegation of seven men
    accompany his remains to the city of Auburn as an escort and
    attend his funeral.

    _Resolved_, That on all parades we will wear the usual badge of
    mourning for one year.

At a special meeting held on the return from Auburn of the escort which
accompanied the remains of Lieut. A. H. McNeil, and after hearing the
report of the officer commanding said escort, the following preamble and
resolutions were unanimously adopted:

    WHEREAS, An escort from this Company having been delegated to
    accompany and perform the last sad duties over the remains of
    our esteemed friend, Lieut. A. H. McNeil, at Auburn, and while
    there having met with reception and attention which ever
    characterize the true and tried friend and soldier, be it
    therefore

    _Resolved_, That to General Segoin and Colonel Jenkins, and
    their respective staffs, to the Auburn City Guard, Willard
    Guard, and to the delegation from other Companies, we as a
    Company return them our sincere and heartfelt thanks for the
    manner in which they cared for them, and the kindness with which
    they were every where greeted by them while there, and in the
    admirable arrangements for the funeral made at such short
    notice, and for the cheerful and handsome manner in which they
    were carried out; gratified as we are, words can only attempt a
    description of our feelings of the manner in which they
    alleviated our sorrows in the burial of our dead. And although
    the deceased had not resided among them for years, yet like us
    they appreciated his many virtues and remembered his uniform
    kindness to all, and when they but learned of his decease, their
    tears mingled with ours at our irreparable loss.

    _Resolved_, That in future, should it be possible for us to
    repay them in any manner that it will be forthcoming, feeling,
    as we do, that no sacrifice will be too great in attempting a
    return of their kindness in the hour of our affliction, and as
    individuals, as citizens and as soldiers, we hope that the
    choicest of Heaven's blessings may be theirs, and that their
    respective staffs and Companies may ever meet with prosperity.

GEORGE H. COLLINS, Merchant, enlisted November 5th, 1851. Mr. Collins
was permitted to serve but a short time as a member of the Company, as
he was selected by the Colonel and commissioned Adjutant of the
Regiment, which position he held for many years. Changing his residence
to the city of New York, his connection with the 50th Regiment was
dissolved.

BEN. B. WILCOX, Hotel keeper, enlisted November 5th, 1851. Served with
the Company but a short time; removed to Owego; was for a time
proprietor of the Ah-Wa-Ga House, but more recently of a hotel at
Saratoga Springs.

WILLIAM M. SMITH, Brewer, enlisted November 5th, 1851. Served but a
short time.

H. F. RANDOLPH, Shoe Merchant, enlisted November 5th, 1851. Mr. Randolph
had more than served his time, and reached the rank of Captain, in the
old militia before joining this organization. He was an officer of no
common attainments--prompt, active and generous. The interest he had
always manifested, and now felt, in military matters, compelled him to
join this new enterprise; he enlisted as a private, and is to this day
an honorary member of the Company. He has accompanied them on many an
excursion, and is always invested with the command of the honorary
members. The Captain has now attained the age of sixty-three years, and
is still as smart, hale and hearty as a lad of sixteen.

J. C. MCWHORTER, Merchant, enlisted November 5th, 1851. Remained but a
short time with the Company, but the soul-stirring strains of music, as
rendered by him on the snare drum while he was a member, will long be
remembered by those associated with him during his short military
experience.

FRED. S. LAMOUREUX, Musician, enlisted November 5th, 1851. Was a very
valuable member for a very short time; for while resting from the
fatigue of drill, Lamoureux always furnished the music for the _light
foot_ portion of the Company.

WILLIAM S. ALLEN, Carpenter, enlisted November 6th, 1851. Was a faithful
and exemplary member for a few years, and undoubtedly his connection
with this Company gave him the position he has honorably filled since
his removal from us--that of policeman in New York city. He was
consequently transferred as Sergeant from this Company to Sergeant of
police in that city.

K. MORRIS, Clothing Merchant, enlisted November 7th, 1851. Served but a
short time.

S. NEWMARK, Clothing Merchant, enlisted November 10th, 1851. Served
faithfully for a short time and was granted an honorable discharge.

J. G. CONRAD, Clerk, enlisted November 8th, 1851. Mr. Conrad faithfully
performed the duties of a member of this Company for a short time.

L. R. KING, Merchant, enlisted November 9th, 1851. At the time of the
organization of the Company, Mr. King was elected fourth Sergeant, and
by promotion filled each office up to first Lieutenant, and was in
command of the Company for some time. Lieutenant King, by his kind and
pleasing way, and the interest he ever manifested in the welfare of the
Company, commanded the respect and admiration of every man who served
under him. He held the commission of first Lieutenant from May 28th,
1856, to August 25th, 1862. Upon his resignation being accepted, he was
voted an honorary membership for life. He is one of the enterprising
firm of Treman, King & Co., large manufacturers. We believe that Mr.
King can look back upon the years spent in the DeWitt Guard as not
altogether unprofitable.

W. B. HATFIELD, Clerk, enlisted November 15th, 1851. Mr. Hatfield was a
good soldier; was in the employ of L. H. Culver, Esq.; retained his
connection with the Company and his employer until his removal to the
West.

SPENCE SPENCER, Book Merchant, enlisted November 15th, 1851. Retained
his membership but a short time, but with the liberality which was
always a prominent characteristic of Mr. Spencer, he donated to the
Company a complete uniform, which is the first recorded gift made to
the DeWitt Guard. He is still a citizen of Ithaca, and has of late
attached no small degree of honor to his name by publishing the book
entitled, "The Scenery of Ithaca."

L. MILLSPAUGH, dealer in Harness, Trunks, &c., enlisted November 15th,
1851. Mr. Millspaugh was an old soldier before joining this Company,
having held the commission of Lieut. Colonel in the old militia, issued
by Gov. Seward in 1842; but feeling a deep interest in the organization
of a new Company, enlisted as a private. On the 29th day of January,
1852, he was elected first Corporal, which position he held but a short
time, as he was gradually promoted until he had filled nearly all the
grades of non-commissioned offices. He always declined accepting a
commission, and when it seemed to be the unanimous wish of the Company,
his prompt reply was "No." He continued an invaluable member until long
after he had served his time, (seven years,) when he was granted an
honorable discharge. Our friend, by his emphatic "No," has not been as
successful, however, in a political way, he having repeatedly been
called to fill civil offices of honor and trust; and by his being
re-elected to most of the offices he has held, is in itself sufficient
to show his standing in the community in which he lives. Whether all
this would have been so, had he never joined the DeWitt Guard, we leave
for a discriminating public to judge.

J. B. TERRY, Merchant, enlisted November 15th, 1851. Mr. Terry filled
the office of Secretary of the Company for the first two years of its
existence. He was a good soldier, an exemplary and respected citizen,
and the community generally mourned his loss when he was removed by
death.

JEROME ROWE, Lawyer, enlisted November 18th, 1851. Some unhappy
misunderstanding caused the withdrawal of Mr. Rowe from the Company
during the early part of its history. He was untiring in his endeavors
to establish the organization, and the same energy and devotion which he
displayed at that time, has followed him thus far through life. He
filled the office of Special County Judge of Tompkins County, with honor
to himself and perfect satisfaction to the people. He entered the army
of the United States April 1st, 1861, was commissioned Captain of
Company A, 32d New York volunteers, same date, and served as such one
year.

HUGH MCDONALD, enlisted November 18th, 1851. Was elected Orderly
Sergeant Dec. 31st of the same year, which position he filled as long as
he was a resident of the village. McDonald was a soldier of much
experience, having served in the Mexican war, where he became perfectly
familiar with the duties pertaining to the soldier in the field. As a
drill-master he was not excelled, and under his instruction the Company
soon became very proficient in the manual of arms, and school of the
soldier and Company. At the outbreak of the Rebellion he enlisted in a
Pennsylvania Regiment, was very soon promoted to Captain, and again to
Major. We should be glad to give a full history of his life through the
war, but have been unable to obtain it. This much we can say, he was a
patriotic citizen, a true soldier, and a faithful officer.

N. H. CURTIS, Upholsterer, enlisted November 19th, 1851. Was long
connected with the Company; filled the posts of Corporal and Sergeant.
After a long residence in our village, he removed to the West, where he
survived but a few years.

DANIEL PLACE, Jeweler, enlisted November ---- 1851. Mr. Place joined the
Company in order that the number required by law might be secured, so as
to enable them to proceed with the election of officers. He never served
as an active member.

LUCIUS F. PEASE, Painter, enlisted November 20th, 1851. Mr. Pease well
and faithfully performed the duties required of him as a member of the
DeWitt Guard for the full term of his enlistment, (seven years,) and was
granted an honorable discharge. He is still living in Ithaca, an
industrious mechanic, and a good citizen.

CHRISTOPHER WHALEY, Druggist, enlisted November 21, 1851. Was discharged
on Surgeon's certificate soon after his enlistment.

WILLIAM GLENNY, Clerk, enlisted November 21st, 1851. December 31st was
elected fourth Corporal; March 3d, 1853, was elected Secretary, which
office he most creditably filled, as the records of the Company show, up
to January, 1857; was elected fourth Sergeant Jan. 14th, 1857; May 17th,
1861, second Sergeant, which office he held at the time of his
enlistment in the United States army.

The subject of this sketch reflects great credit upon the Company to
which he formerly belonged, and in the perilous hour honored his
constituency, as well as himself, to a degree unparalleled in the
history of the Rebellion. Having in his former life been a warm and
ardent supporter of the inalienable rights of man, and an exponent of a
free government, the first attempt by traitors to destroy its fair
fabric, bought by the blood of our fathers, and to trample under foot
the time-honored and beloved emblem of our free and independent
nationality, so enraged his sense of right and justice, that he at once
expressed his determination to fulfill his public declarations to the
effect, that when traitors should thrust the bayonet at the nation's
life, he would be found among those who were willing to peril their
lives in its defence.

Being met with opposition and the remonstrance of friends, that there
were single men, and those more inured to hardship, sufficient for the
emergency, whose duty it was to go first, his plans were for a time
delayed, and until a second or third reverse of our arms, when he could
no longer be restrained, went earnestly at work, and by his persistent
efforts succeeded in raising a sufficient number of volunteers for the
basis of a Company; which, by authority of the commandant of the Elmira
rendezvous, in accordance with orders from the Adjutant General of the
State, was organized at Ithaca Sept. 10th, 1861, and by him conducted to
Elmira, where, by a unanimous vote of the Company, he was elected its
Captain, and so commissioned by Gov. Seymour, commission bearing date
Sept. 13th, 1861.

Captain Glenny then went earnestly at work and recruited his Company to
the minimum standard, and by vote of its members united its destinies
with the 64th Regiment N. Y. Volunteers, commanded by Col. Thomas J.
Parker.

On the 10th of December the Regiment moved to Washington, and a month
later crossed the Potomac and camped with the main army three miles west
of Alexandria, and was brigaded under General O. O. Howard, who
commanded the first Brigade, first Division, second Corps. Early in the
spring of 1862, the Brigade moved one week in advance of the main army
for the purpose of repairing the Orange & Alexandria Railroad. A short
distance beyond Fairfax Station signs of the enemy were discovered, and
for safety to the command, two Companies from the 64th, under command of
Captain Glenny, (his own being one of the number) were sent some
considerable distance to the front as an extreme outpost. Here the first
blood of the opening campaign was drawn by shooting a rebel scout by one
of Captain Glenny's men.

The main army soon after advanced to the famous fields of Manassas, but
only to find the enemy beating a hasty retreat, leaving every
conceivable ruin in their track.

At this juncture the army changed its base to the Peninsula and
Chickahominy swamps, where, after the siege of Yorktown, and on the
first of June, was fought the terrific battle of Fair Oaks, in which
Captain Glenny, while leading his men in a charge, received a wound,
which, for a time, was thought to be mortal, a minnie ball passing
through his left shoulder.

In about two months he again returned to his command, but so disabled
that he was detached on recruiting service and stationed at Elmira;
after which he returned to the army, and after nearly another year's
campaign, was, in accordance with orders, again detached at Elmira on
service connected with the draft. After being relieved from this duty,
he rejoined his command, with which he served until the close of the
war.

Owing to circumstances beyond his control, he served near two and a half
years as Captain without promotion, after which in rapid succession he
received the different grades of Major, Lieut. Colonel and Colonel, but
was unable to muster into the latter grade by reason of insufficiency of
numbers in the Regiment. This was, however, in part recompensed for, as
after the smoke of battle and the clash of arms had ceased, and honors
were conferred upon "whom honor was due," Captain Glenny had two grades
by brevet conferred upon him by the President, that of Brevet Colonel
and Brevet Brigadier General, for gallant and meritorious
services--honors which he modestly and unassumingly wears, but of which
he may justly be proud.

From the time of his entry into the service until the close of the war,
near four years, (except while suffering from wounds and on detached
service,) General Glenny fought traitors with unrelenting fidelity to
principle and the inalienable rights of man.

The number of decisive battles of which he may claim to be hero, and in
which he had the honor to bare his breast to the bayonet and bullet, are
twenty-two; six of them being bayonet charges and direct assaults upon
the enemy and their fortifications. Among the principal of these battles
may be placed Fair Oaks, Chancellorsville, Gettysburg, Po River,
Wilderness, Spottsylvania, Cold Harbor, Deep Bottom, Petersburg,
Gravelly Run, Southside Road, Farmville, Reams Station, &c. The Regiment
fought in upwards of thirty-three. General Glenny's superior officers
being wounded, he was invested with the command of the Regiment on the
battle-field of Spottsylvania, which command he retained until the close
of the war, except at different periods, by seniority of rank, he
commanded a Brigade. At the battle of Ream's Station he took command of
the Brigade which he retained for some considerable time, as so fierce
had been the campaign that but one other field officer was left for duty
in the Brigade comprising seven Regiments. Had we time and space, many
acts of personal bravery and valorous deeds might be accredited to this
officer during his brief career of warfare, as owing to his known
integrity of character and ability, superior officers frequently
selected him to fill posts of great danger.

General Glenny's command has the honor of being the first infantry
troops upon the Southside Railroad, also of making the last charge upon
the enemy at Farmville, April 7th, 1865.

Two or three circumstances of peculiar interest, showing the morals of
this officer, may not be inappropriate, and in a degree indicate his
decision of character and fidelity to his untarnished reputation and
walks of private life.

In the latter part of May, 1862, and just prior to the battle of Fair
Oaks, by orders of General McClellan, the first ration of whiskey was
issued to the troops. This being incompatible with the principles of
General Glenny, he at once called his men in line, and stated that he
believed the new element just introduced in the army was destructive of
its best interests, prejudicial to its health, efficiency and
discipline, and rather than stultify his conscience by being responsible
for its issue, he would suffer himself to be cashiered for disobedience
of orders. His position having been defined, the question was submitted
to the Company, which, by a unanimous vote, rejected the whiskey. During
the day General Howard, who by some means had become acquainted with the
facts, at once dispatched one of his aids with a book, his compliments
and a message, to General Glenny, to the effect that he was the only
officer in the Brigade who had taken that position, and was gratified to
know he had one under his command who had sufficient moral courage to
take so exalted a stand.

At Chancellorsville, where the Union army met with temporary defeat,
this Regiment made one of the most gallant stands of any during the war.
It held its position and repulsed five successive charges made by the
enemy under cover of their artillery. The enemy, a few minutes later,
succeeded in turning the right of our lines, when orders were sent to
General Glenny to withdraw his men immediately, which he did
successfully under a galling fire, and just as the enemy were closing in
upon him from front and rear in the form of a pair of shears.

Again at Po River, the Regiment was hastily thrown out as a skirmish
line. Owing to emergencies the main army were obliged to change position
so suddenly, that there was no time to withdraw or notify the skirmish
line of their perilous position; and the only alternative was to leave
them to their fate. It was not until some two hours later, when
mistrusting all was not right, and finding the main army had left the
position a few hours previously taken up, it was decided at once to make
desperate efforts to extricate the Regiment, which was found to be
surrounded on three sides, and the fourth fast closing in, which was
accomplished with but slight loss. This was a prominent trait in General
Glenny's character, to always hazard life rather than be a prisoner in
the hands of traitors, whom he looked upon with contempt and scorn.

In the last charge made by the Regiment, or any of the army, at
Farmville, April 7th, 1865, General Glenny lost fourteen men, and one
officer of the rank of Captain. The latter finding himself mortally
wounded, and having been rather a reckless young man, at once became
alarmed with reference to his future state. While lying on the field, he
called General Glenny, (then Colonel,) took him by the hand, and as soon
as he could gather sufficient strength to speak, says, "Colonel, can you
pray?" When answered in the affirmative he said, "I have got to die and
am unprepared." In compliance with his request, General Glenny knelt by
his side in prayer; but as missiles of death were flying on every hand,
and the enemy opening an increasing fire, which required him to watch as
well as pray, and to attend to the living as well as the dying, he at
once ordered the Captain carried to the rear, where he soon died,
leaving good evidence that he had found spiritual relief.

This was the closing drama of the war, as two days after General Lee
surrendered the rebel army of Northern Virginia to General Grant. The
Union army soon after returned to Washington and vicinity, where, by
different commands, they were mustered out of service. The 64th
proceeded to Elmira, where it received final pay and discharge July
24th, 1865. Thus ended near four years of warfare with General Glenny;
he being the only officer who went out as such who returned with the
Regiment.

The General is now engaged in the mercantile trade, and located in the
store formerly occupied by John Kendall, Esq., and is carrying on a very
successful and profitable trade.

STEPHEN BREWER, Saddles, Harness, &c., enlisted November 21st, 1851. Mr.
Brewer was a good soldier; his membership with the Company was soon
dissolved by his removal to Cortland village, where, like his
professional brother Millspaugh, he has held many offices of trust and
honor, among which was County Judge of Cortland county.

F. K. ANDRUS, Bookseller, &c., enlisted November 21st, 1851. Mr. Andrus
has answered to his name as fourth, third, second and first Corporal,
and fifth, fourth, third and second Sergeants. Was one of the most
active members of the Company during the whole seven years, and over, of
his membership. We find but very few meetings or drills of the Company
that he is not marked present. He was a thorough soldier, never
satisfied with half knowing how. His motto was, "Excelsior." No member
who served while Sergeant Andrus was connected with the Company, will
ever forget him; always good-natured and cheerful, inclined to look on
the bright and never on the dark side of the picture; and during times
in the history of the Company, when many were despondent, and the future
looked any thing but encouraging, he was always with a cheerful heart
and a ready hand, willing to contribute in whatever way was necessary to
raise the standard of the Company; and we believe whatever he undertook
he succeeded in accomplishing. Mr. Andrus is now one of the firm of
Andrus, McChain & Co., probably the largest Paper Manufacturers in
Western New York; and very many of our citizens and distinguished
visitors from abroad, can testify to his politeness and urbanity in
showing them through their large manufactory at Fall Creek.

CHARLES CLAPP, Painter, enlisted November 21st, 1851. Mr. Clapp, at his
own request, was granted a discharge soon after his enlistment. His
military ardor was in no degree dampened, however, as will be seen from
the following: He enlisted in the United States army December 30th,
1863, in Company M, 21st New York Cavalry, in which he served eighteen
months; was engaged in the battle of New Market, and in the reserve at
Cedar Creek. Mr. Clapp also had two sons in the army. He was
particularly distinguished for his Good Samaritan kindness, as many of
his comrades can testify. Having some knowledge of medicine, he imparted
the all-healing balm to those about him who were sick or wounded.

E. C. FULLER, Painter, enlisted November 21st, 1851. He filled the
offices of Corporal and Sergeant; was a good soldier, a faithful
officer, and a skilled artisan.

WILLIAM V. BRUYN, Lawyer, enlisted November 21st, 1851. Immediately upon
his joining the Company he was elected first Lieutenant, which
commission he held until his removal to Syracuse. He was a man of
talents and fine accomplishments, which, combined with his gentlemanly
bearing, made an officer of which the Company were at all times proud.
He was once District Attorney of Tompkins county, and is now engaged in
his profession in the city of Syracuse, where he meets with that success
he so richly merits.

LOREN DAY, wholesale Liquor dealer, enlisted November 21st, 1851. Mr.
Day, we believe, never served as a member but a short time, if at all.
His connection, however, with this or any other institution, would be an
honor to it. He is one of the most quiet, still one of the best,
citizens of our village. He has been very successful in business, which
may be credited to his strict attention and uncompromising honesty.

WILLIAM M. CULVER, dealer in Hats, Caps and Furs, enlisted November 22d,
1851. Served but a short time, a worthy member, and was honorably
discharged. He is still successfully engaged in the above business.

THEODORE A. HANMER, Clerk, enlisted November 24th, 1851. Very soon after
enlistment he removed to a Southern State, where he still resides.

PHILIP J. PARTENHEIMER, Cashier Tompkins County Bank, enlisted November
25th, 1851. We often hear it said there is no man but has his enemies;
this may be the rule, we will produce the exception.

At the first election of Company A, held in December, 1851, Mr.
Partenheimer was unanimously elected their Captain, which commission he
held until August 25th, 1862--over ten years. Nearly two hundred men
served under him while Captain of this Company, by each of which he was
not only respected and honored as their commanding officer, but as a
citizen and gentleman. Few officers ever had the confidence, respect and
esteem of his command as did Captain Partenheimer. Very likely some were
at times dissatisfied with his rulings; soon, however, his sound
judgment was apparent, and his decisions perfectly satisfactory to all.
When necessary he was stern, but always kind and forgiving. When he gave
a command, his men knew it must be promptly and correctly executed. His
generosity was only exceeded (so far as his Company was concerned) by
his desire to have his gifts unknown to the members or others, and if it
could be known how much he had paid for the use and improvement of his
Company, a very considerable sum could be added to the amount of
disbursements spoken of in the preface of this record.

Captain Partenheimer's first business engagement was with S. B. Munn,
Jr., of this village. His clerkship was of short duration, however, as
his superior talent as an accountant was soon displayed, and he made his
second engagement with the Tompkins County Bank as book-keeper. With
this situation the same remarks are applicable as to the clerkship; he
was soon promoted to the position of Teller of the same institution, and
later to Cashier, which office he still holds. His various and rapid
promotions in the Bank were not equal, however, to the demands made upon
him by his fellow citizens. To show his popularity, we mention some of
the civil offices he has filled: Town Clerk, Notary Public, Trustee of
the village, President of same repeatedly, Chief Engineer of the Fire
Department for many years in succession, and also served his town in
the Board of Supervisors of Tompkins county. Each of the above mentioned
offices he has filled with honor to himself, and for us to say with
satisfaction to the people, would be superfluous. It is worthy of note,
that Captain Partenheimer never was ambitious for office; that all the
offices he has filled, both civil and military, have been thrust upon
him; and it is proverbial in his case, that he has in the most positive
and peremptory manner, declined many honors that the community have
endeavored to heap upon him. He is, most emphatically, a self-made man;
and to his own personal exertions the public are indebted for a man of
sterling worth and vast usefulness.

PHILIP STEPHENS, Butcher, enlisted November 25th, 1851. Mr. Stephens was
one of the best soldiers of the DeWitt Guard; and not only this, but one
of the most valuable men for the Company. He would allow nothing to
prevent his attendance at the drills and meetings, where he always took
an active part, as he also did in the general welfare of the Company.
His purse was always open to contribute to any object that had in view
the advancement of the institution. He creditably filled most of the
non-commissioned offices; enjoyed being a soldier, and the Company
enjoyed him as such. Mr. Stephens has been very successful in his
business enterprises, and has built up a reputation throughout the
State. The epicure of New York city as well as Chicago, satisfies his
taste with luxuries provided by Stephens in the way of choice meats. Mr.
Stephens has recently purchased one of the most beautiful building sites
in our village, and intends soon building a handsome and capacious
dwelling.

A. PHILLIPS, Merchant Tailor, enlisted November 25th, 1851. Mr. Phillips
remained with the Company but a short time, and upon his retiring
therefrom, presented them with a new uniform complete. It has always
been the pleasure of Mr. Phillips to lend his influence for the benefit
of the Company, and has furnished in the person of his son a most worthy
and valuable member.

JOHN S. VAN LIEW, Clerk, enlisted November 29th, 1851. Removed from the
district soon after joining the Company.

A. G. THOMPSON, enlisted November 29th, 1851. With the history of Mr.
Thompson the writer is not acquainted.

JOHN RANDOLPH, Mason, enlisted December 1st, 1851. Was an excellent
member for some years; his tall and commanding form, his precise and
measured step and general bearing, fitted him for a first-class soldier.
He removed to Michigan about 1858. Joining a Michigan Regiment, he
entered the United States army in 1861; was commissioned as Captain soon
after his enlistment, and for meritorious conduct was promoted to Major.
He was a brave soldier and a courageous officer. He died soon after
honorably serving the time of his enlistment, from disease contracted
while in the service.

We copy the following to show the esteem in which he was held by his
command:

    "MINER'S HILL, VA., November 18th, 1861.

    We, the undersigned, members of Company D, (Barry Guard,) 4th
    Michigan Volunteers, in testimony of our high appreciation of
    our beloved Captain, John Randolph, for his uniform urbanity to,
    and kind treatment of, his Company, and for his ability as an
    officer, do hereby present him with the accompanying slight
    memento of our highest regard.

    J. N. Hall, E. S. Baldwin, G. G. Mowry, and ninety-seven other
    members of the Company."


    SPEECH OF MAJOR BARRY.

    "Captain Randolph: I have been commissioned by the members of
    Company D, (Barry Guard,) under your command, to present you in
    their behalf this beautiful sword and belt, in testimony of
    their high appreciation of your uniform urbanity to, and kind
    treatment of, your Company, and of your ability as an officer.

    While I feel honored in being the medium of communication
    between the Company (which, among all others, possesses my
    highest affection) and yourself, I can refer with pride to this
    testimonial as conclusive evidence, not only of your high
    qualities as an officer, but also the kindness of your heart.

    Captain, I commit this sword to your keeping in confidence, that
    possessing those qualities as an officer and a man, you will
    never suffer it to be dishonored."


    RESPONSE OF CAPTAIN RANDOLPH.

    "Major Barry: No words that I may speak can express my feelings
    on this occasion. But a few days ago I left behind me a brave
    band of tried and true men, whose warm expressions of concern
    for my safety and speedy return scarcely die away in the
    distance, ere I am followed by a more substantial token of their
    esteem for me, and kindness of heart, in the shape of this
    beautiful sword. Coming, as it does, unexpectedly and in so
    delicate a way, it is not a wonder that my eye should express a
    feeling that is foreign to my heart. We are bound together in a
    brotherhood, by ties more binding and endearing than those which
    make up friendship in civil life. With the same old flag
    floating over us, sharing a common and imminent danger
    perpetually about us, with the thousand other incidental and
    reciprocal acts of courtesy attending well ordered camp-life, it
    would be strange if we did not become brothers in feeling, as
    well as in action. As I felt a gladness a few days ago, when
    departing from camp on a short furlough to visit my many friends
    here, so now on returning I feel my heart bound at the thought
    that I shall soon hear the cheers of comrades, and feel the warm
    grasp of their stout hands. We have ever remembered and looked
    upon you, Major Barry, as the father of our Company, and feel
    proud that we bear the name of the Barry Guard. When the boom of
    the gun of treason first rolled through the land, and the harsh
    voice of actual war broke upon the startled ears of our peaceful
    and happy people, your voice called us together, gave our zeal
    direction, and cooled our excitement to concentrated action; and
    not one of us will ever cease to regret that other duties
    prevented your accompanying us in a cause we all know has your
    whole heart and sympathy. This splendid gift, then, comes to me
    with double effect. It is like the donation of brothers tendered
    by the hand of a father, and so I receive it. And I here swear
    never to dishonor the blade nor disgrace the donors, but
    whenever I can strike a blow for the right, for our cause, for
    our flag and the Union, it shall leap from the scabbard, and God
    helping me, shall not be again sheathed while this right arm can
    strike a blow, or victory remains uncertain."

SHERMAN K. HALL, Grocer, enlisted December 2d, 1851. Remained with the
Company but a short time.

WILLIAM O. BRYAN, Shoemaker, enlisted December 2d, 1851. Removed from
town very soon after enlistment; is now engaged in the Drug and Medicine
trade of the West.

F. A. PARTENHEIMER, proprietor of the "Continental Boot and Shoe Store."
A strong desire to become a military gentleman led Mr. Partenheimer to
enlist in the militia of the State, which he did January 1st, 1852, when
he found that he possessed all the proper qualifications of a good
soldier. Undoubtedly, however, these necessary qualifications were more
apparent to others than himself, as he was soon elected Corporal, from
which he was promoted to Sergeant, and most worthily did he fill his
office, until having served his seven years he was granted an honorable
discharge. Our sincere regrets are extended to any Company which does
not number among its members at least one man like Sergeant
Partenheimer. A more true and devoted soldier never existed; but upon
him nature had bestowed a great deal more than the ordinary amount of
original wit; and at times, when not on duty, our Sergeant would furnish
innocent fun for a Regiment. At Camp Burnett, Sept. 1859, he was the
life of the camp, and many of his jokes are not, to this day, forgotten.

It gives us pleasure to state, that now Mr. Partenheimer is sole
proprietor of one of our most successful and enterprising Boot and Shoe
manufactories, and is receiving that portion of public patronage which
he merits.

CHARLES F. BLOOD, Merchant Tailor, enlisted January 1st, 1852. In
joining this Company, Mr. Blood's first and greatest ambition was to
become a thorough soldier, which object he successfully accomplished we
shall proceed to show.

Very soon after becoming a member of the Company, he was elected their
standard-bearer. His strong desire to become familiar with all the
rudiments, and to become perfect, not only in the school of the soldier,
but also of the Company and Battalion, led him to devote but little time
to the duties of his new office. So anxious was he to learn, that with
the Tactics for his drill-master, and a borrowed gun for an assistant,
he would by himself combine the theoretical with the practical. We say
without fear of contradiction, that to-day a man more conversant with
the theory and practice of the science of military, cannot be found.

The 28th of May, 1856, he was elected and commissioned second
Lieutenant, which office he filled until August 25th, 1862, at which
time he was elected Captain. As a commanding officer Captain Blood could
not be excelled. The time he had so studiously devoted in the earlier
part of his military career to this object, he now discovered was of
great use to him. Combine with this knowledge his splendid voice and
fine military carriage, he was an officer of which his men were at all
times proud.

When the Company volunteered and were mustered into the United States
service, Captain Blood accompanied them; and through his exertions they
obtained a very desirable position in the 58th Regiment National Guard.
It was his chief and constant aim to see that his men were at all times
comfortable, and to see that they, as United States soldiers, had all
they were entitled to.

Very soon after joining the army, Captain Blood was detailed from his
Company and commissioned one of the court-martial of the Department of
New York, before which court was transacted a large amount of business.
The compliments that were bestowed upon Captain Blood as a member of
this court, by the Division and Post Commanders, and by other members of
the court, must, indeed, have been very flattering to him. In his
decisions (not one of which were ever set aside or annulled) he was
prompt and discriminating, always tempering his judgment with that
amount of clemency which he considered was best for the Government he
represented, and for the unfortunate delinquents who appeared before
him.

Notwithstanding he was so much of the time separated from his command,
still he endeavored to be in camp with them every night, and a large
portion of the time messed with them.

Captain Blood, as every person knows who is acquainted with him, was a
strictly conscientious man, and still he always enjoyed the sports and
harmless amusements of his men in camp, and at all proper times and
occasions would join with them. It is needless for us to say, that each
member of his Company became very much attached to him, not one of which
but would have sacrificed their all for his comfort.

His door was always open and he was at all times glad to see his men,
and his tent was Company Head-Quarters _indeed_. It was the remark of
very many officers and others who visited Elmira during encampment of
this Company, that Captain Blood was the most accomplished officer, and
commanded the best Company of men, that assisted in garrisoning that
post during the war.

The Captain always attended the religious services of the Regiment, and
by this means exerted a beneficial influence over his men. His example
was always that of an uncompromising christian, as well as a good
soldier and true patriot.

Immediately following the Elmira campaign, Captain Blood was elected and
commissioned Lieutenant Colonel of the 50th Regiment National Guard, and
now holds that commission.

In this instance we see a private of Company A, by various promotions,
reach the rank second in command of the Regiment, and undoubtedly in a
short time will be in full command. No officer is more worthy the honor
than Colonel Blood.

In civil life he is none the less honored, having filled public offices
with equal success.

He has been not only a good soldier, a respected Lieutenant, honored
Captain and esteemed Colonel, but is a citizen of the highest standing
and respected by every one.

H. J. WILSON, Painter, enlisted January 1st, 1852. Mr. Wilson served his
full time and received an honorable discharge as a soldier, but is still
connected with the Regiment as a musician. It is the strong desire of
every member of the Company, as well as of the Regiment, that his
membership may be continued yet many years. Our excellent Band, without
Wilson, would be like tinkling brass--of uncertain sound. The rich, full
and expressive tones rendered by him on his powerful Tuba, fully prove
him to be a musician of no ordinary talent.

JACOB SAGER, Clerk, enlisted January 1st, 1852. Was Company musician,
which position he filled until his removal from the District. He was not
only a good musician, but a gentleman.

CLARK WILSON, Machinist, enlisted January ----, 1852. Mr. Wilson was
Company drummer for a time, but preferring a gun to a drum, took his
place in the ranks; served some time; is now Chief Engineer on Seneca
Lake.

HORACE ROOT, Brewer, enlisted March 17th, 1852. Mr. Root was always
promptly on hand at the drills and meetings of the Company while a
member. The record does not show how long he was connected with the
Company; our recollection is some three years.

CALEB BABCOCK, enlisted March 17th, 1852. His membership was short; very
soon after becoming a member he left the place. He is now an officer on
one of the New York and Liverpool Line of Steamers.

A. J. TERRY, Tobacconist, enlisted May 15th, 1852. Mr. Terry was a good
member of the Company and a good citizen. He died a few years ago, after
suffering the most excruciating torture of acute rheumatism.

JAMES C. MCCLUNE, Lawyer, enlisted June 3d, 1852. Mr. McClune always
evinced the greatest interest in the welfare of the Company; he was one
of its best workers, was a first-class soldier, and was soon elected
Corporal from which he was promoted to Sergeant, which office he held
until November 29th, 1856, when he was removed by death. Upon receiving
intelligence of his death a special meeting was called, when the
following preamble and resolutions, offered by Lieut. King, were
unanimously adopted:

    "WHEREAS, The Supreme Ruler of the Universe has, in the exercise
    of His power and wisdom, seen fit to remove from our midst our
    esteemed friend and fellow soldier, Sergeant James C. McClune,
    therefore be it

    _Resolved_, That we receive the sad bereavement as a mandate
    from Him who doeth all things well.

    _Resolved_, That we offer our sincere and heartfelt condolence
    to the sorrowing family of the deceased, and we assure them that
    we will ever revere the memory of their son and brother.

    RESOLVED, That as a mark of our respect for the character of our
    deceased comrade, we will attend his funeral, and escort his
    remains to their last resting place with military honors.

    RESOLVED, That we wear the usual badge of mourning for the space
    of six months.

    RESOLVED, That a copy of these resolutions, signed by the
    Chairman and Secretary, be presented to the family of the
    deceased, and published in the village papers.

    P. J. PARTENHEIMER, _Captain_.

    WILLIAM GLENNY, _Sec'y_.

JAMES H. GREENLY, Merchant, enlisted June 3d, 1852. Mr. Greenly was in
every respect a most estimable man, and as a soldier he had no superior.
Always manifested a lively interest in whatever conduced to the benefit
of the organization. He filled all the grades of non-commissioned
offices; was Orderly Sergeant at the time he removed from us. No member
ever left, carrying with him more well wishes and kind regards, than
Sergeant James H. Greenly. Success and prosperity attend him ever in all
his undertakings.

JACOB WARSHASKI, Clothing Merchant, enlisted July 1st, 1852. Was a
faithful and worthy member for a few years. Upon changing his residence
was granted an honorable discharge.

MAJOR A. O. SHAW, Blacksmith. To name a day as the one on which the
Major enlisted, is for us an impossibility, and we think it would be too
much of a task for him, even, to find out the exact year, say nothing
about the day. Suffice it to say, he has been honored with the title of
Major from the earliest recollection of the writer. He has seen the time
when he had command of more musicians alone than this Company at any one
time ever numbered as members. He always enjoyed being a military man,
and we believe there could be no greater pleasure for the Major to-day,
than to head a column of a few hundred men and march through the streets
of Ithaca, as he has done in years gone by. He has received three
honorable discharges, each being granted by reason of the expiration of
his term of service. This would give the Major twenty-one years in the
service, and how much he overran on time on each of the discharges, we
doubt if he knows. At all events he was a member of the DeWitt Guard
when the writer joined, (which was in 1855,) and served until last year
before he received his last discharge.

He has always been, and is to-day, one of the most accommodating
military men of our acquaintance. At any time the Company would like to
have him turn out with them, he is always ready, and invariably refuses
a single dime compensation. The Major has the respect, not only of the
Company with which he has so long served, but of the whole community. As
a citizen, his politeness and gentlemanly conduct attracts the attention
of every person who meets him; and the various positions he has so long
and creditably filled, is sufficient to show that he is properly
appreciated by the community in which he resides.

MOSES R. WRIGHT, Lawyer, enlisted July 8th, 1852. Was connected with the
Company but a short time; was a man of fine talent, and a lawyer of
great ability. He died in this village June 6th, 1855.

L. S. BLUE, Boot and Shoe Merchant, enlisted July 8th, 1852. Mr. Blue
served but a short time. Is now a resident of New York city.

JOHN PAGE, Shoemaker, enlisted July 12th, 1852. His membership was
short.

D. M. OLTZ, Carpenter, enlisted June 23d, 1853. Was a good soldier and a
good member of the Company; served for some time. His membership was
dissolved by his removal to Canada.

J. B. HAMMOND, Jeweler, enlisted June 23d, 1853. Served faithfully as
Company bugler until his removal to St. Louis.

MELVILLE WILKINSON, Clerk, enlisted July 4th, 1853. Was a good soldier
while connected with the Company, and a better one after leaving it. He
removed from the district after a membership of one or two years. Upon
the breaking out of the war he enlisted in the 23d New York Volunteers;
was soon commissioned Lieutenant; served his time; volunteered the
second time, and was elected Captain in the 107th New York Volunteers.
He was a brave and true officer; was engaged in many battles; was
transferred to the Veteran Reserve Corps; afterwards held a prominent
position upon the staff of General Coxe, who commanded the Department of
Ohio. At the close of the war he devoted his time to preparing himself
for the ministry, and is now an Episcopal clergyman, located in Ohio.

THOMAS J. PHILLIPS, Miller. (Date of enlistment not recorded.) Mr.
Phillips was no ordinary soldier, as he most conclusively proved to a
Bank President at the Seneca Falls encampment. He was always careful to
know what his duty was, and then he was going to do it, let the
consequences be what they might. He was always good natured, perfectly
happy, and was poor society for those troubled with the _blues_. Never
wanted much to do with a person who did not feel as good as himself. Was
worth at the encampment spoken of above, more than some whole Companies.
Had the advantages of an early education and good bringing up, used to
living well at home, and believed in living well in camp--_and did_. No
person, although he might be President of all the Banks in Hungary,
could pass the line when he was the sentinel. He was athletic, not only
in person but in mind, and too much good cannot be said of him as a
soldier and a citizen. The Company sustained a severe loss when Mr.
Phillips removed from among them, and became the proprietor of the Danby
Spring Mills.

WILLIAM H. BROWN, Grocer, enlisted July 28th, 1853. Mr. Brown served his
full time and received an honorable discharge. He always felt a deep
interest in the welfare of the Company; particularly prompt to meet all
the demands made upon him; always gave cheerfully, and has in many
instances paid for others who could illy afford to pay for themselves;
was always careful to have no one know that he paid obligations other
than his own; always present at the drills and meetings of the Company,
and altogether Mr. Brown was one of the _solid men_ of the Company. He
has acted as Company Sutler at a number of encampments, and in this
capacity has given the most perfect satisfaction.

LEONARD STODDARD, Carriage Maker, enlisted July 28th, 1853. His
membership was short--removing from the district soon after joining. He
was employed in the extensive establishment of William S. Hoyt, Esq.,
the largest carriage manufacturer in Western New York.

SAMUEL STODDARD, Wool and Leather Merchant, enlisted June 29th, 1854.

In the DeWitt Guard, as well as in every other organization or
association with which Mr. Stoddard has been connected, he was, as he
would term his best grade of wool, super extra. He was an old militiaman
when he joined this Company, and had improved all the advantages to be
derived from the Old Guard, which in an eminent degree qualified him
for a good soldier in this, then new, Company. A peculiar trait in the
military character of Mr. Stoddard was, he invariably attended the
drills and meetings of the Company. Consider, with this fact, the large
business carried on by him, which one would suppose would require his
undivided time and attention, and we find he must have sacrificed a good
deal for the interest he felt in this Company. He would forego other
enjoyments for the sake of attending the weekly drills in which he took
much pleasure, believing that this exercise was of vast good to him. He
became a very proficient soldier; never would accept office of any kind,
though besought with tears; his highest ambition was to be a _good_ high
private; was one of the most liberal men in the Company, always
contributing freely, and many times more than his proportion; was always
in favor of paying promptly any demand made upon the Company, and
opposed to obligations or debts accumulating against them, and we find
it recorded in two or three instances where Mr. Stoddard moved that a
tax of two or more dollars be levied upon each member to pay up
deficits. He served his full time and was granted an honorable
discharge. For the high standing of the DeWitt Guard to-day, they are in
no small degree indebted to Mr. Stoddard. He has enjoyed the confidence
of the community sufficient to be elected several times to positions of
trust and honor. Long live Samuel Stoddard.

D. L. AVERY, Merchant, enlisted June 24th, 1854. Mr. Avery was a young
man of fine attainments, and had every promise of a brilliant future. He
manifested much interest in the Company, and although connected with
them but a short time, yet sufficiently long to gain the esteem and
respect of each member. His death occurred August 24th, 1854. That the
loss of Mr. Avery was keenly felt by the Company, the following preamble
and resolutions, which were unanimously adopted, will show:

    WHEREAS, It has pleased Divine Providence suddenly to take away
    from our midst by death our much esteemed friend and fellow
    soldier D. L. Avery, thus depriving us of an active and valued
    member, and our citizens of one whom but to know was to esteem;
    and Whereas, The officers and soldiers of the DeWitt Guard
    feeling and duly appreciating the loss of our universally
    esteemed member of our corps, and being desirous of giving
    expression to a spontaneous sentiment of regard for our departed
    brother in arms, it is therefore unanimously

    _Resolved_, That we do most sincerely mourn the loss of our
    late comrade, so suddenly and unexpectedly called away from our
    ranks by the stern and unrelenting King of Terrors, and that we
    tender to the partner, brother and sisters of the deceased our
    heartfelt sympathies in their irreparable loss.

    _Resolved_, That we attend in a body to assist in the last sad
    duties and ceremonies of the funeral of our late brother, friend
    and fellow soldier, and that we wear the usual badge of mourning
    on all parades for thirty days.

    _Resolved_, That the proceedings be signed by our Captain, and a
    copy thereof be furnished the relatives of the deceased, and
    also for publication in the village papers.

    P. J. PARTENHEIMER, _Capt, Com'd'g_.

    WILLIAM GLENNY, _Sec'y_.

M. E. ELMENDORF, Dentist, enlisted June 30th, 1854. Mr. Elmendorf was a
first-class soldier and a tip-top fellow generally. Was particularly
celebrated as a fine shot, taking a prize at each of the target shoots
while a member. Was an active, energetic young man, and very readily
became master of his profession, and is now a Dental Surgeon of
considerable note in the city of New York.

LOT S. HINDS, Currier, enlisted July 12th, 1854. Was a good, attentive
soldier and a faithful member; served some years with the Company;
removed from our village to Danby, where he now resides. Has a son in
the United States army.

J. S. PUTNAM, Hotel keeper, enlisted July 12th, 1854. Was a resident but
a short time.

IRA M. GARDNER, Mason, enlisted September 18th, 1855. Mr. Gardner served
faithfully his seven years, and received an honorable discharge. He has
always resided in Ithaca, is a good citizen, a respected man, and a
first-class mechanic.

WILLIAM H. HAMMOND, Gas Plumber, enlisted September 23d, 1855. Served
his full time and was honorably discharged. Held the office of Company
standard-bearer for some years. Was also armory keeper, keeping the guns
and equipage in perfect order. We believe the State honestly indebted to
him for services rendered, for which he ought to have his pay.

WILLIAM V. BROWN, Currier, enlisted September 26th, 1855. Mr. Brown was
celebrated for the great amount of artistic and thoroughly grand music
as produced by himself on the bass drum. He was Company musician, and
remained with them as long as he was a citizen of the place. He is now a
resident of Union Springs. "_Big Bill Brown, the Drummer_" will long be
remembered with gratitude by all those connected with the Company during
his membership.

K. S. VAN VOORHEES, Master Mechanic, enlisted July ----, 1854. Colonel
Van Voorhees entered the militia service of the State in Feb., 1835,
joining the first Company New York Cadets, which was attached as a flank
Company to the 2d Regiment N. Y. S. Artillery, (doing duty as Infantry,)
and known as the Governor's Guard. In the spring of 1839 he was promoted
from Orderly Sergeant, and commissioned as Captain of the Company by
Gov. W. H. Seward, he having been unanimously elected to that position
by the members of the Company. In the spring of 1840 he was presented
with an elegant sword bearing the following inscription:

    Presented to

    CAPT. K. S. VAN VOORHEES,

    BY THE FIRST COMPANY NEW YORK CADETS, AS A TOKEN OF
    ESTEEM AND RESPECT.

    New York, April 16th, 1840.

In the Fall of 1840 he visited Ithaca, and having concluded to make this
place his permanent residence, he forwarded to New York his resignation
in the Spring of 1841. After his removal to this place, he lent his
assistance to the drilling and instruction of the Old Ithaca Guard until
they were disbanded.

Upon the most urgent solicitations of both officers and men, he
consented to become one of the members of the DeWitt Guard. He,
possessing probably the greatest amount of military knowledge of any
person in the district, was secured by the Company as instructor, and
immediately elected Orderly Sergeant. This he did simply as an
accommodation, having gained all the military honors he cared to have
bestowed upon him before coming to Ithaca.

For us to bestow any compliments upon him in this sketch is perfectly
uncalled for, as we produce the following record in place of further
remarks:

At the breaking out of the Rebellion he was prevented from entering the
service of his country by a severe bodily injury which he had received a
few months before; but in the Fall of 1862 he had so far recovered from
his lameness, that he ventured to accept the position of Lieutenant
Colonel of a Regiment then organizing at Binghamton, N. Y., and
afterwards known as the 137th New York Volunteers, to which position he
was chosen by the unanimous vote of the War Committee of the 24th
Senatorial District.

He immediately entered upon the duty, in connection with Colonel David
Ireland, of organizing and disciplining the Regiment, and getting it
ready for active service in the field. The want of any knowledge of
military tactics by either officers or men, rendered the labor of
instructing and drilling the Regiment very arduous, the most of which
was performed by Lt. Col. Van Voorhees, Col. Ireland attending to the
administrative affairs of the Regiment. Previous to the Regiment's
leaving for the seat of war, Lt. Col. Van Voorhees was presented by his
friends at Ithaca with a fine horse and set of horse equipments. The
Regiment was mustered into the U. S. service on the 25th September, and
left for Washington on the 27th, arriving there on the 30th, and were
immediately forwarded to Harper's Ferry, Va., by way of Fredericksburgh,
Md.; arriving at Harper's Ferry on the 3d October, where they remained
until the 10th December, having in the meantime made two important
reconnoissances under Gen. Gregg--one to Charlestown and the other to
Winchester, Va.

On the 10th December the 12th Army Corps, to which the 137th Regiment
had been attached, left Harper's Ferry at the time of Burnside's
unsuccessful attack on Fredericksburgh, and having marched to Dumfries,
Va., were, in consequence of Burnside's repulse, marched back to Fairfax
Station, where they remained until the 17th January, 1863, when they
were again ordered forward, Burnside intending to make another attack on
Fredericksburgh, but failed on account of the mud.

The 12th Corps having reached Stafford Court House, the Brigade to which
the 137th was attached was ordered to Aquia Creek, where they remained
until the 26th April, when they commenced their march to
Chancellorsville, which they reached on the 29th of April. On the 30th
the 12th Corps was ordered forward to feel the enemy's position, and
finding them in strong force returned to camp, where they commenced
throwing up earthworks, the 137th using bayonets for picks and tin
plates for shovels. In the subsequent battles the Regiment maintained
its position in the trenches until they were entered by the enemy from
the right, (the right flank of the army having been turned by the giving
way of the 11th Corps,) when they were ordered to retire, which they did
in good order. As this was the first battle in which the Regiment was
engaged, some anxiety was felt by the officers as to the mettle of their
men; but their conduct on this occasion was such as to give no further
uneasiness. After the battle the Regiment returned to Aquia Creek, where
it remained until the 13th June, when it commenced its march to
Gettysburg, and on the 2d and 3d July was closely and hotly engaged with
the invader.

Late in the afternoon of the 2d July the whole of the 12th Corps, with
the exception of Green's Brigade, was sent to support the left of the
line, which was closely pressed; they had scarcely gone when Stonewall
Jackson's old Corps, seven thousand strong, under Ewell, charged our
right, which was defended by only Green's Brigade of New York troops
less than two thousand strong; but so obstinate was the defence, that
the enemy did not succeed in breaking our lines; heavy firing was kept
up nearly all night. About four o'clock of the morning of the 3d, the
enemy again advanced to the charge but was again repulsed, and a heavy
and constant fire was kept up until half past ten, when the enemy
retired. The loss of the 137th was four officers and forty-one men
killed, and three officers and sixty-four men wounded. Lt. Col. Van
Voorhees was slightly wounded twice during the action.

After the battle and the escape of Lee's army across the Potomac, the
army again encamped on the banks of the Rappahannock and afterwards on
the banks of the Rappidan, when, on the 23d September, immediately after
the battle of Chickamauga, the 11th and 12th Corps under Hooker were
ordered to Tennessee, where they arrived in the fore part of October. In
the latter part of that month Hooker was ordered by Grant to open
communication between Bridgport, Ala., and Chattanooga, Tenn., by the
way of White Side, along the line of the Memphis and Charleston
Railroad. The army of the Cumberland being besieged in Chattanooga and
destitute of provisions, it became necessary to secure a shorter line of
communication, or the place would have to be abandoned with the loss of
all the artillery and trains, as there were no animals left to draw them
away. On the 28th of October the 11th Corps under Gen. Howard, followed
by a part of Geary's Division of the 12th Corps, all under the command
of Gen. Hooker, debouched into Lookout Valley, and for six miles marched
in plain view of the rebels who occupied the summit and sides of the
mountain, and who could almost count the men in the ranks. On encamping
for the night, the 11th Corps was about two and a half miles in advance
of Geary's Division, which, being observed by the enemy, they determined
to surprise and capture Geary's Division; and accordingly two Divisions
of Longstreet's Corps were ordered to the attack. They came in between
the 11th Corps and Geary's Division, and while one Division took up a
position to prevent reinforcements from being sent to Gen. Geary, the
other advanced to the attack, which came near being a surprise, the
attack being made about midnight. Gen. Geary had with him at the time
but four Regiments and two sections of a battery. The 111th Pennsylvania
succeeded in getting into line, and the 137th New York were but partly
in line when the enemy opened fire upon them at less than fifty yards
distance. These two Regiments bore the whole brunt of the battle, which
lasted over two hours; the other two Regiments were placed in position
to protect the right flank and rear, leaving the left flank exposed.
Early in the action Gen. Green, commanding the Brigade, was wounded, and
Col. Ireland of the 137 Regiment being senior Colonel, the command of
the Brigade devolved upon him, leaving the command of the Regiment to
Lt. Col. Van Voorhees. The enemy finding the left unprotected, moved a
part of their force to the left, and came down on the left and rear of
the 137th, but Col. Van Voorhees immediately placed his three left
Companies perpendicular to the rear facing them to the left, and facing
the rear rank of four other Companies to the rear, the Regiment kept up
such a vigorous and well directed fire to the front, flank and rear, as
finally to beat back the enemy and cause his retreat, though not till
nearly every cartridge in the Regiment was expended.

The 137th (who lost nearly one-third of their number in killed and
wounded) was highly complimented for their coolness and courage in this
engagement. Gen. Geary in a speech delivered to the Regiment at the time
of its muster-out, used the following language in regard to their
conduct on this occasion: "I have at all times and in all places given
you the credit of saving my Division from rout or capture at Wauhatchie.
As I passed down your rear and observed the vigorous attack that was
made upon you, I exclaimed, 'My God, if the 137th gives way all is
lost.' But thanks to the coolness, skill and courage of your commanding
officer, and to your own determined will, you maintained your ground
nobly, and the enemy was driven back to his mountain den."

Gen. Howard, in a speech at Philadelphia, characterized this battle as
"the wonderful night's revel at Wauhatchie;" and the rebel papers and
dispatches acknowledged a serious defeat and heavy loss. Col. Van
Voorhees was severely wounded during the action, but refused to leave
the field to have his wound dressed until the action was over and all
danger of its renewal had passed.

Col. Van Voorhees being at home recovering from his wound, was not with
his Regiment in their "battle above the clouds," in which it maintained
its reputation, being the first to enter the enemy's works upon Lookout
Mountain. Col. Van Voorhees rejoined his Regiment in January, and led it
in all the battles of the Atlanta campaign, which commenced on the 2d
day of May and ended by the capture of Atlanta on the 2d day of
September, being four months of almost continuous fighting. The first
battle was that of Mill Creek Gap, May 8th, in which Geary's Division
drove the rebels into their works on the summit of Taylor's Ridge. The
next was the battle of Resacca, May 15th, in which the Regiment lost
several in wounded. The next was the battle of Dallas, or New Hope
Church, on the 25th of May; here Hooker's Corps lost heavily. One line
of the enemy's works was carried just at night, and they driven about a
mile into a second line of works which was not carried owing to the
darkness; but a position was taken and a line of works established
within a stone's throw of the enemy's line. The Regiment remained here
eight days under a constant fire, and without any shelter from the
weather. On the 5th June the enemy was found to have evacuated his
works, and it was supposed had crossed the Chattahoochie River; the men
needing rest the enemy was not followed. The army was moved forward a
few miles and put into camp for rest.

On the 7th June, Col. Van Voorhees being officer of the day and having
charge of the picket line, discovered the enemy's position; their line
extending from Kenesaw Mountain to Lost Mountain, a distance of eight
miles. He made a written report of the fact to Gen. Geary, who
immediately sent for him and discredited the report, stating that he did
not believe there was a rebel soldier this side of the Chattahoochie; he
however said he would send up the report. On the 8th June Gen. Sherman
telegraphed to the Secretary of War that "his cavalry had that day
discovered the enemy's position, and that his right rested on Kenesaw
Mountain and his left on Lost Mountain," thus confirming Col. Van
Voorhees' report made the day previous.

On the 15th June the Regiment was moved forward to the foot of Pine
Knob, (which was occupied by the enemy,) where they threw up works for
the artillery who shelled the hill, one result of which was the killing
of Gen. Polk of the rebel army. On the same day the Division moved
forward to the attack of Pine Knob; several lines of rifle pits were
carried, but the main works were very formidable and were not carried. A
line of works were built the same night within a hundred yards of the
enemy's line, and heavy skirmishing kept up on the 16th, and on the
morning of the 17th the enemy was found to have evacuated his works. The
Regiment lost two killed and twenty wounded. The enemy was immediately
pursued and found in a new position before noon of the same day. In
advancing to support a battery the Regiment lost one man killed and one
wounded. On the morning of the 19th the enemy was found to have again
abandoned his works, but was found strongly entrenched two miles to the
rear. From this time up to the 5th July, when the enemy retreated across
the Chattahoochie, it was one continued series of battles, skirmishes,
and changes of position.

On the 22d June the 137th Regiment, in connection with the 111th
Pennsylvania, were highly complimented by Gen. Hooker for their bravery
in obtaining possession of a commanding position which was strongly
defended by the enemy.

No forward movement was made from the 7th to the 17th July, the army
needing rest and clothing; but on the 17th it again moved forward and
crossed the Chattahoochie River. On the 19th the 137th was thrown out as
skirmishers, and came upon the enemy's skirmishers at Peach Tree Creek,
four miles from Atlanta. The day being excessively warm, and Col. Van
Voorhees' duties as commander of the skirmish line very arduous, he was
prostrated by the heat and over exertion, acquiring a disability from
which he has not yet fully recovered.

Hooker's Corps crossed Peach Tree Creek on the night of the 19th; and on
the 20th, while moving forward to take up a position, were unexpectedly
and fiercely attacked by the enemy in a thick piece of woods. Col. Van
Voorhees was ordered to move his Regiment by the right flank and take up
a position on the right of another Regiment, and in doing so came almost
directly upon the enemy's line of battle. Not knowing the position of
the rest of the Brigade owing to the thick underbrush, and fearing that
if he fell back the right flank of the Brigade would be exposed, he
caused his men to maintain their position, which they did manfully for
near half an hour, when he learnt that the rest of the Brigade had
fallen back some fifteen minutes before, and that his Regiment was left
alone battling with the enemy; he immediately gave orders to fall back,
when the Regiment retreated from its dangerous position. Loss eight
killed and nineteen wounded. Col. Van Voorhees was suffering at the time
with a very high fever, and could with difficulty sit on his horse. Many
officers in his condition would have got excused and went to the rear,
but he never wanted his Regiment to go into action without him; he
became very much attached to it and wished to share all its dangers. On
the 22d, being unable to sit up, he was carried to the field hospital;
the Surgeon in charge advised him to make application to be sent to the
hospital at Chattanooga; this he refused to do, saying, that after all
the hardships and fighting he had gone through with in the campaign, he
did not want to be to the rear when Atlanta was taken. He was, however,
on the 25th, against his consent, sent to the hospital at Lookout
Mountain. He rejoined his Regiment on the 30th August in time to lead it
into Atlanta on the 2d September.

After the death of Col. Ireland, which occurred shortly after entering
Atlanta, all the officers present with the Regiment signed a petition to
Gov. Seymour, which was handsomely endorsed by the Brigade and Division
Commanders, requesting that Lt. Col. Van Voorhees be commissioned as
Colonel of the Regiment. Owing to an unjust order from the War
Department that "all Regiments reduced below the minimum number should
be deprived of its Colonel," he was unable to get mustered, though Gen.
Geary made a direct and special request of the Secretary of War, which
was endorsed by Gen. Slocum, requesting that he might be mustered into
the grade of Colonel as a "reward for his efficiency and gallantry as an
officer, his coolness and bravery on the battle-field, and for his
general good conduct during the whole of his period of service," but the
request was not granted.

The 20th Corps remained in Atlanta until the 15th November, when Gen.
Sherman commenced his celebrated "March to the Sea." His march being
entirely unopposed, nothing worthy of note occurred until their arrival
near Savannah, December 11th. The 137th having been sent out to feel the
enemy's position, were deployed as skirmishers, and soon came upon the
enemy's skirmishers who were protected by the ruins of some buildings
and by a rice field embankment. A lively fire was kept up for some time,
when it was deemed advisable to drive them from their position so as to
uncover their front. Col. Van Voorhees gave the order to move forward;
so impetuous was the charge that the enemy was quickly driven into his
works, and could have been driven out and beyond them--as they were
seen to leave after firing one round--but as there was no support at
hand, Col. Van Voorhees did not deem it prudent to assail the fort,
which was defended by several heavy guns, and accordingly recalled his
men after several had gained the abattis of the fort, and took up a
position behind the rice-field embankment formerly held by the rebel
skirmishers, within two hundred yards of the rebel fort.

The Regiment remained here until the 21st December, assisting in the
construction of works which could only be done under cover of darkness;
the rebel batteries were very active, and the men exposed to a constant
shelling; three shells passed through the Quarters of Col. Van Voorhees
in one forenoon, and having moved his Quarters to another building, a
piece of a shell from a gun-boat passed through his room, taking in its
way a table at which he had been sitting but a few minutes previous. The
Regiment returned from working on a fort about two o'clock of the
morning of the 21st, and shortly after signs of the enemy's evacuating
the city were observable, when Capt. S. B. Wheelock of the 137th, with
ten men, was sent out to reconnoitre the enemy's works. He found the
works abandoned with the guns still standing in position. The fact was
reported to the Brigade Commander, who immediately ordered the Brigade
forward into the enemy's works, and from thence moved directly into the
city, arriving there at daybreak, the 137th was the first to enter the
city. The Regiment remained in the city doing guard duty until the 27th
January, 1865, when it commenced its march through the Carolinas,
arriving at Goldsboro, N. C., on the 24th March.

Col. Van Voorhees having been advised by several of the army Surgeons to
seek a change of climate for the recovery of his health, which had been
much impaired by exposure and the malarial influence of the climate, he
left Savannah January 1st, and was not with his Regiment in their march
from Savannah to Goldsboro. He left home February 22d to rejoin his
Regiment, but did not succeed in reaching it until its arrival at
Goldsboro. On the 10th April Sherman again moved forward in the
direction of Raleigh, N. C., which place he reached on the 13th April;
here the army remained until the 30th April, when it commenced its march
for Home, arriving at Alexandria, Va., on the 19th May. The Regiment
was mustered out on the 9th June, and ordered to Elmira, N. Y., where it
was paid off and discharged on the 18th June, 1865, having been nearly
three years in active service.

In giving the military history of Col. Van Voorhees, we have coupled
with his also that of the Regiment, as their histories are one. The
officers and men of his command have always spoken well of him; they had
confidence in him as a commander, and esteemed him highly as a man. He
also enjoyed the confidence and respect of his superior officers,
especially of Gen. Geary, who placed the utmost confidence in his
ability as an officer, usually appointing him officer of the day when
more than usual watchfulness was required, saying that he "always felt
safe when Col. Van Voorhees was in command of the picket line." This
confidence was also shared in by the Regiment, it being generally
selected to occupy the most exposed positions, or lead the column when
danger was thought to be imminent.

Col. Van Voorhees was several times (on account of the absence of all
its field officers) detailed to command the 149th New York, a Syracuse
Regiment of which Gen. Barnum, now State Prison Inspector, was Colonel.
On one of these occasions, when about to be relieved and returned to his
own Regiment, the following paper was put into his hands, signed by all
the officers present with the Regiment:

    149TH REG'T N. Y. VOLS.,
    Aquia Landing, Va., June 8th, 1863.

    COL. K. S. VAN VOORHEES:

    We, the undersigned, officers of this command, take this
    opportunity of expressing the feelings of each and every one of
    us, as the time approaches which must sever the relations that
    have existed between us and you as our commander. We desire to
    assure you of our full appreciation of your services, always
    characterized by kindness and forbearance, and in which the
    qualities of the gentleman and soldier have commanded our
    admiration. We desire to thank you for the earnestness and zeal
    you have exhibited in your endeavors to instruct and better
    prepare us for the duties devolving upon us, and to assure you
    that we shall always remember the past four weeks, in which you
    have been connected with us, with feelings of satisfaction and
    pleasure; and taking leave of you, as we are about to do, we
    earnestly hope that in the future _that_ success may attend you
    which industry and fidelity always merit.

At the close of the war Lt. Col. Van Voorhees was appointed Colonel by
brevet by the President "for gallant and meritorious services in the
late campaigns in Georgia and the Carolinas."


(_Contributed by Capt. B. R. W._)

JOSEPH ESTY, JR., Clerk, enlisted Sept. 26th, 1855, and was elected
Secretary of the Company January 14, 1857. July 28th, 1858, he was first
put in the line of promotion by being elected fourth Corporal, and so
great was his popularity with the Company, and his knowledge of tactics,
that within a trifle over four years from the time of his receiving his
chevron as fourth Corporal, he was elected and received his commission
as second Lieutenant, (Aug. 25th, 1862,) having filled nearly if not all
of the intermediate positions. During the Elmira campaign he was with
the Company, steadily refusing to accept of any better fare or
accommodations, than the men under his charge received.

While at Barracks No. 1, he invariably accompanied his men to the mess
house, and prevented many impositions which officers in charge were in
the habit of practicing upon soldiers who were obliged to take their
rations in that unsavory institution. While the Company were on duty at
the rebel prison, no officer did his duty more cheerfully and strictly.
He was never known to plead illness to avoid his turn, and the writer of
this sketch has, on more than one occasion, known him to take the turn
of other officers who plead illness, when he himself was not fit for
duty. On one occasion he attended the officer's drill of the Regiment
when he was hardly able to leave his tent, and upon the fact being
reported to the Colonel, he was peremptorily ordered to his Quarters, to
gain the rest which he would not take voluntarily.

No officer in the Regiment stood higher in the estimation of both
officers and men, than did Lieut. Esty; and such was the respect of his
own Company for him, that upon their return home and the promotion of
Captain Blood to the position he now occupies, Lieut. Esty was (Dec.
26th, 1864) elected Captain.

His reluctance to accept the position, showed that he had no aspirations
to rise in rank above his fellows, and it was only upon the urgent
entreaties of the officers of the Regiment, and his intimate friends,
that he was induced to accept the honor thus thrust upon him; and we
venture to say, without any fear of detracting from the worthy merits of
his predecessors, that no officer has given more time and money to
advance the interest of the Company, than has he--a large proportion of
the target prizes for the past two years having been procured by him.
At the meeting for target practice August 15th, 1865, Captain Esty was
presented by the Company with a splendid sword and belt, which cost
about $120. The Captain was taken completely by surprise, as he had
received no hint of the matter, and his overcharged feelings prevented
him from making known to the Company how highly he prized the gift; but
his pleasure at receiving was not greater than the happiness of the
donors, in thus having an opportunity of demonstrating their feelings
toward him.

The beautiful Armory and Drill-Room now occupied by the Company, are
mainly due to his indefatigable efforts.

One prominent feature in the history of the Company, and one which we
fear the historian may, from feelings of delicacy, omit, was the
splendid supper given, soon after the return of the Company from Elmira,
by Captain Esty and lady--an entertainment which was a high testimonial
of the Captain's generosity, and the skill and hospitality of Mrs. Esty.
The supper will long be remembered by the happy participants.

Captain Esty, in civil life, is no less esteemed than as a soldier,
having been for a number of years the confidential clerk and
book-keeper in the extensive Leather establishment of Hon. E. S. Esty,
an establishment which owes its success in no small degree to his
energetic and business qualities.

CHARLES HAUSNER, Carpenter, enlisted October 6th, 1855. Served his full
time in the Company. Enlisted Sept. 10th, 1861, in the United States
army, in which he served until the 6th day of Sept., 1862, when he was
honorably discharged by reason of being totally unserviceable on account
of wounds received while in the army. He participated in the battle of
Fair Oaks, and received in that one engagement six wounds, while his
clothes were pierced by fourteen bullets of the enemy. Probably no
soldier ever received the same number of wounds and lived. Upon his
return home he was elected Captain of Company E, 50th Regiment National
Guard.

A. T. JARVIS, Clerk, enlisted March 19th, 1856. Was a member but a short
time.

O. BINGHAM, Boot and Shoe Merchant, enlisted April 2d, 1856. Served his
full time, and was honorably discharged from further service in the
militia. Upon the breaking out of the Rebellion he enlisted in Company
D, 137th N. Y. Volunteers. August 16th, 1862, was mustered into the
United States service at Camp Susquehanna, Binghamton. Soon after the
Regiment was ordered to Washington, and from thence to Harper's Ferry,
Va., in October, 1862. The Regiment was soon attached to the 12th Army
Corps; after a few weeks in camp were ordered to join Gen. Burnside in
front of Fredericksburgh, Va. On account of the almost impassibility of
the roads, the Regiment did not arrive in time to participate in the
fight. Were here ordered into camp at Fairfax, Va., from thence to Aquia
Landing, on the Potomac.

The Regiment remained in this camp, perfecting themselves in all the
arts of war, until Gen. Hooker had perfected the plan for the battle of
Chancellorsville, to which place the Regiment was ordered in the latter
part of April, 1863, under command of Gen. Slocum. In this engagement
the 137th Regiment did some very hard fighting, and the hero of this
sketch came near losing his life while performing acts of kindness to
his comrades. He was returning from a spring near by with a number of
canteens of water, when he was attacked by a number of rebels who gave
him chase through the woods; but our soldier escaped unharmed, although
at one time it seemed that nothing short of a miracle could save him.
After the battle the Regiment recrossed the Rappahannock and were again
in camp.

On the 13th of June Mr. Bingham was promoted to the office of Chief
Musician of the Regiment by Col. Ireland for meritorious conduct, and no
member of the Regiment or Brigade was more competent to fill this
position. This office he held until mustered out of the service.

June 14th the Regiment started for Gettysburg; arrived on the 1st of
July and immediately took position on the right of the line. In this
battle the Regiment was engaged three days; Chief Musician Bingham had
his cap shot off his head as he was carrying a wounded Sergeant from the
line; he lost five men of his drum corps, three being wounded and two
captured.

In September the 11th and 12th Corps were detached from the army of the
Potomac and ordered to Tennessee. The men were transported in cattle
cars, and reached the city of Nashville after about ten days travel;
from thence were moved to Wauhatchie Valley. In this valley one
Brigade, composed of the 137th and other Regiments, in all about one
thousand men, were attacked by the rebel General Hood with four thousand
picked men; the enemy finally withdrew to Lookout Mountain. In this
fight our Chief Musician had his bugle, which was hanging by his side,
pierced with a bullet and destroyed.

After several other engagements in this vicinity, the enemy were routed,
and the men ordered to prepare for the taking of Atlanta, which city was
captured by the Union forces Sept. 2d, 1864, Chief Musician Bingham
marching in command of the drum corps of his Division playing the
familiar tune Yankee Doodle, to the disgust of the inhabitants of that
city.

From this time comparative quiet reigned until November 14th, when
commenced the great "March for the Sea Coast," which was so successfully
accomplished, as also the march from Savannah to Richmond, from which
point the army were moved by easy marches to Washington, at which city
they were mustered out of the service as fast as possible. Our Chief
Musician was mustered out near Washington June 9th, 1865, and
immediately sent with the Regiment to Elmira, where they were paid and
honorably discharged June 20th.

He was in the service nearly three years; never lost a day's duty from
his Regiment; he participated in every engagement of the Regiment from
the time it entered the field, and fully proved himself to be a soldier
of ability and courage, possessing all the qualities that are requisite
to make a first-class American soldier.

Now that he has returned to his home and friends, we all unite in
bestowing upon him the honor he so dearly bought, and respect and
cherish him as one of the defenders of our common country.

H. W. BISHOP, Druggist, elected May 31st, 1856. Doctor Bishop was an
excellent member; served the Company as Treasurer for two years; filled
most of the non-commissioned offices, and was esteemed highly by all the
members, as he was by the community at large. He was Orderly Sergeant at
the time he left the Company and joined the United States army. Very
soon after his enlistment in the service of his country, he was promoted
to hospital Steward, which position he filled until removed by death.
Many there are, besides his near relatives and the Company of which he
was a member, who mourn the loss of Doctor Bishop.

E. S. CONKLIN, enlisted June 9th, 1856. The writer is wholly
unacquainted with the history of this member.

E. B. TORREY, Banker, enlisted September 10th, 1856. No member ever
connected himself with the DeWitt Guard who took more interest in the
Company than did Mr. Torrey; and although his profession was such that
it would seem impossible for him to spend any very great amount of time
with the Company, still through the kindness and leniency of President
J. B. Williams, and Cashier, Colonel Hardy, he almost always answered to
his name at all the drills and parades of the Company. At the business
meeting he was particularly useful, always lending his advice, and eager
to do any thing that would increase the interest of the members. Always
scrupulously prompt in meeting his obligations, and we believe during
the several years of his membership, he never allowed his dues to run
over one month; he filled most of the non-commissioned offices; as a
soldier he liked every other soldier, and every other soldier liked him;
and the only way he could ever dissolve his membership, was by the
expiration of his term of enlistment. He most creditably served his time
and received an honorable discharge. He retired from the Bank a short
time since, and secured a patent for "Torrey's Patent Artesian Wells,"
which is a most valuable invention, and is being universally used
wherever introduced. We extend to him our hearty congratulations for the
success he has already attained, and earnestly hope that our friend will
realize his full anticipations in his new enterprise.

M. R. BARNARD, Principal of Public School, enlisted Sept. 10th, 1856.
Mr. Barnard served his full time and was honorably discharged from
further service in the militia. He served the Company as Secretary for a
year or more. He is still represented by his son, Corporal E. E.
Barnard; is brother of John Barnard, the hero of Lookout Mountain. Has
been for many years Principal of our Public School, having some times as
many as eight hundred scholars. In this situation, as well as every
other one, he gave the most perfect satisfaction, and the regrets were
many that we heard expressed when he determined to withdraw from the
school, and still many more when it became known that he had fully
determined to change his residence to Louisville, Ky.

Prof. Barnard is a thorough scholar, a man of great and comprehensive
mind, fine intellect, and a man in every way qualified to hold the very
first position in society wherever he may go. When in his new home he
becomes as well known as he is here, we know he will be equally
respected. Success and prosperity ever attend him.

MARCUS LYON, Lawyer and District Attorney, elected January 20th, 1857.
Mr. Lyon soon discovered that it would require more of his time than he
could possibly devote to this purpose, and furnished a substitute in the
person of the lamented Wager.

LUTHER LOSEY, Harness-Maker, enlisted June 27th, 1857. Mr. Losey served
his time, was a good soldier and a fine mechanic, else he could not have
found employment so many years in the establishment of Colonel
Millspaugh. He is now a resident of one of the Western States.

HENRY S. KRUM, Shoe Merchant, enlisted May 18th, 1858. Mr. Krum served
but a very short time as a member of this Company, but sufficiently
long to prepare him to assume command of a Company upon his entering the
United States service. He was in the service for some time, and upon his
return home was elected Captain of the Caroline Company, National Guard,
which position he still holds.

JOHN C. HAZEN, Merchant, enlisted May 18th, 1858. We have very
frequently, through this History, mentioned instances where the Company
were indebted to individual members for some particular acts, or the
interest they have manifested in the general good and prosperity of the
Company. In this instance, however, we have the contrary. We believe
Lieut. Hazen is more indebted to the DeWitt Guard, than any person now
living, and on this point we are sure we shall satisfy the reader.

July 12th, 1857, the Company visited the city of Auburn, (an account of
which will be found in the History of the Company). While there, they
were several times the guests of a number of distinguished citizens of
that city. At a very elaborate and magnificent entertainment given in
honor of the Company, by Hon. B. F. Hall, the subject of this sketch
formed the acquaintance of the daughter of our host. Auburn's fairest
daughters were there. The elite of the city were represented. Among them
all, the choice of our friend was the lady just mentioned. The result of
the acquaintance that evening formed, is generally known. Little did the
good people of Auburn think that our excursion was to be the means of
depriving them of one of their fairest daughters. Auburn, the loveliest
city of the plain, the loser; but Ithaca, the Forest City, the gainer.
All must concede that no one was more deserving, or better entitled to
the prize, than our respected soldier. A very noticeable and singular
incident in connection with our excursion to Auburn, we came near
forgetting, which should be mentioned here. It is this: that at that
time, Sergeant Hazen was Company Secretary, and the account of that
trip, so fully and graphically given, in another part of this book, is
taken verbatim from his minutes.

As we have noticed, Mr. Hazen enlisted in May, 1858. He was permitted to
remain but a short time in the ranks, but filled all of the
non-commissioned offices, and was Orderly Sergeant while in the United
States service, which is a position of much importance, and also one
where the utmost caution must be used, or the occupant will soon find
that his comrades are exceedingly dissatisfied with him; it being the
duty of the Orderly to make the various details. But in this instance,
there was never one word of complaint. The Orderly, in his pleasant
manner, would say to the men: "Please report for duty, to-morrow
morning," and invariably the men were there. Every member of the
Company, not only but very many officers and men with whom we were
associated while in Elmira, became very much attached to Sergeant Hazen;
and all this, not without cause, for certainly he was one of the very
best men in camp. To show that he was appreciated, very soon after the
Company returned from Elmira, they elected him First Lieutenant, which
commission he now holds.

Lieutenant Hazen is not only a fine soldier, and a good and respected
officer, but as a citizen and a business man, he has very few superiors.
The firm of Stowell & Hazen is known throughout the county, and they
enjoy the confidence of as large a class of customers, as any House in
Western New York. They conform to a strict degree of honesty in small as
well as large transactions, and by this means have built up a
reputation second to none in the State.

EDWARD D. NORTON, Printer, enlisted June 17, 1858. His qualifications as
a soldier, were sufficiently good to entitle him to fill the posts of
Corporal and Sergeant in a worthy and creditable manner. He was employed
for many years in the _Ithaca Journal_ office, but finally removed to
the city of Rochester, where he now resides.

WILLIAM BYINGTON, Merchant, enlisted June 21st, 1858. Mr. Byington
served his full time, and was honorably discharged. He was a good
soldier, an equally good Corporal, and a better Sergeant. At the time
the Company were called into the United States service, it was
impossible for Sergeant Byington to accompany them; Lieut. Kenney, his
partner, being an officer in the Company, it was desirable to have him,
and of course both could not leave; but the Sergeant, at considerable
expense, furnished a satisfactory substitute. He was never behind his
comrades in contributing in any way that would be for the general good
of the institution. He is one of the enterprising merchants of this
place, and all acquainted with him can testify to his equally good
qualifications as a citizen, that we have as a soldier.

WILLIAM L. MINTURN, Mason, enlisted June 17th, 1858. Was a faithful and
attentive soldier, served his full time and received an honorable
discharge. There is no better man in the community than Mr. Minturn. As
for his reputation as a Master Mechanic, we refer the reader to the many
buildings erected under his supervision in our village.

SILAS R. ZIMMER, Clerk, enlisted July, 20th, 1858. Mr. Zimmer served a
number of years with the Company to the most perfect satisfaction of
both officers and men. He was one of the employees of that prince of
merchants, L. H. Culver, Esq.

A. BRUM, Clothing Merchant, enlisted July 27th, 1858. Was connected with
the Company but a short time. Removed, we believe, to the city of New
York.

PHILIP S. RYDER, Artist, enlisted July 27th, 1858. Mr. Ryder performed
well the duties of a member of this Company so long as he remained a
resident of the district. We believe he is now a resident of Cleveland,
O.

LEVI KENNEY, Merchant, enlisted June 24th, 1858. After serving a very
short time as private, was elected Corporal, promoted to Sergeant, and
finally to first Lieutenant, which commission he held until the
expiration of his term of enlistment, when he resigned. Lieutenant
Kenney was a stirring and an energetic officer. The command of the
Company devolved upon him much of the time while in the United States
army, and at one time was in command of the Regiment. The Company had
been but a few days at Elmira, when Lieut. Kenney was selected from
among all the officers to command a very large detachment of
substitutes, drafted men and bounty-jumpers to the Head-Quarters of Gen.
Grant's army. He selected his officers and Guard with care, and we think
his report upon his return, to the Commander of the Post, was as
satisfactory as any return ever made to him. This is the only instance
that occurred while there, of the command being given to an officer of
less rank than Captain. The Lieutenant was detailed from his command on
three different occasions and commissioned one of the court-martial for
the trial of officers only. He was elected clerk of the court, and the
records were kept by him equally well as by one who had long been
familiar with the duties of an office of that kind. He was one of the
best officers in the Regiment, thoroughly familiar with his duties, and
required of his men (as do all good officers) a prompt and willing
obedience to all commands. He was complimented on several occasions by
Col. Wisner, commanding the Regiment; also received honorable mention by
Major Beal, of the veteran Reserve Corps, and by Col. Moore, commanding
the Post.

Soon after returning from Elmira his term of service expired, and he
resigned his commission and was granted an honorable discharge. No
officer or enlisted man ever served his term with more fidelity than did
Lieut. Kenney, and no officer was more entitled to the respect of his
men. He is the senior partner in the firm of Kenney, Byington & Co., the
only exclusively Dry-Goods House in Ithaca; and their splendidly
arranged and well filled store, together with the vast amount of
patronage they enjoy, is sufficient proof that he is as well appreciated
as a citizen and business man, as he was a soldier and officer.

JAMES H. SMITH, Tin-Smith, enlisted September 2d, 1858. As long as Mr.
Smith was a citizen of Ithaca he was a member in good standing in this
Company. Our recollection is that he served about three years. He
removed to Elmira.

P. B. WAGER, Lawyer, enlisted January 5th, 1859. Remained with the
Company until he enlisted in the service of his country. No young man
ever started in life with a more brilliant prospect than did Mr. Wager;
had but a short time previous to his enlistment in the United States
army been admitted to the bar, and had commenced the practice of Law
with very marked success. At the outbreak of the Rebellion he enlisted
in Company I, 32d New York Volunteers, and received a Lieutenancy, which
commission he held until the time of his death. He died in camp, and his
remains were forwarded to his home and buried with military honors by
this Company, assisted by the entire Fire Department of the village.
Lieutenant Wager was a patriotic soldier and a courageous officer.

D. A. MCKAY, Cigar Manufacturer, enlisted May 12th, 1859. Served as a
member of this Company until his enlistment in the United States army.
Was soon commissioned Lieutenant, and faithfully served until the close
of the war. We have been unable to collect as full a history of
Lieutenant McKay as we would have been glad to have given; but we are
able to say, however, that his war history was an honorable one, and he
has a lasting claim upon his fellow citizens for gallant services
rendered his country during the hour of her peril.

C. C. GREENLY, Merchant, enlisted September 27th, 1859. But a very short
period of time elapsed between his enlistment and the time when he was
duly confirmed fourth Corporal of Company A. Step by step he advanced
until commissioned a Lieutenant by Gov. Fenton, which commission he now
holds. Each office he has filled most honorably, and no member stands
higher in the estimation of the Company to-day than Lieut. Greenly.
While serving in the army, he performed the duties that devolved upon
him in a manner that would have been highly creditable to an officer of
many years experience.

It was the pleasure of the writer to be associated with Lieut. Greenly
and others who were in charge of a detail of men whose destination was
the Head-Quarters of Gen. Grant at City Point, and too much credit
cannot be awarded the Lieutenant for the care with which he guarded his
men, turning over to the authorities at City Point every man of his
command, while others would be short five or six, and sometimes many
more; all in his charge were either drafted men, substitutes, or
deserters. The writer most thoroughly appreciated the company of Lieut.
Greenly in that expedition, and wishes to acknowledge many favors shown
him.

It may be supposed by many that the duties of the members of the DeWitt
Guard at Elmira were not very arduous; but in this particular instance
we know the contrary to be the case. Aside from the regular camp duties,
(which a portion of the time were very severe,) the Lieutenant carried
on an extensive correspondence, the satisfactory termination of which
resulted in the marriage of our respected officer soon after his return
from the field.

W. F. FINCH, Merchant, enlisted May 1st, 1860. During nearly six years
of membership, we find Mr. Finch marked absent from the drills but three
or four times--surely a good introduction. Not only in attendance,
however, was he regular and punctual, but in every other duty required
of him as a member of the Company. So particular was he not to be in
arrears on the Company's books, that we believe there was not six
months of his membership that the Company were not indebted to him for
dues and taxes paid in advance. He enjoyed the exercise of the drill,
and became perfectly familiar with the tactics and evolutions; took
great pride in being a good soldier. Against his wishes he was elected
Corporal, and by various promotions reached the position of second
Sergeant. A little more than a year ago we were deprived of the pleasure
of the further direct membership of our respected Sergeant, by the
interposition of our esteemed Colonel, H. D. Barto, who, discovering in
him a man with the qualifications of a perfect soldier, appointed him to
a position on his staff, which, after due consideration, he accepted.
Still he retains his membership in the Company so far as paying his dues
are concerned. He is a member of the firm of Morrison, Hawkins & Finch,
the leading Dry-Goods House of the place.

EDGAR M. FINCH, Book-Keeper, enlisted June 6th, 1860. Is brother of
Sergeant W. F. Finch, and the same must be said in his case, so far as
holding office is concerned, with one exception. He has filled every
non-commissioned office --is now Orderly Sergeant. He served with his
Company during their term of enlistment in the United States army. No
better soldier can be found, not even in the regular army, than Sergeant
Finch. The most regular attendant at the drills, meetings and parades,
of any member ever connected with the Company. As will be noticed, he
enlisted over six years ago, and during that time has never paid a fine.
He is one of the most unassuming, yet one of the noblest and most
generous young men of Ithaca.

JOHN C. HEATH, Wholesale and Retail Grocer, enlisted September 4th,
1860.

We know of no one who has devoted more time, or distributed more money
to build up, keep in existence and sustain the military organizations of
the day, than Quartermaster Heath. Whatever he becomes interested in,
either in a military or business way, he invariably drives to a
successful termination. In the organization of the Regiment he took an
active part, and we know Colonel Barto must feel under great
indebtedness to him for rendering invaluable assistance in organizing
and mustering in the service many of the new Companies.

While connected with the Company he was one of its best members and
warmest supporters; and although at the present time in no way directly
connected with them as a Company, he still manifests a deep interest in
its prosperity. His first office was fourth Corporal, from which he was
promoted to Quartermaster Sergeant upon the non-commissioned staff of
Col. H. A. Dowe, (since promoted to Brigadier General.) Upon the
reorganization of the Regiment, he accepted the commission of
Quartermaster upon the staff of Colonel Barto, which he now holds, the
duties of which for the past year and a half have been onerous, having
distributed to the various Companies of the Regiment all their arms,
clothing and other equipage, besides performing other duties not
directly in the line of his office. The officers, as well as the men of
the 50th Regiment, owe Quartermaster Heath a debt of gratitude, which we
are led to believe will only be cancelled by their continuing to sustain
and keep alive the interest they have recently manifested in their
Companies, and make the Regiment one of the best in the State.

We congratulate our friend on being associated in business with James B.
Taylor, Esq., the most celebrated of all Ithaca Grocery merchants. The
firm of J. B. Taylor & Co. is known from New York to Chicago, and from
Boston to New Orleans, as the most responsible and most accommodating of
any establishment of the kind between these extreme points; also, for
keeping the largest stock of goods, and selling them the cheapest, of
any House outside of the great cities.

With Quartermaster Heath to look after the interest of the militia, and
Alderman Taylor that of his constituents and the general welfare of our
village, we may consider ourselves safe beyond the possibility of a
doubt.

H. W. JACKSON, JR., Merchant, enlisted September 4th, 1860. Very soon
after joining this Company he enlisted in the United States service,
being one of the organizers of Company I, 32d New York Volunteers. Was
elected first Lieutenant, which commission he held for about a year and
a half, when his health failing he was compelled to resign. He was
engaged in two or three battles under Gen. Franklin.

C. WOODWORTH, Merchant, enlisted September 4th, 1860. Mr. Woodworth was
most an estimable man in every respect. During the short time he was
connected with the Company, every member became warmly and firmly
attached to him.

He removed from this place to Fon Du Lac, Wis., where he had been a
resident but a short time when, in the all-wise Providence of God, he
was called to that Heavenly City for which he, in a most eminent degree,
was prepared to enter.

GEORGE H. GRANT, Clerk, enlisted April 23d, 1861. Served faithfully as a
member of this Company, also in the United States army and in the United
States navy. Was most thoroughly appreciated by the members of this
Company. During the Elmira campaign he was one of the great alleviators
of that terrible disease--homesickness. Will long be remembered as one
of the celebrated Quartette--Grant, Wilson, Betts and Johnson.

E. J. FARNHAM, Clerk, enlisted April 23d, 1861. Was one of the first
soldiers that enlisted from this place in the United States army. Served
honorably in Company A, 32d New York Volunteers, until in consequence of
disease contracted in the army, he was no longer qualified to serve and
was honorably discharged. Was a good soldier, and sacrificed his health
for the honor of his country.

ADNAH NEYHART, Speculator, enlisted April 23d, 1861. By reason of his
profession, Mr. Neyhart was much of the time separated from the Company,
but always prompt in meeting his obligations and sustaining the Company
in every possible way, aside from being personally present. Furnished a
substitute who represented him in the United States army, suffered many
reverses in business, but fortunately his last investment was a good
one--_he struck oil_--and is now again "_sound_."

We congratulate him; no one has worked harder for, or is better entitled
to, a two hundred and fifty barrel well than Adnah.

THOMAS A. BROWN, Tin-Smith, enlisted April 23d, 1861. Was an active
member during the short time he was a resident of the village.

R. W. HEGGIE, Clerk, enlisted July 3d, 1861. No young man ever joined
this Company that evinced more interest in its success and general
welfare, than did Mr. Heggie, and no member was more respected. He was
in every way calculated to win the esteem and friendship of all with
whom he became associated. He very readily became a perfect soldier.
With a fervent love for his country, and a desire to do something for
its defence in the hour of its peril, he enlisted, August 26th, 1863, in
Company G, 15th New York Cavalry; was soon elected first Sergeant, and
May 24th, 1864, was commissioned Lieutenant. Was engaged in many
battles, in one of which he was wounded and a short time separated from
his Company. He was a courageous officer, always ready to dash into the
conflict. Several times he was in command of troops, conveying them from
Boston to Charleston; was then entrusted by Government with a position
of great responsibility and importance, but at all times was equal to
his duties. He faithfully served until the close of the war, and was
honorably mustered out. Is now connected with one of the largest cotton
establishments of the South, and located at Galveston, Texas.

JOHN S. GAY, Clerk, enlisted July 3d, 1861. Was a member until July 7th,
1865; was with the Company during their term of service in the army; a
good soldier that could be trusted, and he accompanied several
detachments to the front. Is now engaged in business at Cairo, Ill.

W. H. KELLOGG, Tobacconist, enlisted July 3d, 1861. Served as a member
until July 7th, 1865. Volunteered in the United States army Sept. 2d,
1864, and honorably served the full term of his enlistment.

HENRY A. ST. JOHN, Merchant, enlisted July 3d, 1861. Although his name
is recorded as enlisting July 3d, 1861, he had, however, been connected
with the Company a long time previous to that date, but in a capacity
that would not admit of his signing the roll and becoming a regular
member under the statute. Displaying a taste for the science of military
while a mere boy, he was elected by the members of this Company one of
their markers. At the time he became a full member he was well versed in
the school of the soldier, and familiar with the school of the Company.
Was soon elected fourth Corporal, being the youngest member that had
ever held office; was gradually promoted until he reached the post of
second Sergeant, which position he now fills. Sergeant St. John
particularly distinguished himself while at Elmira; was one of the best
non-commissioned officers of the Regiment. Col. R. P. Wisner, commanding
the 58th Regiment, twice appointed him to fill vacancies occasioned by
absence of officers of his staff. Was the first Sergeant detached from
the Regiment and placed in charge over substitutes and deserters, en
route for City Point, arriving at his destination without the loss of a
man. He fully understood his duty, enforcing strict discipline, and
requiring his men to conform to all the regulations and articles of war,
but equally careful not to exceed the bounds of his authority.

He is one of the most active men of the Company; always first in any
enterprise, the object of which is the good of the organization. He has
contributed much toward this History by giving a detailed and very
accurate account of the Elmira campaign, which may be found on another
page. It is a pleasure to be associated with him as a soldier, or
socially in the ordinary walks of life. Is a member of the firm of G. W.
Baker & Co., the popular Dry-Goods House of the place.

M. L. GRANGER, Merchant, enlisted July 3d, 1861. In time and money Mr.
Granger has sacrificed much for the sake of being a soldier. Always
present at parades, drills or meetings, and always prompt to meet his
obligations. He volunteered in the United States service with the
Company in 1864, shared the pleasures and deprivations of camp life with
his comrades. For the fatherly care and attention shown the younger
members, and those who needed assistance in any way, he was named and
known in camp by the title of "Uncle Amos." He honestly served out the
term of his enlistment and was honorably discharged. Is partner in the
firm of J. S. Granger & Co., a very extensive Dry-Goods House, who enjoy
the reputation of keeping the most carefully selected stock of goods of
any establishment of the kind in Central New York.

ROBERT GOODWIN, Baker, enlisted July 3d, 1861. A good soldier and an
upright man. Was employed in the Bakery department of the extensive
establishment of John L. Whiton, Esq. Removed West about three years
ago.

JAMES STANYON, Blacksmith, enlisted July 3d, 1861. Was Company musician,
and served as such until he volunteered in the United States service. He
was a worthy and honorable soldier, engaged in many battles. We have
been unable to obtain his war history for publication.

HENRY W. COLLINS, Clerk, enlisted July 3d, 1861. Like Sergeant St. John,
Mr. Collins was one of the Company markers long before he became a
regular member. Was a soldier of merit, and liked by all the members.
Served the Company as Secretary; his skillful penmanship, as shown upon
the records, would be of itself a sufficient recommendation; but "_none
need apply_," as he is now first book-keeper in the New York office of
Adams' Express Company. His absence is temporary, however, as he still
considers Ithaca his residence, and is still a member of this Company.

JOHN C. GAUNTLETT, Druggist, enlisted September 4th, 1861. Mr. Gauntlett
has always been as popular as a soldier, as he is a citizen and
associate. He is of the class that we would always like to retain as
members; but to meet the demands of superior officers, we are obliged to
relinquish our claim upon them. Starting from the ranks, Sergeant
Gauntlett had reached the post of fourth Sergeant, when Colonel Barto
selected him as Regimental Standard-bearer, which office he now holds.
Not feeling disposed to leave his old friends, however, he retains his
membership and position in the Company, and still acts with them, except
on Regimental parade. He volunteered with the Company in the United
States service, and well and faithfully served out the term of his
enlistment.

He is engaged in the Drug and Medicine business, and it is a matter of
pride to him, and a source of gratification to his numerous friends,
that he stands at the head of that branch of trade in Tompkins county.

IRVING W. NORTON, Cigar-Maker, enlisted September 4th, 1861. Was a good
soldier while connected with the Company. Volunteered in the United
States service, and received a bayonet wound near his right eye. By this
he was prevented from being with his Company for a short time, when he
again resumed his duties and served the full term of his enlistment. Mr.
Norton, and the night he was wounded, will long be remembered by the
DeWitt Guard.

JOHN L. MANDEVILLE, Civil Engineer and Surveyor, enlisted October 2d,
1861. A prompt and systematic soldier, and a most excellent member of
the Company. Although a resident of the town of Caroline, is as
frequently at the drills as many who live in town. Has always taken a
great interest in the Company, accompanied them to Elmira, and
volunteered in the United States service. Was permitted to serve but a
short time with the Company, however, as he was detailed chief Clerk at
Colonel Moore's Head-Quarters; he was, nevertheless, always ready for
any kind of duty, when not engaged in his office. While acting as
sentinel (relieving one of the guard for a play spell) one night, he
alone arrested two desperate characters, who were stealing from the camp
of the 58th Regiment, for which he received a unanimous vote of thanks.
He served the full term of his enlistment, and was honorably discharged,
since which time, until recently, he has been engaged in civil
engineering in and around Washington and Baltimore. He has now returned,
and can be addressed at Mott's Corners, Tompkins county, N. Y.

E. K. JOHNSON, Clerk, enlisted March 10th, 1862. Mr. Johnson, better
known as "Kirk," was honored with a non-commissioned office. Served with
the Company as Secretary, and from his records we make extracts
elsewhere. Was a capital soldier, a perfect gentleman, and a first rate
fellow generally. Volunteered and served in the United States service
with the DeWitt Guard at Elmira. No more daring soldier ever stood up
before a live Johnny, than he; was detailed as police--the celebrated
quartette, Johnson, Betts, Grant and Wilson--and we can assure the
reader that every thing within their reach was perfectly safe.
Consistent with their obligations as police officers, they watched the
various hen-roosts, and other places likely to be disturbed by unruly
soldiers; and not more than fifteen or sixteen times did they find in
the cook stove oven of Company A, turkeys, chickens, ducks, and other
domestic fowls. At the close of his term of service in the army, he made
an engagement with a large establishment at the West, where he has since
resided. He has warm and _peculiar_ attachments to the place of his
birth, and we earnestly hope it may yet be his permanent residence.

A. H. PLATTS, Grocer, enlisted March 7th, 1862. Retained his membership
but a very short time.

W. H. HOSFORD, Mechanic, enlisted August 6th, 1862. Served honorably in
the United States army. We should have been glad to have published his
war history, but have been unable to procure it.

JAMES H. BISHOP, Carpenter, enlisted August 6th, 1862. August 16th,
1862, Mr. Bishop volunteered in the United States army for three years,
unless sooner discharged. Soon after enlisting, he joined Captain John
H. Terry's Company, which was connected with the 137th Regiment,
commanded by Col. David Ireland, and subsequently by Col. K. S. Van
Voorhees. Before leaving Binghamton was elected Corporal. The first camp
duty performed by Corporal Bishop, was picket duty on Bolivar Heights;
the weather becoming severely cold, and he being placed upon the
"lookout," which was the highest point on the Heights, he suffered more
from cold and exposure than he did during all the time he was in the
service. This post he occupied one week; soon after this the camp was
removed to Fairfax Station. April 27th was ordered to pack and be ready
to move. The baggage of each soldier consisted of his clothes, tent,
blankets, eight day's rations, and one hundred and sixty rounds of
cartridges, with gun and accoutrements. Corporal Bishop was engaged in
each day's battle at Chancellorsville, which were the 1st, 2d and 3d
days of May. Was next engaged at the battle of Gettysburg, where he was
constantly fighting for three days. After the return of the Regiment to
Virginia, Corporal Bishop was detailed for special duty, and sent to
Elmira on recruiting service, at which place he remained until April,
1864, when he again joined his regiment at Stevenson, Ala. Was engaged
in the skirmishes around Resacca, and finally in the battle at that
place, which was from the 12th to the 15th of May. Participated in the
sharp fight at Dallas Woods, also at Pine Knob and the severe battle of
Peach Tree Creek. After these and many other battles of less account,
the Regiment marched into the city of Atlanta at midnight, the band
playing "The Campbells are Coming." Thus ended a campaign of four
months.

Again taking up a line of march toward Milledgeville, the only
obstructions they met were the railroads, which were speedily rendered
useless by taking up the track, heating the rails in a fire made of the
ties, and then twisting them around the nearest tree or stump. Being
obliged to depend upon the country through which they passed for
subsistence, foraging parties were each day sent out, and supplies of
sweet potatoes, pork and poultry would be brought in by them, upon which
they lived like nabobs. After marching many days and much skirmishing,
they finally entered the city of Savannah about sunrise on the morning
of the 22d day of December. From this time up to the time of the
muster-out of the Regiment, Corporal Bishop was every day ready for
duty, losing no time by sickness or otherwise. Was finally mustered out
with his Regiment and honorably discharged. All honor to Corporal James
H. Bishop of the 137th Regiment New York Volunteers.

He is now settled down again in his old home, receiving the
congratulations of his friends, and prepared at all times to assist them
"to a new house," or accommodate them in any way in the line of his
profession.

A. L. BISHOP, Carpenter, enlisted August 6th, 1862. Soon after joining
the DeWitt Guard, Mr. Bishop volunteered in the United States service,
into which he was mustered Aug. 16th, 1862, in Captain J. H. Terry's
Company, 137th New York Volunteers. Before leaving Binghamton, the first
place of rendezvous of the Regiment, Mr. Bishop was elected and
appointed first Duty Sergeant of the Regiment. He left Binghamton with
his Regiment for the seat of war Sept. 27th, 1862. The first camp of any
account was at Pleasant Valley, where our Sergeant experienced rather
hard fare--being obliged to eat rations which would, by very fastidious
persons, have been considered rather unpalatable--but of course
soldiers must get used to most every thing, and so our friend made the
best of his "hard tack" and _fresh meat_. On the 10th day of December he
was elected and appointed Orderly Sergeant, filling the vacancy
occasioned by the death of Orderly Sergeant M. L. Beers. Arrived at
Aquia Jan. 27th, 1863. The duty here was very severe, consisting of camp
guard, picket guard, ordinance guard, railroad guard and fatigue duty.
Remained in camp at this point until the last of April, when orders were
received to be ready to march at a moment's warning, which orders were
carried into execution April 27th, when the Rappahannock was crossed at
Kelly's Ford, moving in the direction of Chancellorsville, where the
Company were engaged the 1st, 2d and 3d days of May, on each of which
Sergeant Bishop took an active part.

On the 8th day of June he was commissioned and mustered as second
Lieutenant of Company D, vice Lieutenant Whitmore resigned. Was engaged
the 2d and 3d days of July in the battle of Gettysburg. Was in command
of troops that guarded the wagon trains from Nashville, Tenn., to
Bridgeport, Ala. Also marched and guarded a wagon train to Chattanooga;
arriving as far as Wauhatchie halted for the night, comfortably rolling
themselves in their blankets preparatory to a good night's rest. About
eleven o'clock firing was heard upon the picket line, when they were
ordered out and soon in line, which had hardly been done before they
received a sharp volley of musketry from the rebels. The fight lasted
until three o'clock of the next morning. The killed, wounded and missing
of the 137th Regiment in this engagement was ninety men. Lieut. Bishop
also participated in the famous fight at Lookout Mountain, and that of
Ringold, Ga.

May 2d, 1864, he commenced the great Georgia campaign with Gen. Sherman;
was engaged in the battle of Resacca from the 12th to the 15th of May,
and on the 25th in the battle of Dallas Wood; the next engagement was at
Pine Knob on the 15th of June; had continued skirmishing until the 20th
of July, when occurred the battle of Peach Tree Creek, Ga., after which
they rested until the 23d, when they moved in front of Atlanta; marched
into the city Sept. 2d at twelve o'clock, after a campaign of over four
months.

October 24th Lieut. Bishop was commissioned and mustered first
Lieutenant of Company D, vice Lieut. C. C. Kellogg resigned. October
25th he was sent out with a foraging party; were out four days and
returned with five hundred wagon loads of forage. November 1st started
for home on a twenty days leave of absence, and eight of the days were
occupied in getting there; upon his return he found the Regiment at
Savannah. January 27th he was ordered to the hospital, being wholly
unfit for duty; was detained there twenty days: was again with the
Regiment at Raleigh, N. C., where orders were received to be ready
forthwith to march for Richmond, the Confederacy having succumbed to the
government of the United States. Passed through Richmond the 11th of
May, crossed the Rappahannock at U. S. ford the 15th, and arrived at
Alexandria on the 19th. May 23d he received an order stating that he was
honorably discharged from further service by reason of physical
disability; arrived at his home in Ithaca June 20th, 1865.

No more worthy soldier or respected officer ever enlisted or commanded a
Company, than Lieut. A. L. Bishop; and a more honorable record than his
cannot be produced--always ready to do his whole duty to his comrades
and his country.

J. H. TERRY, Lawyer, enlisted August 4th, 1862. Had belonged to the
Company but a short time when he enlisted in the United States service,
and was elected Captain of a Company organized in this village. We have
been unable to obtain his war history. He is now engaged in his
profession at the West.

B. R. WILLIAMS, Junior Editor of the Ithaca Citizen and Democrat,
enlisted September 3d, 1862. Captain Williams, while connected with the
Company, was one of its most useful members, and it gives us pleasure to
be afforded this opportunity to acknowledge our obligations, and also to
accord to him the honor which is his due.

He was permitted to remain as a private in the Company but a very short
time before he was elected Corporal, and by promotion reached the
position of Sergeant, in which capacity he enlisted in the United States
service with this Company in September, 1864; there, after a short time,
the Company were deprived of his services by reason of his accepting a
position upon the staff of Col. R. P. Wisner, which, however, did not
separate him from his former associates. Captain Williams, by his many
acts of personal kindness toward the members of the DeWitt Guard while
in the service, and particularly toward the officers, in rendering them
the most invaluable assistance in arranging and closing up their
account, was entitled to and received their most hearty thanks. He
rendered very many acts of kindness officially which were in no way
connected with the duties of his office, but it seemed to be a pleasure
for him to do any thing for the officers and men of his former Company.
He was constantly on terms of the most perfect friendship with the
officers and men of the Regiment, and was a particular favorite with
all.

While a member of the Company he filled the office of Secretary, and we
are permitted to copy extracts from his minutes which we do on another
page. Very soon after returning from Elmira, he was commissioned Captain
of Engineers in the 50th Regiment, National Guard. Notwithstanding his
promotion, he still insists upon retaining his membership in the DeWitt
Guard, against which not one objection is known to exist; it is the
strong desire of every member of the Company that he may continue such,
as long as they are in any way connected with said institution.

M. L. THOMPSON, Speculator, enlisted September 8th, 1862. Removed from
the District soon after enlisting; sought his fortune in the oil wells
of Pennsylvania, which adventures, we are pleased to state, have been
successful.

GEORGE E. HALSEY, Druggist, enlisted September 23d, 1862. Served with
the Company until he represented himself in the United States army by
substitution, when he withdrew from this Company. Is proprietor of the
celebrated Fountain Drug Store of this village.

VERNON J. TERRY, Tobacconist, enlisted September 23d, 1862. Mr. Terry is
the third member of the same family who have served as members of this
Company. On account of business it was impossible for him to personally
accompany his comrades during their service in the United States
army,--but generously furnished a substitute at an expense to him of
over one hundred dollars. He is one of the large tobacco and cigar
manufactures of this village, and his brand upon the weed is a sure
indication of prime stock.

ALFRED BROOKS, Hat, Cap and Fur Merchant, enlisted October 1st, 1862.
Is now fourth Sergeant of the Company; is a favorite, not only of the
Company, but of the community at large; was a good soldier, is a good
Sergeant, and will make a good Captain or Colonel. Stood face to face
with the Rebels at Elmira, and never evinced the slightest degree of
cowardice.

He is the junior partner of the firm of F. Brooks & Son, so favorably
known throughout the county. The most fastidious cannot fail in being
exactly suited with a selection from their extensive assortment of hats,
caps or furs.

P. L. ROOT, Painter, enlisted May 12th, 1863. Served but a very short
time.

ERASTUS M. CRONK, Traveling Agent, enlisted May 19th, 1863. Mr. Cronk's
profession is such that necessarily he is absent from many of the drills
and meetings of the Company, but he is always willing to pay for all
such absences.

He procured a substitute that represented him in the United States army,
with a desire to do all that he can for the good of the organization,
and a perfect willingness to stand by all rules and regulations of the
Company. He is a good member, although only occasionally meeting with
them.

E. T. GARDNER, Mason, enlisted May 19th, 1863. At the time the Company
volunteered in the service of the general government, Mr. Gardner _did
not_ go, being under eighteen years of age at the time he enlisted, and
not legally a soldier. Hence his name was stricken from the Roll.

E. M. GREENLY, Professor in Ithaca Academy, enlisted May 20th, 1863.
Very much of the time since his enlistment he has been traveling in
foreign countries. Since his final return he has not renewed his
membership.

WILLIAM H. HERN, Clerk, enlisted May 21st, 1863. Mr. Hern was a
first-class soldier, and a young man of high standing and great
respectability in society. He removed from this village to the city of
Syracuse; is engaged in candy manufacturing. Has also a large bakery
which is in operation day and night, and is doing a very profitable
business.

THOMAS HERN, Confectioner, enlisted May 21st, 1863. Served with the
Company in the United States army, and was a true and faithful soldier;
was respected by both officers and men.

ALBERT PRAME, Shoemaker, enlisted May 21st, 1863. Is now Corporal,
which position he gained by being one of the most regular members at
meetings and drills, and one the best drilled soldiers of the Company.
Corporal Prame is one of the most unassuming and quiet members, but one
of the best men that ever kept step with the beat of the drum. He proved
himself one of the "excelsior" during the term of enlistment in the
United States service. Was one of the guard over a large detachment of
troops sent to the front, and we speak understandingly when we say he
was the best soldier that possibly could have been selected for that
purpose. No bribe, however large, was sufficient to induce him to depart
from his duty in the slightest degree. He well and truly performed all
the duties required of a soldier, and was honorably discharged with the
Company on expiration of his term of enlistment at Elmira.

CHARLES R. RANDOLPH, Book-Binder, enlisted May 21st, 1863. Is brother of
the late Major John Randolph. Served with the Company until transferred
to the 50th Regimental Band, by order of Colonel Henry D. Barto. Mr.
Randolph furnished a substitute to represent him in the army of the
United States, after paying three hundred dollars, being one of the
original drafted men.

Mr. Randolph is Foreman in the Bindery department of the establishment
of Andrus, McChain & Company. Has not only the confidence and respect of
his employers, but of the community at large.

E. E. WARFIELD, Harness-Maker, enlisted May 21st, 1863. A good soldier,
an honest, upright man, and a superior mechanic. Was with the Company at
Elmira, and honorably served the full term of his enlistment.

CHARLES RICE, Rail Road Man, enlisted May 21st, 1863. But never served.

WILLIAM S. CRITTENDEN, Clerk, enlisted May 21st, 1863. Mr. Crittenden is
a good member, and is faithfully serving the term of his enlistment. Was
with the Company in the United States service, and performed all the
duties required of him. Is a book-keeper and accountant; and has been
selected as the most competent person to take the militia enrollment of
this district.

URI CLARK, Jeweler, enlisted May 26th, 1863. Sergeant Clark is as good a
soldier as he is a perfect engraver, and as good an officer as he is
skillful and perfect in the various arts of which he is master. With no
show of arrogance on account of his attainments, he fulfills his duties
as a member of the DeWitt Guard as cheerfully and as consistent as he
does any and all the duties of a good citizen, and an upright member of
society. He was honored by the members of the Company by being elected
in the first place to the vacancy occasioned by the promotion of the
fourth Corporal; he bore his honor meekly, and by gradual promotion has
reached the rank of third Sergeant.

Sacrificed his business for the sake of doing his duty as a soldier, and
volunteered with the Company in the service of the United States in
September, 1864, and most honorably did he serve the full term of his
enlistment.

E. C. MARSH, Merchant, enlisted June 3d, 1863. Served honorably as
Lieutenant in the United States army. We have been unable to procure his
war history for publication.

W. H. HOYT, Tobacconist, enlisted June 3d, 1863. Furnished a good and
acceptable substitute to represent him in the army, for which he paid
one hundred dollars. Is engaged largely in the manufacture of cigars.
All who appreciate a good cigar, and who indulge in this luxury, should
try the brand manufactured by our friend Hoyt.

L. P. KENNEDY, Merchant, enlisted June 9th 1863. We envy no man his task
were he compelled to find, in this lower sphere, a more consistent,
upright and generous man, or a more devoted, faithful and exemplary
soldier, than Corporal L. P. Kennedy; always at the drills, invariably
present at all parades, and never absent at the meetings of the Company.
He was represented in the United States army by a good and faithful
substitute.

He is engaged in a general dry-good and fancy trade, and is receiving a
liberal share of the public patronage.

E. M. LATTA, Turner, enlisted September 2d, 1863. Corporal Latta is one
of the members that the Company, and all who feel an interest in its
welfare, are greatly indebted to. One of the most punctual and regular
attendants at all the meetings, drills and parades; so much so, that it
is the remark of those present, when the Corporal is absent, that
something serious is the matter. A finer soldier never shouldered a gun,
a perfect gentleman, a splendid mechanic, and a citizen respected by
all who know him. One of the best shots in the Company, invariably
taking a prize at the target shoots. He volunteered and was mustered in
the United States service with the Company in 1864. No more faithful or
better soldier ever swore in the service, always ready to do any thing
he was called upon, and many times did double duty to relieve others
whom he thought not as well able to perform the labor as himself. The
attachments formed by members of the Company while at Elmira, will long
be remembered, and the name of Corporal Latta will stand high upon the
list of those who rendered many kindnesses, and was always so willing to
do any thing for his comrades that would tend in any way to meliorate
their condition. He was detailed several times and sent with detachments
of troops to the front, and in all his trips never lost a man. Served
the full term of his enlistment and was honorably discharged.

JOHN SHAW, Student, (date of enlistment not recorded). A very active
member; joined the Company when a mere boy and filled the position of
marker. As soon as he was of suitable age and size, he shouldered his
gun and became a regular member; he served well and faithfully until he
left his home to attend college.

We believe it is his intention to devote himself to the ministry.

M. G. PHILLIPS, Blacksmith, enlisted September 2d, 1863. Mr. Phillips
was an honored and respected member, a good soldier, and a conscientious
man. He died December 26th, 1864.

FRED. GREENLY, Student, enlisted September 2d, 1863. A young man of fine
attainments, and a splendid soldier. He served with the Company as long
as he was a resident of the place.

Is now a Professor in the Military Academy at Eaglewood, New Jersey.
Received his first military education in this Company, and was under the
instruction of Colonel K. S. Van Voorhees.

WILLIAM K. STANSBURY, Book-Keeper, enlisted September 2d, 1863. Served
as marker in the Company until September, 1864, when he resigned.

FRANK PERRY, Confectioner, enlisted September 3d, 1863. Was a good
member, and served faithfully until he removed from the district. Is now
a resident of the city of Syracuse.

C. R. BALDWIN, Furniture Dealer, enlisted October 8th, 1863. Furnished a
substitute who represented him with the Company in the United States
service, for which he paid one hundred dollars. Is engaged in the most
extensive Furniture trade of any establishment in the county.

JAMES PATTERSON, Cigar-Maker, enlisted October 8th, 1863. Served with
the Company until he volunteered in the United States army. He was a
good soldier, and received a number of promotions in the army. Was
engaged in many battles, an account of which we are unable to give.

EUGENE E. BARNARD, Clerk, enlisted October 8th, 1863. Son of Professor
M. R. Barnard, and nephew of John Barnard, the hero of Lookout Mountain.
By reason of his superior qualifications as a soldier, was honored by
being elected Corporal, which office he now holds, and fulfills the
duties required of him as such with perfect satisfaction. He volunteered
with the Company in the U. S. service, and served his full time with
honor. Was most a capital fellow in camp; always performed his duty
well, and was honorably discharged with the Company on the expiration
of their term of service. The Company can ill afford to lose Corporal
Barnard.

JOHN C. CLEVELAND, Furniture Dealer, enlisted October 8th, 1863. Served
but a short time.

LINUS S. MACKEY, Painter, enlisted March 5th, 1864. Mr. Mackey was a
good soldier, as may be inferred from the fact of his promotion from the
ranks of this Company to Sergeant of the Engineer Corps of the 50th
Regiment.

He enlisted in the United States army August 6th, 1862, at Ithaca, and
attached himself to Company D, 143d, New York Volunteers; was soon
promoted to Sergeant. He served in the army until September 16th, 1863,
at which time he was honorably discharged, by reason of disability from
disease of the lungs contracted while in the army.

M. M. BROWN, Physician and Surgeon, enlisted March 7th, 1864. Doctor
Brown joined this Company out of pure patriotic and christian motives,
supposing that the government would accept the services of the Company
when offered, which offer was twice tendered the government during the
short time he was connected with the Company. Believing that they were
not to be called upon to defend the honor and integrity of the country,
the Doctor furnished an acceptable substitute, and was, by reason of his
profession, relieved from further membership. The Doctor is engaged in a
very successful practice in our village and is one of the Coroners of
the county.

STEPHEN F. LEWIS, Artist, enlisted June 7th, 1864. Mr. Lewis is most an
acceptable member. Is temporarily absent in the city of New York
perfecting himself in his favorite art. He served with the Company
through the Elmira campaign, and was a true soldier.

We hope our comrade will soon be again with us.

THEODORE DESCHNER, Gun-Smith, enlisted June 22d, 1864. Mr. Deschner was
originally from Danzig, Prussia Proper; was engaged five years in the
Prussian service; was promoted from the ranks to a non-commissioned line
office, and again to Captain, and served as such from 1848 to 1850. He
received a severe wound while bravely charging with his men in a sharply
contested fight in the Province of Posen in 1849. From the effects of
this wound Mr. Deschner has never recovered, and will, in all
probability, be a sufferer during life. In 1850 he was engaged against
the Austrians. In 1854 he was again called into the service of his
country, but suffering so acutely from his wound he resigned his office
and came to this country and located in the city of Rochester, where he
resided seven years; here he organized a Rifle Company. Finally upon the
urgent solicitation of a number of citizens of this place, he removed
here in 1861, and has been engaged in the manufactory of Guns and
Pistols. He has the reputation of doing the finest work of any mechanic
engaged in his branch of trade in the State; constantly receiving orders
from the Eastern States, and his Western customers have not forgotten
him. Has constantly on hand an extensive assortment of Guns, Pistols and
Fishing Tackle.

Very soon after joining the DeWitt Guard, he was chosen Company Standard
Bearer; later was appointed by Colonel Barto Regimental Gunner. Has been
for the last three years Company Armorer, and all who have visited the
Armory, and at all examined the guns and accoutrements, can testify to
his qualifications for this office. He is probably one of the best, if
not the best, marksmen in Tompkins County, always taking a prize at the
target shoots of the Company.

Mr. Deschner is a very worthy, upright and honest citizen, and is well
entitled to all the honors that have been bestowed upon him.

WALTER C. STEEL, Student, enlisted June 22d, 1864. Mr. Steel is a young
man that commands the respect and esteem of all his acquaintances. He
enlisted in this Company as musician, but he is at all times ready to
perform any duty in a military way that he may be called upon to do. He
is not only an expert with the drum, but few can excel him in the
tactics, is perfectly familiar not only with all the calls with the
drum, but can go through the drill equally well. He volunteered in the
United States service with the Company, and well did he serve out the
whole of his time; of all the musicians at Elmira none could compete
with Mr. Steel. He is a young man of much promise, and the whole Company
wish him great success in whatever profession he may adopt.

GEORGE R. WILLIAMS, Vice-President Merchants' & Farmers' National Bank,
of Ithaca, enlisted July 13th, 1864. For a perfect sample of an honest,
upright, conscientious, as well as active, energetic and successful
young man, we produce Mr. Williams. Notwithstanding his official duties,
he endeavors to be present at the drills and meetings, and is an
invaluable member. He volunteered in the service of the General
Government with the Company in 1864. They were soon deprived of his
services, by reason of his being detailed as chief Clerk at
Head-Quarters. He however remained with them in camp, frequently
volunteering to appear with them on dress-parade and during inspections.
No man stood higher, or commanded more respect in Elmira, than Mr.
Williams.

H. E. SMITH, Clerk, enlisted August 29th, 1864. Discharged July 7th,
1865; served with the Company at Elmira.

T. H. GRIFFITH, Miller, enlisted September 1st, 1864. A particular
favorite with all the members at Elmira. Was Company cook, and no man
could make army rations taste better than our friend Griffith. He served
as a member until some time after the Company returned from Elmira,
when, on account of his residence being in another district, he was
honorably discharged.

H. L. MILLER, Farmer, enlisted September 1st, 1864. Harley was well
liked by all the men at Elmira--and withal he was a first rate soldier.
Although a resident of another district, is still connected with the
Company.

J. W. BROWN, Clerk, enlisted September 1st, 1864. Brother of M. M.
Brown, M. D., whose substitute he was. Served faithfully with the
Company through the Elmira campaign; was a good soldier, and a young man
of much promise.

CHARLES R. SHERWOOD, Clerk, enlisted September ----, 1864. Charley was a
good young man, and was just as good a soldier. Served the full term of
his enlistment with the Company at Elmira. Upon his return, removed to
the city of Buffalo.

MARTIN BESIMER, Student, enlisted December 26th, 1864. A good soldier
and a very fine young man. Served with the Company until very recently,
when he removed from the district.

AARON OSBORN, Clerk, enlisted February 27th, 1865. Mr. Osborn is one of
the very best members at the present day; always present and always
prompt to meet his dues and other obligations, and as a soldier is
excelled by very few; as a citizen he is respected by all. He is
connected with the large Boot and Shoe manufactory of C. Christiance &
Son, of this village.

W. V. WOOD, Farmer, enlisted February 27th, 1865. Discharged June, 1866.

W. H. HALL, Clerk, enlisted February 27th, 1865. Volunteered from the
Company in the United States Navy.

CHARLES A. PHILLIPS, Clothing Merchant, enlisted February 10th, 1865.
Mr. Phillips is one of the most active members; is its present
Secretary; every body likes Charley. Is one of the firm of A. Phillips &
Sons, extensive Clothing manufactures. The large and increasing business
of their House is their best recommendation.

D. N. JOHNSON, Book-Keeper, enlisted February 27th, 1865. Son of Captain
Johnson and brother of E. K., whose history has already been noticed.
One of the most respected and esteemed young men of the village. A good
soldier and a good member of the Company. Is confidential clerk and
book-keeper with Messrs. Seymour & Johnson, merchants and general
dealers.

C. L. TABER, Clerk, enlisted April 5th, 1865. Charley is a first rate
boy; just as good a soldier, and equally as good a member of the
Company.

WILLIAM HATCH, Steam-Boat Steward, enlisted February 10th, 1865. Any
person who has traveled the waters of Cayuga Lake, and not heard of
Billy Hatch, and not regaled themselves with the luxuries provided by
him, is probably the very one who would deny the existence of any such
sheet of water, or would astonish us no more were they to deny their own
existence. To confine ourselves to Mr. Hatch's qualifications as a
soldier, however, would be more proper in this connection; but where a
man is as good in one position as in another, we are frequently apt to
digress from our subject.

The time he is obliged to be away from the drills and meetings, he makes
up by doing for the Company very much in other directions. One of the
most prompt, as well as one of the most generous members, has frequently
paid fines and dues or other obligations of other members, who he
thought could not afford to pay for themselves. Although at many of our
drills we miss Mr. Hatch, still he is a member we should be as unwilling
to have leave us, as would Captain Wilcox, Captain Goodrich or the
traveling community at large, to have him resign his position on the
Kate Morgan.

M. J. BARKER, Express Clerk, enlisted May 4th, 1865. A very stirring and
energetic young man, and a soldier of ability. Is properly appreciated
by the Company he represents.

CHARLES F. CLARK, Clerk, enlisted May 4th, 1865. Is a young man of
promise, a good soldier and first class salesman. Is employed in the
large dry-goods house of J. S. Granger & Company.

GEORGE POLLAY, Carpenter, enlisted February 1st, 1865. Served with the
Company through the term of their enlistment in the United States army.
Was there a good soldier; was discharged from the general service with
the Company, and discharged from the Company soon after.

FRANK LUCAS, enlisted February 1st, 1865. A short time thereafter was
discharged. Has served in the United States army.

GEORGE M. KING, Student, enlisted May 31st, 1865. A perfect gentleman,
and as good a member as ever enrolled himself with the DeWitt Guard. He
joined with a full determination to become as good a soldier as there
was in the Company. He has applied himself most thoroughly, and we leave
for those who see the Company on parade to judge how near he has
reached the goal of a soldier's ambition. Is a very fine shot, and has
taken prizes at the various target practices.

WARREN H. LEWIS, enlisted June 7th, 1865. Soon after left to seek his
fortune in the oil regions of Pennsylvania.

CHARLES W. CONOVER, Farmer, enlisted June 7th, 1865. Although Mr.
Conover has belonged to the Company but little over a year, still by
strict attention, and a determination to learn, he has become a soldier
of merit. No member is more regular, or manifests a livelier interest in
the Company than he. A stranger to many of the members when he enlisted,
but soon he gained their well wishes, and to-day no one stands higher in
the estimation of the Company than Mr. Conover.

FRANK BAKER, Farmer, enlisted June 7th, 1865. All that was said in
relation to the last named soldier, is perfectly in place in this
instance. Mr. Baker is a very attentive and active member; very few
drills or meetings that he is not present, although he has further to
come than any other person connected with the Company. Such members as
these will in due time receive the promotion they have earned and are
entitled to.

THEODORE J. SMITH, Cigar-Maker, enlisted June 17th, 1865. Mr. Smith is a
good soldier, having served a long time in the United States service, a
history of which we have been unable to obtain.

S. W. PURDY, Barber, enlisted June 20th, 1865. Was a much better barber
than soldier; and although a sufficiently good marksman to take the
first prize, still not generous enough to pay his Company obligations
before leaving the place.

GEORGE L. CLAPP, enlisted June 20th, 1865. A fine young man and a good
soldier, served his country during the late war. An account of his war
history we have been unable to obtain.

FITCH R. CURRAN, Book-Keeper, enlisted June 20th, 1865. After a very
short membership, our friend discovered that he had not yet reached the
age of eighteen. Taking advantage of his age he withdrew.

JOHN F. YOUNG, Jeweler, enlisted June 20th, 1865. Mr. Young is a
gentleman of much promise and an excellent soldier. Is one of the most
active members of the Company. Is employed in the large establishment
of Burritt, Brooks & Co., the oldest House of the kind in Western New
York.

CHARLES E. FISK, Book-Binder, enlisted June 28th, 1865. Is one of the
most respectable members at the present time, and is in all respects a
fine young man. Is an employee in the establishment of Andrus, McChain &
Co.

FRANK B. WYCKOFF, Clerk, enlisted September 6th, 1865. Mr. Wyckoff has
been, and we hope will continue to remain, a good member of this
Company, notwithstanding a little informality in his muster. Is employed
in the Dry-Goods House of Morrison, Hawkins & Co.

M. B. APGAR, Turner, enlisted September 6th, 1865. Mr. Apgar was a fine
soldier, and it was one of the misfortunes that the Company are
constantly liable to, that he retired therefrom by reason of changing
his residence to the city of New York. He was a United States soldier
and was connected with Company G, 15th New York Cavalry. Was engaged in
all the battles that the Regiment participated in. Enlisted at Ithaca,
July 30th, 1863, and was mustered in at Syracuse, August 26th. He alone
captured a number of prisoners at the charge on Martinsburg, August
21st, for which he was promoted to Corporal, and November 9th was again
promoted to Sergeant. Was taken prisoner December 21st, 1864, but was
soon exchanged. Received the farewell address of General Custer, May
23d, 1865, and was mustered out soon after. We are sure Sergeant Apgar
was engaged in over fourteen battles. He is remembered as one of the
defenders of the country.

NORMAN JOHNSON, Jr., Carpenter, enlisted September 6th, 1865. Mr.
Johnson served in the United States army, but we have been unable to
procure his history for publication.

JOHN S. HULBERT, Painter, enlisted August 24th, 1865. Mr. Hulbert
withdrew from the Company and was discharged soon after his enlistment.

He enlisted in Company D, 137th Regiment New York Volunteers, August
16th, 1862, and was with the Regiment until the capture of Atlanta, at
which time he was detailed as wagon guard at Head-Quarters. Was mustered
out of the service June 9th, 1865. Was engaged in the following battles:
Chancellorsville, Gettysburg, Wauhatchie Valley, Lookout Mountain,
Missionary Ridge, Ringold, Resacca, Dallas Woods, Pine Knob, Kenesaw
Mountain, South Mountain, Peach Tree Creek and Atlanta. Another of the
brave soldiers who served our Union in the recent civil war.

S. L. BAKER, Tin-Smith, enlisted September 6th, 1865. Mr. Baker is
respected by all the members of the Company; is always punctual at the
parades, drills and meetings, and is an industrious and worthy young
man. Is employed in the extensive works of Messrs. Treman, King & Co.
Took the first prize at the July target shoot.

HARLAN HILL, Rail Road Agent, enlisted September 8th, 1865. Mr. Hill is
the gentlemanly Ticket Agent at the Delaware, Lackawanna & Western Rail
Road Depot in this village, a position which he fills with ability.
Although not long connected with the Company, still he has well
perfected himself in the tactics, and is a prompt and active member.

R. W. DODD, Cigar-Maker, enlisted October 4th, 1865. Mr. Dodd was one of
the first soldiers that enlisted from this village. Joining Company A,
(Captain Jerome Rowe) 32d New York Volunteers. He well and faithfully
served the full term of his enrollment, and again re-enlisted. We
regret being unable to give a full history of Mr. Dodd's military life.

THEODORE QUICK, Cigar-Maker, enlisted October 12th, 1865. Mr. Quick has
succeeded in perfecting himself as a soldier to a degree that but few
attain. Few men can excell him in the tactics. Is an invaluable member
of the Company. He enlisted in the United States army August 11th, 1862,
in Company I, 109th Regiment, and served with the Company and Regiment
until they were mustered out. Was engaged in the battles of the
Wilderness, Spotsylvania, Petersburg, Welden Railroad and a number of
lesser engagements.

On account of illness contracted in the army, was three months in the
hospital.

W. S. MANDEVILLE, Clerk, enlisted October 12th, 1865. Considering the
time he has served Mr. Mandeville is one of the best soldiers we know
of, prompt, energetic and capable, we think, of commanding a Company or
a Regiment. Immediately upon joining the Company, he manifested an
interest, and with a determination to learn he attended every drill, and
aside from this would by himself study the tactics, until he became
perfectly posted in the science of military. He is a young man of much
promise, and is the exemplification of a perfect gentleman. Is employed
in the large Drug Store of Messrs. Schuyler & Curtis, and enjoys the
confidence and respect, not only of his employers, but of the whole
circle of his acquaintances, and the very many patrons of the House with
which he is engaged.

J. J. MITCHELL, Merchant, enlisted October 12th, 1865. Mr. Mitchell
beareth the same similarity to the last named member, that one pea
beareth to another. As long as he was a resident of the village he was
invariably present at the parades, drills and meetings of the Company.
He is now a citizen of Lansing, but retains his membership in this
Company, and meets with them on all parades. He is engaged in the
Dry-Goods trade at Ludlowville, and is probably doing the greatest
amount of business of any house of the kind--outside of the village of
Ithaca--in Tompkins County.

CLARK FRALICK, enlisted October 5th, 1865. He enlisted July 20th, 1862,
in the United States army, in which he served three years in Company D,
143d New York Volunteers; was engaged in six battles; was not sick a day
while in the service, nor ever lost an hour from his Regiment.

E. M. THOMPSON, enlisted October 10th, 1865. Mr. Thompson removed from
the place soon after his enlistment.

W. H. BROWER, enlisted October 31st, 1865. Signed the Roll, but never
appeared at a meeting or drill.

E. G. FOSTER, Boat-Builder, enlisted November 6th, 1865. Soon removed to
Minnesota.

LUKE BERGIN, Tailor, enlisted November 10th, 1865. Manifests but a
slight degree of interest in the Company.

ARCHE DRESSER, Harness-Maker, enlisted November 10th, 1865. Soon removed
from the district. Was a soldier, and a good one, in the United States
army.

B. ALMY, JR., Teacher, enlisted January 17th, 1866. Mr. Almy joined upon
transfer from the Enfield Company, of which he was Orderly Sergeant. Is
a teacher of ability; his present engagement is with the Public School
in this village.

JOHN E. CLAPP, Clerk, enlisted March 15th, 1866. Is one of the most
attentive members at the present time.

H. G. STODDARD, Clerk, enlisted March 29th, 1866. Mr. Stoddard, as will
be observed, has very recently joined, but promises to become one of the
best members of the Company.

J. H. WILLETTS, Student, enlisted May 7th, 1866. Mr. Willetts joined the
Company almost a perfect stranger to all the members, but by his
gentlemanly deportment and perfect willingness to learn, has gained the
respect of both officers and men.

M. MCCALLESTER, Farmer, enlisted May 7th, 1866. His residence is so far
from the village that he is only occasionally present at the drills and
meetings, but from the eagerness he displayed to learn when he first
became a member, we are led to believe he will make a good soldier.

C. N. TABER, enlisted May 31st, 1866. Mr. Taber promises to become a
soldier of extraordinary merit.

LEWIS S. NEIL, Painter, enlisted May 31st, 1866. Although next to the
last soldier enlisted in the DeWitt Guard, we are led to believe will
soon become next to the best in his knowledge of military; and perhaps
in this instance as in others, the last shall be first.

JOHN BARNARD, "The Hero of Lookout Mountain," seized with a patriotic
ardour to serve his country in its trying period for National
existence, on the 20th day of August, 1862, he volunteered and joined
Capt. J. H. Terry's Company, then being formed in this village. Was duly
examined and mustered into the United States service at Binghamton, N.
Y., on the 25th of September, 1862. Was unanimously elected 8th Corporal
of Company D. He left Binghamton with the Regiment for the seat of war,
September 27th.

He accompanied General Geary on a reconnoissance to Manchester, which
occupied five days. December 10th ordered to reinforce General Burnside
at Fredericksburg. This was the first time our hero came within hearing
of the enemy's guns, but his courage was equal to any emergency, and
never, through the whole course of his military life, did he turn his
back to the enemy, but always stood up and boldly battled for the right.
Sunday, December 28th, had the first skirmish. On the 18th of January,
1863, was detailed by Colonel Ireland as one of the color guard of the
Regiment. On the 27th day of April, was ordered on a march, and with
eight days' rations and ninety rounds of ammunition, started for the
Chancellorsville battle ground, where he arrived and participated in
the battles of May 1st, 2d and 3d. July 2d and 3d were engaged with the
enemy upon the bloody fields of Gettysburg. September 24th, was ordered
to reinforce General Rosecrans at Chattanooga, Tennessee. October 29th,
participated in the midnight battle of Wauhatchie. In this engagement
one out of every three of the whole number were either killed or
wounded. Color-bearer Baker was seriously wounded, and the colors of the
Regiment fell into the hands of our gallant Barnard, he having escaped
unharmed, although his overcoat, which was strapped upon his back, was
shot through by one of the enemy's bullets. After this engagement he was
detailed as color-bearer of the Regiment, vice Baker wounded.

On the 24th of November was ordered to march flying light, with only one
day's rations; participated in the famous "Battle above the Clouds;"
climbing over rocks and fallen trees, our bold and daring Sergeant
succeeded in planting the colors of his Regiment on the rebel works,
amid a terrific fire from the enemy. Sergeant Brink, with the State
colors, was shot down upon his right, and Corporal Foot, of the color
guard, upon his left. For this brave and heroic deed, Sergeant Barnard
received the thanks of Colonel Ireland, as well as of all the general
officers. November 25th, was engaged in the battle of Missionary Ridge,
and November 27th in the battle of Ringold, Georgia. January 4th, 1864,
was ordered to Stevenson, Alabama. While here Sergeant Barnard was
detailed by the Commandant of the Post and appointed Post-Master, a very
responsible position, having the entire charge of the mail for over five
thousand troops. This office he held until Sherman's campaign against
Atlanta commenced, and in May he again resumed his office in the
Regiment. Was engaged in the action at Resacca, May 15th, battle of New
Hope Church, May 25th, battle of Pine Hill, June 15th, and continued
skirmishing until June 21st, when he participated in the battle of
Kolb's Farm. June 24th battle of Kenesaw Mountain; still continued
skirmishing with the enemy, and drove them across the Chattahoochie
River. July 20th was in the battle of Peach Tree Creek; also in the
siege of Atlanta, and was among the first troops that entered the city,
September 2d.

November 15th he started on the Georgia campaign, and participated in
the siege of Savannah from December 11th until December 21st, when
together with the color-bearer of the 102d New York, he hoisted the old
flag upon the City Hall in Savannah. January 27th, 1865, started on the
Carolina campaign. Was engaged in the skirmishes at Edisto River,
Lexington Court House, S. C, and Averysboro, N. C. Arrived at Goldsboro,
N. C, April 1st, 1865. Was present at the capture of Raleigh on the 14th
of April.

On the 30th of April, the war having virtually closed by the surrender
of Generals Lee and Johnson, Sergeant Barnard, with his Regiment,
started homeward, arriving in Alexandria, Virginia, May 19th. Took part
in the Grand Review at Washington, May 24th, and on June 9th was
mustered out of the United States service.

Sergeant Barnard was engaged in fourteen battles, besides numerous
skirmishes, which, in times previous to the late war, would have been
considered battles of much account.

Suffering all the dangers, exposures and deprivations of the Georgia and
Carolina campaigns, our Sergeant was never a day from his Regiment,
unless detailed for special duty. He made every mile of the whole march
on foot, carrying a burden that every American soldier knows is enough
to break down the constitution of almost any ordinary man.

No soldier ever enlisted in the service of his country, who is deserving
of more honor than Sergeant John Barnard.

Remember, you that staid at home and experienced none of the trials and
deprivations of war, those who sacrificed their health, their lives and
their all for you, as well as every other citizen of this great
Republic.




HISTORY OF THE COMPANY.


The DeWitt Guard was organized in 1851, and the first regular meeting
was held December 31st. At this meeting a series of By-Laws were
adopted, very many of which are in operation at the present time,
although there is not at the present time a single person connected with
the organization who at that time was a member.

J. B. Terry was elected the first Secretary, and George H. Collins
Treasurer, with Stephen Brewer and Loren Day as Directors.

At that time the law permitted the Companies to have a certain number of
supernumeraries, and at the second regular meeting, F. Reed Dana, W. G.
Maurice, Isaac Tichenor, Julius M. Adsley, Dana Fox, E. M. Marshall,
John Rumsey, George McChain and S. B. Covert, were duly elected
supernumeraries. The first out of doors drill took place in the Park,
June 23d, and lasted two hours. The 4th day of July was duly observed
by the Company: a parade, at which the Company did their first street
firing, and a dinner at Colonel Seymour's Ithaca Hotel, constituted the
festivities of the day. At the regular meeting, September 2d, 1852, a
note was given to Colonel Millspaugh for fifty dollars, this being the
amount he advanced to pay the Armorer's bill. On Thursday morning,
September 23d, the drum beat at five o'clock, which warned the citizens
of the near approach of the departure of Captain Partenheimer's Company,
not for the seat of war, but for their first encampment at Goodwin's
Falls. At 9 o'clock the life-like engine "Lackawanna," with a modesty
becoming the Company to whom she belonged, introduced the Company to his
honor "William E. Dodge," who safely landed his "precious load of
freight" soon after at Goodwin's Landing. After a march of about three
miles, to the music of Canham's Brass Band, the camp-ground was reached;
tents were soon pitched, colors were hoisted, and at one P. M. were
ready for our first rations; at two P. M. of the same day the Company
paraded for the first time upon a camp-ground. The Company remained in
camp one week.

Thursday November 25th, 1852, by proclamation of the Governor, was
observed as a day of Thanksgiving. This being the day designated by the
fair ones of our village for the presentation of the Banner to our
Company, Captain Partenheimer's orders were responded to by a prompt and
full corps. Upon being drawn up in line in front of the Clinton House,
Hon. S. B. Cushing, on behalf of the Ladies, in a few appropriate
remarks, presented the Banner. Our worthy Lieutenant Bruyn, on behalf of
the Captain and his Company, returned his most sincere and heartfelt
thanks, with a few remarks highly complimentary to him from whose hand
he received the Banner, and to those Ladies instrumental in making the
donation. Alter a parade through the principal streets, and giving each
Public House a round of blank cartridges, with that good feeling ever
manifested by the Company, they were dismissed by our commanding
officer. March 3d William Glenny was elected Secretary in place of J. B.
Terry, resigned.

July 4th, 1853, was duly celebrated by the Company by an encampment
through the day in the Park. August 9th the Company were inspected by
Brigadier General Segoine, of Auburn. September 8th, 1853, the second
encampment of the Company took place at Goodwin's Falls; were here again
reviewed by General Segoine and Colonel D. E. Avery. On Sunday the
Company in a body attended church at Trumansburg. Washington's
birth-day, February 22d, 1854, was observed by the Company; a national
salute was fired by Sergeant McDonald, loading and firing five times a
minute. June 27th the committee of arrangements for the celebration of
the coming Fourth of July, offered the Company thirty dollars if they
would participate in the celebration, which was promptly refused, and
the Company voted unanimously to join in the celebration without money
and without price. Accordingly the Fourth day of July, 1854, was duly
celebrated in the true spirit of '76. The first target shoot of the
Company was held July 11th, 1854, and resulted in Sergeant McDonald
taking the first prize, L. Millspaugh the second and S. Stoddard the
third. Saturday August 26th, 1854, the Company appeared in full uniform
at 51/2 o'clock, A. M., to escort the remains of their late comrade, D.
Lewis Avery, to their last resting place. His remains were taken to
Aurora for interment.

Monday August 28th, the Company started for Camp Seneca, at Seneca
Falls, where a week was spent by them very profitably. The second target
practice was September 22d, 1854, and Sergeant L. R. King, E. C. Fuller,
M. E. Elmendorf, Lot S. Hinds and Sergeant McDonald, were declared the
best shots, and received the prizes accordingly. January 8th, 1855, was
duly observed by the Company; in the evening had supper at the Clinton
House. September 6th the Company unanimously voted to furnish uniforms
free of expense to all new members who would join. September 14th, 1855,
K. S. Van Voorhees was elected first Sergeant, L. R. King, second
Sergeant, F. K. Andrus, third Sergeant, and James McClune, fourth
Sergeant. September 19th, third target shoot, the lucky ones not
recorded. October 31st, 1855, the Company were inspected and reviewed by
General Segoine and staff, and Colonel D. E. Avery and staff; in the
afternoon of the same day was another target shoot. November 29th the
Company escorted the remains of their late Lieutenant, A. H. McNeil, to
the Depot, being en route for the city of Auburn. The Company held their
annual meeting and took supper at the Clinton House, January 8th, 1856.
May 28th L. R. King was elected first Lieutenant, in place of W. V.
Bruyn, resigned, and Charles F. Blood second Lieutenant, in place of A.
H. McNeil, deceased.

Wednesday June 11th, 1856. The Willard Guard of Auburn, accompanied by
Scott's Cornet Band of Rochester, arrived on an excursion to Ithaca.
When nearing the dock they were saluted with twenty-one guns from the
DeWitt Guard, and received by them accompanied by the entire Fire
Department of the village, and were escorted through the principal
streets to their quarters at the Clinton House. They were there welcomed
by an appropriate speech from J. H. Selkreg, Esq. William Shapcott, of
the Willard Guard, returning thanks on behalf of their Company to the
soldiers, Fire Department and citizens, for the cordial manner in which
they had been received. The Willard Guard paraded during the forenoon of
the following day, and at five o'clock P. M. were escorted to the Park
by the DeWitt Guard, where they were drilled in the different evolutions
of military tactics with great credit to themselves. On Friday morning
the DeWitt Guard again paraded and escorted their visitors to the
Steamboat Landing. After a few speeches, a great rivalry was kept up
between the two Companies for the last cheer, but amid the clattering of
drums it was impossible to tell which succeeded.

September 2d, 3d, 4th, 5th and 6th, the Company were encamped at Dryden;
on Friday they were reviewed by General Segoine and staff of Auburn. The
encampment passed off with perfect harmony, and without any thing to mar
the good feeling which prevailed throughout. Tuesday, December 10th, the
Company escorted the remains of their late member, Sergeant James C.
McClune, to their last resting place. February 24th, upon invitation of
the Pioneers of Tompkins County, the Company paraded and escorted that
body through the principal streets of the village. September 15th target
shoot. October 13th the Company were inspected at Goodwin's Falls by
Adjutant George H. Collins. Upon invitation of the President of the
Tompkins County Horticultural Society, the Company paraded and attended
their Fair, June 3d, 1858. Upon invitation of the Tompkins Blues, the
Company visited Trumansburg and joined in celebrating the Fourth day of
July. A very pleasant entertainment was provided by the citizens of
that place. July 21st the Company visited Owego, and were agreeably
entertained by the citizens; returned the same evening.

August 17th, 1858, the Company paraded in honor of the _successful
laying_ of the Atlantic Cable. August 31st, upon invitation of the
Ithaca Fire Department, joined with them in procession, and escorted
Cayuga Hose Company No. 4, of Auburn, to the Clinton House.

"The DeWitt Guard, accompanied by Whitlock's celebrated Cornet Band and
several invited guests, left Ithaca at 7 o'clock A. M., July 12th, 1859,
on an excursion to our neighboring city of Auburn, and to enjoy one of
the _pleasantest trips ever experienced_ by any Company of soldiers. The
Company mustered two Lieutenants, three color-bearers and twenty-five
men. The smiles of Heaven seemed to be upon us, and every thing seemed
given to _conduce to our happiness_. It was indeed a lovely sight as we
floated down the beautiful Cayuga, which lay sleeping between the banks
of those noble hills, decked in nature's verdant garb. It would have
been a lovely scene for some artist to sketch in glowing colors; but no
artist could touch so tenderly the points with which nature has adorned
them.

We arrived in the beautiful city at half-past twelve, amid the
thundering voice of artillery. Were received by the three military
Companies of the city, and were escorted by them through the principal
streets to our Head-Quarters White's Exchange. After a capital dinner,
we were marched to Fort Hill Cemetery to visit the grave of our lamented
Lieutenant, A. H. McNeil; an hour was spent in that beautiful cemetery.
In the evening we _were entertained_ at the residence of Mayor B. F.
Hall, which entertainment passed off to the perfect _satisfaction of all
present_. Wednesday morning were called together at ten o'clock, and
accepted an invitation of the Military Committee to visit the Prison and
Insane Asylum.

In the afternoon the Auburn Companies, together with the DeWitt Guard,
paraded for nearly two hours, after which each Company was practiced in
the Battalion movements; the DeWitt Guard taking the lead. Each Company
displayed a thorough discipline in military tactics, the movements being
of almost mathematical precision. In the evening the Company were the
guests of Doctor Willard, and was splendidly entertained at his
beautiful residence on Genesee street. The Doctor is a model gentleman;
truly did we enjoy his hospitality. From his residence we were marched
to that of Captain Dodge of the Willard Guard, where a splendid
reception was given in honor of the DeWitt Guard. Here we were honored
with the society of some of Auburn's fairest daughters, their influence
on us being such as (in the language of our worthy Chaplain, Rev. W. C.
Steel) to make some _willing captives_. The Company returned late in the
evening to their Head-Quarters, highly pleased with their evening's
entertainments. Thursday morning the Company was marched to some of the
principal residences, paying our compliments to those of whom we had
been the honored guests the evening previous. The hour of two P. M.
having arrived, the time for our departure, we were escorted to the
Depot by the military Companies together with many citizens. Hon. A.
Wells extending our thanks to the soldiers and citizens of Auburn, for
the kindness shown us during our visit with them. Rev. Mr. Steel
following in a few beautiful and appropriate remarks, during which tears
were seen to fall from the eyes of some of the soldiery. We had won many
friends; the hour of separation had arrived; nothing could be more
expressive than the falling of a tear, the utterance of the soul, simple
yet unexpressed; no language could be more eloquent. We entered the cars
amid many cheers, having had proof that pleasures enjoyed excel
pleasures anticipated.

After a pleasant return trip on the lake, we were much surprised to find
our own good citizens in large numbers, together with a Company of
Cavalry and the entire Fire Department, at the landing ready to receive
us, and escort us to our homes. We were received with a beautiful and
eloquent speech by Marcus Lyon, Esq., which was responded to by our
Chaplain, Rev. W. C. Steel. Were marched through the principal streets
to our Armory, highly pleased with our trip. Long will this excursion be
remembered by the DeWitt Guard; our _hearts_ having been united to the
soldiers and _people_ of Auburn by those bonds of friendship which time
shall never efface."

    JOHN C. HAZEN, Secretary.

The 50th Regiment National Guard, consisting of Company A, Captain P. J.
Partenheimer, Company D, of Trumansburgh, Captain Belnap, and Company I,
of Havanna, Captain Mulford, the Regiment commanded by Colonel H. A.
Dowe, encamped at Ithaca, September 5th, 1859. On Friday were inspected
by General Segoine, of Auburn, and Adjutant Van Voorhees, of Ithaca. The
weather was fine during the encampment, every thing passed off pleasant
and to the satisfaction of all concerned. Long will Camp Burnett be
remembered by the members of the DeWitt Guard. January 4th, 1860,
Colonel A. E. Mather was elected a member of this Company, but was never
mustered in. June 4th, 1861, the Company paraded and escorted the Dryden
Volunteers to the Depot.

July 3d the Company was presented with a handsome stand of colors by
Sergeant John C. Hazen. April 2d, 1861, the Company tendered their
services to the General Government. August 6th, 1862, escorted
volunteers to the Depot; three hearty cheers were given by the members
of the DeWitt Guard, for those of their number who had volunteered in
the service of their country. September 28th attended the funeral of
Lieutenant Marsh, at McLean, who was killed in the army. October 28th,
1862, were inspected at Trumansburg. December 3d Captain Blood
introduced the Bayonet Drill. February 22d, 1863, was celebrated by the
Company by a parade, and a supper in the evening at the Clinton House.
March 19th attended the funeral of Peter J. Hausner, a soldier who died
from disease contracted while in the army. June 17th, 1863, the Company
the second time offered their services to the Government. June 22d the
Company paraded in honor of the returning volunteers, and escorted them
through the streets of our village. July 1st attended the funeral of
Lieutenant Avery, at Farmerville, who was killed in the army. Celebrated
the 4th day of July, 1863, by an excursion to Long Point, at which place
the Company engaged in target practice with both muskets and artillery.
Annual parade, inspection and review at Ithaca, October 21st, 1863. Were
inspected by General William Glenny and Colonel H. A. Dowe, since
promoted to Brigadier General. The Company had another target practice
same day. Washington's Birth-day, February 22d, 1864, was celebrated by
a parade and supper in the evening at Gregory's. April 25th, 1864, the
Company for the third time offered their services to the General
Government. July 4th paraded and had target practice. Aug. 28th, the Co.
was accepted by the Gen'l Gov't for 100 days' service at Elmira.


(_By B. R. W., Secretary._)

SEPT. 2D, 1864.--The Company assembled at the Armory at 6 o'clock, A.
M., with tears in their eyes and carpet-sacks in hand, to march for
Elmira. Headed by their gallant Captain, they proceeded silently to the
Depot, where the parting was truly heart-rending, and the Secretary, in
order to hide his feelings, was forced to take refuge in a freight car,
and solace himself with a fresh chew of _Mike Wick's best_. The voyage
was safely performed, the only cause of complaint being the _rye_
treatment which some of the men received at Willseyville.

The grand entree at Elmira was made at about two o'clock, P. M., where
we were received in behalf of the United States by the brilliant and
dashing Captain Colby, of the 58th, by whom, assisted by Drum-Major
Robinson's justly celebrated martial band, we were escorted to Barracks
No. 1.

On entering the portals of this haven of rest, our ears were saluted
with cries of _Fresh Fish_. Our inexperienced eyes searched eagerly on
every side for this delectable delicacy, but we failed to discover it.
The future movements of the Company at this post are recorded by our
worthy Sergeant, H. S.




ELMIRA CAMPAIGN.

DETAILED ACCOUNT OF THE DOINGS OF COMPANY A, FIFTIETH REGIMENT N. G., S.
N. Y., WHILE PERFORMING ONE HUNDRED DAYS' DUTY AT ELMIRA. NEW YORK.

Taken from the Diary of one of its Members.


In pursuance of Orders as follows:

    GENERAL HEAD-QUARTERS STATE OF NEW YORK, }
    ADJUTANT GENERAL'S OFFICE,               }
    Albany, Aug. 28th, 1864.                 }

    SPECIAL ORDERS, No. 348.

    Captain Charles F. Blood, commanding Company A, of the 50th
    Regiment National Guard of the State of New York, will, by the
    5th of September, proximo, proceed with his command to Elmira,
    N. Y., and report to Major A. S. Diven, acting Assistant Provost
    Marshal General, and Superintendent of the Volunteer Recruiting
    Service, who will muster them into the service of the United
    States for one hundred (100) days, and attach them to the 58th
    Regiment National Guard, of the State of New York.

    Requisition for the necessary clothing and transportation will
    be made upon Brigadier General S. V. Talcott, Quartermaster
    General, No. 51 Walker Street, New York city, and for arms and
    accoutrements upon Brigadier General James A. Farrell,
    Commissary General of Ordinance, State Arsenal, New York city.

    By order of the Commander-in-Chief,
    JOHN T. SPRAGUE,
    Adjutant General.

    HEAD-QUARTERS 50TH REGIMENT N. G., S. N. Y. }
    Trumansburg, N. Y., Aug. 27th, 1864.        }

    SPECIAL ORDERS, No. 3.

    Above Special Order, No. 348, is hereby promulgated.

    Captain Charles F. Blood, commanding Company "A," of this
    Regiment, will immediately promulgate the above Orders to his
    command.

    Said Captain will immediately report to these Head-Quarters, in
    writing, the strength of his command, and the number of men he
    will be able to report for duty at Elmira on the 5th day of
    September, proximo.

    The Captain will see the importance of this Order, when it is
    stated that orders must be made at once for clothing,
    transportation, arms and accoutrements, at New York city for his
    command.

    By order of
    COL. HENRY D. BARTO,
    Commanding 50th Reg't N. G., S. N. Y.

    Lewis Halsey, Adjutant.

Company A, 50th Regiment National Guard, State of New York, started at 9
o'clock on the morning of the second day of September, 1864, in
obedience with the above order, with the following officers and men:

    CHARLES F. BLOOD, _Captain_.
    LEVI KENNEY, _1st Lieutenant_.
    JOSEPH ESTY, JR., _2d Lieutenant_.
    J. C. HAZEN, _Orderly_.
    C. C. GREENLY, _2d Sergeant_.
    E. M. FINCH, _3d Sergeant_.
    H. A. ST. JOHN, _4th Sergeant_.
    B. R. WILLIAMS, _1st Corporal_.
    URI CLARK, _2d Corporal_.
    J. C. GAUNTLETT, _3d Corporal_.
    ALFRED BROOKS, _4th Corporal_.

    Frank Betts,
    E. E. Barnard,
    J. W. Brown,
    F. Cheesbrough,
    Wm. Crittenden,
    A. Dean,
    James Faulkner,
    John Gay,
    M. L. Granger,
    T. H. Griffith,
    George H. Grant,
    S. J. Humm,
    T. Hern,
    E. K. Johnson,
    J. McKinney,
    W. H. Kellogg,
    S. T. Lewis,
    E. M. Latta,
    J. Mandeville,
    E. C. Marsh,
    H. L. Miller,
    J. W. Norton,
    C. L. O'Brien,
    A. Prame,
    O. S. Perry,
    George Pollay,
    W. C. Steele,
    C. R. Sherwood,
    H. E. Smith,
    E. E. Warfield,
    Geo. R. Williams,
    J. V. Wilson.

We reached Elmira at 2 P. M. on the same day, and were immediately
marched to our quarters at Barracks No. 1, afterwards called the
Substitute Camp. At 31/2 P. M. we were mustered into the United States
service as Company L, 58th Regiment N. G., S. N. Y., Col. R. P. Wisner
commanding, and the same evening, on the requisition of our Captain, we
drew the following articles of clothing, arms and equipments, to each
man:

    1 Woolen Blanket,
    1 Rubber Blanket,
    1 Overcoat,
    1 Blouse,
    1 Pair Pants,
    1 Cap,
    2 Pair Drawers,
    2 Pair Socks,
    1 Pair Shirts,
    1 Pair Shoes,
    1 Canteen,
    1 Spoon,
    1 Knife and Fork,
    1 Cup,
    1 Plate,
    1 Knapsack,
    1 Haversack.

The arms served us were of the Enfield pattern, known as rifled muskets,
and were said to have been taken off of a rebel blockade-runner, which,
together with the necessary belts, cap and cartridge boxes, made as
complete an outfit as were given to any of the men serving in our army
for the preservation of the Union.

One can scarcely imagine the ridiculous picture our boys made as they
tried on their new clothes, so generously given them by "Uncle Sam."
Here in one corner you might see a six-footer striving in vain to induce
a pair of pants, by hard pulling and stretching, to reach below his
knees, but finding no virtue in perseverance, he seizes the coat and
finds to his dismay the same difficulty with the sleeves that he found
with the pants--namely, too short. As he sits studying over his
misfortune, he is hailed by another fellow just his counterpart,
hobbling across the floor with a pair of pants so long that they
threaten to trip him at every step.

But, O, dear! Look at that perfect picture of despair; a fellow who at
home wears a number five boot, trying to make a pair of number ten shoes
stay on his feet. Presently, however, a man is found whose fortune has
dealt to him a pair of "gun-boats" a size too small, immediately, with
true yankee spirit, a trade is made, and each is satisfied that he has
made the best of the bargain; so by dint of exchanges, garments are
found to fit, which at first seemed as if they had been distributed by
common consent, the smallest men to receive those intended for the
largest, and vice versa.

But what ails that fellow over yonder? He looks as if he had lost his
last friend, and never expected to have another. We rush up to enquire
the cause of his discomforture, but our anxiety is turned into laughter,
when we behold him who had been congratulating himself on making such a
fine appearance in a suit of blue; brushing off the threads and dust,
and picking up one thread which seemed to be very long, but only
producing the more thread by the greater picking, our fine fellow finds
that he has ventilated the entire side of one of his trowsers legs.
Hark! the Orderly cries "fall in for rations;" although we may not yet
be perfectly acquainted with all orders pertaining particularly to camp
life, yet all seem to understand this one. With a good appetite after
our fun, we start for the mess-house. Some hungry man behind us as we
march along, hopes the beef steak will be tender, and the potatoes well
done, while another hints he does not like eggs too hard boiled, and a
third says he must have his rolls hot, and good butter to eat on them,
or he don't care for any supper; while a fourth never eats pies, and so
of course is anxious to find a good pudding awaiting his ravenous
appetite. But misery me! what a smell! where does it come from? most
certainly from the mess-house, no denying that. As we enter, every man
immediately loses his appetite; but bound to face the music, we all sit
down, place our cups and plates on the table, and await coming events.
Presently there comes a man with a basket of bread, another with a pan
of beef and a third with a pail of coffee. Waiter No. 1 very dexterously
causes a huge chunk of bread to alight on your plate; waiter No. 2 makes
a piece of beef perform the same evolution, and your cup is soon filled.
Here is your meal, now make the attack. Our bread and butter man seems
patiently waiting, although very pale, and is only aroused from his
stupor by a neighbor asking him if he is not going to eat; he meekly
answers, by saying he is waiting for some sugar and milk for his coffee.
But all are soon satisfied, and we go back to our barracks, our poor
beef-steak-and-potato companion feeling very much disappointed.

Our duty at the substitute camp was to perform the guard duty necessary
to keep the men from escaping, and also to act as guard in taking men
from this post to the front. This camp was used as a rendezvous for
substitutes, to equip them preparatory to sending them to the army. The
larger proportion of the men sent to this post seemed to be composed of
the refuse of all society, whose entire aim seemed to have been to
enlist and desert as often as opportunity offered. They were a lawless
set of men, and it was only by enforcing the most rigid discipline, that
they were kept within bounds.

When a squad of substitutes was to be taken to the front, one or two
commissioned officers were usually detached, together with a compliment
of non-commissioned officers and privates, sufficient to carefully guard
against desertions on their way. Ordinary freight cars were used for
transportation, into which were crowded from 35 to 40 men, allowing five
men in each car as a guard. It was a shameful way of treating human
beings, crowded together for two days with barely room to move in, and
being required to assume all manner of positions at night in order to
get a little rest. Although sufficient rations were purported to be
issued for the journey, yet they never sufficed, and the men often
suffered from hunger. Yet in time Baltimore was reached, where all the
men were generally put into comfortable quarters for a day or so, and
then placed on board transports to be taken to different points on the
Potomac or James Rivers.

These transports were often condemned, or at least unsafe vessels in the
employ of the Government, with no conveniences for the accommodation of
the number of men crowded on them. The writer had the misfortune to be
on one of these miserable crafts. On the night of Friday, Sept. 9th, we
left Baltimore with 1100 men, en route for City Point, on an old
condemned English emigrant steamer. We were 55 hours making the trip
(more than twice as long as we should have been), and twice the vessel
was turned to be run ashore, as she leaked so badly, and the pumps
giving out for a time, it was feared by her commander the water might
put out the fires under the boilers, and at no time could the old tub be
kept on an even keel. There were only a few casks of water, and no
provisions of any kind on board. The rations issued to the men on
starting were all gone long before we reached our destination, and not a
little suffering was experienced by the poor fellows for want of
something to eat. This is but one of many instances in which one portion
of the men in the Government employ were made to suffer by the neglect
and ill-treatment of another portion.

But to return to our camp at Elmira. Our duties were about the same
thing every day; doing guard duty when it came our turn for detail, with
the diversion of an occasional squad to the front. This began to be an
old story to us, and we had to use our best endeavors to get up some
little excitement to break the monotony of camp routine.

On the afternoon of Saturday, Sept. 10th, orders were issued to our
Regiment to move to Barracks No. 3, without delay. It was a rainy day,
and all felt more like staying quietly in the barracks than like packing
up and moving; yet go we must, and go we did. The last squad left at 8
o'clock in the evening. Tents, of which each Company had twelve,
including one officer's wall tent, were pitched for the night, and all
made themselves as comfortable as possible. In the morning, although it
had ceased raining, it was very wet, and the nature of the ground made
it very uncomfortable. We arranged our camp with a little more care,
building a stockade of boards two feet high, on which we pitched each
tent, and also making a floor on the bottom. Later in the season we
provided each tent with either a camp-stove or fire-place, which made
our quarters very comfortable, even in the severest weather.

We also built a cook-house capable of seating our entire Company, and
furnished it with a good stove and such other apparatus as was necessary
to carry on our culinary operations. We were indeed the envy of the
entire Brigade, and it is undoubtedly true that by our own exertions we
possessed the best _arrangement_ for promoting our own comfort of any
Company on the ground. We were enabled by our advantages to provide all
the variety possible with the rations served us. There was hardly a day
but we were supplied with some delicacy by the kindness of our officers,
that was not on the regular bill of fare. Indeed, our Table d'Hote
gained such a notoriety, that in less than two weeks we had some of the
staff officers as regular boarders, and our worthy Colonel considered
it quite an honor when we gave him a standing invitation to partake of
any meal with us when he did not see fit to go to his boarding house--an
invitation that he often accepted and seemed quite to enjoy.

Our principal duty at Barracks 3, or the rebel camp, as commonly called,
although the correct name was Camp Chemung, was to guard the rebel
prisoners confined at this post. Almost every day, however, men were
detailed and sent off on extra duty. The prison was formed of a stockade
built of boards 14 feet long, placed perpendicularly on a fence frame,
having the posts on the outside, thereby giving a perfectly smooth
surface on the inside, quite impossible to scale. There were two
entrances to the enclosure, one called the Main Gate, which was placed
on front, and was the principal means of entrance, the other was called
the Rear Gate, and placed at the rear of the prison on the river bank.
All around this stockade, four feet from the top, there was a platform
and railing for the guard to walk on, with sentry boxes about 240 feet
apart. Besides the guard "on the fence," there was a line of sentinels
on the ground outside the stockade. During the day men armed with
revolvers were posted at different points in the enclosure, and at night
were formed into a patrol guard. This patrol walked around the entire
enclosure about 15 feet from the stockade, there being an interval of
three minutes of time between each man. The guard on the fence and those
outside were relieved every two hours; the patrol was relieved every
four hours. It was the duty of the guard to challenge any of the
prisoners who were approaching the stockade, a second challenge was
given if the first was not sufficient, and if they still persisted and
were evidently trying to effect some means of escape, the order was to
fire on them and give the alarm.

There were about 300 men detailed for duty each day. These consisted of
eight commissioned officers, 32 non-commissioned officers, and 260
privates. This number was distributed to four different positions,
allowing an equal number of officers to each, but the men were
apportioned to each post according to the amount of duty to be done.

The guard was formed and reviewed each morning at 8 o'clock, preparatory
to going on duty; the new guard usually relieved the guard of the
previous day at 10 o'clock, and were kept on duty 24 hours. Each squad
was under command of two officers, and was divided into three reliefs;
these reliefs alternated with each other in a duty of two hours, thus
allowing each man four hours' rest out of six.

The field officer of the day was accustomed to make a complete tour of
the camp during the day, and usually visited each guard post at least
once during the night. Whenever he was seen approaching any of the
principal posts, the entire guard had to be turned out in order to be
inspected and reviewed by him.

During the night, from 8 o'clock in the evening until 6 in the morning,
every half hour was called by the guard on the fence, at the same time
giving the number of each post and the word "All's well."

The prisoners were divided into companies, each company being under the
charge of an officer detailed for that purpose. Roll was called morning
and evening, at one of which the officer was required to be present and
to make a daily report to the commandant of the post. Two meals per day
were given the prisoners, one at 8 A. M. and one at 3 P. M. They were
furnished with good, wholesome food, prepared in an immense cooking
establishment. Each company marched to this house at the regular hours,
and were served with their rations, going immediately back to their
quarters to eat them.

Several large and commodious hospitals were provided for the sick,
arranged with all possible convenience, and attended by a corps of
competent Surgeons.

One might draw a grand comparison between the way in which our men were
treated in the different prisons of the South, and the treatment of
rebels at the hands of our Government. We who have seen the worn-out,
hobbling rebel prisoner, go forth exchanged, after a few months'
imprisonment, a strong and healthy man, cannot but feel the contrast
when we see old friends, who, months ago were freed from Southern
prisons, even now unable to stand the burden of any daily toil, and
still wearing in their deep-lined faces the marks of past hardships. And
when we think of those who once filled the vacant places in our homes
and in our hearts, who might now be with us but for such hardships, we
can reflect only with shuddering upon the treatment they have received,
and feel grateful that we are at peace again. Verily, many a tale that
we might tell were better left untold.

On the morning of Friday, Oct. 7th, one of the guard on the outside of
the fence discovered a hole, through which it was evident some of the
prisoners had escaped. The alarm was given, but it was too late. On
investigation there were found to be 16 prisoners missing. They had made
a tunnel about four feet under ground and sixty odd feet long, large
enough to allow a man to crawl through. The night in which they made
their escape was very dark and stormy, and taking advantage of this,
they completed their excavation, crawled through, and were free.

This mode of escape was afterwards often tried, but the above is the
only instance in which any reward was obtained for the great amount of
work thus expended. A fellow put into practical operation one day a
novel method of escaping. It was customary on the death of any of the
rebels, to carry them to the dead-house; here the bodies were placed in
coffins, marked, and a register kept. From the prison they were carried
to the burial-ground, where the coffins were placed in long trenches,
with a head-board marked to correspond with the register kept at the
prison. One day one of the assistants at the dead-house arranged with
one of his fellows to be placed in a coffin, and have the lid lightly
nailed on. He was carried to the burial-ground, and unloaded with the
other bodies. As soon as the cart drove off, our sharp fellow easily
kicked the lid off and made good his escape.

Our camp life was beginning to be very monotonous. Each day the same
routine was observed, and we were at our wit's end to produce some sort
of amusement. We were provided, however, with the following incident
which served us as a fund for some days: On the night of October 15th,
all the camps being quiet, and no sound coming through the still night
air, save the steady tread of the guard, or the hoarse, hollow cough of
the prisoners, at 11 o'clock we were all suddenly aroused from our
slumbers by the report of the alarm gun, the long roll soon followed and
instantly the officers were out ordering the men quickly into line, each
Company was marched on the parade ground on a double quick, the line
soon formed and every thing was in readiness awaiting orders. Presently
an orderly came riding up assigning to our Regiment a position, then
quickly to another camp he went, and we started at quick time for our
position, just as we set off the battery came thundering down the road,
the bugle sounded, men dismounted, pieces were unlimbered, quickly
loaded, and ready for action. From the opposite direction came more
field pieces which formed a battery just in front of our halting place,
then by us rushed a Regiment, and to us again came the orderly, and we
were divided, one Battalion went in one direction and the other in an
other. Thus the different commands were manoeuvred for about an hour,
finally a rest being allowed, the men began to enquire if we had not
been "sold," as it was evident there was no disturbance in the prison
camp nor any signs of an outbreak. But no one could give a solution to
the problem, until the next morning we found it was all done by our
Brigade Commander, to see what reliance could be placed on the men in
case of an emergency.

In pursuance of orders received a day or two previous, our Regiment,
together with the entire Brigade, started at noon of October 19th for
the general parade ground, to take part in a Brigade review, it was an
informal affair and only occupied two hours, it was a sort of
preliminary or drill to fit us for a grand review to take place some
time in the next month.

Messrs. Tolles and Burritt came over from Ithaca, reaching camp the
morning of October 20th, to take views in and about the camps, they
succeeded in getting a great many fine views of the different positions
occupied by the troops.

At inspection on the morning of October 23d, orders were issued to each
Regiment, to hold themselves in readiness to fall in at a moment's
notice. It was understood that Governor Seymour was in the city and
would visit the different camps during the day. It being unknown at what
time we would have to fall in, our boys went about the camp with their
equipments on, ready to take their places in line at the first call. In
the afternoon at 3 o'clock the roll was sounded and our Regiment was
soon in line, presently Gov. Seymour and a few members of his staff,
accompanied by some of the post officers, passed and were saluted by the
Regiment; there was no pretentious show of any kind, merely a
recognition and compliment to the Commander-in-Chief of the State
forces.

On the evening of October 24th, our boys arranged one of their
characteristic performances--a minstrel show. We had indeed acquired a
great reputation during our life in camp for being possessed of an
inexhaustible store of fun, and had the material for engaging in
anything that might offer which could be turned into a source of
amusement.

On the evening mentioned we built a staging of rather large dimensions
of material furnished us by the Quarter-Master of the Regiment, sticking
bayonets in the ground with a candle placed in them to serve as
foot-lights, seats were provided for our audience, and every convenience
added as far as possible in order to make our entertainments popular. We
were richly rewarded on this occasion as our performances had been
growing very much in favor, and on this night many came up from the city
in carriages until we had an audience of which many a more worthy
showman might have been proud.

It would be impossible to enumerate all the sources of fun that were
introduced and carried out, but it is sufficient to say that there was
not an hour in the day but that one might enjoy a hearty laugh over the
pranks of one or more of the boys.

The 2d of November was a great day among the different Regiments
stationed at Elmira. A grand review had been ordered to come off at
noon, to consist of all the troops not on duty, to be reviewed by
General Diven and staff. There were nine Regiments and two Batteries on
the field, viz: the 12th Regulars, 1st V. R. C., the 54th, 56th, 58th,
77th, 98th, 99th, 102d Regiments N. G., the 4th Regulars, and Rochester
Batteries. The line was formed at noon, on the large field in the rear
of the regular parade ground. Soon after, General Diven and staff came
on the ground, receiving the customary salute from the Batteries. We
were marched in review, first at common time, then at quick time. After
going through some minor evolutions, we were dismissed, reaching our
camps just before 6 o'clock. Everything passed off well, and the
reviewing officers expressed themselves highly satisfied with the
appearance of the men, and their proficiency in drill. There were about
4,500 men of all grades, who took part in the review, and those who
witnessed the parade considered it a fine affair, as well as being a
creditable appearance of our State troops.

It was now drawing near the time when a great many of the Regiments were
to be mustered out of service, having served the time for which they
enlisted.

On the 3d of November the 54th Regiment was mustered out, and left for
home. On the 5th, the 56th, 77th, and 99th Regiments were also dismissed
from service, and each set out for their respective homes. This made our
duties very much harder, as no troops were furnished in place of those
leaving; consequently those who remained had to do double duty. We did
not mind that much, however, as we knew our time would soon come for
going home; although it would be near the middle of December before our
100 days were completed, yet our time was out with that of the remainder
of the Regiment, who were mustered in some 20 days before we were.

The evening of November 16th was occupied by our Company in giving an
oyster supper as a complimentary entertainment to the officers of the
Regiment. The table was set and supper served in our cook-house. Among
our guests we had the Colonel and staff, and nearly all the line
officers of our Regiment, together with several members of other
Regiments. Everything passed off finely, and both guests and hosts
seemed to enjoy the evening's fun to the fullest extent.

It was fully expected by the authorities that the Regiment would be
relieved from duty by the 20th of November, but all hopes of reaching
home before the first of the following month were given up, for we
certainly could not be spared until some Regiment should come to take
our place, as there were barely men enough to do the duty required, and
even those were virtually over-worked. It made little difference with
us, however, as we had some time yet to serve, but then we had expected
to be relieved from duty the same as the rest of the command to which we
were attached, and felt some little disappointment at the delay. All
were anxious to be home at Thanksgiving, the 24th of November, to eat
the time-honored roast turkey and plum pudding, but we found it was of
no use to raise any expectations, as they were not to be realized. We
were not forgotten, however. There arrived from home the night before
several boxes and barrels, well filled with all the delicacies, as well
as substantials, that are necessary to makeup a grand Thanksgiving
dinner. These were spread and partaken of by our boy with seemingly as
much pleasure as if we had been at home.

After many disappointments and vexatious delays, orders were issued on
the 1st of December to the effect that any Company having the proper
papers drawn up and showing no deficiency as regarded equipments, should
be mustered out on the 2d day of December, or as soon thereafter as all
necessary papers were completed.

You may imagine that a great amount of writing was done during that
night, as the next morning found us ready for the mustering officer.
Quite early in the morning we began to pack up and make preparations to
break camp.

At 10 A. M. the Captain was in possession of the Quarter-Master's and
Ordinance officers' receipts for arms, accoutrements and camp equipage
returned, and at 11 A. M. we were mustered out of the United States
service, having been Uncle Sam's boys in blue just ninety-two days. We
soon after set off for the Depot with what baggage we had, and at 7 P.
M. reached Owego where we had to remain until morning.

At about 7 o'clock we were in sight of home and soon at the Depot, here
we were received by a large number of citizens and marched directly to
the Armory where we were welcomed home in a short speech by _M. R.
Barnard_, neatly responded to by _Captain Blood_, after which we
separated to don a citizen's attire and citizen's employment.

Although our three months' work, in the mere point of dollars and cents,
was a loss to every man, yet I doubt if there is one who regrets having
spent this much time in the government service. Each man received a
regular discharge which in years hence he may refer to with somewhat of
pride at the thought of having done even his mite in serving his country
and contributed a little towards suppressing the rebellion. We were
regularly enlisted in the United States army, and subject in every
particular to the same treatment and usage as any of the men in the
government employ. Our duty, it is true, was not attended with any of
the dangers which accompanied the duties of the men in the field, yet it
was work that had to be done, and could be as well performed by State
troops as to take veterans from the field. Our Company as a whole were
well treated in every instance, enjoying many advantages which the
social position of the members secured to them, and we were allowed
privileges which were hardly expected; in fact our standard of
capabilities was raised so high that our men were constantly being
detailed for some special duty, requiring men of more than ordinary
intellect and foresight to accomplish. Soon after moving to Barracks No.
3, two of our men were detached from the Company and placed in the
capacity of chief Clerks at Brigade Head-Quarters, another was made
Clerk and Assistant to the Post Inspector, each retaining his
responsible position during our stay in camp. Another was appointed to
the position of Ordinance Sergeant, while a fifth member held the rank
of Sergeant Major for a number of weeks, during the absence of the
regular occupant of that office. Any one at all acquainted with the
duties devolving upon an occupant of either of these offices, may judge
of the honor extended our Company, and the preference shown its
particular members, by the appointments to such positions of
responsibility and trust.

It may be a fact worthy of mention, that there was not a duty imposed on
our men that was not promptly fulfilled; every detail called for was
forthcoming, and that, too, without hesitation or caviling, which was so
common among a large number of the Companies. This is the more
noticeable, as during the last few weeks of our stay at Elmira our boys
were called on to do double duty. There were so many of the Regiments
going home, and no provision made for supplying their places, yet every
duty was cheerfully performed, although some men did 40 hours actual
duty out of 48.

Every man had a pride in keeping everything in and about our quarters
scrupulously clean. Our cook-house, with all its cooking apparatus,
presented the appearance of a model kitchen, and each tent was swept and
arranged with all the care that could have been taken by a tidy
house-wife.

In appearance and proficiency of drill, as a Company, we soon attained a
place second to none, and which we easily retained against all
competitors.

Through the exertions and faithfulness of our officers, we had the
pleasure of receiving from Captain Carpenter, the Post Inspector, the
compliment that we were finest in appearance, and most proficient in
drill, of any of the Companies stationed at Camp Chemung.

Our officers were ever watchful to promote the comfort and best interest
of the men, striving in a hundred different ways to lighten the duties
imposed on the men, providing everything in their power to relieve the
sick, besides, at a personal expense, contributing many articles of food
or camp furniture, so that, by their exertions, the irksomeness of our
duties was destroyed, and every man considered it more of a pleasure
than an obligation to obey their commands.

We were sorry to part with many of our own Regiment, as well as members
of other commands with whom we had formed an acquaintance, much to our
profit, but our work had been done, and we were honorably discharged,
returning home feeling that the time had been well spent, and with no
regrets that we had been in the United States service for three months.

       *       *       *       *       *

December 26th a delegation of the Company attended the funeral of M. G.
Phillips, a late member. January 5th.--Annual meeting and supper at
Captain Esty's. Washington's Birth-day, February 22d, 1865, was duly
honored by the Company by a parade. May 28th--Attended the funeral of
the late Lieutenant George Fisk. June 27th--Were inspected at
Trumansburg by Colonel H. D. Barto. July 7th--A number of members were
expelled for violation of By-Laws. Attended the funeral of Captain
Bartholemew, at Etna, who was killed in the United States service.
August 3d--Attended the funeral of Major Belcher, who died from disease
contracted while in the army of the United States. Target shoot August
15th, 1865. The prizes were taken and awarded as follows:

1st. William S. Crittenden--a splendid Revolver, presented by Captain
Esty.

2d. Walter C. Steel--a pair of rich, gold-lined Silver Goblets,
presented by Lieutenant John C. Hazen.

3d. L. S. Mackey--a beautiful Silver Castor, presented by the Sergeants
of the Company.

4th. Sergeant E. M. Finch--an English silver-steel, pearl handle Pocket
Knife, presented by L. R. King, Esq.

5th. Geo. R. Williams--bottle of French Perfumery, presented by Geo. E.
Halsey, Esq.

6th. John Young--a magnificent box of Herring, presented by J. B. Taylor
& Co.

7th. Geo. M. King--a Glass Pipe, presented by Messrs. J. B. Taylor & Co.

After the prizes were awarded, Captain Esty was presented with a
magnificent sword, belt, sword-knot and case, by Capt. B. R. Williams,
on behalf of the members and ex-members of the Company.

The Company was reviewed and inspected by Colonels H. D. Barto and K. S.
Van Voorhees, at Trumansburg, Oct. 19th, 1865. January 23d, attended the
funeral of Chief-Engineer Joseph Sidney, U. S. N., who died while in the
service of his country.

We now come in the history of the Company to the dedication of the new
Armory and Drill-Room, which are located in the Cornell Library
building, and which were dedicated by one of the finest entertainments
ever given in Ithaca, February 10th, 1866, at which time the Company
were assisted by Miss Louise St. John, Mrs. J. S. Granger, Miss A.
McCormick, Mrs. Joseph Esty, Jr., and Miss Frankie Atwater; also Gen. H.
A. Dowe, Gen. William Glenny, Col. Charles F. Blood, Col. K. S. Van
Voorhees, Capt. B. R. Williams, Quar. Mas. J. C. Heath, Hon. B. G.
Ferris, Hon. James B. Taylor, F. M. Finch, Esq., F. K. Andrus, Esq.,
Charles Curtis, Esq., Edward Hall, Esq., Thomas Crane, Esq., Edward
Moore, Esq., L. V. B. Maurice, Esq., Elijah Cornell, Esq., and Master
Fred. Summers.

The entertainment was liberally patronized by the citizens of Ithaca,
enabling the Company to cancel a large proportion of the indebtedness
incurred in furnishing their Armory. The expenditures of the Company in
this direction, and expense attending their exhibition, was six hundred
and twenty-eight dollars and fifty-four cents.

The present indebtedness of the Company is less than two hundred
dollars, which amount they hope to cancel entirely by the profits on the
sales of this History.

The furniture of the Armory will compare, we think, with any room in the
Library. A fine photographic likeness of each of the officers of the
Company, taken by the celebrated Artists, Messrs. Beardsley Brothers,
occupy a prominent position. The Drill-Room is one of the finest in the
State. For the present superior advantages enjoyed by the Company, they
are much indebted to Hon. Ezra Cornell, whose name is connected with
every enterprise which has in view the prosperity of our village.

We have endeavored to give, as we stated at the commencement, a full,
true and concise history of the DeWitt Guard, our task is completed; and
in closing, we only ask that a generous public will remember the present
and former members of this Company, who sacrificed so much for their
country in the hour of her peril, and to bestow honor where honor is
due.


       *       *       *       *       *


Transcriber's Notes

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Page 15: "unparalelled" changed to "unparalleled" (to a degree
unparalleled).

Pages 19, 21: "Chancellorville" changed to "Chancellorsville".

Page 19: "Coal Harbor" changed to "Cold Harbor".

Page 33: "comrads" changed to "comrades" (the cheers of comrades).

Page 37: "seperated" changed to "separated" (separated from his
command).

Page 38: "commisioned" changed to "commissioned" (was elected and
commissioned).

Page 40: "excrutiating" changed to "excruciating" (the most excruciating
torture).

Page 41: "comrad" changed to "comrade" (of our deceased comrade).

Page 50: "base" changed to "bass" (on the bass drum).

Page 50: "equippage" changed to "equipage" (equipage in perfect order).

Page 53: "reconnoisances" changed to "reconnoissances" (two important
reconnoissances).

Page 105: "accroutrements" changed to "accoutrements" (with gun and
accoutrements).

Page 115: "opperation" changed to "operation" (in operation day and
night).

Page 125: "marksman" changed to "marksmen" (marksmen in Tompkins
County).

Page 137: "excell" changed to "excel" (Few men can excel him).

Page 145: "brake" changed to "break" (enough to break down).

Page 155: "McNiel" changed to "McNeil".

Page 166: "stake" changed to "steak" (the beef steak will be tender).

Page 167: "potatoe" changed to "potato" (beef-steak-and-potato).

Page 180: "arraigned" changed to "arranged" (our boys arranged).

Page 180: "inexhaustable" changed to "inexhaustible" (inexhaustible
store of fun).

Page 184: "ninty" changed to "ninety" (just ninety-two days).

Page 186: "capabilites" changed to "capabilities" (our standard of
capabilities).





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of History of the Dewitt guard, company
A, 50th regiment National guard, state of New York, by Unknown

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORY OF THE DEWITT GUARD ***

***** This file should be named 36200.txt or 36200.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/2/0/36200/

Produced by Moti Ben-Ari and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
