The Project Gutenberg EBook of Misrepresentative Men, by Harry Graham

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Misrepresentative Men

Author: Harry Graham

Illustrator: F. Strothmann

Release Date: June 3, 2011 [EBook #36321]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MISREPRESENTATIVE MEN ***




Produced by Mark C. Orton, David E. Brown and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)









_Misrepresentative Men_


[Illustration: "_He might be seen, in any weather,
               In what is called 'the altogether.'_"      _Page 34_]




  MISREPRESENTATIVE MEN

  By HARRY GRAHAM
  ("COL. D. STREAMER")

  _Author of "Ruthless Rhymes for Heartless Homes," etc., etc._

  ILLUSTRATED BY F. STROTHMANN

  NEW YORK
  FOX, DUFFIELD & COMPANY
  MCMV

  COPYRIGHT, 1904, BY FOX, DUFFIELD & COMPANY
  _Published, September, 1904_
  PRINTED IN AMERICA




  _These Verses are
  Gratefully Dedicated
  to_

  [Illustration]

  "_From quiet home and first beginning,
    Out to the undiscovered ends,
  There's nothing worth the wear of winning,
    But laughter and the love of friends._"




  My verses in Your path I lay,
    And do not deem me indiscreet,
  If I should say that surely they
    Could find no haven half so sweet
                          As at Your feet.
  Unworthy little rhymes are these,
  Tread tenderly upon them, please!

  One single favour do I crave,
    Which is that You regard my pen
  As Your devoted humble slave.
    Most fortunate shall I be then
                          Of mortal men;
  For what more happiness ensures
  Than work in service such as Yours?

  Should You be pleased, at any time,
    To dip into this shallow brook
  Of simple, unpretentious rhyme,
    Or chance with fav'ring smile to look
                          Upon my book;
  Don't mention such a fact out loud,
  Or haply I shall grow too proud!

  Accept these verses then, I pray,
    Disarming press and public too,
  For what can hostile critics say?
    What else is left for them to do,
                          Because of You,
  But view with kindness this collection,
  Which bears the seal of Your protection?




_Contents_

                          PAGE

  FOREWORD                  11

  THEODORE ROOSEVELT        17

  BACON                     27

  ADAM                      33

  JOAN OF ARC               39

  PADEREWSKI                45

  WILLIAM TELL              51

  DIOGENES                  57

  SIR THOMAS LIPTON         63

  MARAT                     69

  ANANIAS                   75

  NERO                      77

  AFTWORD                   83

  POSTLUDE                  87




_List of Illustrations_


  "_He might be seen in any weather
  In what is called the altogether_"       FRONTISPIECE

                                                   PAGE

  "_The politician's grip of steel_"                 18

  "_At six A.M. he shoots a bear_"                   22

  "_When Eve appeared upon the scene_"               36

  "_On concert platforms he perform_"                48

  "_Altho' he raised a rasping voice
  To persons who his view obstructed_"               58

  "_But Charlotte Corday came along,
  Intent to right her country's wrong_"              70




_Foreword_


  All great biographers possess,
    Besides a thirst for information,
  That talent which commands success,
    I mean of course Imagination;
  Combining with excessive Tact
  A total disregard for Fact.

  Boswell and Froude, and all the rest,
    With just sufficient grounds to go on,
  Could only tell the world, at best,
    What Great Men did, and thought--and so on.
  But I, of course, can speak to you
  About the things they didn't do.

  I don't rely on breadth of mind,
    On wit or pow'rs of observation;
  Carnegie's libraries I find
    A fruitful source of inspiration;
  The new Encyclopaedia Brit.
  Has helped me, too, a little bit.

  In any case I cannot fail,
    With such a range of mental vision,
  So deep a passion for detail,
    And such meticulous precision.
  I pity men like Sidney Lee;
  How jealous they must be of me!

  'Tis easy work to be exact,
    (I have no fear of contradiction),
  Since it has been allowed that Fact
    Is stranger far than any Fiction;
  But what demands the truest wit
  Is knowing what one should omit.

  Carlyle, for instance, finds no place
    Among my list of lucubrations;
  Because I have no wish to face
    The righteous wrath of his relations.
  Whatever feud they have with Froude,
  No one can say that _I_ was rude.

  This work is written to supply
    A long-felt want among Beginners;
  A handbook where the student's eye
    May read the lives of saints and sinners,
  And learn, without undue expense,
  The fruits of their experience.

  A book to buy and give away,
    To fill the youthful with ambition,
  For even they may hope, some day,
    To share the Author's erudition;
  So not in vain, nor void of gain,
  The work of his colossal brain.




_Theodore Roosevelt_


  Alert as bird or early worm,
    Yet gifted with those courtly ways
  Which connoisseurs correctly term
    The _tout-c'qu'-il-y-a de Louis seize_;
  He reigns, by popular assent,
  The People's peerless President!

  Behold him! Squarely built and small;
    With hands that would resemble Liszt's,
  Did they not forcibly recall
    The contour of Fitzsimmons' fists;
  Beneath whose velvet gloves you feel
  The politician's grip of steel.

  Accomplished as a King should be,
    And autocratic as a Czar,
  To him all classes bow the knee,
    In spotless Washington afar;
  And while his jealous rivals scoff,
  He wears the smile-that-won't-come-off.

[Illustration: "_The politician's grip of steel._"]

  In him combined we critics find
    The diplomatic skill of Choate,
  Elijah Dowie's breadth of mind,
    And Chauncey's fund of anecdote;
  He joins the morals of Susannah
  To Dr. Munyon's bedside manner.

  The rugged virtues of his race
    He softens with a Dewey's tact,
  Combining Shafter's easy grace
    With all Bourke Cockran's love of fact;
  To Dooley's pow'rs of observation
  He adds the charms of Carrie Nation.

  In him we see a devotee
    Of what is called the "simpler life"
  (To tell the naked Truth, and be
    Contented with a single wife).
  Luxurious living he abhors,
  And takes his pleasures out of doors.

  And, since his sole delight and pride
    Are exercise and open air,
  His spirit chafes at being tied
    All day to an official chair;
  The bell-boys (in the room beneath)
  Can hear him gnash his serried teeth.

  In summertime he can't resist
    A country gallop on his cob,
  So, like a thorough altruist,
    He lets another do his job;
  In winter he will work all day,
  But when the sun shines he makes Hay.

  And thus, in spite of office ties,
    He manages to take a lot
  Of healthy outdoor exercise,
    Where other Presidents have not;
  As I can prove by drawing your
  Attention to his _carte du jour_.

  At 6 a.m. he shoots a bear,
    At 8 he schools a restive horse,
  From 10 to 4 he takes the air,--
    (He doesn't take it all, of course);
  And then at 5 o'clock, maybe,
  Some colored man drops in to tea.

  At intervals throughout the day
    He sprints around the house, or if
  His residence is Oyster Bay,
    He races up and down the cliff;
  While seagulls scream about his legs,
  Or hasten home to hide their eggs.

[Illustration: "_At six A. M. he shoots a bear._"]

  A man of deeds, not words, is he,
    Who never stooped to roll a log;
  Agile as fond gazelle or flea,
    Sagacious as an indoor dog;
  In him we find a spacious mind,
  "Uncribb'd, uncabin'd, unconfin'd."

  In martial exploits he delights,
    And has no fear of War's alarms;
  The hero of a hundred fights,
    Since first he was a child (in arms);
  Like battle-horse, when bugles bray,
  He champs his bit and tries to neigh.

  And if the Army of the State
    Is always in such perfect trim,
  Well-organized and up to date,
    This grand result is due to him;
  For while his country reaped the fruit,
  'Twas he alone could reach the Root.

  And spite of jeers that foes have hurled,
    No problems can his soul perplex;
  He lectures women of the world
    Upon the duties of their sex,
  And with unfailing courage thrusts
  His spoke within the wheels of trusts.

  No private ends has he to serve,
    No dirty linen needs to wash;
  A man of quite colossal nerve,
    Who lives _sans peur et sans reproche_;
  _In modo suaviter_ maybe,
  But then how _fortiter in re_!

  A lion is his crest, you know,
    Columbia stooping to caress it,
  With _vi et armis_ writ below,
    _Nemo impune me lacessit_;
  His motto, as you've read already,
  _Semper paratus_--always Teddy!




_Bacon_


  In far Elizabethan days
    (Ho! By my Halidome! Gadzooks!)
  Lord Bacon wrote his own essays,
    And lots of other people's books;
  Annexing as a pseudonym
  Each author's name that suited him.

  All notoriety he'd shirk,
    Nor sought for literary credit,
  Although the best of Shakespeare's work
    Was his. (For Mrs. Gallup said it,
  And she, poor lady, I suppose,
  Has read the whole of it, and knows.)

  Such was his kind, unselfish plan,
    That he allowed a rude, unshaven,
  Ill-educated actor man
    To style himself the Bard of Avon;
  Altho' 'twas _he_ and not this fellow
  Who wrote "The Tempest" and "Othello."

  For right throughout his works there is
    A cipher hid, which makes it certain
  That all Pope's "Iliad" is his,
    And the "Anatomy" of Burton;
  There's not a volume you can name
  To which he has not laid a claim.

  He is responsible, I wot,
    For Euclid's lucid demonstrations,
  The early works of Walter Scott,
    And the Aurelian "Meditations";
  Also "The House with Seven Gables"
  And most of AEsop's (so-called) Fables.

  And once, when he annoyed the Queen,
    And wished to gain the royal pardon,
  He wrote his masterpiece; I mean
    That work about her German Garden;
  And published, just before his death,
  The "Visits of Elizabeth."

  Yet peradventure we are wrong,
    For just as probable the chance is
  That all these volumes may belong
    To someone else, and not to Francis.
  I think,--tho' I may be mistaken,--
  That Shakespeare wrote the works of Bacon.


_MORAL_

  If you approach the Mosque of Fame,
    And seek to climb its tallest steeple,
  Just lodge a literary claim
    Against the works of other people.
  And though the Press may not receive it,
  A few old ladies will believe it.

  For instance, I of proof could bring
    Sufficient to convince the layman
  That I had written ev'rything
    Attributed to Stanley Weyman.
  In common justice I should pocket
  The royalties of S. R. Crockett.

  And anyone can plainly see,
    Without the wit of Machiavelli,
  That "Hall Caines look alike to me,"
    Since I am Ouida and Corelli.
  Yes, I am Rudyard Kipling, truly,
  And the immortal Mr. Dooley.




_Adam_


  In History he holds a place
    Unique, unparalleled, sublime;
  "The First of all the Human Race!"
    Yes, that was Adam, all the time.
  It didn't matter if he burst,
  He simply _had_ to get there first.

  A simple Child of Nature he,
    Whose life was primitive and rude;
  His wants were few, his manners free,
    All kinds of clothing he eschewed,--
  He might be seen in any weather,
  In what is called "the Altogether!"

  The luxuries that we enjoy
    He never had, so never missed;
  Appliances that we employ
    For saving work did not exist;
  He would have found them useless too,
  Not having any work to do.

  He never wrote a business note;
    He had no creditors to pay;
  He was not pestered for his vote,
    Not having one to give away;
  And, living utterly alone,
  He did not need a telephone.

  The joys of indolence he knew,
    In his remote and peaceful clime,
  He did just what he wanted to,
    Nor ever said he "hadn't time!"
  (And this was natural becos
  He had whatever time there was.)

  His pulse was strong, his health was good,
    He had no fads of meat or drink,
  Of tonic waters, Breakfast Food,
    Or Pills for Persons who are Pink;
  No cloud of indigestion lay
  Across the sunshine of his day.

  And, when he went to bed each night,
    He made his couch upon the soil;
  The glow-worms gave him all his light,
    (He hadn't heard of Standard Oil);--
  At dawn he woke,--then slept again,
  _He_ never had to catch a train!

[Illustration: "_When Eve appeared upon the scene._"]

  A happy, solitary life!
    But soon he found it dull, I ween,
  So thought that he would like a wife,--
    When Eve appeared upon the scene.
          *      *      *
  And we will draw a kindly veil
  Over the sequel to this tale.


_MORAL_

  Ye Bachelors, contented be
    With what the future holds for you;
  Pity the married man, for he
    Has _nothing_ to look forward to,--
  To hunger for with bated breath!--
          *      *      *
  (Nothing, that is to say, but Death!)




_Joan of Arc_


  From Pimlico to Central Park,
    From Timbuctoo to Rotten Row,
  Who has not heard of Joan of Arc,
    His tragic tale who does not know?
  And how he put his life to stake,
  For Principle and Country's sake?

  This simple person of Lorraine
    Had thoughts for nothing but Romance,
  And longed to see a king again
    Upon the battered throne of France;
  (With Charles the Seventh crowned at Rheims,
  He realized his fondest dreams.)

  Then came the fight at Compiegne,
    Where he was captured by the foe,
  And lots of vulgar foreign men
    Caught hold and wouldn't let him go.
  "Please don't!" he begged them, in despair,
  "You're disarranging all my hair."

  Unmoved by grace of form or face,
    These brutes, whose hearts were quite opaque,
  At Rouen, in the market-place,
    Secured him tightly to a stake;
  (Behaviour which cannot be viewed
  As other than extremely rude.)

  Poor Joan of Arc, of course, was bound
    To be the centre of the show,
  When, having piled the faggots round,
    They lit him up and let him go.
  (Which surely strikes the modern mind
  As thoughtless, not to say unkind.)

  But tho' he died, his deathless name
    In Hist'ry holds a noble place,
  And brings the blush of conscious shame
    To any Anglo-Saxon face.
  Perfidious truly was the nation
  Which caused his premature cremation!

           *    *    *

  I showed these verses to a friend,
    Inviting him to criticise;
  He read them slowly to the end,
    Then asked me, with a mild surprise,
  "What was your object," he began,
  "In making Joan of Arc a man?"

  I hastened to the library
    Which kind Carnegie gave the town,
  Searched Section B. (Biography.)
    And took six bulky volumes down;
  Then studied all one livelong night,
  And found (alas!) my friend was right.

  I'm sorry; for it gives me pain
    To think of such a waste of rhyme.
  I'd write the poem all again,
    Only I can't afford the time;
  It's rather late to change it now,--
  I can't be bothered anyhow.




_Paderewski_


  While other men of "note" have had
    A certain local reputation,
  They never could compare with Pad,--
    (Forgive this terse abbreviation),--
  Loot: Orpheus may have been All Right;
  Cap: Paderewski's Out of Sight!

  No lunatic, competing in
    The game of Arctic exploration,
  Can ever really hope to win
    More pleasures of anticipation
  Than he who fixes as his goal
  So satisfactory a Pole.

  The grand piano is his forte,
    And when he treads upon its pedals,
  Weak women weep, and strong men snort,
    While Cuban veterans (with medals)
  Grow kind of bleary-eyed and soppy;
  And journalists forget their "copy."

  And as he makes the key-board smart,
    Or softly on its surface lingers,
  He plays upon the public's heart,
    And holds it there beneath his fingers;
  Caresses, teases, pokes or squeezes,--
  Does just exactly as he pleases.

  And oh! the hair upon his head!
    Hay-coloured, with a touch of Titian!
  He's under contract, so 'tis said,
    To keep it in this wild condition;
  All those who wish for thatch like Pad's
  Should buy--
              (This space To Let for Ads.)

  On concert platforms he performs,
    Where ladies, (matrons, maids or misses),
  Surround his feet in perfect swarms,
    And try to waft him fat damp kisses;
  Till he takes refuge in his hair,
  And sits serenely smiling there.

  He draws the tear-drop to the eye
    Of dullest dude or quaintest Quaker;
  The instrument he plays is by
    The very best piano-maker,
  Whose name, I hope you won't forget,
  Is--
            (Once again, this space To Let.)

[Illustration: "_On concert platforms he performs._"]

  Before the style of his technique,
    The science of his execution,
  The blackest criminal grows weak
    And makes a moral resolution;
  Requiring all his strength of will
  Before he even robs a till.

  Rough soldiers, from the seat of war,--
    (I never understood what "seat" meant)--
  Have ceased to swear or hit the jar
    After a course of Rooski's treatment.
  'Tis more persuasive and as sure
  As (shall we say?) the Water-cure!

  Thus on triumphantly he goes,--
    A long succession of successes,--
  And nobody exactly knows
    Just how much income he possesses;
  He makes sufficient (if not more)
  To keep the wolf from the stage-door.

  And when he plays a "Polonaise,"
    (His own unrivalled composition),
  The entertainment well repays
    The prices charged one for admission;
  But still, as ladies all declare,
  His crowning glory is his hair!




_William Tell_


  All persons who, by way of joke,
    Point loaded guns at one another,
  (A state of things which ends in smoke,
    And murder of an aunt or brother,)
  Will find that it repays them well
  To note the tale of William Tell.

  He was a patriotic Swiss,
    Whose skill was such with bow and arrow,
  He never had been known to miss
    A target, howsoever narrow;
  His archery could well defy
  The needle or the camel's eye.

  And when the hated Austrian
    Invaded his beloved country,
  This simple man at once began
    To treat the foe with calm effront'ry,
  And gave a sporting exhibition,
  To which he charged ten cents admission.

  He set his son against a tree,
    Upon his head an apple placing,
  Next measured paces thirty-three,
    And turned about, his offspring facing,
  Then chose an arrow, drew his bow,--
  (And all the people murmured "Oh!")

  No sound disturbed the morning air,
    (You could have heard a tea-tray falling,)
  Save in the virgin forest, where
    A chipmunk to his mate was calling,
  Where sang the giddy martingale,
  Or snaffle woo'd the genial quail.

  But, drowning cry of beast or bird,
    There rose the hush of expectation;
  No whispered converse, not a word
    From the surrounding population;
  A tactful silence, as of death,
  While people held each other's breath.

  The bow rang out, the arrow sped!
    Before a man could turn completely,
  All scatheless shone the offspring's head,
    The apple lay divided neatly!
  The ten-cent public gave a roar,
  And appleplectic shrieked "En-_core_."

  They kissed the hero, clasped his hand,
    In search of autographs pursued him,
  Escorted with the local band,
    Cheered, banqueted and interviewed him,
  Demanding how he shot so well;
  But simple William would not Tell.

  The Austrians, without a word,
    Retired at once across the border,
  And thence on William they conferred
    Two medals and a foreign order,
  (And tactfully addressed the bill
  "Hereditary Arch-Duke Will.")

  And, in the piping times of peace,
    Such luxury his life was wrapt in,
  He got the chief-ship of police,
    (And made his son a Precinct Captain),
  Wore celluloid white cuffs and collars,
  And absolutely rolled in dollars.

  Still, to the end, whenever Will
    With fiscal problems had to grapple,
  He called to mind his offspring's skill
    At balancing the homely apple,
  And made him use his level head
  At balancing accounts instead.




_Diogenes_


  He stopped inside a tub, from choice,
    But otherwise was well-conducted,
  Altho' he raised a rasping voice
    To persons who his view obstructed,
  And threw a boot at anyone
  Who robbed him of his patch of sun.

  And thus he lived, without expense,
    Arrayed in somewhat scant apparel,
  His customary residence
    The limits of an empty barrel;
  (His spirits would perforce be good,
  Maturing slowly "in the wood.")

  With lamp alight he sought at night
    For honest men, his ruling passion;
  But either he was short of sight,
    Or honest men were out of fashion;
  He never found one, so he said;--
  They probably were all in bed.

[Illustration: "_Altho' he raised a rasping voice to persons who his
view obstructed._"]

  At last, when he was very old,
    He got abducted by a pirate,
  And to a man of Corinth sold,
    At an exorbitantly high rate;
  His owner called him "Sunny Jim,"
  And made an indoor pet of him.

  And soon, as one may well suppose,
    He learnt the very choicest manners,
  Could balance sugar on his nose,
    Or sit right up and smoke Havanas,
  Or swim into the pond for sticks,--
  There was no limit to his tricks.

  He never tasted wine nor meat,
    But ate, in full and plenteous measure,
  Grape-Nuts and Force and Shredded Wheat,
    Pretending that they gave him pleasure.
  At length, at eighty-nine, he died,
  Of a too strenuous inside.

  Had but this worthy cynic been
    A member of _our_ favoured nation,
  Niagara he might have seen,
    And realised a new sensation,
  If he had set himself the task
  To brave the Rapids in his cask.

  Or if his ghost once more began,
    With lighted lamp, his ancient mission,
  And searched the city for a man
    Whose honesty outsoared suspicion,
  We could provide him, in New York,
  A nice (if somewhat lengthy) walk.


_MORAL._

  Tho' thumping tubs is easy work,
    With which no critic cares to quarrel,
  There may be charms about a Turk,
    Policemen even may be moral;
  And, tho' they never get found out,
  There are _some_ honest men about.




_Sir Thomas Lipton_


  Of all the sportsmen now afloat
    Upon the waters of this planet,
  No better ever manned a boat,
    (Or paid another man to man it,)
  And won a kindly public's heart
  Like dear Sir Thomas Lipton, Bart.

  Behind a counter, as a child,
    He woo'd Dame Fortune, fair but fickle,
  Until at last one day she smiled
    Upon his spices and his pickle;
  And all the world rejoiced to see
  Plain Thomas Lipton made "Sir Tea."

  He won the trade, his name was made;
    In country-house or London gutter,
  All classes found his marmalade
    A perfect "substitute for butter."
  His jam in loudest praise was sung,
  His sauces were on ev'ry tongue.

  He built a yacht; that is to say,
    He paid another man to build it;
  With all the patents of the day,
    Regardless of the cost, he filled it;
  And hired, which was expensive too,
  At least three Captains and a crew.

  And, being properly brought up,
    A member of that sober nation,
  Which ever loves to raise the cup
    That cheers without inebriation,
  He saw an op'ning if he took
  His lifting pow'rs to Sandy Hook.

  And there his hospitality
    Was always welcome to the masses;
  As on the good ship "Erin" he
    Provided luncheons for all classes;
  Where poets, publicans and peers,
  Retained his spoons as souvenirs.

  But tho' each boat of his that sailed
    Was like the last one, only better,
  To lift the cup she always failed,--
    Because the Yankees wouldn't let her.
  (A state of things which was not quite,
  What Englishmen would term, polite!)

  His efforts were alas! in vain,
    He couldn't beat the pot defender,
  Again he tried, and yet again,--
    He might as well have sailed a tender!
  At last he cried "I give it up!
  America can keep her cup!"

  "For She, and she alone, has got
    The proper breed of modern Yachtsmen!
  If only _I_ had hired a lot
    Of Swedes, Norwegians and Scotsmen,
  I might have met, with calm defiance,
  The crew on which _She_ placed Reliance.

  "But, as the matter stands, instead
    Of knowing what a well-fought fight is,
  I'm feted, dined and banqueted,
    Until I get appendicitis!
  And probably shall end my life
  By marrying a Yankee wife!

  "I felt it when the line was crost,
    I hold it true, whate'er befall,
  'Tis better to have luffed and lost,
    Than never to have luffed at all!
  My shareholders must be content
  With such a good advertisement."




_Marat_


  It is impossible to do
    Three diff'rent kinds of things at once;
  A fact that must be patent to
    The brain-pan of the dullest dunce;
  Yet Marat somehow never knew it,
  And died in an attempt to do it.

  A Revolutionist was he;
    The People's Friend,--they called him so,--
  And many such there used to be
    In France, a hundred years ago.
  (For further notice see Carlyle,--
  If you can grapple with his style.)

  His manners were so debonnair,
    He took a hip-bath ev'ry day;
  Would sit and write his letters there,
    In quite an unselfconscious way;
  And, if you wished to interview him,
  His housekeeper would take you to him.

[Illustration: "_But Charlotte Corday came along,
               Intent to right her country's wrong._"]

  But Charlotte Corday came along,
    A Norman noble's nobler daughter,
  Intent to Right her Country's Wrong,
    And put an end to ceaseless slaughter;
  In Marat she descried a victim,--
  So bought a knife and promptly pricked him!

  Poor Marat, who (as was his wont)
    Was planning further Revolutions,
  The while he washed, exclaimed, "Oh, don't!
    "You're interrupting my ablutions!
  "I can't escape; it isn't fair!
  "A sponge is all I have to wear!"

  But Charlotte firmly answered "Bosh!"
    (How could she so forget good breeding?)
  "While you sit there and calmly wash,
    The noblest hearts in France are bleeding!"
  Then jabbed him in those vital places
  Where ordinary men wear braces!

  So perished Marat. In his way
    To prove a lesson, apt and scathing,
  From which young people of to-day
    May learn the dangers of mixed bathing,
  And shun the thankless operation
  Of sponging on a rich relation.


_MORAL_

  Ye democrats, who plan and plot
    Schemes to decapitate your betters,
  Remember that a bath is not
    The proper place for writing letters;
  Nor one which Providence intends
  For interviews with lady-friends.




_Ananias_


  When Golf was in its childhood still,
    And not the sport that now it is;
  When no-one knew of Bunker Hill,
    Or spoke of Boston tee-parties;
  One man there was who played the game,
  And Ananias was his name.

  But little else of him we know,
    Save that his grasp of facts was slack,
  And yet, as circumstances show,
    He was a golfomaniac,
  And thus biographers relate
  The story of his tragic fate:--

  He occupied his final scene,
    (In golfing parlance so 'tis said),
  In "practising upon the _green_,"
    And, after a "bad lie," "lay dead;"
  Then came Sapphira,--she, poor soul,
  After a worse "lie," "halved the hole."




_Nero_


  The portrait that I seek to paint
    Is of no ordinary hero,
  No customary plaster saint,--
    For nothing of the sort was Nero.
  (He was an Emperor, but then
  He had his faults like other men.)

  And first, (a foolish thing to do),
    He turned his hand to matricide,
  And straight his aged mother slew,
    The poor old lady promptly died!
  ('Tis surely wrong to kill one's mother,
  Since one can hardly get another.)

  He was a hearty feeder too,
    And onto his digestion thrust
  All kinds of fatty foods, and grew
    Robust--with accent on the _Bust_.
  ("Sweets are"--I quote from memory--
  "The Uses of Obesity!")

  He married twice; two ladies fair
    Agreed in turn to be his wife,
  To board his slender barque and share
    His fate upon the stream of Life.
  (Forgive me if I mention this
  As being true Canoebial bliss!)

  His talent on the violin
    He was for ever proud of showing;
  The tone that he produced was thin,
    Nor could one loudly praise his "bowing;"
  But persons whom he played before
  Were almost sure to ask for more.

  For he decreed that any who
    Did not encore him or applaud,
  Should be beheaded, cut in two,
    Hanged, flayed alive, and sent abroad.
  (So it was natural that they
  Who "came to cough remained to pray.")

  He felt no sympathy for those
    Who had not lots to drink and eat,
  Who wore unfashionable clothes,
    And strove to make the two ends meet;
  (They drew no tears, "the short and sim-
  Ple flannels of the Poor," from him.)

  To Christians he was far from kind,
    They met with his disapprobation;
  The choicest tortures he designed
    For folks of their denomination.
  (And all Historians insist
  That he was no philanthropist.)

  To lamp-posts he would oft attach
    A Jew, immersed in paraffine,
  Apply a patent safety match,
    And smile as he surveyed the scene.
  ('Twas possible in Rome at night
  To read a book by Israelight.)

  And when occurred the famous fire,
    Of which some say he was the starter,
  He roused the Corporation's ire
    By playing Braga's "Serenata";
  ('Tis said that, when he changed to Handel,
  The "play was hardly worth the scandal."[A])

  He crowned his long career at last
    By one supreme and final action,
  Which, after such a lurid past,
    Gave universal satisfaction;
  And not one poor relation cried
  When he committed suicide.




_Aftword_


  The feast is ended! (As we've seen.)
    'Tis time the vacant board to quit.
  By "vacant bored" I do not mean
    My host of readers, not a bit!
  For they, the mentally elite,
  Are stimulated and replete.

  The fare that I provide is light,
    But don't, I pray, look down upon it!
  Such verse is just as hard to write
    As any sentimental sonnet.
  It looks a simple task, maybe,--
  Well--try your hand at it, and see!

  Don't fancy too that I dispense
    With study, or eschew research;
  Sufficient books of reference
    I have, to fill the highest church.
  I've no dislike of work, I swear,--
  It's _doing it_ that I can't bear!

  Abuse or praise me, as you choose,
    There is no limit to my patience;
  My verse the _London Daily News_
    Once styled "Mephitic exhalations"!
  I lived that down,--(don't ask me how,)--
  And nothing really hurts me now.

  For while my stricken soul survived,
    With wounded pride and dulled ambition,
  My humble book of verses thrived
    And quite outgrew the old edition!
  So now I have exhaled some more,--
  Mephitically, as before!




_Postlude_


  The book is finished! With a sigh,
    My pen upon the desk I lay;
  The weary task is o'er, and I
    Am off upon a holiday,
  To Paris, lovely Paris, where
  I have a little _ventr'-a-terre_.[B]

  And tho' my verses may be weak,
    And call for your severest strictures,
  The illustrations are unique,--
    I really never saw such pictures!
  (At times, in my unthinking way,
  I almost hope I never may.)




Footnotes:


  [A] NOTE.--"_Lors, dit-on, quand il jouait Handel
             Le jeu ne valait pas la chandelle._"

  [B] PUBLISHER'S READER--"_Pied-a-terre_"?
      AUTHOR--Shut up!




Transcriber's Notes:


  Passages in italics are indicated by _italics_.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Misrepresentative Men, by Harry Graham

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MISREPRESENTATIVE MEN ***

***** This file should be named 36321.txt or 36321.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/3/2/36321/

Produced by Mark C. Orton, David E. Brown and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
