The Project Gutenberg EBook of Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine, Volume 60,
No. 372, October 1846, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine, Volume 60, No. 372, October 1846

Author: Various

Release Date: June 27, 2011 [EBook #36530]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BLACKWOOD'S EDINBURGH ***




Produced by Brendan OConnor, JoAnn Greenwood, Jonathan
Ingram and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Library of Early
Journals.)









        BLACKWOOD'S
    EDINBURGH MAGAZINE.

No. CCCLXXII. OCTOBER, 1846. VOL. LX.


TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE: A few obvious misprints have been corrected, but in
general the originally erratic spelling, punctuation and typesetting
conventions have been retained. Accents in foreign language poetry are
inconsistent in the original, and have not been standardized. Hyphenated
or nonhyphenated and accented or unaccented versions of same words
retained as in original when occurring evenly, or consistently by
individual author or speaker. Otherwise changed to most frequent use.

P. 417, Dumas & C{ie.}, "ie." appears as superscript in original.




CONTENTS.


    WILD SPORTS AND NATURAL HISTORY OF THE HIGHLANDS,      389

    LETTERS AND IMPRESSIONS FROM PARIS,                    411

    VISIT TO THE VLADIKA OF MONTENEGRO,                    428

    ELINOR TRAVIS. CHAPTER THE LAST,                       444

    HOCHELAGA,                                             464

    LETTERS ON ENGLISH HEXAMETERS. LETTER III.,            477

    THE DANCE. FROM SCHILLER,                              480

    A NEW SENTIMENTAL JOURNEY,                             481

    POEMS. BY ELIZABETH BARRETT BARRETT,                   488

    THE CONDE'S DAUGHTER,                                  496


    EDINBURGH:
    WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS, 45, GEORGE STREET;
    AND 37, PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON.

    _To whom all Communications (post paid) must be addressed._

    SOLD BY ALL THE BOOKSELLERS IN THE UNITED KINGDOM.

    PRINTED BY BALLANTYNE AND HUGHES, EDINBURGH.




BLACKWOOD'S EDINBURGH MAGAZINE.

No. CCCLXXII. OCTOBER, 1846. VOL. LX.




WILD SPORTS AND NATURAL HISTORY OF THE HIGHLANDS.[1]


THIS year we have been a defaulter on the Moors. Not that our eye has
become more dim, our aim less sure, or our understanding weaker than of
yore; but we are no longer subject to the same keen and burning impulses
which used periodically to beset us towards the beginning of our
departed Augusts, inflaming our destructive organs, and driving us to
the heather, as the stag is said to be driven by instinct to the shores
of the sea. Somehow or other, we now take things much more coolly. We no
longer haunt the shop of Dickson--that most excellent and unassuming of
gunmakers--for weeks before the shooting-season, discussing the
comparative excellences of cartridge and plain shot, or refitting our
battered apparatus with the last ingenuities of Sykes. Our talk is not
of pointers or of setters; neither do we think it incumbent upon us to
perambulate Princes Street in a shooting-jacket, or with the dissonance
of hobnailed shoes. We can even look upon the northern steamers,
surcharged with all manner of ammunition, crammed from stem to stern
with Cockney tourists and sportsmen, carriages and cars, hampers,
havresacks, and hair trunks, steering their way from our noble frith
towards the Highlands, without the slightest wish to become one of that
gay and gallant crew. Incredible as it may appear, we actually wrote an
article upon the twelfth of August last; nor was the calm, even tenor of
our thoughts for a moment interrupted by the imaginary whirr of the
gor-cock. For the life of us, we cannot recollect what sort of a day it
was. To be sure, we were early up and at work--that is, as early as we
ever are, somewhere about ten: we wrote on steadily until dinner-time,
with no more intermission than was necessary for the discussion of a
couple of glasses of Madeira. After a slight and salubrious meal, we
again tackled to the foolscap, and by nine o'clock dismissed the
printer's devil to his den with a quarter of a ream of manuscript. We
then strolled up to our club, where, for the first time, we were
reminded of the nature of the anniversary, by the savour of roasted
grouse. So, with a kind of melancholy sigh for the impairment of our
blunted energies, we sat down to supper, and leisurely explored the
pungent pepper about the backbone of the bird of the mountain.

But empty streets, hot sun, and dust like that of the Sahara, are
combined nuisances too formidable for the most tranquil or indolent
nature. It is not good for any one to be the last man left in town. You
become an object of suspicion to the porters--that is, the more
superannuated portion of them, for the rest are all gone to carry bags
upon the moors--who, seeing you continue from day to day sidling along
the deserted streets, begin to entertain strange doubts as to the real
probity of your character, or, at all events, as to your absolute
sanity. If you are a lawyer, and remain in town throughout August and
September, your own conscience will tell you at once that you are
nothing short of an arrant sneak. Are there not ten other months in the
year throughout which you may cobble condescendences, without emulating
the endurance of Chibert, and confining yourself in an oven, to the
manifest endangerment of your liver, for the few paltry guineas which
may occasionally come tumbling in? Will any agent of sense consider you
a better counsel, or a more estimable plodder, because you affect an
exaggerated passion for _Morrison's Decisions_, and refuse to be
divorced even for a week from your dalliance with Shaw and Dunlop? Is
that unfortunate Lord Ordinary on the Bills to be harassed day and
night, deprived of his morning drive, and deranged in his digestive
organs, on account of your unhallowed lust for fees? Is your unhappy
clerk, whose wife and children have long since been dismissed to cheap
bathing-quarters on the coast of Fife, where at this moment they are
bobbing up and down among the tangled rocks, skirling as the waves come
in, or hunting for diminutive crabs and cavies in the sea-worn pools--is
that most oppressed and martyred of all mankind to be kept, by your
relentless fiat, or rather wicked obstinacy, from participating in the
same sanatory amusements with Bill, and Harry, and Phemie, and the rest
of his curly-headed weans? Think you that the complaints of Mrs Screever
will not be heard and registered against you in heaven, as, mateless and
disconsolate, she cheapens haddocks in the market, or plucks sea-pinks
along the cliffs of hoary Anstruther or of Crail? Shame upon you!
Recollect, for the sake of others, if not for your own, that you call
yourself a gentleman and a Christian. Shut up your house from top to
bottom--fee the policeman to watch it--wafer a ticket on the window,
directing all parcels to be sent to the grocer with whom you have
deposited the key--give poor Girzy a holiday to visit her friends at
Carnwath--and be off yourself, as fast as you can, wherever your
impulses may lead you, either to the Highlands with rod and gun, or, if
you are no sportsman, to Largs, or Ardrossan, or Dunoon, pleasant places
all, where you may saunter along the shore undisturbed from morn until
dewy eve, hire a boat at a shilling the hour, and purvey your own
whitings; or haply, if you are in good luck, take a prominent part in
the proceedings of a regatta, and make nautical speeches after dinner to
the intense amusement of your audience.

But you say you are a physician. Well, then, cannot you leave your
patients to die in peace? It is six months since you were called in to
attend that old lady, who has a large jointure and a predisposition to
jaundice. You have visited her regularly once a day--sometimes
twice--prescribed for her a whole pharmacopeia of drugs--blistered her,
bled her, leeched her--curtailed her of wholesome diet, forbidden
cordial waters, and denounced the needful cinnamon. Dare you lay your
hand on your heart and say that you think her better? Not you. Why not,
then, give the poor old woman, who is not only harmless, but an
excellent subscriber to several Tract societies, one chance more of a
slightly protracted existence? Restore to her her natural food and
adventitious comforts. Send her away to Cheltenham or Harrowgate, or
some such other vale of Avoca, where, at all events, she may get fresh
air, clean lodgings, and lots of mineral water. So shall you escape the
pangs of an awakened conscience, and your deathbed be haunted by the
thoughts of at least one homicide the less.

What we say to one we say to all. Stockbroker! you are a good fellow in
the main, and you never meant to ruin your clients. It was not your
fault that they went so largely into Glenmutchkins, and made such
unfortunate attempts to _bear_ the Biggleswade Junction. But why should
you continue to tempt the poor devils at this flat season of the year,
and with a glutted market, into any further purchases of scrip? You know
very well, that until November, at the earliest, there is not the most
distant prospect of a rise, and you have already pocketed, believe us,
a remarkably handsome commission. Do not be in too great a hurry to kill
the goose with the golden eggs. A rest for a month or so will make them
all the keener for speculation afterwards, and nurse their appetite for
premiums. We foresee a stirring winter, if you will but take things
quietly in the interim. Assemble your brethren together--shut up the
Exchange by common consent during the dog-days--convert your lists into
wadding, and let Mammon have a momentary respite.--Writer to the Signet!
is it fair to be penning letters, each of which costs your employer
three and fourpence, when they are certain to remain unanswered? Do not
do it. This is capital time for taking infeftments, and those
instruments of sasine may well suffice to plump out the interior of a
game-bag. No better witnesses in the world than a shepherd and an
illicit distiller; and sweet will be your crowning caulker as you take
instruments of earth and stone, peat and divot, and the like, in the
hands of Angus and Donald, by the side of the spring, far up in the
solitary mountain. Therefore, again we say, be off as speedily as you
can to the moors, and leave the Deserted City to sun and dust, and the
vigilance of a perspiring Town Council.

Example, they say, is better than precept--we might demur to the
doctrine, but we are not in a disputatious humour. For we too are bound,
though late, to the land of grouse--indeed we have already accomplished
the greater part of our journey, and are writing this article in a
pleasant burgh of the west, separated only by an arm of the sea, across
which the bright-sailed yachts are skimming, from a long range of
heathery hills, whereon we hope, if it pleases fortune, to do some
execution on the morrow. Our three pointers, Orleans, Tours, and
Bordeaux--so named after the speculation that enabled us to purchase
them--are basking in the sun on the little green beneath our window;
whilst Scrip, our terrier and constant companion, is perched upon the
sill, barking with all his might at a peripatetic miscreant of a
minstrel, who for the last half hour has been grinding Gentle Zitella to
shreds in his barrel organ. We have tried in vain to move him with
coppers dexterously shied so as to hit him if possible on the head, but
the nuisance will not abate. We must follow the example of the
Covenanters, and put an end to him at the expenditure of a silver shot.
"There, our good fellow, is a shilling for you--have the kindness to
move on a few doors further; there are some sick folks in this house. At
the end of the row you will find a family remarkably addicted to
music--the house with the green blinds--you understand us? Thank you!"
And in a few moments we hear his infernal instrument, now not
unpleasantly remote, doling out the popular air of the Glasgow Chappie,
for the edification of the intolerable Gorbalier who poisoned our
passage down the Clyde by constituting himself our Cicerone, and
explaining the method by which one might discriminate the Railway boats
from those of the Castle Company, by the peculiar ochreing of their
funnels.

Did we intend to remain here much longer, we should be compelled in
self-defence to clear the neighbourhood. This is not so impracticable as
at first sight may appear. We have made acquaintance with a very
pleasant fellow of a Bauldy--quite a genius in his way--who has a
natural talent for the French horn. To him an old key-bugle would be an
inestimable treasure, and we doubt not that with a few instructions he
would become such a proficient as to serenade the suburb day and night.
Nor would our conscience reproach us for having made one human creature
supremely happy, even at the cost of the emigration of a few dozen
others. But fortunately we have no need to recur to any such experiment.
To-morrow we shall enact the part of Macgregor with our foot upon our
native heather; and for one evening, wherever the locality, we could not
find a more apt or pleasant companion than Mr Charles St John, whose
sporting journals are at last published in the Home and Colonial
Library.

We make this preliminary statement the more readily, because for divers
reasons we had hardly expected to find the work so truly excellent of
its kind; and had there been any shortcomings, assuredly we should have
been foul of St John. In the first place, we entertained, and do still
entertain, the opinion that very few English sportsmen are capable of
writing a work which shall treat not only of the Wild Sports, but of the
Natural History of the Highlands. They belong to a migratory class, and
seldom exchange the comforts of their clubs for the inconveniences of
northern rustication, at least before the month of June. Now and then,
indeed, you may meet with some of them, whose passion for angling
amounts to a mania, by the side of the Tweed or the Shin, long before
the mavis has hatched her young. But these are usually elderly
grey-coated men, whose whole faculties are bent upon hackles--the
patriarchs of a far nobler school than that of Walton--magnificent
throwers of the fly--salmonicides of the first water--yet in our humble
estimation not very conversant with any other subject under heaven.
Their sporting error--rather let us call it misfortune--is that they do
not generalise. By the middle of September their occupation for the year
is over. Shortly afterwards they assemble, like swallows about to leave
our shores, on the banks of the Tweed, which river is permitted by the
mercy of the British Parliament to remain open for a short time longer.
There they angle on, kill their penultimate and ultimate fish; and
finally, at the approach of winter, retreat to warmer quarters, and
recapitulate the campaigns of the summer over port of the most generous
vintage. These are clearly not the men to indite the Wild Sports and
Natural History of the North.

The other section of English sportsmen come later and depart a little
earlier. They are the renters of moors, crack sportsmen in every sense
of the word, who resort to Ross-shire as regularly as they afterwards
emigrate to Melton. Now, as to their slaughtering powers, we entertain
not the shadow of a doubt. Steady shots and deadly are they from their
youth upwards--trained, it may be, upon level ground, but still unerring
in their aim. If not so wiry-sinewed, and sound of wind as the
Caledonian, their pluck is undeniable, and their perseverance
praiseworthy in the extreme. Show them the birds, and they will bring
them to bag--give them a fair chance at a red-deer, and the odds are
that next minute he shall be rolling in blood upon the heather. But
this, let it be observed, is after all a mere matter of tooling. To be a
good shot is only one branch of the finished sportsman's accomplishment,
and it enters not at all into the conformation of the naturalist. We
would not give a brace of widgeons for the best description ever written
of a week's sport in the Highlands, or indeed any where else, provided
it contained nothing more than an account of the killed and wounded,
some facetious anecdotes regarding the lives of the gillies, and a
narrative of the manner in which the author encountered and overcame a
hart. Even the adventures of a night in a still will hardly make the
book go down. We want an eye accustomed to look to other things beyond
the sight of a gun-barrel--we want to know more about the quarry than
the mere fact that it was flushed, fired at, and killed. Death can come
but once to the black-cock as to the warrior, but are their lives to be
accounted as nothing? Ponto we allow to be a beautiful brute--a little
too thin-skinned, perhaps, for the moors, and apt, in case of mist, to
lapse into a state of ague--yet, notwithstanding, punctual at his
points, and cheap at twenty guineas of the current money of the realm.
Howbeit we care not for his biography. To us it is matter of the
smallest moment from what breed he is descended, by whose gamekeeper he
was broken, neither are we covetous as to statistics of the number of
his brothers and sisters uterine. It is of course gratifying to know
that our southern acquaintance approves of the sport he has met with in
a particular district; and that on the twelfth, not only the bags but
the ponies were exuberantly loaded with a superfluity of fud and
feather. Such intelligence would have been listened to most benignly had
it been accompanied by a box of game duly addressed to us at
Ambrose's--as it is, we accept the fact without any spasm of
extraordinary pleasure.

There are, we allow, some sporting tours from which we have derived both
profit and gratification; but the locality of these is usually remote
and unexplored. We like to hear of salmon-fishing in the Naamsen, and of
forty and fifty pounders captured in its brimful rapids--of bear-skalls
in Sweden, buffalo-hunting in the prairies, or the chase of the majestic
lion in Caffreland or Morocco. Such narratives have the charm of
novelty; and if, now and then, they border a little upon the marvellous
or miraculous, we do our best to summon up faith sufficient to bolt them
all. We by no means objected to Monsieur Violet's account of the
_estampades_ in California, or of the snapping turtles in the
cane-brakes of the Red River. He was, at all events, graphic in his
descriptions; and the zoology to which he introduced us, if not genuine,
was of a gigantic and original kind. In fact, no sort of voyage or
travel is readable unless it be strewn thickly with incident and
adventure, and these of a startling character. Nobody cares now-a-days
about meteorological observations, or dates, or distances, or names of
places; we have been tired with these things from the days of Dampier
downwards. Nor need any navigator hope to draw the public attention to
his facts unless he possesses besides a deal of the talent of the
novelist. If incident does not lie in his path, he must go out of his
way to seek it--if even then it should not appear, there is an absolute
necessity for inventing it. What a book of travels in Central Africa
could we not write, if any one would be kind enough to furnish us with a
mere outline of the route, and the authentic soundings of the Niger!

Scotland, however, is tolerably well known to the educated people of the
sister country, and her productions have ceased to be a marvel. Grouse
are common as howtowdies in the London market; and even red-deer
venison, if asked for, may be had for a price. There is no great mystery
in the staple commodity of our sports. Something, it is true, may still
be said with effect regarding deer-stalking--a branch of the art
venatory which few have the opportunity to study, and of those few a
small fraction only can attain to a high degree. Grouse are to be found
on every hill, black-game in almost every correi; few are the woods, at
the present day, unhaunted by the roe; but the red-deer--the stag of
ten--he of the branches and the tines--is, in most parts of the country
save in the great forests, a casual and a wandering visitor; and many a
summer's day you may clamber over cairn and crag, inspect every scaur
and glen, and sweep the horizon around with your telescope, without
discovering the waving of an antler, or the impress of a transitory
footprint. But this subject is soon exhausted. Scrope has done ample
justice to it, and left but a small field untrodden to any literary
successor. The _Penny Magazine_, if we mistake not, disposed several
years ago of otter-hunting, and the chase of the fox as practised in the
rocky regions; and finally, Colquhoun--he of the Moor and the Loch--with
more practical knowledge and acute observation than any of his
predecessors, reduced Highland sporting to a science, and became the
Encyclopedist of the _ferA| naturA|_ of the hills. With these authorities
already before us, it was not unnatural that we should have entertained
doubts as to the capabilities of any new writer, not native nor to the
custom born.

Neither did the puff preliminary, which heralded the appearance of this
volume, prepossess us strongly in its favour. What mattered it to the
sensible reader whether or no "the attention of the public has already
been called to this journal by the _Quarterly Review_ of December 1845?"
The book was not published, had not an existence, until seven or eight
months after that article--a reasonably indifferent one, by the way--was
penned; and yet we are asked to take that sort of pre-Adamite notice as
a verdict in its favour! Now, we object altogether to this species of
side-winded commendation, this reviewing, or noticing, or extracting
from manuscripts before publication, more especially in the pages of a
great and influential Review. It is always injudicious, because it looks
like the work of a coterie. In the present case it was doubly unwise,
because this volume really required no adventitious aid whatever, and
certainly no artifice, to recommend it to the public favour.

Whilst, however, we consider it our duty to say thus much, let it not be
supposed that we are detracting from the merits of the extracts
contained in that article of the _Quarterly_. On the contrary, they
impressed us at the time with a high idea of the graphic power of the
writer, and presented an agreeable contrast to the general prolixity of
the paper. It is even possible that we are inclined to underrate the
efforts of the critic on account of his having forestalled us by
printing _The Muckle Hart of Benmore_--a chapter which we should
otherwise have certainly enshrined within the columns of _Maga_.--At all
events it is now full time that we should address ourselves more
seriously to the contents of the volume.

Mr St John, we are delighted to observe, is not a sportsman belonging to
either class which we have above attempted to describe. He is not the
man whose exploits will be selected to swell the lists of slaughtered
game in the pages of the provincial newspapers; for he has the eye and
the heart of a naturalist, and, as he tells us himself, after a pleasant
description of the wild animals which he has succeeded in
domesticating--"though naturally all men are carnivorous, and,
therefore, animals of prey, and inclined by nature to hunt and destroy
other creatures, and, although I share in this our natural instinct to a
great extent, I have far more pleasure in seeing these different animals
enjoying themselves about me, and in observing their different habits,
than I have in hunting down and destroying them."

Most devoutly do we wish that there were many more sportsmen of the same
stamp! For ourselves, we confess to an organ of destructiveness not of
the minimum degree. We never pass a pool, and hear the sullen plunge of
the salmon, without a bitter imprecation upon our evil destiny if we
chance to have forgotten our rod; and a covey rising around us, when
unarmed, is a plea for suicide. But this feeling, as Mr St John very
properly expresses it, is mere natural instinct--part of our original
Adam, which it is utterly impossible to subdue. But give us rod or gun.
Let us rise and strike some three or four fresh-run fish, at intervals
of half-an-hour--let us play, land, and deposit them on the bank, in all
the glory of their glittering scales, and it is a hundred to one if we
shall be tempted to try another cast, although the cruives are open, the
water in rarest trim, and several hours must elapse ere the advent of
the cock-a-leekie. In like manner, we prefer a moor where the game is
sparse and wild, to one from which the birds are rising at every twenty
yards; nor care we ever to slaughter more than may suffice for our own
wants and those of our immediate friends. And why should we? There is
something not only despicable, but, in our opinion, absolutely brutal,
in the accounts which we sometimes read of wholesale massacres committed
on the moors, in sheer wanton lust for blood. Fancy a great hulking
Saxon, attended by some half-dozen gamekeepers, with a larger retinue of
gillies, sallying forth at early morning upon ground where the grouse
are lying as thick and tame as chickens in a poultry-yard--loosing four
or five dogs at a time, each of which has found his bird or his covey
before he has been freed two minutes from the couples--marching up in
succession to each stationary quadruped--kicking up the unfortunate
pouts, scarce half-grown, from the heather before his feet--banging
right and left into the middle of them, and--for the butcher shoots
well--bringing down one, and sometimes two, at each discharge. The
red-whiskered keeper behind him, who narrowly escaped transportation, a
few years ago, for a bloody and ferocious assault, hands him another
gun, ready-loaded; and so on he goes, for hour after hour, depopulating
God's creatures, of every species, without mercy, until his shoulder is
blue with the recoil, and his brow black as Cain's, with the stain of
the powder left, as he wipes away the sweat with his stiff and
discoloured hand. At evening, the pyramid is counted, and lo, there are
two hundred brace!

Is this sporting, or is it murder? Not the first certainly, unless the
term can be appropriately applied to the hideous work of the shambles.
Indeed, between knocking down stots or grouse in this wholesale manner,
we can see very little distinction; except that, in the one case, there
is more exertion of the muscles, and in the other a clearer atmosphere
to nerve the operator to his task. Murder is a strong term, so we shall
not venture to apply it; but cruelty is a word which we may use without
compunction; and from that charge, at least, it is impossible for the
glutton of the moors to go free.

Great humanity and utter absence of wantonness in the prosecution of his
sport, is a most pleasing characteristic of Mr St John. He well
understands the meaning of Wordsworth's noble maxim,--

    "Never to blend our pleasure or our pride
    With sorrow of the meanest thing that feels;"

and can act upon it without cant, without cruelty, and, above all,
without hypocrisy. And truly, when we consider where he has been located
for the last few years, in a district which offers a greater variety of
game to the sportsman than any other in Great Britain, his moderation
becomes matter of legitimate praise. Here is his own description of the
locality wherein he has pitched his tent:--

"I have lived for several years in the northern counties of Scotland,
and during the last four or five in the province of Moray, a part of the
country peculiarly adapted for collecting facts in Natural History, and
for becoming intimate with the habits of many of our British wild birds
and quadrupeds. Having been in the habit of keeping an irregular kind of
journal, and of making notes of any incidents which have fallen under my
observation connected with the zoology of the country, I have now
endeavoured, by dint of cutting and pruning those rough sketches, to put
them into a shape calculated to amuse, and perhaps, in some slight
degree, to instruct some of my fellow-lovers of Nature. From my earliest
childhood I have been more addicted to the investigation of the habits
and manners of every kind of living animal than to any more useful
avocation, and have in consequence made myself tolerably well acquainted
with the domestic economy of most of our British _ferA| naturA|_, from the
field-mouse and wheatear, which I stalked and trapped in the plains and
downs of Wiltshire during my boyhood, to the red-deer and eagle, whose
territory I have invaded in later years on the mountains of Scotland. My
present abode in Morayshire is surrounded by as great a variety of
beautiful scenery as can be found in any district in Britain; and no
part of the country can produce a greater variety of objects of interest
either to the naturalist or to the lover of the picturesque. The rapid
and glorious Findhorn, the very perfection of a Highland river, here
passes through one of the most fertile plains in Scotland, or indeed in
the world; and though a few miles higher up it rages through the wildest
and most rugged rocks, and through the romantic and shaded glens of the
forests of Darnaway and Altyre, the stream, as if exhausted, empties
itself peaceably and quietly into the Bay of Findhorn--a salt-water loch
of some four or five miles in length, entirely shut out by different
points of land from the storms which are so frequent in the Moray Frith,
of which it forms a kind of creek. At low-water this bay becomes an
extent of wet sand, with the river Findhorn and one or two smaller
streams winding through it, till they meet in the deeper part of the
basin near the town of Findhorn, where there is always a considerable
depth of water, and a harbour for shipping.

"From its sheltered situation and the quantity of food left on the sands
at low-water, the Bay of Findhorn is always a great resort of wild-fowl
of all kinds, from the swan to the teal, and also of innumerable waders
of every species; while occasionally a seal ventures into the mouth of
the river in pursuit of salmon. The bay is separated from the main water
of the Frith by that most extraordinary and peculiar range of country
called the Sandhills of Moray--a long, low range of hills formed of the
purest sand, with scarcely any herbage, excepting here and there patches
of bent or broom, which are inhabited by hares, rabbits, and foxes. At
the extreme point of this range is a farm of forty or fifty acres of
arable land, where the tenant endeavours to grow a scanty crop of grain
and turnips, in spite of the rabbits and the drifting sands. From the
inland side of the bay stretch the fertile plains of Moray, extending
from the Findhorn to near Elgin in a continuous flat of the richest
soil, and comprising districts of the very best partridge-shooting that
can be found in Scotland, while the streams and swamps that intersect it
afford a constant supply of wild-fowl. As we advance inland we are
sheltered by the wide-extending woods of Altyre, abounding with roe and
game; and beyond these woods again is a very extensive range of a most
excellent grouse-shooting country, reaching for many miles over a
succession of moderately-sized hills which reach as far as the Spey.

"On the west of the Findhorn is a country beautifully dotted with woods,
principally of oak and birch, and intersected by a dark, winding burn,
full of fine trout, and the constant haunt of the otter. Between this
part of the country and the sea-coast is a continuation of the
Sandhills, interspersed with lakes, swamps, and tracts of fir-wood and
heather. On the whole, I do not know so varied or interesting a district
in Great Britain, or one so well adapted to the amusement and
instruction of a naturalist or sportsman. In the space of a morning's
walk you may be either in the most fertile or the most barren spot of
the country. In my own garden every kind of wall-fruit ripens to
perfection, and yet at the distance of only two hours' walk you may
either be in the midst of heather and grouse, or in the sandy deserts
beyond the bay, where one wonders how even the rabbits can find their
living.

"I hope that my readers will be indulgent enough to make allowances for
the unfinished style of these sketches, and the copious use of the first
person singular, which I have found it impossible to avoid whilst
describing the adventures which I have met with in this wild country,
either when toiling up the rocky heights of our most lofty mountains, or
cruising in a boat along the shores, where rocks and caves give a chance
of finding sea-fowl and otters; at one time wandering over the desert
sand-hills of Moray, where, on windy days, the light particles of
drifting sand, driven like snow along the surface of the ground, are
perpetually changing the outline and appearance of the district; at
another, among the swamps, in pursuit of wild-ducks, or attacking fish
in the rivers, or the grouse on the heather.

"For a naturalist, whether he be a scientific dissector and preserver of
birds, or simply a lover and observer of the habits and customs of the
different _ferA| naturA|_, large and small, this district is a very
desirable location, as there are very few birds or quadrupeds to be
found in any part of Great Britain who do not visit us during the course
of the year, or, at any rate, are to be met with in a few hours' drive.
The bays and rivers attract all the migratory water-fowl, while the
hills, woods, and corn-lands afford shelter and food to all the native
wild birds and beasts. The vicinity, too, of the coast to the wild
western countries of Europe is the cause of our being often visited by
birds which are not strictly natives, nor regular visitors, but are
driven by continued east winds from the fastnesses of the Swedish and
Norwegian forests and mountains.

"To the collector of stuffed birds this county affords a greater variety
of specimens than any other district in the kingdom; whilst the
excellence of the climate and the variety of scenery make it inferior to
none as a residence for the unoccupied person or the sportsman.

"Having thus described that part of the globe which at present is my
resting-place, I may as well add a few lines to enable my reader to
become acquainted with myself, and that part of my belongings which will
come into question in my descriptions of sporting, &c. To begin with
myself, I am one of the unproductive class of the genus homo, who,
having passed a few years amidst the active turmoil of cities, and in
places where people do most delight to congregate, have at last settled
down to live a busy kind of idle life. Communing much with the wild
birds and beasts of our country, a hardy constitution and much leisure
have enabled me to visit them in their own haunts, and to follow my
sporting propensities without fear of the penalties which are apt to
follow a careless exposure of one's-self to cold and heat, at all hours
of night and day. Though by habit and repute a being strongly endowed
with the organ of destructiveness, I take equal delight in collecting
round me all living animals, and watching their habits and instincts; my
abode is, in short, a miniature menagerie. My dogs learn to respect the
persons of domesticated wild animals of all kinds, and my pointers live
in amity with tame partridges and pheasants; my retrievers lounge about
amidst my wild-fowl, and my terriers and beagles strike up friendship
with the animals of different kinds, whose capture they have assisted
in, and with whose relatives they are ready to wage war to the death. A
common and well-kept truce exists with one and all. My boys, who are of
the most bird-nesting age (eight and nine years old), instead of
disturbing the numberless birds who breed in the garden and shrubberies,
in full confidence of protection and immunity from all danger of gun or
snare, strike up an acquaintance with every family of chaffinches or
blackbirds who breed in the place, visiting every nest, and watching
over the eggs and young with a most parental care."

Why, this is the very Eden of a sportsman! Flesh, fowl, and fish of
every description in abundance, and such endless variety, that no month
of the year can pass over without affording its quota of fair and
legitimate recreation. But to a man of Mr St John's accomplishment and
observant habits, the mere prey is a matter of far less moment than the
insight which such a locality affords, into the habits and instincts of
the creatures which either permanently inhabit or casually visit our
shores. His journal is far more than a sportsman's book. It contains
shrewd and minute observations on the whole of our northern fauna--the
results of many a lonely but happy day spent in the woods, the glens,
the sand-tracts, by river and on sea. His range is wider than that which
has been taken either by White of Selborne, or by Waterton; and we are
certain that he will hold it to be no mean compliment when we say, that
in our unbiased opinion, he is not surpassed by either of them in
fidelity, and in point of picturesqueness of description, is even the
superior of both. The truth is, that Mr St John would have made a
first-rate trapper. We should not have the slightest objections to lose
ourselves in his company for several weeks in the prairies of North
America; being satisfied that we should return with a better cargo of
beaver-skins and peltry than ever fell to the lot of two adventurers in
the service of the Company of Hudson's Bay.

It is totally impossible to follow our author through any thing like his
range of subjects, extending from the hart to the seal and otter, from
the eagle and wild swan to the ouzel. One or two specimens we shall
give, in order that you, our dear and sporting reader, may judge whether
these encomiums of ours are exaggerated or misplaced. We are, so say our
enemies, but little given to laudation, and far too ready when occasion
offers, and sometimes when it does not, to clutch hastily at the knout.
You, who know us better, and whom indeed we have partially trained up in
the wicked ways of criticism, must long ago have been aware, that if we
err at all, it is upon the safer side. But be that as it may, you will
not, we are sure, refuse to join with us in admiring the beauty of the
following description;--it is of the heronry on the Findhorn--a river of
peculiar beauty, even in this land of lake, of mountain, and of flood.

"I observe that the herons in the heronry on the Findhorn are now busily
employed in sitting on their eggs--the heron being one of the first
birds to commence breeding in this country. A more curious and
interesting sight than the Findhorn heronry I do not know: from the top
of the high rocks on the east side of the river you look down into every
nest--the herons breeding on the opposite side of the river, which is
here very narrow. The cliffs and rocks are studded with splendid pines
and larch, and fringed with all the more lowly but not less beautiful
underwood which abounds in this country. Conspicuous amongst these are
the bird-cherry and mountain-ash, the holly, and the wild rose; while
the golden blossoms of furze and broom enliven every crevice and corner
in the rock. Opposite to you is a wood of larch and oak, on the latter
of which trees are crowded a vast number of the nests of the heron. The
foliage and small branches of the oaks that they breed on seem entirely
destroyed, leaving nothing but the naked arms and branches of the trees
on which the nests are placed. The same nests, slightly repaired, are
used year after year. Looking down at them from the high banks of the
Altyre side of the river, you can see directly into their nests, and can
become acquainted with the whole of their domestic economy. You can
plainly see the green eggs, and also the young herons, who fearlessly,
and conscious of the security they are left in, are constantly passing
backwards and forwards, and alighting on the topmost branches of the
larch or oak trees; whilst the still younger birds sit bolt upright in
the nest, snapping their beaks together with a curious sound.
Occasionally a grave-looking heron is seen balancing himself by some
incomprehensible feat of gymnastics on the very topmost twig of a
larch-tree, where he swings about in an unsteady manner, quite
unbecoming so sage-looking a bird. Occasionally a thievish jackdaw
dashes out from the cliffs opposite the heronry, and flies straight into
some unguarded nest, seizes one of the large green eggs, and flies back
to his own side of the river, the rightful owner of the eggs pursuing
the active little robber with loud cries and the most awkward attempts
at catching him.

"The heron is a noble and picturesque-looking bird, as she sails quietly
through the air with outstretched wings and slow flight; but nothing is
more ridiculous and undignified than her appearance as she vainly chases
the jackdaw or hooded crow who is carrying off her egg, and darting
rapidly round the angles and corners of the rocks. Now and then every
heron raises its head and looks on the alert as the peregrine falcon,
with rapid and direct flight, passes their crowded dominion; but intent
on his own nest, built on the rock some little way further on, the hawk
takes no notice of his long-legged neighbours, who soon settle down
again into their attitudes of rest. The kestrel-hawk frequents the same
part of the river, and lives in amity with the wood-pigeons that breed
in every cluster of ivy which clings to the rocks. Even that bold and
fearless enemy of all the pigeon race, the sparrowhawk, frequently has
her nest within a few yards of the wood-pigeon; and you see these birds
(at all other seasons such deadly enemies) passing each other in their
way to and fro from their respective nests in perfect peace and amity.
It has seemed to me that the sparrowhawk and wood-pigeon during the
breeding season frequently enter into a mutual compact against the crows
and jackdaws, who are constantly on the look-out for the eggs of all
other birds. The hawk appears to depend on the vigilance of the
wood-pigeon to warn him of the approach of these marauders; and then the
brave little warrior sallies out, and is not satisfied till he has
driven the crow to a safe distance from the nests of himself and his
more peaceable ally. At least in no other way can I account for these
two birds so very frequently breeding not only in the same range of
rock, but within two or three yards of each other."

Now for the wild swan. You will observe that it is now well on in
October, and that the weather is peculiarly cold. There is snow already
lying on the tops of the nearer hills--the further mountains have
assumed a coat of white, which, with additions, will last them until the
beginning of next summer; and those long black streaks which rise
upwards, and appear to us at this distance so narrow, are, in reality,
the great ravines in which two months ago we were cautiously stalking
the deer. The bay is now crowded with every kind of aquatic fowl. Day
after day strange visitants have been arriving from the north; and at
nightfall, you may hear them quacking and screaming and gabbling for
many miles along the shore. Every moonlight night the woodcock and snipe
are dropping into the thickets, panting and exhausted by their flight
from rugged Norway, a voyage during which they can find no resting-place
for the sole of their foot. In stormy weather the light-houses are beset
with flocks of birds, who, their reckoning lost, are attracted by the
blaze of the beacon, dash wildly towards it, as to some place of refuge,
and perish from the violence of the shock. As yet, however, all is calm;
and lo, in the moonlight, a great flight of birds stooping down towards
the bay!--noiselessly at first, but presently, as they begin to sweep
lower, trumpeting and calling to each other; and then, with a mighty
rustling of their pinions, and a dash as of a vessel launched into the
waters, the white wild-swans settle down into the centre of the
glittering bay! To your tents, ye sportsmen! for ball and cartridge; and
now circumvent them if you can.

"My old garde-chasse insisted on my starting early this morning, _nolens
volens_, to certain lochs six or seven miles off, in order, as he termed
it, to take our 'satisfaction' of the swans. I must say that it was a
matter of very small satisfaction to me, the tramping off in a sleety,
rainy morning, through a most forlorn and hopeless-looking country, for
the chance, and that a bad one, of killing a wild swan or two. However,
after a weary walk, we arrived at these desolate-looking lochs: they
consist of three pieces of water, the largest about three miles in
length and one in width; the other two, which communicate with the
largest, are much smaller and narrower, indeed scarcely two gunshots in
width; for miles around them, the country is flat, and intersected with
a mixture of swamp and sandy hillocks. In one direction the sea is only
half a mile from the lochs, and in calm winter weather the wild-fowl
pass the daytime on the salt water, coming inland in the evenings to
feed. As soon as we were within sight of the lochs we saw the swans on
one of the smaller pieces of water, some standing high and dry on the
grassy islands, trimming their feathers after their long journey, and
others feeding on the grass and weeds at the bottom of the loch, which
in some parts was shallow enough to allow of their pulling up the plants
which they feed on as they swam about; while numbers of wild-ducks of
different kinds, particularly widgeons, swarmed round them and often
snatched the pieces of grass from the swans as soon as they had brought
them to the surface, to the great annoyance of the noble birds, who
endeavoured in vain to drive away these more active little depredators,
who seemed determined to profit by their labours. Our next step was to
drive the swans away from the loch they were on; it seemed a curious way
of getting a shot, but as the old man seemed confident of the success of
his plan, I very submissively acted according to his orders. As soon as
we moved them, they all made straight for the sea. 'This won't do,' was
my remark, 'Yes, it will, though; they'll no stop there long to-day with
this great wind, but will all be back before the clock _chaps_ two.'
'Faith, I should like to see any building that could contain a clock,
and where we might take shelter,' was my inward cogitation. The old man,
however, having delivered this prophecy, set to work making a small
ambuscade by the edge of the loch which the birds had just left, and
pointed it out to me as my place of refuge from one o'clock to the hour
when the birds would arrive.

"In the mean time we moved about in order to keep ourselves warm, as a
more wintry day never disgraced the month of October. In less than half
an hour we heard the signal cries of the swans, and soon saw them in a
long undulating line fly over the low sand-hills which divided the sea
from the largest loch, where they alighted. My commander for the time
being, then explained to me, that the water in this loch was every where
too deep for the swans to reach the bottom even with their long necks,
in order to pull up the weeds on which they fed, and that at their
feeding-time, that is about two o'clock, they would, without doubt, fly
over to the smaller lochs, and probably to the same one from which we
had originally disturbed them. I was accordingly placed in my ambuscade,
leaving the keeper at some distance, to help me as opportunity
offered--a cold comfortless time of it we (_i. e._ my retriever and
myself) had. About two o'clock, however, I heard the swans rise from the
upper loch, and in a few moments they all passed high over my head, and
after taking a short survey of our loch (luckily without seeing me),
they alighted at the end of it furthest from the place where I was
ensconced, and quite out of shot, and they seemed more inclined to move
away from me than come towards me. It was very curious to watch these
wild birds as they swam about, quite unconscious of danger, and looking
like so many domestic fowls. Now came the able generalship of my keeper,
who seeing that they were inclined to feed at the other end of the loch,
began to drive them towards me, at the same time taking great care not
to alarm them enough to make them take flight. This he did by appearing
at a long distance off, and moving about without approaching the birds,
but as if he was pulling grass or engaged in some other piece of labour.
When the birds first saw him, they all collected in a cluster, and
giving a general low cry of alarm, appeared ready to take flight; this
was the ticklish moment, but soon, outwitted by his manA"uvres, they
dispersed again, and busied themselves in feeding. I observed that
frequently all their heads were under the water at once, excepting
one--but invariably _one_ bird kept his head and neck perfectly erect,
and carefully watched on every side to prevent their being taken by
surprise; when he wanted to feed, he touched any passer-by, who
immediately relieved him in his guard, and he in his turn called on some
other swan to take his place as sentinel.

"After watching some little time, and closely watching the birds in all
their graceful movements, sometimes having a swan within half a shot of
me, but never getting two or three together, I thought of some of my
assistant's instruction which he had given me _en route_ in the morning,
and I imitated, as well as I could, the bark of a dog: immediately all
the swans collected in a body, and looked round to see where the sound
came from. I was not above forty yards from them, so, gently raising
myself on my elbow, I pulled the trigger, aiming at a forest of necks.
To my dismay, the gun did not go off, the wet or something else having
spoilt the cap. The birds were slow in rising, so without pulling the
other trigger, I put on another cap, and standing up, fired right and
left at two of the largest swans as they rose from the loch. The
cartridge told well on one, who fell dead into the water; the other flew
off after the rest of the flock, but presently turned back, and after
making two or three graceful sweeps over the body of his companion, fell
headlong, perfectly dead, almost upon her body. The rest of the birds,
after flying a short distance away, also returned, and flew for a minute
or two in a confused flock over the two dead swans, uttering their
bugle-like and harmonious cries; but finding that they were not joined
by their companions, presently fell into their usual single rank, and
went undulating off towards the sea, where I heard them for a long time
trumpeting and calling.

"Handsome as he is, the wild swan is certainly not so graceful on the
water as a tame one. He has not the same proud and elegant arch of the
neck, nor does he put up his wings while swimming, like two snow-white
sails. On the land a wild swan when winged makes such good way, that if
he gets much start it requires good running, to overtake him."

Confound that Regatta! What on earth had we to do on board that yacht,
racing against the Meteor, unconquered winger of the western seas? Two
days ago we could have sworn that no possible temptation could divorce
us from our unfinished article; and yet here we are with unsullied pen,
under imminent danger of bartering our reputation and plighted faith to
Ebony, for some undescribable nautical evolutions, a sack race, and the
skeleton of a ball! After all, it must be confessed that we never spent
two more pleasant days. Bright eyes, grouse-pie, and the joyousness of
happy youth, were all combined together; and if, with a fair breeze and
a sunny sky, there can be fun in a smack or a steamer, how is it
possible with such company to be dull on board of the prettiest craft
that ever cleaved her way, like a wild swan, up the windings of a
Highland loch? But we must make up for lost time. As we live, there are
Donald and Ian with the boat at the rocks! and we now remember with a
shudder that we trysted them for this morning to convey us across to the
Moors! Here is a pretty business! Let us see--the month is rapidly on
the wane--we have hardly, in sporting phrase, broken the back of this
the leading article. Shall we give up the moors, and celebrate this day
as another Eve of St John? There is a light mist lying on the opposite
hill, but in an hour or two it will be drawn up like a curtain by the
sunbeams, and then every bush of heather will be sparkling with
dewdrops, far brighter than a carcanet of diamonds. What a fine
elasticity and freshness there is in the morning air! A hundred to one
the grouse will sit like stones. Donald, my man, are there many birds on
the hill? Plenty, did you say, and a fair sprinkling of black-cock? This
breeze will carry us over in fifty minutes--will it? That settles the
question. Off with your caulker, and take down the dogs to the boat. We
shall be with you in the snapping of a copper-cap.

This article, if finished at all, must be written with the keelavine pen
on the backs of old letters--whereof, thank heaven! we have scores
unanswered--by fits and snatches, as we repose from our labours on the
greensward; so we shall even take up our gun, and trust for inspiration
to the noble scenery around us. Is every thing in? Well, then, push off,
and for a time let us get rid of care.

What sort of fishing have they had at the salmon-nets, Ian? Very bad,
for they're sair fashed wi' the sealghs. In that case it may be
advisable to drop a ball into our dexter barrel, in case one of these
oleaginous depredators should show his head above water. We have not
had a tussle with a phoca since, some ten years ago, we surprised one
basking on the sands of the bay of Cromarty. No, Donald, we did not kill
him. We and a dear friend, now in New Zealand, who was with us, were
armed with no better weapon than our fishing-rods, and the sealgh, after
standing two or three thumps with tolerable philosophy, fairly turned
upon us, and exhibited such tusks that we were glad to let him make his
way without further molestation to the water. The seal is indeed a
greedy fellow, and ten times worse than his fresh-water cousin the
otter, who, it seems, is considered by the poor people in the north
country as rather a benefactor than otherwise. The latter is a dainty
epicure--a _gourmand_ who despises to take more than one steak from the
sappy shoulder of the salmon; and he has usually the benevolence to
leave the fish, little the worse for his company, on some scarp or ledge
of rock, where it can be picked up and converted into savoury kipper. He
is, moreover, a sly and timid creature, without the impudence of the
seal, who will think nothing of swimming into the nets, and actually
taking out the salmon before the eyes of the fishermen. Strong must be
the twine that would hold an entangled seal. An aquatic Samson, he snaps
the meshes like thread, and laughs at the discomfiture of the tacksman,
who is dancing like a demoniac on the shore; and no wonder, for nets are
expensive, and the rent in that one is wide enough to admit a bullock.

Mr St John--a capital sportsman, Donald--has had many an adventure with
the seals; and I shall read you what he says about them, in a clever
little book which he has published--What the deuce! We surely have not
been ass enough to forget the volume! No--here it is at the bottom of
our pocket, concealed and covered by the powder-flask:--

"Sometimes at high-water, and when the river is swollen, a seal comes in
pursuit of salmon into the Findhorn, notwithstanding the smallness of
the stream and its rapidity. I was one day, in November, looking for
wild-ducks near the river, when I was called to by a man who was at work
near the water, and who told me that some 'muckle beast' was playing
most extraordinary tricks in the river. He could not tell me what beast
it was, but only that it was something 'no that canny.' After waiting a
short time, the riddle was solved by the appearance of a good-sized
seal, into whose head I instantly sent a cartridge, having no balls with
me. The seal immediately plunged and splashed about in the water at a
most furious rate, and then began swimming round and round in a circle,
upon which I gave him the other barrel, also loaded with one of Eley's
cartridges, which quite settled the business, and he floated rapidly
away down the stream. I sent my retriever after him, but the dog, being
very young and not come to his full strength, was baffled by the weight
of the animal and the strength of the current, and could not land him;
indeed, he was very near getting drowned himself, in consequence of his
attempts to bring in the seal, who was still struggling. I called the
dog away, and the seal immediately sank. The next day I found him dead
on the shore of the bay, with (as the man who skinned him expressed
himself) 'twenty-three pellets of large hail in his craig.'

"Another day, in the month of July, when shooting rabbits on the
sand-hills, a messenger came from the fishermen at the stake-nets,
asking me to come in that direction, as the 'muckle sealgh' was swimming
about, waiting for the fish to be caught in the nets, in order to
commence his devastation.

"I accordingly went to them, and having taken my observations of the
locality and the most feasible points of attack, I got the men to row me
out to the end of the stake-net, where there was a kind of platform of
netting, on which I stretched myself, with a bullet in one barrel and a
cartridge in the other. I then directed the men to row the boat away, as
if they had left the nets. They had scarcely gone three hundred yards
from the place when I saw the seal, who had been floating, apparently
unconcerned, at some distance, swim quietly and fearlessly up to the
net. I had made a kind of breastwork of old netting before me, which
quite concealed me on the side from which he came. He approached the
net, and began examining it leisurely and carefully to see if any fish
were in it; sometimes he was under and sometimes above the water. I was
much struck by his activity while underneath, where I could most plainly
see him, particularly as he twice dived almost below my station, and the
water was clear and smooth as glass.

"I could not get a good shot at him for some time; at last, however, he
put up his head at about fifteen or twenty yards' distance from me; and
while he was intent on watching the boat, which was hovering about
waiting to see the result of my plan of attack, I fired at him, sending
the ball through his brain. He instantly sank without a struggle, and a
perfect torrent of blood came up, making the water red for some feet
round the spot where he lay stretched out at the bottom. The men
immediately rowed up, and taking me into the boat, we managed to bring
him up with a boat-hook to the surface of the water, and then, as he was
too heavy to lift into the boat (his weight being 378 lbs.) we put a
rope round his flippers, and towed him ashore. A seal of this size is
worth some money, as, independently of the value of his skin, the
blubber (which lies under the skin, like that of a whale) produces a
large quantity of excellent oil. This seal had been for several years
the dread of the fishermen at the stake-nets, and the head man at the
place was profuse in his thanks for the destruction of a beast upon whom
he had expended a most amazing quantity of lead. He assured me that
L.100 would not repay the damage the animal had done. Scarcely any two
seals are exactly of the same colour or marked quite alike; and seals,
frequenting a particular part of the coast, become easily known and
distinguished from each other."

But what is Scrip youffing at from the bow? A seal? No, it is a shoal of
porpoises. There they go with their great black fins above the water in
pursuit of the herring, which ought to be very plenty on this coast.
Yonder, where the gulls are screaming and diving, with here and there a
solan goose and a cormorant in the midst of the flock, must be a patch
of the smaller fry. The water is absolutely boiling as the quick-eyed
creatures dart down upon their prey; and though, on an ordinary day, you
will hardly see a single seagull in this part of the loch, for the
shores are neither steep nor rocky, yet there they are in myriads,
attracted to the spot by that unerring and inexplicable instinct which
seems to guide all wild animals to their booty, and that from distances
where neither sight nor scent could possibly avail them. This
peculiarity has not escaped the observant eye of our author.

"How curiously quick is the instinct of birds in finding out their food.
Where peas or other favourite grain is sown, wood pigeons and tame
pigeons immediately congregate. It is not easy to ascertain from whence
the former come, but the house pigeons have often been known to arrive
in numbers on a new sown field the very morning after the grain is laid
down, although no pigeon-house, from which they could come, exists
within several miles of the place.

"Put down a handful or two of unthrashed oat-straw in almost any
situation near the sea-coast, where there are wild-ducks, and they are
sure to find it out the first or second night after it has been left
there.

"There are many almost incredible stories of the acuteness of the
raven's instinct in guiding it to the dead carcass of any large animal,
or even in leading it to the neighbourhood on the near approach of
death. I myself have known several instances of the raven finding out
dead bodies of animals in a very short space of time. One instance
struck me very much. I had wounded a stag on a Wednesday. The following
Friday, I was crossing the hills at some distance from the place, but in
the direction towards which the deer had gone. Two ravens passed me,
flying in a steady straight course. Soon again two more flew by, and two
others followed, all coming from different directions, but making direct
for the same point. ''Deed, sir,' said the Highlander with me, 'the
corbies have just found the staig; he will be lying dead about the head
of the muckle burn.' By tracing the course of the birds, we found that
the man's conjecture was correct, as the deer was lying within a mile of
us, and the ravens were making for its carcass. The animal had evidently
only died the day before, but the birds had already made their breakfast
upon him, and were now on their way to their evening meal. Though
occasionally we had seen a pair of ravens soaring high overhead in that
district, we never saw more than that number; but now there were some
six or seven pairs already collected, where from we knew not. When a
whale, or other large fish, is driven ashore on the coast of any of the
northern islands, the ravens collect in amazing numbers, almost
immediately coming from all directions and from all distances, led by
the unerring instinct which tells them that a feast is to be found in a
particular spot."

We should not wonder if the ancient augurs, who, no doubt, were
consummate scoundrels, had an inkling of this extraordinary fact. If so,
it would have been obviously easy, at the simple expenditure of a few
pounds of bullock's liver, to get up any kind of ornithological
vaticination. A dead ram, dexterously hidden from the sight of the
spectators behind the Aventine, would speedily have brought birds enough
to have justified any amount of warlike expeditions to the Peloponesus;
while a defunct goat to the left of the Esquiline, would collect sooties
by scores, and forebode the death of CA|sar. We own that formerly we
ourselves were not altogether exempt from superstitious notions touching
the mission of magpies; but henceforward we shall cease to consider
them, even when they appear by threes, as bound up in some mysterious
manner with our destiny, and shall rather attribute their apparition to
the unexpected deposit of an egg.

But here we are at the shore, and not a mile from the margin of the
moor. Ian, our fine fellow, look after the dogs; and now tell us,
Donald, as we walk along, whether there are many poachers in this
neighbourhood besides yourself? Atweel no, forbye muckle Sandy, that
whiles taks a shot at a time.--We thought so. In these quiet braes there
can be little systematic poaching. Now and then, to be sure, a hare is
killed on a moonlight night among the cabbages behind the shieling; or a
blackcock, too conspicuous of a misty morning on a corn-stook, pays the
penalty of his depredations with his life. But these little acts of
delinquency are of no earthly moment; and hard must be the heart of the
proprietor who, for such petty doings, would have recourse to the
vengeance of the law. But were you ever in Lochaber, Donald?--Oo ay, and
Badenoch too.--And are you aware that in those districts where the deer
are plenty, there exist, at the present day, gangs of organised
poachers--fellows who follow no other calling--true Sons of the Mist,
who prey upon the red-deer of the mountain without troubling the herds
of the Sassenach; and who, though perfectly well known by head-mark to
keeper and constable, are still permitted with impunity to continue
their depredations from year to year?--I never heard tell of it.

No more have we. Notwithstanding Mr St John's usual accuracy and great
means of information, he has given, in the fifth chapter of his book, an
account of the Highland poachers which we cannot admit to be correct. In
every thinly-populated country, where there is abundance of game,
poaching must take place to a considerable extent, and indeed it is
impossible to prevent it. You never can convince the people, that the
statutory sin is a moral one; or that, in taking for their own
sustenance that which avowedly belongs to no one, they are acting in
opposition to a just or a salutary law. The question of _whence_ the
game is taken, is a subtilty too nice for their comprehension. They see
the stag running wild among the mountains, to-day on one laird's land,
and away to-morrow to another's, bearing with him, as it were, his own
transference of property; and they very naturally conclude that they
have an abstract right to attempt his capture, if they can. The
shepherd, who has thousands of acres under his sole superintendence, and
whose dwelling is situated far away on the hills, at the head, perhaps,
of some lonely stream, where no strange foot ever penetrates, is very
often, it must be confessed, a bit of a poacher. Small blame to him. He
has a gun--for the eagle, and the fox, and the raven, must be kept from
the lambs; and if, when prowling about with his weapon, in search of
vermin, he should chance to put up, as he is sure to do, a covey of
grouse, and recollecting at the moment that there is nothing in the
house beyond a peas-bannock and a diseased potato, should let fly, and
bring down a gor-cock, who will venture to assert that, under such
circumstances, he would hesitate to do the same? For every grouse so
slaughtered, the shepherd frees the country from a brace of vermin more
dangerous than fifty human poachers; for every day in the year they
breakfast, dine, and sup exclusively upon game.

Let the shepherd, then, take his pittance from the midst of your plenty
unmolested, if he does no worse. Why should his hut be searched by some
big brute of a Yorkshire keeper, for fud or feather, when you know
that, in all essentials, the man is as honest as steel--nay, that even
in this matter of game, he is attentive to your interests, watches the
young broods, protects the nests, and will tell you, when you come up
the glen, where the finest coveys are to be found? It is, however, quite
another thing if you detect him beginning to drive a contraband trade.
Home consumption may be winked at--foreign exportation is most decidedly
an unpardonable offence. The moment you find that he has entered into a
league with the poulterer or the coachman, give warning to the offending
MelibA"us, and let him seek a livelihood elsewhere. He is no longer
safe. His instinct is depraved. He has ceased to be a creature of
impulse, and has become the slave of a corrupted traffic. He is a
noxious member of the Anti-game-law League.

This sort of poaching we believe to be common enough in Scotland, and
there is also another kind more formidable, which, a few years ago, was
rather extensively practised. Parties of four or five strong,
able-bodied rascals, principally inmates of some of the smaller burghs
in the north, used to make their way to another district of country,
taking care, of course, that it was far enough from home to render any
chance of identification almost a nullity, and would there begin to
shoot, in absolute defiance of the keepers. Their method was not to
diverge, but to traverse the country as nearly as possible in a straight
line; so that very often they had left the lands of the most extensive
proprietors even before the alarm was given. These men neither courted
nor shunned a scuffle. They were confident in their strength of numbers,
but never abused it; nor, so far as we recollect, have any fatal results
attended this illegal practice. Be that as it may, the misdemeanour is a
very serious one, and the perpetrators of it, if discovered, would be
subjected to a severe punishment.

But Mr St John asserts the existence of a different class of poachers,
whose exploits, if real, are a deep reproach to the vigilance of our
respected friends the Sheriffs of Inverness, Ross, and Moray, as also to
the Substitutes and their Fiscals. According to the accounts which have
reached him, and which he seems implicitly to believe, there are, at
this moment, gangs of caterans existing among the mountains, who follow
no other occupation whatever than that of poaching. This they do not
even affect to disguise. They make a good income by the sale of game,
and by breaking dogs--they take the crown of the causeway in the country
towns, where they are perfectly well known, and where the men give them
"plenty of walking-room." On such occasions, they are accompanied with a
couple of magnificent stag-hounds, and in this guise they venture
undauntedly beneath the very nose of "ta Phuscal!" The Highland poacher,
says Mr St John, "is a bold fearless fellow, shooting openly by
daylight, taking his sport in the same manner as the laird, or the
Sassenach who rents the ground." That is to say, this outlaw, who has a
sheiling or a bothy on the laird's ground--for a man cannot live in the
Highlands without a roof to shelter him--shoots as openly on these
grounds as the laird himself, or the party who has rented them for the
season! If this be the case, the breed of Highland proprietors--ay, and
of Highland keepers--must have degenerated sadly during the last few
years. The idea that any such character would be permitted by even the
tamest Dumbiedykes to continue a permanent resident upon his lands, is
perfectly preposterous. Game is not considered as a matter of such
slight import in any part of the Highlands; neither is the arm of the
law so weak, that it does not interfere with most rapid and salutary
effect. No professed poacher, we aver, dare shoot openly upon the lands
of the laird by whose tenure or sufferance he maintains a roof above his
head; and it would be a libel upon those high-minded gentlemen to
suppose, that they knowingly gave countenance to any such character, on
the tacit understanding that their property should be spared while that
of their neighbours was invaded. In less than a week after the
information was given, the ruffian would be without any covering to his
head, save that which would be afforded him by the arches of the
Inverness or Fort-William jail.

Long tracts of country there are, comparatively unvisited--for example,
the district around Lochs Ericht and Lydoch, and the deserts towards the
head of the Spey. Yet, even there, the poacher is a marked man. The
necessity of finding a market for the produce of his spoil, lays him
open immediately to observation. If he chooses to burrow with the
badger, he may be said to have deserted his trade. He cannot by any
possibility, let him do what he will, elude the vigilance of the keeper;
and, if known, he is within the clutches of the law without the
necessity of immediate apprehension.

The truth of the matter is, that the poachers have no longer to deal
directly with the lairds. The number of moors which are rented to
Englishmen is now very great; and it is principally from these that the
depredators reap their harvest. Accordingly, no pains are spared to
impress the Sassenach with an exaggerated idea of the lawlessness of the
Gael, in every thing relating to the game-laws and the statutes of the
excise. The right of the people to poach is asserted as a kind of
indefeasible servitude which the law winks at, because it cannot
control; and we fear that, in some cases, the keepers, who care nothing
for the new-comers, indirectly lend themselves to the delusion. The
Englishman, on arriving at the moor which he has rented, is informed
that he must either compromise with the poachers, or submit to the loss
of his game--a kind of treaty which, we believe, is pretty often made in
the manner related by Mr St John.

"Some proprietors, or lessees of shooting-grounds, make a kind of half
compromise with the poachers, by allowing them to kill grouse as long as
they do not touch the deer; others, who are grouse-shooters, let them
kill the deer to save their birds. I have known an instance where a
prosecution was stopped by the aggrieved party being quietly made to
understand, that if it was carried on, a score of lads from the hills
would shoot over his ground for the rest of the season."

Utterly devoid of pluck must the said aggrieved party have been! Had he
carried on the prosecution firmly, and given notice to the authorities
of the audacious and impudent threat, with the names of the parties who
conveyed it, not a trigger would have been drawn upon his ground, or a
head of game destroyed. If the lessees of shooting-grounds are idiots
enough to enter into any such compromise, they will of course find
abundance of poachers to take advantage of it. Every shepherd on the
property will take regularly to the hill; for by such an arrangement the
market is virtually thrown open, and absolute impunity is promised. But
we venture to say that there is not one instance on record where a
Highland proprietor, of Scottish birth and breeding, has condescended to
make any such terms--indeed, we should like to see the ruffian who would
venture openly to propose them.

As to Mr St John's assertion, that "in Edinburgh there are numbers of
men who work as porters, &c., during the winter, and poach in the
Highlands during the autumn," we can assure him that he is labouring
under a total delusion. A more respectable set of men in their way than
the Edinburgh chairmen, is not to be found on the face of the civilised
globe. Not a man of those excellent creatures, who periodically play at
drafts at the corners of Hanover and Castle Street, ever went out in an
illicit manner to the moors: nor shall we except from this vindication
our old acquaintances at the Tron. Their worst vices are a strong
predilection for snuff and whisky; otherwise they are nearly faultless,
and they run beautifully in harness between the springy shafts of a
sedan. If they ever set foot upon the heather, it is in the capacity of
gillies, for which service they receive excellent wages, and capital
hands they are for looking after the comforts of the dogs. Does Mr St
John mean to insinuate that the twin stalwart tylers of the lodge
Canongate Kilwinning--whose fine features are so similar that it is
almost impossible to distinguish them--go out systematically in autumn
to the Highlands for the purpose of poaching? Why, to our own
knowledge, they are both most praiseworthy fathers of families,
exemplary husbands, well to do in the world, and, were they to die
to-morrow, there would not be a drop of black-cock's blood upon their
souls. Like testimony could we bear in favour of a hundred others, whom
you might trust with untold gold, not to speak of a wilderness of hares;
but to any one who knows them, it is unnecessary to plead further in the
cause of the caddies.

We fear, therefore, that in this particular of Highland poaching, Mr St
John has been slightly humbugged; and we cannot help thinking, that in
this work of mystification, his prime favourite and hero, Mr Ronald, has
had no inconsiderable share. As to the feats of this handsome desperado,
as related by himself, we accept them with a mental reservation.
Notwithstanding the acknowledged fact that the Grants existed
simultaneously with the sons of Anak, we doubt extremely whether any one
individual of that clan, or of any other, could, more especially when in
bed, and fatigued with a long day's exertion, overcome five sturdy
assailants. If so, the fellow would make money by hiring a caravan, and
exhibiting himself as a peripatetic Hercules: or, if such an exhibition
should be deemed derogatory to a poaching outlaw, he might enter the
pugilistic or wrestling ring, with the certainty of walking the course.
The man who, without taking the trouble to rise out of bed, could put
two big hulking Highlanders under him, breaking the ribs of one of them,
and keeping them down with one knee, and who in that posture could
successfully foil the attack of other three, is an ugly customer, and we
venture to say that his match is not to be found within the four seas of
Great Britain. The story of his tearing down the rafter, bestowing
breakfast upon his opponents, and afterwards pitching the keeper
deliberately into the burn, is so eminently apocryphal, that we cannot
help wondering at Mr St John for honouring it with a place in his pages.

Did you ever see a badger, Scrip? That, we suspect, is the vestibule of
one of them at which you are snuffing and scraping; but you have no
chance of getting at him, for there he is lying deep beneath the rock;
and, to say the truth, game as you are, we would rather keep you intact
from the perils of his powerful jaw. He is, we agree with Mr St John, an
ancient and respectable quadruped, by far too much maligned in this
wicked age; and--were it for no other reason than the inimitable
adaptation of his hair for shaving-brushes--we should sincerely regret
his extinction in the British isles. We like the chivalry with which our
author undertakes the defence of any libelled and persecuted animal, and
in no instance is he more happy than in his oration in favour of the
injured badger. Like Harry Bertram, he is not ashamed "of caring about a
brock."

"Notwithstanding the persecutions and indignities that he is unjustly
doomed to suffer, I maintain that he is far more respectable in his
habits than we generally consider him to be. 'Dirty as a badger,'
'stinking as a badger,' are two sayings often repeated, but quite
inapplicable to him. As far as we can learn of the domestic economy of
this animal when in a state of nature, he is remarkable for his
cleanliness--his extensive burrows are always kept perfectly clean, and
free from all offensive smell; no filth is ever found about his abode;
every thing likely to offend his olfactory nerves is carefully removed.
I, once, in the north of Scotland, fell in with a perfect colony of
badgers; they had taken up their abode in an unfrequented range of
wooded rocks, and appeared to have been little interrupted in their
possession of them. The footpaths to and from their numerous holes were
beaten quite hard; and what is remarkable and worthy of note, they had
different small pits dug at a certain distance from their abodes, which
were evidently used as receptacles for all offensive filth; every other
part of their colony was perfectly clean. A solitary badger's hole,
which I once had dug out, during the winter season, presented a curious
picture of his domestic and military arrangements--a hard and long job
it was for two men to achieve, the passage here and there turned in a
sharp angle round some projecting corners of rock, which he evidently
makes use of when attacked, as points of defence, making a stand at any
of these angles, where a dog could not scratch to enlarge the aperture,
and fighting from behind his stone buttress. After tracing out a long
winding passage, the workmen came to two branches in the hole, each
leading to good-sized chambers: in one of these was stored a
considerable quantity of dried grass, rolled up into balls as large as a
man's fist, and evidently intended for food; in the other chamber there
was a bed of soft dry grass and leaves--the sole inhabitant was a
peculiarly large old dog-badger. Besides coarse grasses, their food
consists of various roots; amongst others, I have frequently found about
their hole the bulb of the common wild blue hyacinth. Fruit of all kinds
and esculent vegetables form his repast, and I fear that he must plead
guilty to devouring any small animal that may come in his way, alive or
dead; though not being adapted for the chase, or even for any very
skilful strategy of war, I do not suppose that he can do much in
catching an unwounded bird or beast. Eggs are his delight, and a
partridge's nest with seventeen or eighteen eggs must afford him a fine
meal, particularly if he can surprise and kill the hen-bird also; snails
and worms which he finds above ground during his nocturnal rambles, are
likewise included in his bill of fare. I was one summer evening walking
home from fishing in Loch Ness, and having occasion to fasten up some
part of my tackle, and also expecting to meet my keeper, I sat down on
the shore of the loch. I remained some time, enjoying the lovely
prospect: the perfectly clear and unruffled loch lay before me,
reflecting the northern shore in its quiet water. The opposite banks
consisted, in some parts, of bright greensward, sloping to the water's
edge, and studded with some of the most beautiful birch-trees in
Scotland; several of the trees spreading out like the oak, and with
their ragged and ancient-looking bark resembling the cork-tree of
Spain--others drooping and weeping over the edge of the water in the
most lady-like and elegant manner. Parts of the loch were edged in by
old lichen-covered rocks; while farther on a magnificent scaur of red
stone rose perpendicularly from the water's edge to a very great height.
So clearly was every object on the opposite shore reflected in the lake
below, that it was difficult, nay impossible, to distinguish where the
water ended and the land commenced--the shadow from the reality. The sun
was already set, but its rays still illuminated the sky. It is said that
from the sublime to the ridiculous there is but one step;--and I was
just then startled from my reverie by a kind of grunt close to me, and
the apparition of a small waddling grey animal, who was busily employed
in hunting about the grass and stones at the edge of the loch; presently
another, and another, appeared in a little grassy glade which ran down
to the water's edge, till at last I saw seven of them busily at work
within a few yards of me, all coming from one direction. It at first
struck me that they were some farmer's pigs taking a distant ramble, but
I shortly saw that they were badgers, come from their fastnesses rather
earlier than usual, tempted by the quiet evening, and by a heavy summer
shower that was just over, and which had brought out an infinity of
large black snails and worms, on which the badgers were feeding with
good appetite. As I was dressed in grey and sitting on a grey rock, they
did not see me, but waddled about, sometimes close to me; only now and
then as they crossed my track they showed a slight uneasiness, smelling
the ground, and grunting gently. Presently a very large one, which I
took to be the mother of the rest, stood motionless for a moment
listening with great attention, and then giving a loud grunt, which
seemed perfectly understood by the others, she scuttled away, followed
by the whole lot. I was soon joined by my attendant, whose approach they
had heard long before my less acute ears gave me warning of his coming.
In trapping other vermin in these woods, we constantly caught
badgers--sometimes several were found in the traps; I always regretted
this, as my keeper was most unwilling to spare their lives, and I fancy
seldom did so. His arguments were tolerably cogent, I must confess. When
I tried to persuade him that they were quite harmless, he answered me by
asking--'Then why, sir, have they got such teeth, if they don't live,
like a dog or fox, on flesh?--and why do they get caught so often in
traps baited with rabbits?' I could not but admit that they had most
carnivorous-looking teeth, and well adapted to act on the offensive as
well as defensive, or to crunch the bones of any young hare, rabbit, or
pheasant that came in their way."

But now we have reached the moors, and for the next few hours we shall
follow out the Wild Sports for ourselves. Ian, let loose the dogs.

Oh, pleasant--pleasant and cool are the waters of the mountain well! It
is now past noonday, and we shall call a halt for a while. Donald, let
us see what is in that bag. Twelve brace and a half of grouse, three
blackcock, a leash of snipes, two ditto of golden plovers, three hares,
and the mallard that we raised from the rushes. Quite enough, we think,
for any rational sportsman's recreation, howbeit we have a few hours yet
before us. Somewhere, we think, in the other bag, there should be a cold
fowl, or some such kickshaw, with, if we mistake not, a vision of beef,
and a certain pewter flask.--Thank you. Now, let us all down by the side
of the spring, and to luncheon with what appetite we may.

Are there any deer on these hills, Ian? But seldom. Occasionally a
straggler may come over from one of the upper forests, but there are too
many sheep about; and the deer, though they will herd sometimes with
black cattle, have a rooted antipathy to the others. No sight is finer
than that of a stag surrounded by his hinds; but it is late in the year
that the spectacle becomes most imposing, and we would have given
something to have been present with Mr St John on the following
occasion:--

"The red deer had just commenced what is called by the Highlanders
roaring, _i. e._ uttering their loud cries of defiance to rival stags,
and of warning to their rival mistresses.

"There had been seen, and reported to me, a particularly large and fine
antlered stag, whose branching honours I wished to transfer from the
mountain side to the walls of my own hall. Donald and myself
accordingly, one fine morning, early in October, started before daybreak
for a distant part of the mountain, where we expected to find him; and
we resolved to pass the night at a shepherd's house far up in the hills,
if we found that our chase led us too far from home to return the same
evening.

"Long was our walk that day before we saw horn or hoof; many a likely
burn and corrie did we search in vain. The shepherds had been scouring
the hills the day before for their sheep, to divide those which were to
winter in the low ground from those which were to remain on the hills.
However, the day was fine and frosty, and we were in the midst of some
of the most magnificent scenery in Scotland; so that I, at least, was
not much distressed at our want of luck. Poor Donald, who had not the
same enjoyment in the beauty of the scene, unless it were enlivened by a
herd of deer here and there, began to grumble and lament our hard fate;
particularly as towards evening wild masses of cloud began to sweep up
the glens and along the sides of the mountain, and every now and then a
storm of cold rain and sleet added to the discomfort of our position.
There was, however, something so very desolate and wild in the scene and
the day, that, wrapt in my plaid, I stalked slowly on, enjoying the
whole thing as much as if the elements had been in better temper, and
the Goddess of Hunting propitious.

"We came in the afternoon to a rocky burn, along the course of which was
our line of march. To the left rose an interminable-looking mountain,
over the sides of which was scattered a wilderness of grey rock and
stone, sometimes forming immense precipices, and in other places
degenerating into large tracts of loose and water-worn grey shingle,
apparently collected and heaped together by the winter floods. Great
masses of rock were scattered about, resting on their angles, and
looking as if the wind, which was blowing a perfect gale, would hurl
them down on us.

"Amongst all this dreary waste of rock and stone, there were large
patches of bright green pasture, and rushes on the level spots, formed
by the damming up of the springs and mountain streams.

"Stretching away to our right was a great expanse of brown heather and
swampy ground, dotted with innumerable pools of black-looking water. The
horizon on every side was shut out by the approaching masses of rain and
drift. The clouds closed round us, and the rain began to fall in
straight hard torrents; at the same time, however, completely allaying
the wind.

"'Well, well,' said Donald, 'I just dinna ken what to do.' Even I began
to think that we might as well have remained at home; but, putting the
best face on the matter, we got under a projecting bank of the burn, and
took out our provision of oatcake and cold grouse, and having demolished
that, and made a considerable vacuum in the whisky flask, I lit my
cigar, and meditated on the vanity of human pursuits in general, and of
deer-stalking in particular, while dreamy visions of balls, operas, and
the last pair of blue eyes that I had sworn everlasting allegiance to,
passed before me.

"Donald was employed in the more useful employment of bobbing for burn
trout with a line and hook he had produced out of his bonnet--that
wonderful blue bonnet, which, like the bag in the fairy tale, contains
any thing and every thing which is required at a moment's notice. His
bait was the worms which in a somewhat sulky mood he kicked out of
their damp homes about the edge of the burn. Presently the ring-ousel
began to whistle on the hill-side, and the cock-grouse to crow in the
valley below us. Roused by these omens of better weather, I looked out
from our shelter and saw the face of the sun struggling to show itself
through the masses of cloud, while the rain fell in larger but more
scattered drops. In a quarter of an hour the clouds were rapidly
disappearing, and the face of the hill as quickly opening to our view.
We remained under shelter a few minutes longer, when suddenly, as if by
magic, or like the lifting of the curtain at a theatre, the whole hill
was perfectly clear from clouds, and looked more bright and splendidly
beautiful than any thing I had ever seen. No symptoms were left of the
rain, excepting the drops on the heather, which shone like diamonds in
the evening sun. The masses of rock came out in every degree of light
and shade, from dazzling white to the darkest purple, streaked here and
there with the overpourings of the swollen rills and springs, which
danced and leapt from rock to rock, and from crag to crag, looking like
streams of silver.

"'How beautiful!' was both my inward and outward exclamation. 'Deed it's
not just so dour as it was,' said Donald; 'but, the Lord guide us! look
at yon,' he continued, fixing his eye on a distant slope, at the same
time slowly winding up his line and pouching his trout, of which he had
caught a goodly number. 'Tak your perspective, sir, and look there,' he
added, pointing with his chin. I accordingly took my perspective, as he
always called my pocket-telescope, and saw a long line of deer winding
from amongst the broken granite in single file down towards us. They
kept advancing one after the other, and had a most singular appearance
as their line followed the undulations of the ground. They came slowly
on, to the number of more than sixty (all hinds, not a horn amongst
them), till they arrived at a piece of table-land four or five hundred
yards from us, when they spread about to feed, occasionally shaking off
the raindrops from their hides, much in the same manner as a dog does on
coming out of the water.

"'They are no that canny,' said Donald. '_Nous verrons_,' said I.
'What's your wull?' was his answer; 'I'm no understanding Latin, though
my wife has a cousin who is a placed minister.' 'Why, Donald, I meant to
say that we shall soon see whether they are canny or not: a rifle-ball
is a sure remedy for all witchcraft.' Certainly there was something
rather startling in the way they all suddenly appeared as it were from
the bowels of the mountain, and the deliberate, unconcerned manner in
which they set to work feeding like so many tame cattle.

"We had but a short distance to stalk. I kept the course of a small
stream which led through the middle of the herd; Donald followed me with
my gun. We crept up till we reckoned that we must be within an easy
shot, and then, looking most cautiously through the crevices and cuts in
the bank, I saw that we were in the very centre of the herd: many of the
deer were within twenty or thirty yards, and all feeding quietly and
unconscious of any danger. Amongst the nearest to me was a remarkably
large hind, which we had before observed as being the leader and biggest
of the herd, I made a sign to Donald that I would shoot her, and left
him to take what he liked of the flock after I fired.

"Taking a deliberate and cool aim at her shoulder, I pulled the trigger;
but, alas! the wet had got between the cap and nipple-end. All that
followed was a harmless snap: the deer heard it, and, starting from
their food, rushed together in a confused heap, as if to give Donald a
fair chance at the entire flock, a kind of shot he rather rejoiced in.
Before I could get a dry cap on my gun, snap, snap, went both his
barrels; and when I looked up, it was but to see the whole herd quietly
trotting up the hill, out of shot, but apparently not very much
frightened, as they had not seen us, or found out exactly where the
sound came from. 'We are just twa fules, begging your honour's pardon,
and only fit to weave hose by the ingle,' said Donald. I could not
contradict him. The mischief was done; so we had nothing for it but to
wipe out our guns as well as we could, and proceed on our wandering. We
followed the probable line of the deers' march, and before night saw
them in a distant valley feeding again quite unconcernedly.

"'Hark! what is that?' said I, as a hollow roar like an angry bull was
heard not far from us. 'Kep down, kep down,' said Donald, suiting the
action to the word, and pressing me down with his hand; 'it's just a big
staig.' All the hinds looked up, and, following the direction of their
heads, we saw an immense hart coming over the brow of the hill three
hundred yards from us. He might easily have seen us, but seemed too
intent on the hinds to think of any thing else. On the height of the
hill he halted, and, stretching out his neck and lowering his head,
bellowed again. He then rushed down the hill like a mad beast: when
half-way down he was answered from a distance by another stag. He
instantly halted, and, looking in that direction, roared repeatedly,
while we could see in the evening air, which had become cold and frosty,
his breath coming out of his nostrils like smoke. Presently he was
answered by another and another stag, and the whole distance seemed
alive with them. A more unearthly noise I never heard, as it echoed and
re-echoed through the rocky glens that surrounded us.

"The setting sun threw a strong light on the first comer, casting a kind
of yellow glare on his horns and head, while his body was in deep shade,
giving him a most singular appearance, particularly when combined with
his hoarse and strange bellowing. As the evening closed in, their cries
became almost incessant, while here and there we heard the clash of
horns as two rival stags met and fought a few rounds together. None,
however, seemed inclined to try their strength with the large hart who
had first appeared. The last time we saw him, in the gloom of the
evening, he was rolling in a small pool of water, with several of the
hinds standing quietly round him; while the smaller stags kept passing
to and fro near the hinds, but afraid to approach too close to their
watchful rival, who was always ready to jump up and dash at any of them
who ventured within a certain distance of his seraglio. 'Donald,' I
whispered, 'I would not have lost this sight for a hundred pounds.'
'Deed no, its grand,' said he. 'In all my travels on the hill I never
saw the like.' Indeed it is very seldom that chances combine to enable a
deer-stalker to quietly look on at such a strange meeting of deer as we
had witnessed that evening. But night was coming on, and though the moon
was clear and full, we did not like to start off for the shepherd's
house, through the swamps and swollen burns among which we should have
had to pass; nor did we forget that our road would be through the valley
where all this congregation of deer were. So after consulting, we turned
off to leeward to bivouac amongst the rocks at the back of the hill, at
a sufficient distance from the deer not to disturb them by our necessary
occupation of cooking the trout, which our evening meal was to consist
of. Having hunted out some of the driest of the fir-roots which were in
abundance near us, we soon made a bright fire out of view of the deer,
and, after eating some fish, and drying our clothes pretty well, we
found a snug corner in the rocks, where, wrapped up in our plaids and
covered with heather, we arranged ourselves to sleep.

"Several times during the night I got up and listened to the wild
bellowing of the deer: sometimes it sounded close to us, and at other
times far away. To an unaccustomed ear it might easily have passed for
the roaring of a host of much more dangerous wild beasts, so loud and
hollow did it sound. I awoke in the morning cold and stiff, but soon put
my blood into circulation by running two or three times up and down a
steep bit of the hill. As for Donald, he shook himself, took a pinch of
snuff, and was all right. The sun was not yet above the horizon, though
the tops of the mountains to the west were already brightly gilt by its
rays, and the grouse-cocks were answering each other in every
direction."

A graphic and most true description! The same gathering of the deer, but
on a far larger scale, may be seen in the glens near the centre of
Sutherland, hard by the banks of Loch Naver. Many hundreds of them
congregate there together at the bleak season of their love; and the
bellowing of the stags may be heard miles off among the solitude of the
mountain. Nor is it altogether safe at that time to cross their path.
The hart--a dangerous brute whenever brought to bay--then appears to
lose all trace of his customary timidity, and will advance against the
intruder, be he who he may, with levelled antler and stamping hoof, as
becomes the acknowledged leader, bashaw, and champion of the herd. Also
among the Coolin hills, perhaps the wildest of all our Highland scenery,
where the dark rain-clouds of the Atlantic stretch from peak to peak of
the jagged heights--where the ghostlike silence strikes you with
unwonted awe, and the echo of your own footfall rings startlingly on the
ear from the metallic cliffs of Hyperstein.

What is it, Ian? As we live, Orleans is pointing in yon correi, and
Bordeaux backing him like a Trojan. Soho, Tours! Now for it. Black game,
we rather think. Well roaded, dogs! Bang! An old cock. Ian, you may pick
him up.

FOOTNOTE:

[1] _Wild Sports and Natural History of the Highlands._ From the
Journals of CHARLES ST JOHN, Esq. Murray. London: 1846.




LETTERS AND IMPRESSIONS FROM PARIS.[2]


THE gay metropolis of France has not lacked chroniclers, whether
indigenous or foreign. And no wonder. The subject is inexhaustible, the
mine can never be worn out. Paris is a huge kaleidoscope, in which the
slightest movement of the hand of time produces fantastic changes and
still recurring novelties. Central in position, it is the rendezvous of
Europe. London is respected for its size, wealth, and commerce, and as
the capital of the great empire on which the sun never sets; Paris is
loved for its pleasures and pastimes, its amusements and dissipations.
The one is the money-getter's Eldorado, the other the pleasure-seeker's
paradise. The former is viewed with wonder and admiration; for size it
is a province, for population a kingdom. But Paris, the modern Babel,
with its boulevards and palaces, its five-and-twenty theatres, its gaudy
restaurants and glittering coffee-houses, its light and cheerful aspect,
so different from the soot-grimed walls of the English capital, is the
land of promise to truant gentlemen and erratic ladies, whether from the
Don or the Danube, the Rhine or the Wolga, from the frozen steppes of
the chilly north, or the orange groves of the sunny south. A library has
been written to exhibit its physiognomy; thousands of pens have laboured
to depict the peculiarities of its population, floating and stationary.

Amongst those who have most recently attempted the task, Mr Karl
Gutzkow, a dramatist of some fame in his own land, holds a respectable
place. He has recorded in print the results of two visits to Paris, paid
in 1842 and in the present year. The self-imposed labour has been
creditably performed; much truth and sharpness of observation are
manifest in his pages, although here and there a triviality forces a
smile, a far-fetched idea or a bizarre opinion causes a start. Mr
Gutzkow partakes a fault common to many of his countrymen--a tendency to
extremes, an aptness either to trifle or to soar, now playing on the
ground with the children, then floating in the clouds with mystical
familiars, or on a winged hobbyhorse. Desultory in style, he neglects
the classification of his subject. Abruptly passing from the grave to
the light, from the solid to the frothy, he breaks off a profound
disquisition or philosophical argument to chatter about the new
vaudeville, and glides from a scandalous anecdote of an actress into the
policy of Louis Philippe. His frequent and capricious transitions are
not disagreeable, and help one pleasantly enough through the book, but a
methodical arrangement would be more favourable to the reader's memory.
As it is, we lay down the volume with a perfect jumble in our brains,
made up of the sayings, doings, qualities, and characteristics of
actors, authors, statesmen, communists, journalists, and of the various
other classes concerning whom Mr Gutzkow discourses, introducing them
just as they occur to him, or as he happened to meet with them, and in
some instances returning three or four times to the same individual. The
first part of the book, which is the most lengthy and important, is in
the form of letters, and was perhaps actually written to friends in
Germany. This would account for its desultoriness and medley of matter.
The second portion, written during or subsequently to a recent visit to
Paris, serves as an appendix, and as a rectification of what came
before. The author troubles himself little about places; he went to see
Parisians rather than to gaze at Paris, to study men rather than to
admire monuments, and has the good sense to avoid prattling about things
that have been described and discussed by more common-place writers than
himself. Well provided with introductions, he made the acquaintance of
numerous notabilities, both political and literary, and of them he
gives abundant details: an eager play-goer, his theatrical criticisms
are bold, minute, and often exceedingly happy; an observant man, his
remarks on the social condition of Paris and of France are both acute
and interesting. Let us follow him page by page through his fifth letter
or chapter, the first that relates to Paris. Those that precede contain
an account of his journey from Hanover. On his entrance into France, he
encounters various petty disagreeables, in the shape of ill-hung
vehicles, sulky conductors, bad dinners, extravagant prices, and
attempts at extortion, which stir up his bile, accustomed as he is to
the moderate charges, smiling waiters, and snug although slow
_eilwagens_ of his own country. But he has resolved neither to grumble
at trifles nor to judge hastily. A visit to France, and especially to
Paris, has long been his darling project. His greatest fear is to be
disappointed--imagination, especially that of a German, is so apt to
outrun reality.

"Every _sou_ upon which I read 'Republique FranASec.aise,' every portrait of
the unhappy Louis upon the coarse copper money, makes such impression on
me, that I no longer think of any thing but the historical ground under
my feet; and consoled for my trifling grievances, upon a fine spring
morning I enter the great Babel through the BarriA"re St Denis.

"I am in France, in Paris. I must reflect, in order to ascertain what
was my first thought. As a boy, I hated France and loved Paris. My
thoughts clung fast to Germany's fall and Germany's greatness; my
feelings, my fancy, ranged through the French capital, of which I had
early heard much from my father, who had twice marched thither as a
Prussian soldier and conqueror." Then come sundry reflections on the
July revolution, and its effect on Europe. "These are chains of thought
which hereafter will occupy us much. I must now think for a while of the
France that I brought with me, because the one I have found is likely to
lead me astray. Louis Philippe, Guizot, the armed peace, the peace at
all price, the chamber of peers, the attempts on the king's life, the
deputies, the _A(C)piciers_, the great men and the little intrigues, art
and science, VA(C)ry, Vefour, Musard--I am really puzzled not to forget
something of what I previously knew. A hackney-coach horse, lying dead
upon the boulevard, preoccupies me more than yonder _hA'tel des
Capucins_, where Guizot gives his dinners. A wood-pavement at the end of
the Rue Richelieu sets me a-thinking more than the bulletin of to-day's
_DA(C)bats_. They pave Paris with wood to deprive revolutions of building
materials. Barricades are not to be made out of blocks. Better that
those who cannot hear should be run over than that those who cannot see
should risk to fall from their high estate."

Considering that, when this was written, all the wood-pavement in Paris
might have been covered with a Turkey carpet, and that up to this day
its superficies has very little increased, Mr Gutzkow's discovery has
much the appearance of a mare's nest. A better antidote to the stone
within Paris is to be found in the stone around it. The fortifications
will match the barricades. But it would be unfair to criticise too
severely the crude impressions of a novice, suddenly set down amidst the
turmoil, bustle, tumult, and fever of the French capital. From the
pavements we pass to the promenaders.

"Pity that black should this year be the fashion for ladies' dresses.
The mourning garments clash with the freshness of spring. The heavens
are blue, the sun shines, the trees already burst into leaf, the
fountains round the obelisk throw their countless diamonds into the air.
The exhibition of pictures has just opened. Shall I go thither, and
exchange this violet-scented atmosphere for the odour of the varnish? In
Paris the exhibition comes with the violets--in Berlin with the asters.
I prefer the autumn show at Berlin to the spring exhibition in Paris;
also intrinsically, with respect to art. Our German painters have more
poetry. With us painting is lyric--here all is, or strives to be,
dramatic. Every picture seems to thrust itself forward and demand
applause. I see great effects, but little feeling. Religion is
represented by a few gigantic altar-pieces. They are the offerings of a
devotion which only thinks of the saints because new churches require
new pictures. New churches consist of stone, wood, gold, silver, an
organ, an altar-piece. These pictures of saints belong to the ministry
of public works; it is easy to see that they have been done to order.
Besides them, the gallery is full of Oriental scenes, family pictures
and portraits. The first are to inspire enthusiasm for Algiers, the
second illustrate the happiness of wedded life, the last are matrimonial
advertisements in oil colour. In the family groups, children and little
dogs are most prominent; of the male portraits the beard is the
principal part. It is useless to look for men here; one sees nothing but
hair. Everybody wears a beard _A  la mode du moyen Acge--flAcneurs_,
coachmen, marquises, artisans. On all sides one is surrounded with
Vandyke and Rubens heads, poetical beards and hair, contrasting
strangely with prosaic eyes, pallid lips, and the graceless costumes of
the nineteenth century."

After some more very negative praise of French art, Mr Gutzkow gets sick
of turpentine and confinement, and rushes out of the Louvre into the
sunshine and the Champs ElysA(C)es, where the sight of the throng of
dashing equipages, gay cavaliers, and pretty amazons, instead of causing
him to throw up his hat and bless his stars for having conducted him
into such ways of pleasantness, renders him melancholy and metaphysical.
He is moralising on the Parisian ladies, when a cloud of dust and the
clatter of cavalry give a new turn to his reflections. "Here," he
exclaims, "comes an example of earthly happiness. Louis Philippe, King
of the French, surrounded by a half squadron of his body-guard; a narrow
and scarcely perceptible window in his deep six-horse carriage; a King,
flying by, resting not, leaning back in his coach, not venturing to look
out, breathing with difficulty under the shirt of mail which, according
to popular belief, he ever wears beneath his clothes. But of this more
hereafter." Quite enough as it is, Mr Gutzkow; and you are right, being
in so gloomy a mood, to run off to the Theatre FranASec.ais, and try to
dissipate your vapours by seeing Rachel in ChimA"ne. An unfavourable
criticism of that actress, retracted at a later period, closes the
chapter. ChimA"ne is one of Rachel's worst parts, and her critic was not
in his best humour. He found her cold, and deficient in voice.
Subsequently, in Joan of Arc, she fully redeemed herself in his opinion,
although he had seen the best German actresses in Schiller's tragedy of
that name, with which the work of Soumet ill bears comparison. Here, he
acknowledges, she raised herself to an artistical elevation to which no
German actress of the present day can hope to attain.

The next actress of whom Mr Gutzkow records his judgment, is the queen
of the vaudeville, the faded but still fascinating Dejazet. From the
classic hall of the "FranASec.ais" to the agreeable little den of iniquity
at the other end of the Palais Royal, the distance was not great, but
the transition was very violent. It was passing from a funeral to an
orgie, thus to leave PhA"dre for FrA(C)tillon, Rachel for Dejazet. "She
performed in a little piece called the _Fille de Dominique_, in which
she represents the daughter of a deceased royal comedian of the days of
MoliA"re. She comes to Paris to get admitted into the troop to which her
father belonged. She is to give proofs of her talents, and has already
done so before any one suspects it. She has been to Baron, the comedian,
and presented herself alternately as a peasant girl, a fantastical lady,
and as a young drummer of the Royal Guard. She is seen by the audience
in all these parts. Her first word, her first step, convinced me of the
great fidelity of her acting. She is no queen, no fairy, or great dame
out of Scribe's comedies, but the peasant girl, the grisette, the
heroine of the vaudeville. All about her is arch, droll, true. Her
gestures are extraordinarily correct and steady; and in spite of her
harsh counter-tenor, and of an organ in which many a wild night and
champagne debauch may be traced, she sings her couplets with clearness
of intonation, grace of execution, and not unfrequently with most
touching effect. I am at a loss fully to explain and define her very
peculiar style of acting."

Mr Gutzkow thought that the French public had become careless of
Dejazet, even when he first saw her, now four years ago. We believe he
is mistaken, and that she is as much appreciated as ever, in spite of
her five and forty years, soon to be converted into fifty. Although
haggard from vigils and dissipation, neither on the stage nor off it
does she look her age. The good heart and joyous disposition that have
endeared her to her comrades of the buskin, have in some degree
neutralized the effects of her excesses. On his second visit to Paris,
our author finds her grown exceedingly old, and depreciates as much as
he before praised her--calls her a rouged corpse, and makes all manner
of uncivil and unsavoury comments and comparisons. He goes so far as to
style her acting in 1846, languid, feeble, and insipid. _Qui trop dit,
ne dit rien_, and this is palpable exaggeration. We perceive scarcely
any difference in Dejazet now and five years ago. Her singing voice may
be a little less sure, her eyes a trifle hollower--she may need rather
more paint to conceal the inroads of time on her _piquante_ and
_spirituelle_ physiognomy, but she preserves the same spirit and
vivacity, _verve_ and vigour. Her appearance this spring at the VariA(C)tA(C)s
theatre, in the vaudeville of _Gentil Bernard_, was a triumph of talent
over time; and crowded houses, attracted not by the excellence of the
piece, but by the perfection of the acting, proved that Dejazet is
still, which she long has been, the pet of the Parisians. She is an
extraordinary actress--so true to nature, possessed of such perfect
judgment, and grace of gesticulation. Not a movement of her hand, a turn
of her head, an inflexion of her voice, but has its signification and
produces its effect. Her performance in the picturesque and bustling
second act of _Gentil Bernard_ is faultless. The frequenters of St
James's theatre have this summer had an opportunity of appreciating it.
At Paris she was better supported. Lafont makes a very fair La Tulipe,
but not so good a one as Hoffmann. The inferior parts, also, were far
better filled on the Boulevard des Italiens, than in King Street, St
James's, where the whole weight of the protracted and not very
interesting vaudeville rested upon the shoulders of Dejazet.

The success of Rachel has roused the ambition and raised the reputation
of the daughters of Israel, who are now quite in vogue at the Paris
theatres. Mesdemoiselles Rebecca and Worms, at the "FranASec.ais," are both
Jewesses; at the minor theatre of the "Folies Dramatiques," Judith
delights a motley audience by her able enactment of the grisette.
Instances have been known of very Christian young ladies feigning
themselves of the faith of Moses, in hope that the fraud might
facilitate their admission to the Thespian arena.

A severe judgment is passed by Mr Gutzkow upon the present state of
musical art and representations in the French capital. The opera, he
affirms, and not without reason, is on its last legs, sustained only by
the ballet, by the beauty of the scenery and costumes. Duprez has had
his day, Madame Stolz is among the middlings, Barroilhet alone may be
reckoned a first-rate singer. Our author saw the _ElA-sir d'Amore_ given
by a company which he says would hardly be listened to in a German
provincial town. Madame Stolz was then absent on a starring expedition.
The ballet of _Paquita_ was some compensation for the poorness of the
singing. "At the 'Italiens' I heard the _Barber of Seville_, with
Lablache, Ronconi, Tagliafico, Mario, and Persiani. This opera is
considered the triumph of the Italian company; but I confess that the
magnificence of the theatre, the high charge for admission, the Ohs! and
Ahs! of the English women in the boxes, just arrived from London, and
who had never before heard good music, were all insufficient to blind me
with respect to the merits of the performance. I look upon the Italian
opera at Paris as a mystification on the very largest scale, a thorough
classic-Italian swindle. That a German company, composed of our best
opera singers, would be infinitely superior to this Italian one, appears
to me to admit of no dispute; but even at an ordinary theatre in Germany
or Italy, one hears as good singing, perhaps with the exception of
Lablache in _Bartolo_--and even he is cold and careless, devoid of
freshness, and always seems to say to the audience, 'You stupid people,
take that for your twelve francs a-seat!' The quackery of this theatre
becomes the more intelligible when we reflect that, in all Paris, there
is no other where a single note of Italian opera music can be heard, the
Italians having the monopoly of the sweet melodies of their native
country. The Grand Opera, and the Opera Comique, deal in French music
only; and the pleasure obtainable in any small German town possessing a
theatre, that, namely, of hearing _Norma_, the _Somnambula_, and other
similar operas, is nowhere to be procured except by paying extravagant
prices to these half-dozen Italians." This statement is not quite
correct. The Opera Comique, it is true, gives nothing but French music,
and poor enough it is. In this particular, the Parisians are not
difficult to satisfy. A good libretto, smart scenery, a hard-handed
_claque_, a few skilful _reclames_, and laudatory paragraphs in the
newspapers, will create an enthusiasm even for the insipid music of
Monsieur HalA(C)vy, and sustain the _Mousquetaires de la Reine_, or similar
mawkish compositions, through a whole season. But at the AcadA(C)mie
Royale, good operas are to be heard, although the singing be deficient.
Meyerbeer, Rossini, and Donizetti are not the names of Frenchmen; and
the operas of these and other foreign composers are constantly given in
the Rue Lepelletier.

"Several German opera companies have visited Paris; have begun well, and
finished badly. And here our most brilliant singers would meet the same
fate, because they would be allowed to sing nothing but German music;
and German operas are not listened to in Paris. But if it were possible,
with only a moderately good German company, to give _Norma_, the
_Barber_, _Robert the Devil_, the _Huguenots_, and Mozart's operas,
(omitting the dialogue,) that company, supported by a good orchestra,
and performing in a decent theatre, would carry all before them, and
return to Germany laden with fame and gold. But that is the difficulty.
In France every one must stick to a speciality. From the German they
will hear nothing but German music, and the representation of other
operas is positively forbidden him."

Without going the lengths that Mr Gutzkow does, or by any means
coinciding in his sweeping censure of the artists who now furnish forth
the Italian theatres of London and Paris, we doubt whether it is not
fashion, as much as the excellence of the music, that draws the A(C)lite of
French and English society to the Haymarket and the Salle Ventadour, and
whether a German company of equal intrinsic merit would receive adequate
patronage and encouragement in either capital, supposing even that they
were allowed their choice of operas, and had the benefit of a handsome
theatre and an able management. Certainly they would not get the
enormous salaries which, in combination with the greediness of managers,
and the manA"uvres of ticket-sellers, render the enjoyment of a good
opera, in London at least, a luxury attainable but by an exceedingly
limited class.

Although the prices of admission to most of the Paris theatres are
moderate, they are occasionally raised by illegitimate stratagems. This
is especially the case when a new piece is performed from which much is
expected, or concerning which, by puffery or for other reasons, the
public curiosity has been greatly excited. On such occasions, the first
few representations are sometimes rendered doubly and even trebly
productive. The prices cannot be raised at the theatre itself without
express permission from the authorities, and as this is seldom granted,
another plan is resorted to. The box-office is transferred _de facto_
from the corridor of the theatre to the open street. Whoever applies for
tickets is told that there is not one left to any part of the house.
Nothing then remains but to have recourse to the ticket-brokers, who
carry on their disreputable commerce in the streets or at the
wine-shops. In the Rue Montmartre, within a few doors of the Boulevard,
there is a _marchand de vin_, whose establishment is a grand rendezvous
of these gentry. They are the agents of the managers of the theatres.
The latter sell all the tickets to themselves a fortnight beforehand,
inscribing on the _coupons_ the names of imaginary buyers, and then
distribute them amongst the brokers, who sell them in front of the
theatre to eager theatrical amateurs, as a great favour, and as the last
obtainable tickets, at two or three times the regulation price. The
theatre pockets the profits, minus a brokerage. In this manner a first
representation at the large theatre of the Porte St Martin may be made
to yield ten thousand francs. When a theatre is out of vogue, and
filling poorly, the same system is adopted; but in the contrary sense.
The _marchands de billets_ are provided with tickets which they sell at
less than the established price.

When De Balzac's drama, _Les ExpA(C)dients de Quinola_, was brought out at
the "Odeon," he compounded to receive the proceeds of the first three
nights, in lieu of a share of each representation whilst the piece
should run. The play had been greatly talked of, the steam had been got
up in every way, and the public was in a fever. It is customary enough
in Paris for dramatic authors, in order at once to get paid for their
labours, to barter their _droits d'auteur_ for the entire profits of the
first representations. Scribe does it at the FranASec.ais. When the tickets
are sold at the usual prices, this financial arrangement is regular
enough, and concerns nobody but author and manager. But that would not
satisfy Balzac, who is notorious for his avarice. He set the brokers to
work, and drove the prices up to the highest possible point, fifteen
francs for a stall, instead of five, a hundred francs for a box and so
forth. "Under such circumstances," says Mr Gutzkow, "it cannot be
wondered if people forgot _Eugenie Grandet_ and the _PA"re Goriot_, and
hissed his play. To-day, nearly a hundred criticisms of _Quinola_ have
appeared. It is my belief, that, instead of reading them, Balzac is
counting his five-franc pieces." The drama fell from want of merit as
well as from the indignation excited by the author's greed. Although
Balzac's books are read and admired--some of them at least--personally
he is most unpopular. He is accused, and not without reason, of
arrogance and avarice. His assumption and conceit are evident in his
works. He has sacrificed his fame to love of gold; for one good book he
has produced two that are trash; by speculating on his reputation, he
has undermined and nearly destroyed it. Moreover, he has committed the
enormous blunder of affecting to despise the press, which consequently
shows him no mercy. For a fortnight after the appearance of
_Quinola_--which, although defective as a dramatic composition, was not
without its merits--the unlucky play served as a daily laughing-stock
and whipping-post to the battalion of Parisian critics. Janin led the
way; a host of minor wasps followed in his wake, and threw themselves
with deafening hum and sharp sting against the devoted head of M. de
Balzac. He bore their aggravating assaults with great apparent
indifference, consoled for want of friends by well-lined pockets.

At the "Ambigu Comique," Mr Gutzkow attended a performance of the
_Mousquetaires_, a melo-drama founded on Dumas's romance of _Vingt Ans
AprA"s_. Its success was prodigious; it was performed the whole of last
winter and spring, upwards of one hundred and fifty nights, always to
crowded houses. The novel was dramatised by Dumas himself, with the
assistance of one of his literary subordinates, M. Auguste Maquet. One
or two of the actors at the "Ambigu" are to form part of the troop at M.
Dumas's new theatre, now erecting, and which will open, it is said, this
autumn. It is built by a company, and Dumas has engaged to write for it
a certain number of plays yearly. The Duke of Montpensier gives it his
name.

It will be the twenty-third theatre in Paris. Mr Gutzkow lifts up his
hands and eyes in astonishment and admiration. "And this is granted," he
says, "to that same Alexander Dumas, who, two years ago, publicly
declared, that the stage and modern literature, in France especially,
suffer from the indifference of the king!" He proceeds to compare this
good-humoured facility with the scanty amount of encouragement given to
theatricals in Prussia, with which he appears as moderately satisfied as
with various other matters in the Fatherland. In Berlin, he says,
although another theatre is sadly wanted, there is little chance of its
being conceded either to a dramatic author or to any one else. But to
follow him in his complaints, would lead us from Paris.

It is somewhat strange that Mr Gutzkow, himself a dramatist, and who
tells us that his chief object in visiting Paris was to see the
remarkable men of France, did not make the acquaintance of M. Dumas. We
infer, at least, that he did not, for the above passing reference is all
that his book contains touching the distinguished author of _AngA"le and
Antony_, of _Monte Christo_ and the _Mousquetaires_. To numerous other
_littA(C)rateurs_, of greater and less merit, he sought and obtained
introductions, and of them gives minute and interesting details. In
Germany, as in England, Dumas is better known and more popular than any
other French novelist; but, independently of that circumstance, as a
brother dramatist, we wonder Mr Gutzkow neglected him. Perhaps, since he
blames Balzac for overproduction, and speaks with aversion to the system
of bookmaking, he eschewed the society of Dumas for a similar reason.
Balzac is believed, at any rate, to write his books himself, although
they suffer from haste; but Dumas has been openly and repeatedly accused
of having his books written for him, and of maintaining a regular
establishment of literary aide-de-camps, perpetually busied in the
fabrication of tale, novel, and romance, whose productions he copies and
signs, and then gives to the world as his own. His immense fertility has
been the origin of this charge, which may be false, although appearances
are really in favour of its truth. It seems physically impossible that
one man should accomplish the mere pen and ink work of M. Dumas's
literary labours; and even if, like Napoleon, he had the faculty of
dictating to two or three different secretaries at once, it would
scarcely account for the number of volumes he annually puts forth. From
a clever but violent pamphlet, published in Paris in the spring of 1845,
under the title of _Fabrique de Romans; Maison Alexander Dumas & C{ie.}_
we extract the following statement, which, it cannot be denied, is
plausible enough:--

"It is difficult to assign limits to the fecundity of writer, and to fix
the number of lines that he shall write in a given time. Romance-writing
especially, that frivolous style, has a right to travel post, and to
scatter its volumes in profusion by the wayside. Nevertheless, time must
be taken to consider a subject, to arrange a plan, to connect the
threads of a plot, to organize the different parts of a work; otherwise
one proceeds blindfold, and finishes by getting into a blind alley, or
by meeting insurmountable obstacles. Allowing for these needful
preparations, supposing that an author takes no more repose than is
absolutely necessary, eats in haste, sleeps little, is constantly
inspired; in this hypothesis, the most skilful writer will produce
perhaps fifteen volumes a-year--FIFTEEN VOLUMES, do you hear, Monsieur
Dumas? And, even in this case, he will assuredly not write for fame; we
defy him to chasten and correct his style, or to find a moment to look
over his proofs. Ask those who work unassisted; ask our most fertile
romance-writers, George Sand, Balzac, EugA"ne Sue, FrA(C)dA(C)ric SouliA(C); they
will all tell you, that it is impossible to reach the limit we have
fixed; that they have never attained it.

"You, M. Dumas, have published THIRTY-SIX volumes in the course of the
year 1844; and for the year 1845, you announce twice as many.

"Well, we make the following simple calculation:--The most expert
copyist, writing twelve hours a-day, hardly achieves 3900 letters in an
hour, which gives, per diem, 46,800 letters, or sixty ordinary pages of
a romance. At that rate he can copy five octavo volumes a month, and
sixty in a year, but he must not rest an hour or lose a second. You,
Monsieur Dumas, are a penman of first-rate ability. From the 1st of
January to the 31st of December you work regularly twelve hours a-day,
you sleep little, you eat in haste, you deprive yourself of all
amusements, you hardly travel at all, you are never seen out of your
house: consequently, if we suppose that your dramatic compositions, the
bringing out of your plays, your correspondence with newspapers and
theatres, importunate visitors, a few casual articles--as, for example,
your letters in the _Democratie Pacifique_; (a series of five letters
containing a fierce attack on the ThA(C)atre FranASec.ais, and on its
administrator M. Buloz)--supposing, we say, that all these various
occupations monopolize only one half of your time, we understand that
you may have _copied_ THIRTY volumes in the course of the year 1844--but
only thirty! the six others must have been the result of your son's
labours. Now, if you are going to publish twice as much this year as you
did during the last one, how will you manage? You must either give up
sleeping, and work the twenty-four hours through, or you must teach your
manufacturers to imitate your hand-writing. There is no other plan
possible. To deliver your manuscripts to the printers as they are
delivered to you, would be to furnish proofs against yourself."

The author of this pamphlet is himself a novelist, and allowance must be
made for his jealousy of a successful rival. But there are grounds for
his attack. M. Dumas is known to work hard: literary labour has become a
habit and necessity of his life; but he is not the man to chain himself
to the oar and renounce all the pleasures of society and of Paris, even
to swell his annual budget to the enormous sum which it is reported, and
which he has indeed acknowledged it, to reach. We have seen works
published under his name, whose perusal convinced us that he had had
little or nothing to do with their composition or execution. The
internal evidence of others was equally conclusive in fixing their _bona
fide_ authorship upon their reputed author. _Au reste_, Dumas troubles
himself very little about his assailants, but pursues the even tenor of
his way, careless of calumniators. The most important point for him is,
that his pen, or at least his name, should preserve its popularity; and
this it certainly does, notwithstanding that his enemies have more than
once raised a cry that "_le Dumas baisse sur la place_." On the
contrary, the article, whether genuine or counterfeit, was never more in
demand, both with publishers and consumers. In Paris, as Mr Gutzkow
says, every thing is a speciality; it requires half a dozen different
shops to sell the merchandise that in England would be united in one.
One establishment deals in lucifer-matches and nothing else; chips and
brimstone form its whole stock in trade: it is the _spA(C)cialitA(C) des
allumettes chimiques_. Yonder we find a spacious _magasin_ appropriated
to glove-clasps; here is another where _clysopompes_ are the sole
commodity. We were aware of this peculiarity of French shopkeeping, but
were certainly not prepared to behold, as we did on our last visit to
Paris, a shop opened upon the Place de la Bourse, exclusively for the
sale of Monsieur Dumas's productions. This, we apprehend, is the _ne
plus ultra_ of literary fertility and popularity. "Le Dumas" has become
a commercial _spA(C)cialitA(C)_. The bookseller who wishes to have upon his
shelves all the productions of the author of the _Corricolo_, must no
longer think of appropriating any part of his space to the writings of
others; or if he persists in doing so, he had better take three or four
shops, knock down the partitions, and establish a _magasin monstre_,
like those of which ambitious linendrapers have of late years set the
fashion in the ChaussA(C)e d'Antin and Rue Montmartre. Curiosity prompted
us to enter the Dumas shop and procure a list of its contents. The
number of volumes would have stocked a circulating library. We were
gratified to find--for we have always taken a strong interest in
Alexander Dumas, some of whose bettermost books we have honoured with a
notice in Maga--that several of his works were out of print. On the
other hand, five or six new romances, from two to four volumes each,
were, we were informed by the obliging Dumas-merchant, on the eve of
appearing. It was a small instalment of the illustrious author's annual
contribution to the fund of French _belles lettres_.

In the _Galerie des Contemporains Illustres_, by M. de Lomenie, we find
the following remarks concerning M. Dumas:--

"He has written masses of romances, feuilletons by the hundred. In the
year 1840 alone, he published twenty-two volumes. He has even written
with one hand the history that he turned over with the other, and heaven
knows what an historian M. Dumas is! He has published _Impressions de
Voyages_, containing every thing, drama, elegy, eclogue, idyl, politics,
gastronomy, statistics, geography, history, wit--every thing excepting
truth. Never did writer more intrepidly hoax his readers, never were
readers more indulgent to an author's gasconades. Nevertheless, M. Dumas
has abused to such an extent the credulity of the public, that the
latter begin to be upon their guard against the _discoveries_ of the
traveller."

The public, we apprehend, take M. Dumas's narratives of travels at their
just value, find them entertaining, but rely very slightly on their
authenticity. It has been pretty confidently affirmed and generally
believed, that many of his excursions were performed by the fireside;
that rambles in distant lands are accomplished by M. Dumas with his feet
on his _chenets_ in the ChaussA(C)e d'Antin, or in his country retirement
at St Germains. Nor does he, when taxed with being a stay-at-home
traveller, repel the charge with much violence of indignation. At the
recent trial at Rouen of a sprig of French journalism, a certain
Monsieur _de_ Beauvallon, (truly the noble particle was worthily
bestowed,) the accused was stated to be extraordinarily skilful with the
pistol; and in support of the assertion, a passage was quoted from a
book written by himself, in which he stated, that in order to intimidate
a bandit, he had knocked a small bird off a tree with a single ball. The
prisoner declared that this wonderful shot was to be placed to the
credit of his invention, and not to his marksmanship. "I introduced the
circumstance," said he, "in hopes of amusing the reader, and not because
it really happened. M. Dumas, who has also written his travelling
impressions, knows that such license is sometimes taken." Whereupon
Alexander, who was present in court, did most heartily and admissively
laugh.

Apropos of that trial--and although it leads us away from Mr Gutzkow,
who makes but a brief reference to the orgies, revived from the days of
the Regency, which the evidence given upon it disclosed--M. Dumas
certainly burst upon us on that occasion in an entirely new character.
We had already inferred from some of his books, from the knowing _gusto_
with which he describes a duel, and from his intimacy with Grisier, the
Parisian Angelo, to whom he often alludes, that he was cunning of fence
and perilous with the pistol. But we were not aware that he was looked
up to as a duelling dictionary, or prepared to find him treated by a
whole court of justice--judge, counsellors, jury, and the rest--as an
oracle in all that pertains to custom of cartel. We had reason to be
ashamed of our ignorance; of having remained till the spring of the year
1846 unacquainted with the fact that in France proficiency with the pen
and skill with the sword march _pari passu_. Upon this principle, and as
one of the greatest of penmen, M. Dumas is also the prime authority
amongst duellists. With our Gallic neighbours, it appears, a man must
not dream of writing himself down literary, unless he can fight as well
as scribble. To us peaceable votaries of letters, whose pistol practice
would scarcely enable us to hit a haystack across a poultry-yard, and
whose entire knowledge of swordsmanship is derived from witnessing an
occasional set-to at the minors between one sailor and five villains,
(sailor invariably victorious,) there was something quite startling in
the new lights that dawned upon us as to the state of hot water and
pugnacity in which our brethren beyond the Channel habitually live. When
Hannibal Caracci was challenged by a brother of the brush, whose works
he had criticised, he replied that he fought only with his pencil. The
answer was a sensible one; and we should have thought authors' squabbles
might best be settled with the goosequill. Such, it would seem, from
recent revelations, is not the opinion on the other side of Dover
Straits; in France, the aspirant to literary fame divides his time
between the study and the shooting gallery, the folio and the foil.
There, duels are plenty as blackberries; and the editor of a daily paper
wings his friend in the morning, and writes a _premier Paris_ in the
afternoon, with equal satisfaction and placidity. Not one of the men of
letters who gave their evidence upon the notable trial now referred to,
but had had his two, three, or half-dozen duels, or, at any rate, had
_fait ses preuves_, as the slang phrase goes, in one poor little
encounter. All had their cases of Devismes' pistols ready for an
emergency; all were skilled in the rapier, and talked in Bobadil vein of
the "affairs" they had had and witnessed. And greatest amongst them all,
most versed in the customs of combat, stood M. Dumas, quoting the code,
(in France there is a published code of duelling,) laying down the law,
figuring as an umpire, fixing points of honour and of the duello, as,
at a tourney of old, a veteran knight.

Mr Gutzkow is not far wrong in qualifying the champagne orgies of the
Parisian actresses and newspaper scribes, as a resuscitation of the
_mA"urs de RA(C)gence_. It appears that these gentlemen journalists live
in a state of polished immorality and easy profligacy, not unworthy the
days of Philip of Orleans, whom M. Dumas, be it said _en passant_, has
represented in one of his books as the most amiable, excellent, and
kind-hearted of men, instead of as the base, cold-blooded, and reckless
debauchee which he notoriously was. In France, to a greater extent than
in England, the success of an actress or dancer depends upon the manner
in which the press notices her performances. Theatrical criticisms are a
more important feature in French than in English newspapers, are more
carefully done, and better paid.

"As an artist," said Mademoiselle Lola Montes, the Spanish _bailerina_,
who formerly attracted crowds to the Porte St Martin theatre--less,
however, by the grace of her dancing, than by the brevity of her
attire--"I sought the society of journalists."

Miss Lola is not the only lady of her cloth making her chief society of
the men on whose suffrage her reputation, as an actress, depends. In
Paris, people are apt to pin their faith on their newspaper, and,
finding that the plan saves a deal of thought, trouble, and
investigation, they see with the eyes and hear with the ears of the
editor, go to the theatres which he tells them are amusing, and read the
books that he puffs. Actresses, especially second-rate ones, thus find
themselves in the dependence of a few _coteries_ of journalists, whom
they spare no pains to conciliate. We shall not enter into the details
of the subject, but the result of the system seems to be a sort of
socialist republic of critics and actresses, having for its object a
reckless dissipation, and for its ultimate argument the duelling pistol.
"In Paris," says Mr Gutzkow, "the critics are often dilettanti, who seek
by their pen to procure admission into the boudoirs of the pretty
actresses. The theatrical critic is a _petit maA(R)tre_, the analysis of a
performance a declaration of love." And favours are bartered for
feuilletons. It does not appear, however, that these Helens of the
foot-lamps often lead to serious rivalries between the Greeks and
Trojans of the press. A pungent leading article, or a keen opposition of
interests, is far more likely to produce duels than the smiles or
caprices even of a LiA(C)venne or an Alice Ozy. In these days of extinct
chivalry, to fight for a woman is voted _perruque_ and old style; but to
fight for one's pocket is correct, and in strict conformity with the
commercial spirit of the age. A's newspaper, being ably directed, rises
in circulation and enriches its proprietors. Journalist B, whose
subscribers fall off, orders a sub-editor to pick a quarrel with A and
shoot him. The thing is done; the paper of defunct A is injured by the
loss of its manager, and that of surviving B improves. The object is
attained. "The history of the _ProcA"s Beauvallon_," we quote from Mr
Gutzkow, "so interesting as a development of the modern _Mysteries of
Paris_, arose apparently from a rivalry about women, but in reality was
to be attributed to one between newspapers. It is tragical to reflect,
that for the _Presse_ Emile de Girardin shot Carrel, and that now the
manager of the same paper is in his turn shot by a new rival, on account
of the _Globe_ or the _Epoque_. We are reminded of the poet's words:
_Das ist der Fluch der bAsen That!_"

It will be remembered that De Girardin, the founder of the _Presse_,
killed Armand Carrel, the clever editor of the _National_, in a duel.
The _Presse_ was started at forty francs a-year, at a time when the
general price of newspapers was eighty francs. The experiment was bold,
but it fully succeeded. The thing was done well and thoroughly; the
paper was in all respects equal to its contemporaries; in talent it was
superior to most of them, surpassed by none. De Girardin and his
associates made a fortune, the majority of the other papers were
compelled to drop their prices, some of the inferior ones were ruined.
The innovation and its results made the bold projector a host of
enemies, and he would have found no difficulty in the world in getting
shot, had he chosen to meet a tithe of those who were anxious to fire
at him. But after his duel with Carrel he declined all encounters of the
kind, and fought his battles in the columns of the _Presse_ instead of
in the Bois de Boulogne. Had he not adopted this course he would long
ago have fallen, probably by the hand of a member of the democratic
party, who all vowed vengeance against him for the death of their idol.
As it is, he has had innumerable insults and mortifications to endure,
but he has retaliated and borne up against them with immense energy and
spirit. On one occasion he was assaulted at the opera, and received a
blow, when seated beside his wife, a lady of great beauty and talent.
The aggressor was condemned to three years' imprisonment. The _Presse_
being a conservative paper, and a strenuous supporter of the Orleans
dynasty, the opposition and radical organs of course loudly denounced
the injustice and severity of the sentence. De Girardin was once
challenged by the editors of the _National en masse_. His reply was an
article in his next day's paper, proving that the previous character and
conduct of his challengers was such as to render it impossible for a man
of honour to meet any one of them. Mr Gutzkow made the acquaintance of
Girardin. "At the sight of the slender delicate hand which slew the
steadfast and talented editor of the _National_, I was seized with an
emotion, the expression of which might have sounded somewhat too
_German_. Girardin himself affected me; his daily struggles, his daily
contests before the tribunals, his daily letters to the _National_, his
uneasy unsatisfied ambition, his unpopularity. One may have shot a man
in a duel, but in order to remember the act with tranquillity, the
deceased should have been the challenger. One may have received a blow
in the opera house, and yet not deem it necessary, having already had
one fatal encounter, to engage in a second, but it is hard that the
giver of the blow must pass three years in prison. Such events would
drive a German to emigration and the back-woods; they impel the
Frenchman further forward into the busy crowd. Bitterness, melancholy,
nervous excitement, and morbid agitation, are unmistakeably written upon
Girardin's countenance."

Himself a clever critic, Mr Gutzkow was anxious to make the acquaintance
of a king of the craft, the well-known Jules Janin, the feuilletonist of
the _Debats_. "Janin has lived for many years close to the Luxembourg
palace, on a fourth floor. His habitation is by no means brilliant, but
it is comfortably arranged; and when he married, shortly before I saw
him, he would not leave it. _Le Critique mariA(C)_, as they here call him,
lives in the Rue Vaugirard, rather near to the sky, but enjoying an
extensive view over the gardens, basins, statues, swans, nurses and
children, of the Luxembourg. 'I have bought a chateau for my wife,' said
he, coming down a staircase which leads from his sitting-room to his
study. 'I am married, have been married six months, am happy, too
happy--Pst, AdA"le, AdA"le!'

"AdA"le, a pretty young Parisian, came tripping down stairs and joined us
at breakfast. Janin is better-looking than his caricature at Aubert's.
Active, notwithstanding his _embonpoint_, he is seldom many minutes
quiet. Now stroking his _jeune France_ beard, then caressing AdA"le, or
running to look out of the window, he only remains at table to write and
to eat. He showed me his apartment, his arrangements, his books, even
his bed-chamber. 'I still live in my old nest,' said he, 'but I will buy
my angel--we have been married six months, and are very happy--I will
buy my angel a little chateau. I earn a great deal of money with very
bad things. If I were to write good things, I should get no money for
them.'

"It is impossible to write down mere prattle. Janin, like many authors,
finds intercourse with men a relief from intercourse with books. The
cleverest people willingly talk nonsense; but Janin talked, on the
contrary, a great deal of sense, only in a broken unconnected way,
running after AdA"le, threatening to throw her out of the window, or
rambling about the room with the stem of a little tree in his hand. 'Do
you see,' said he, 'I like you Germans because they like me--(this by
way of parenthesis)--do you see, I have brought up my wife for myself;
she has read nothing but my writings, and has grown tall whilst I have
grown fat. She is a good wife, without pretensions, sometimes
coquettish, a darling wife. It is not my first love, but my first
marriage. You have been to see George Sand? We do not smoke, neither I
nor my wife, so that we have no genius. _Pas vrai, AdA"le?_'

"AdA"le played her part admirably in this matrimonial idyl. 'She does not
love me for my reputation,' said her husband, 'but for my heart. I am a
bad author, but a good fellow. Let's talk about the theatre.'

"We did so. We spoke of Rachel, and of Janin's depreciation of that
actress, whom he had previously supported. 'It's all over with her,'
said he; 'she has left off study, she revels the night through, she
drinks grog, smokes tobacco, and intrigues by wholesale. She gives
soirA(C)es, where people appear in their shirt-sleeves. Since she has come
of age, it's all up with her. She has become dissipated. Shocking--is it
not, AdA"le?'

"'One has seen instances of genius developing itself with dissipation.'

"'They might stand her on her head, but would get nothing more out of
her,' replied Janin. 'Luckily the French theatre rests on a better
foundation than the tottering feet of Mamsell Rachel.--Do you know
Lewald? Has he translated me well?'

"'You have fewer translators than imitators.'

"'Can my style be imitated in German?'

"'Why not? I will give you an instance.'

"Janin was called away to receive a visitor, and was absent a
considerable time. He had some contract or bargain to settle. I took out
my tablets, drank my cup of tea, and wrote in Janin's style the
following criticism upon a performance at the Circus which then had a
great run."

Having previously, it may be presumed, noted down the suggestive and
curious dialogue of which we have given an abbreviation. We have our
doubts as to the propriety, or rather we have no doubts as to the
impropriety and indelicacy, of thus repeating in print the familiar
conversations, and detailing the most private domestic habits of
individuals, merely on the ground of their talents or position having
rendered them objects of curiosity to the mob. Literary notoriety does
not make a man public property, or justify his visitors in dragging him
before the multitude as he is in his hours of relaxation, and of mental
and corporeal dishabille. Mr Gutzkow is unscrupulous in this respect.
Possessing either an excellent memory, or considerable skill in
clandestine stenography, he carefully sets down the sayings of all who
are imprudent enough to gossip with him, and important enough for their
gossip to be interesting. Surely he ought to have informed Messrs
Thiers, Janin, and various others, who kindly and hospitably entertained
him, that he was come amongst them to take notes, and eke to print them.
Forewarned, they would perhaps have been less confiding and
communicative. The last four years have produced many instances of this
species of indiscretion. Two prominent ones at this moment recur to
us--a prying, conceited American, and a clever but impertinent German
_prinzlein_. The latter, we have been informed, was on one occasion
called to a severe account for his tattling propensities. With respect
to Jules Janin, we are sure that Mr Gutzkow's revelations concerning his
household economy, his pretty wife, his morning pastimes and
breakfast-table _causeries_, will not in the slightest degree disturb
his peace of mind, spoil his appetite, or diminish his _embonpoint_. The
good-humoured and clever critic is proof against such trifles. Nay, as
regards initiating the public into his private affairs and most minute
actions, he himself has long since set the example. The readers of the
witty and playful feuilletons signed J. J., will not have forgotten one
that appeared on the occasion of M. Janin's marriage, having for its
subject the courtship and wedding of that gentleman. The commencement
made us smile; the continuation rendered us uneasy; and as we drew near
the close, we became positively alarmed--not knowing how far the writer
was going to take us, and feeling somewhat pained for Madame Janin, who
might be less willing than her _insouciant_ husband that such very
copious details of her commencement of matrimony should be supplied as
pasture to the populace in the columns of a widely-circulated newspaper.
Janin got a smart lashing from some of his rival feuilletonists for his
indecent and egotistical puerility. Doubtless he cared little for the
infliction. Habituated to such flagellations, his epidermis has grown
tough, and he well knows how to retaliate them. He has few friends.
Those who have felt his lash hate him; those whom he has spared envy
him. As a professed critic, he finds it easier and more piquant to
censure than to praise; and scarcely a French author, from the highest
to the lowest, but has at one time or other experienced his pitiless
dissection and cutting _persiflage_. His feuilletons were once, and
still occasionally are, distinguished and prized for their graceful
_naA-vetA(C)_ and playful elegance of style. His correctness of
appreciation, his adherence to the sound rules of criticism, his
thorough competency to judge on all the infinite variety of subjects
that he takes up, have not always been so obvious. And of late years,
his principal charm, his style, has suffered from inattention, perhaps
also from weariness; chiefly, no doubt, from his having fallen into that
commercial money-getting vein which is the bane of the literature of the
day. Still, now and then, one meets with a feuilleton in his old and
better style, delightfully graceful, and pungent and witty, concealing
want of depth by brilliancy of surface. He is a journalist, and a
journalist only; he aspires to no more; books he has not written, none
at least worth the naming--two or three indifferent novels, early
defunct. His feuilletons are especially popular in Germany--more so,
perhaps, than in France. His arch and sparkling paragraphs contrast
agreeably with the heavy solidity of German critics of the _belles
lettres_. By the bye, we must not forget Gutzkow's attempt at an
imitation of M. Janin's style. He was interrupted before he had
completed it, but favours us with the fragment. It is a notice of the
exploits of a Pyrenean dog then acting at Paris. Its author had not time
to read it to Janin, who went out to walk with his wife. "I kept my
paper to myself, exchanged another joke or two with my whimsical host,
and departed. I have written a theatrical article, than which Janin
could not write one more childish. What German newspaper will give me
twenty thousand francs a-year for articles of this kind?" One, only,
whose proprietor and editor have taken leave of their senses. The
article _A  la Janin_ is childish and frivolous enough; but childishness
and frivolity would have availed the Frenchman little had he not united
with them wit and grace. His German copyist has not been equally
successful in operating that union. But to attempt in German an
imitation of Janin's style, so entirely French as it is, and only to be
achieved in that language, appears to us nearly as rational as to try to
manufacture a dancing-pump out of elephant hide.

We grieve to hear the bad accounts of Mademoiselle Rachel's private
propensities and public prospects given by Janin, or, at least, by Mr
Gutzkow, who in another place enters into further details of the fair
tragedian's irregularities. It is difficult to imagine ChimA"ne smoking a
cigar, PhA"dre sitting over a punch-bowl, the Maid of Orleans intriguing
with a journalist, even though it be admitted that the lords of the
feuilleton are also tyrants of the stage, and toss about their
_foulards_ with a tolerable certainty of their being gratefully and
submissively picked up. We will hope, however, either that Janin was
pleased to mystify Gutzkow, thinking it perhaps very allowable to pass a
joke on the curious German who had ferreted him out in his _quatriA"me_,
or that Gutzkow has fathered upon Janin the floating reports and
calumnious inuendos of the theatrical coffee-houses.

Mr Gutzkow went to see George Sand. This was his great ambition, his
burning desire. He is an enthusiastic admirer of her works and of her
genius. It is to be inferred from what he tells us, that he did not find
it easy to obtain an introduction. Madame Dudevant lives retired, and
likes not to be trotted out for the entertainment of the curious. She is
particularly distrustful of tourists. They have sketched her in
grotesque outline, respecting neither her mysteries nor her confidence.
But Mr Gutzkow was resolved to see the outside of her house, pending
the time that he might obtain access to its interior. So away he went to
the Rue Pigale, No. 16, chattered with the portress, peeped into the
garden, gazed at the windows which George Sand, "when exhausted with
mental labour, is wont to open to cool her bosom in the fresh air."
Considering that this was in the month of March, some time had probably
elapsed since the lady had done any thing so imprudent. From a chapter
of _Lelia_ or _Mauprat_ to an equinoctial breeze! There is a catarrh in
the mere notion of the transition. However, Mr Gutzkow viewed the matter
with a poet's eye--the window, we mean to say--and after gazing his
fill, departed, musing as he went. A fortnight later he was admitted to
see the jewel whose casket he had contemplated with so much veneration.
"I have been to see George Sand. She wrote to me: 'You will find me at
home any evening. If, however, I am engaged with a lawyer or compelled
to go out, you must not impute it to want of courtesy. I am entangled in
a lawsuit in which you will see a trait of our French usages, for which
my patriotism must needs blush. I plead against my publisher, who wants
to constrain me to write a romance according to his pleasure--that is to
say, advocating his principles. Life passes away in the saddest
necessities, and is only preserved by anxieties and sacrifices. You will
find a woman of forty years old, who has employed her whole life not in
pleasing by her amiability, but in offending by her candour. If I
displease your eyes, I shall, at any rate, preserve in your heart the
place that you have conceded me. I owe it to the love of truth, a
passion whose existence you have distinguished and felt in my literary
attempts.'

"I went to see her in the evening. In a small room, scarce ten feet
square, she sat sewing by the fire, her daughter opposite to her. The
little apartment was sparingly lighted by a lamp with a dark shade.
There was no more light than sufficed to illumine the work with which
mother and daughter were busied. On a divan in one corner, and in dark
shadow, sat two men, who, according to French custom, were not
introduced to me. They kept silence, which increased the solemn, anxious
tension of the moment. A gentle breathing, an oppressive heat, a great
tightness about the heart. The flame of the lamp flickered dimly, in the
chimney the charcoal glowed away into white shimmering ashes, a
ghostlike ticking was the only sound heard. The ticking was in my
waistcoat pocket. It was my watch, not my heart." How intensely German
is all this overwrought emotion about nothing! Fortunately a chair was
at hand, into which the impressionable dramatist dropped himself. His
first speech was a blunder, for it sounded like a preparation.

"'Pardon my imperfect French. I have read your works too often, and
Scribe's comedies too seldom. From you one learns the mute language of
poetry, from Scribe the language of conversation.'"

To which compliment Aurora Dudevant merely replied: "'How do you like
Paris?'

"'I find it as I had expected.--A lawsuit like yours is a novelty. How
does it proceed?'

"A bitter smile for sole reply.

"'What is understood in France by _contrainte par corps_?'

"'Imprisonment.'

"'Surely they will not throw a woman into prison to compel her to write
a romance. What does your publisher mean by his principles?'

"'Those which differ from mine. He finds me too democratic.'

"And mechanics do not buy romances, thought I. 'Does the _Revue
IndA(C)pendante_ make good progress?'

"'Very considerable, for a young periodical.'"

And so on for a couple of pages. But George Sand was on her guard, and
stuck to generalities. She would not allow her visitor to draw her out,
as he would gladly have done. She had been already too much gossiped
about and calumniated in print. She had an intuitive perception of the
approaching danger. She _nosed_ the intended book. Nevertheless, and
although reserved, she was very amiable; talked about the drama--when Mr
Gutzkow, remembering her unsuccessful play of _Cosima_, tried to change
the subject--inquired after _Bettina_, spoke respectfully of
Germany--of which, however, she does not profess to know any thing--and
even smoked a cigar.

"George Sand laid aside her work, arranged the fire, and lighted one of
those innocent cigars which contain more paper than tobacco, more
coquetry than emancipation. I was now able, for the first time, to
obtain a good view of her features. She is like her portraits, but less
stout and round than they make her. She has a look of Bettina. Since
that time she has grown larger.

"'Who translates me in Germany?'

"'Fanny Tarnow, who styles her translations _bearbeitungen_.'

"'Probably she omits the so-called immoral passages.'

"She spoke this with great irony. I did not answer, but glanced at her
daughter, who cast down her eyes. The pause that ensued was of a second,
but it expressed the feelings of an age."

Although Mr Gutzkow's visits to Paris were each but of a few weeks'
duration, and notwithstanding that he had much to do, many persons to
call upon and things to see, he now and then felt himself upon the brink
of _ennui_. This especially in the evenings, which, he says, would be
insupportable without the theatres. To foreigners they certainly would
be so, and to many Parisians. The theatre, the coffee-house, the
reading-room, the unvarying and at last wearisome lounge on the
boulevards, compose the resources of the stranger in Paris. Access to
domestic circles he finds extremely difficult, rarely obtainable. Many
imagine, on this account, that in Paris there is no such thing as
domestic life, that the quiet evenings with books, music, and
conversation, the fireside coteries so delightful in England and
Germany, are unknown in the French metropolis. If not unknown, they are,
at any rate, much rarer. "The stranger complains especially," says Mr
Gutzkow, "that his letters of introduction carry him little further than
the antechamber. He misses nothing so much as the opportunity of passing
his evenings in familiar intercourse with some family who should admit
him to their intimacy." This want is most perceptible at the season when
Mr Gutzkow was at Paris, March and April, treacherous and rainy months,
comprising Lent, during which Paris is comparatively dull, and when many
persons, either from religious scruples or from weariness of winter and
carnival gaieties, refuse parties, and cease to give their weekly or
fortnightly soirA(C)es, often more agreeable as an habitual resort than
balls and entertainments of greater pretensions. Mr Gutzkow complains
bitterly of the bad weather. The climate of Paris is certainly the
reverse of good. The heat oppressively great in summer, rain intolerably
abundant for seven or eight months of the twelve. If London has its
fogs, Paris has its deluge, and its consequences, oceans of mud, which,
in the narrow streets of the French capital, are especially obnoxious.
The Boulevards and the Rues de Rivoli and De la Paix are really the only
places where one is tolerably secure from the splashing of coach and
scavenger.

"A rainy day," writes Mr Gutzkow, on the 22nd March; "the sky grey, the
Seine muddy, the streets filthy and slippery. You take refuge in the
passages, and in the Palais Royal. Appointments are made in the passages
and reading-rooms. Dinner at the BA"uf A  la Mode, at the Grand Vatel
or Restaurant Anglais, reserving VA(C)ry, VA(C)four, the Rocher de Cancale,
for a brighter day and more cheerful mood."

"Paris is too large in bad weather, and too small in fine. Really, when
the sun shines, Paris is very small. The fashionable part of the
Boulevards, the Rue Vivienne, the Rue Richelieu, the Palais Royal, in
all that region you are soon so much at home that your face is known to
every shopkeeper. Always the same impressions. In the daytime often
insipid; more cheerful at night, when the gas-lights gleam. The art of
false appearances is here brought to the greatest perfection. The
commonest shops are so arranged as to deceive the eye. Mirrors reflect
the wares, and give the establishment an artificial extension, by
lamplight a fantastical grandeur. You try the different _restaurants_,
dining sometimes here, sometimes there, and gradually becoming initiated
in the mysteries of the _carte_; for the most part avoiding all
complicated preparations, and confining yourself to the dishes _au
naturel_, as the surest means of not eating cat for calf. In the Palais
Royal the shops are very dear, only the dinners on the first floor are
cheap, and ennui is to be had gratis. Since so many handsome passages
have been opened through the streets, the Palais Royal has lost its
vogue. Some say that its decline began with its morality. The _Cabinets
particuliers_, formerly of such evil repute, are now the smoking rooms
of the coffeehouses. The Galerie d'Orleans is still the most frequented
part of the Palais Royal. Here the loungers pull out their watches every
five minutes; they all wait either for a friend or for dinner-time.
Meanwhile they saunter to and fro, and admire the skill of their tailors
in the range of mirrors on either side of the gallery.

"I followed the boulevards, the other day, from the Madeleine to the
Column of July--a distance which it took me almost two hours to
accomplish. From the Portes St Denis and St Martin, the boulevards lose
their metropolitan aspect. They become more countrified and homely. The
magnificence of the shops and coffeehouses diminishes and at last
disappears. The luxurious gives way to the useful, the comfortable to
the needy. At the ChActeau d'Eau, where the boulevard turns off at a
right angle, four or five theatres stand together. Here is the road to
the PA"re la Chaise. Here fell the victims of Fieschi's infernal machine.
From one of these little houses the murderous discharge was made. From
which, I will not ask. Perhaps no one could tell me. Paris has forgotten
her revolutions.

"Further on, the Goddess of Liberty flashes on us from the summit of the
July Column. Why in that dancer-like attitude? It may show the artist's
skill, but it is undignified, and seems to challenge the stormwind which
once already blew down Freedom's Goddess from the Pantheon. Upon the
column are engraved the names of the heroes of July.

"What stood formerly upon this spot? Upon yonder little house I read,
'Tavern of the Bastile.' This, then, was the birthplace of French
freedom, of the freedom of the world. Upon this site, now bare, stood
the fortress-prison, whose gloomy interior beheld for centuries the
crimes of tyrants, the violence of despotism, whereof nought but dark
rumours transpired to the world without. On the 14th July 1789, came the
dawn. The Bastile was destroyed, and not one stone of it remained upon
another. It is awfully impressive to contemplate this place, now so
naked and empty, once so gloomily shadowed.

"We enter the suburb of the workmen, the faubourg St Antoine, the former
ally and reliance of the Jacobins. Here things have a ruder and more
strongly marked aspect. It is a sort of Frankfurt Sachsenhausen. By the
Rue St Antoine we again reach the interior of the city, its most
industrious and busy quarter. I love these working-day wanderings in the
regions of labour. I prefer them to all the Sunday promenades upon the
broad pavements of luxury. True that each of these intricate and dirty
streets has its own particular and often nauseous odour. Here are the
soapboilers, yonder a slaughter-house, here again, in the Rue des
Lombards, the atmosphere is laden with the scent of spices and drugs. In
the cellars, men, with shirt-sleeves rolled up, crush brimstone and
pepper and a hundred other things in huge iron mortars; a noise and
smell which reminds me of the treacle-grinders on the Rialto at Venice.
And here, also, in these narrow alleys and dingy lanes, historical
associations linger. Yonder is the battered chapel of St MA(C)ry, where,
eight years ago, four hundred republicans, intrenched in the cloisters,
strove against the whole armed might of Paris, and were overcome only by
artillery. To-day the French Opposition takes things more easily. Its
demonstrations are dinners, as in Germany. The popping of champagne
corks causes no bloodshed. Written speeches, an article in a newspaper,
a toast to the maintenance of order, another against _tentatives
insensA(C)es_;--it will be long before such an opposition attains its end."

Mr Gutzkow, who does not conceal his ultra-liberal opinions, seems
almost to regret the revolutionary days, and to pity Paris for the
tranquillity which a firm and judicious government has at length
succeeded in establishing within its walls. Had a republican outbreak
taken place during his abode in the French capital, one might have
expected to find him raising impromptu battalions from the eighty
thousand Germans and Alsatians, who form an important item of the
Parisian population. His doctrines will hardly gain him much favour with
the powers that be in his own country. But for that he evidently cares
little. He is one of the progress; Young Germany reckons in him a stanch
and devoted partisan. With his democratic tendencies, and in Paris,
where monuments of revolutions abound, and where a thousand names and
places recall the struggles between the people and their rulers, it is
not wonderful that his enthusiasm occasionally boils over, and that he
vents or hints opinions which maturer reflection would perhaps induce
him to repudiate.

A visit to Michel Chevalier suggests a comparison between the different
modes of attaining to public honours and ministerial office in France
and in Germany. "Most delightful to me was the acquaintance of
Chevalier. Delightful and afflicting. Afflicting when I contrasted the
treatment of talent in Germany with that which it meets in France.
Michel Chevalier, the accomplished writer who knows how to handle so
well and agreeably the dry topics of national economy, of railways and
public works, ten years ago was a St Simonian. When the association of
Menilmontant was prosecuted by the French government, he was condemned
to a year's imprisonment. But those who persecuted him for his
principles, prized him for his talents. Instead of letting him undergo
his punishment, as would have been the case in Germany, they gave him
money and sent him to North America, commissioned to make observations
upon that country. Chevalier published, in the _Journal des Debats_, his
able letters from the United States, returned to France, became
professor at the University, and, a year ago, was made counsellor of
state." In opposition to this example, Mr Gutzkow traces the progress of
the German candidate for his office; pipes, beer, and dogs at the
university, plucked in his examination, a place in an administration,
counsellor, knight of several orders, vice-president of a province,
president of a province, minister.

Although there are in Paris more Germans than foreigners of any other
nation, little is seen and heard of them. They do not hang together, and
form a society of their own, as do the English, and even the Spaniards
and Italians. They may be classed under the heads of political refugees,
artisans, men of science and letters, merchants and bankers. Few of them
are of sufficient rank and importance to represent their nation with
dignity, or sufficiently wealthy to make themselves talked of for their
lavish expenditure and magnificent establishments. They have not, like
the English, colonized and appropriated to themselves one of the best
quarters of Paris. Mr Gutzkow complains of the scanty kindness and
attention shown to his countrymen by the richer class of German
residents. "I was in a drawing-room," he says, "whose owner was indebted
for his fortune to a marriage with a German lady. Yet the Germans there
present were neglected both by host and hostess. The German artist or
scholar must not reckon on a Schickler or a Rothschild to introduce him
into the higher circles of Parisian life. These rich bankers are of the
same breed as the German waiters in Switzerland and Alsace, who, even
when waiting upon Germans, pretend to understand only French. Music is
the German's best passport to French society. You may be a great
scientific genius, and find no admission at the renowned soirA(C)es of the
Countess Merlin. Do but offer to take a part in one of the musical
choruses, to strengthen the bass or the tenor, and you are welcome
without name or fame, and even without varnished boots."

We have been diffuse upon the lighter texts afforded us by Mr Gutzkow's
work, and must abstain from touching upon its graver portions. They will
repay perusal. A vein of satire, sometimes verging on bitterness, is
here and there perceptible in his pages. It forms no unpleasant
seasoning to a very palatable book.

FOOTNOTE:

[2] _Briefe aus Paris_, 1842. _Pariser EindrA1/4cke_, 1846. Von KARL
GUTZKOW. Frankfurt am Main, 1846.




VISIT TO THE VLADIKA OF MONTENEGRO.


THE people of the old Illyricum have shown a marvellous consistency of
character through all the changes that have affected the other nations
of the Roman empire. They exist now as they did of old, a hardy race of
borderers, not quite civilised, and not quite barbarous--Christian in
fact, and Turkish to a great extent in appearance. Living on the borders
of the two empires, they exhibit the national characteristics of each
_in transitu_ towards the other. Of all civilised Europe, it is perhaps
here only that the practice of carrying arms universally and commonly
prevails--a custom which we have very old historical authority for
considering as the characteristic mark of unsettled, predatory, and
barbarous manners--an opinion which will be abundantly confirmed by a
glance at the neighbouring Albanians. Any thing original is possessed of
one element of interest, especially when it has been so sturdily
preserved; and sturdy, indeed, have the Illyrians been. In spite of the
polished condition of the empire of which they form a constituent part,
and of the constant steamers up and down the Adriatic promoting
intercourse with the world, they remain much as they used to be, and so
do they seem likely to remain indefinitely.

Perhaps the secret of their stability may be, that visitors pass all
around them, but seldom come among them. People visit the coast to look
at Spalatro for Diocletian's sake, at Pola for its magnificent
amphitheatre, and for the memory of Constantine's unhappy son, and
perhaps at Ragusa. But this is pretty well all they could do
conveniently, which is the same thing as to say, it is all that nineteen
travellers out of twenty would do. In those places where visits are paid
by prescription, the traveller would find, as is likely, nothing of
distinct nationality. Such places are like well-frequented inns, where
any body and every body is at home, and where every body influences the
manners for the time being--there will be found cafA(C)s, carriages, and
ciceroni.

But the case is far different in the more abstruse parts of this
region--in those districts of which some have subsided into the domain
of the Turks, some remain independent, and a narrow strip only is
reserved--the wreck of the old Empire. All are defaulters in the march
of civilisation. But the independent Montenegrini retain in full force
the odour of barbaric romance. They occupy a small territory, not
noticed in many maps, shut in by the Turks on all sides, except where,
for a narrow space, they border on Austria. But they pay no sort of
subjection to either of these mighty powers. With Austria they maintain
friendly intelligence on the footing of the proudest sovereignty, and an
unqualified assertion of the right of nations. With the Turks their
relations are of a ruder and more interesting kind.

The Montenegrini alone of Europe follow the political model of modern
Rome. Their political head is their ecclesiastical superior. The regal
and episcopal offices, conjointly held, are hereditary in collateral
succession, since the reigning prince is bound to celibacy. In the
consecration of their bishops, they pay no regard to canonical age, and
the authorities of the Greek church seem to bend to the peculiar
exigencies of the case. The reigning Vladika was consecrated at the age
of eighteen. His power is, in fact, supreme, though formally qualified
by the assessorship of a senate, who, though entitled to advise, would
outstep their bounds did they attempt to direct. Indeed, legal authority
among such a clan of barbarians can only subsist by despotism. Where
every hand is armed, and violent death a familiar object, the power that
rules must be enabled to act immediately and without appeal. To graduate
authority among them, except in the case of military command, exercised
by immediate delegation from the chief, would be to render it
contemptible.

And such a bishop as now occupies this throne has not been seen since
the martial days of the fighting Pope Julius. The old stories of
prelates clad in armour, and fighting at the head of their troops,
astonish us, but are regarded as altogether antiquated. Yet among those
hills is exhibited a scene that may realise the wildest descriptions of
romance or history. That the people are a people of warriors, is not so
surprising when we consider their locality, their ancestry, and the
circumstances of their life. If they were merely marauders, we should be
no more struck with the singularity of their state than we are with the
vagabondism of the Albanians. A wild country, a wandering population,
and distance from executive restraints, may, in any case, bring natural
ferocity to a harvest of violence and rapine. But the Montenegrini
disclaim the name of robbers and the practice of evil. They consider
themselves to be engaged in a warfare, not only justifiable, but
meritorious, and over bloodshed they cast the veil of religious zeal.

It seems to be a fact that their violence is for the Turks only. So far
as we could gain intelligence, they do not molest Christians; and
experience enables us to speak with pleasure of our own hospitable
reception. But against the Turks their hatred is intense, their valour
and rage unquenchable. It is not to be supposed that any Turk would be
so foolish as to attempt the passage of their territory, except under
express assurance of safe conduct; but should one do so, he would find
ineffectual the strongest escort with which the Sultan could furnish
him. The savage nature of the district must prevent the combined action
of regular troops, or of any troops unacquainted with the localities;
and from behind the crags an unseen enemy would wither the ranks of the
invader. Indeed, it would appear that the passage is not safe for a Turk
even under the assurance of a truce. A tragical _accident_ was the
subject of conversation at the time of our visit. A body of the enemy
had been surprised and cut off, notwithstanding the subsistence of a
truce. Ignorance on the part of the assaulters was the ready plea; and a
message had been dispatched to make such reparation as could be found in
apologies and restitution of effects. But the thing looked ill. A truce
must soon become notorious throughout so confined a region, and among a
people of whom, if not every one engaged personally in the field, every
one had his heart and soul there. It is to be feared that the
obligations of good faith are qualified in the case of a Mahomedan; and
however we may lament, we can hardly view with astonishment so natural a
consequence of their bloody education. "Hates any man the thing he would
not kill?"--and hatred to the Turks is the dawning idea of the
Montenegrino child, and the master-passion of the dying warrior.

With certain saving clauses, we may compare the position of the
Montenegrini to that of the old knights of Malta. Rhodes and Malta are
hardly more isolated, and are more accessible than this mountain region.
If there be a wide difference between the gentle blood and European
dignities of the knights, and the rude estate of the mountaineers, there
is between them a brotherhood of courage, inflexibility, and devoted
opposition to Mahomet. Each company may stand forth as having discharged
a like office, distinguished by the characteristic differences of the
two branches of the church. The knights, noble, polished, and temporally
influential, defended the weak point of Western Christendom--the sea;
the Montenegrini, unpolished, ignorant, of little worldly account, but
great zeal, have done their part for Eastern Christendom, in opposing
the continental power of the Turks. The unpolished nature of their life
and actions has been in the spirit of the church to which they belong.
They have been rude but steady, and stand alone in their strength. They
have resisted not only the power of Mahomedanism on the one side, but
have also refrained from amalgamation with the western Christians,
remaining firm in that allegiance to the sec of Constantinople, which
the Sclavonians derived from their first missionaries.[3]

There is one point of superiority in the case of these barbarians as
compared with that of the military knights. They have never been
conquered, never driven from their fastnesses. The knights defended
Rhodes with valour such as never has been surpassed; and to this day the
recollection moves the apathetic spirit of the Turks; and the monstrous
burying-grounds in the suburbs are witnesses of the slaughter of the
assailants. Yet Rhodes was evacuated, and the Order obliged to seek
another settlement. But the Montenegrini have never been conquered. They
have withstood the whole power of the mightiest sultans, in whose
territories they have been as an ever-present nest of hornets, always
ready to sally forth, losing no opportunity of destruction. These
Osmanlis, who so lately were the proudest of nations, have been
themselves baffled and defied by a handful of Christians. Their
enthusiasm, their numbers, their artillery, their commanding possession
of the lake of Scutari, all have failed to bring under their power a
handful of some hundred and fifty thousand men. The cross, once planted
in this rugged soil, has taken effectual root, and continues still to
flash confusion on the followers of Islam. It is the symbol of our faith
that is carried before the mountaineers when they go forth to battle;
and it still inspirits them, as it did those legions of the faithful who
first learned to reverence its virtue.

We must not carry things too far. It would be absurd to claim for these
people the general merit of devotion; to suppose that as a general rule
they are actuated by the love of religion. Alas! they are undoubtedly
very ignorant of the religion for which they fight. Yet, so far as
knowledge serves them, they are religious; where error is the
consequence of ignorance, we may grieve, but should be slow to condemn.
Some are probably led to heroism by liberal devotion to the person of
the Bishop; some because they have been nursed in the idea that Turks
are their natural enemies, whom to destroy is a work of merit. But,
nevertheless, they exhibit the spectacle of a people who, proceeding on
a principle of religion, however that principle be obscured, have
instituted, and long have maintained, a crusade against the religious
fanatics who once made Europe tremble. Their spirit at least contains
the commendable elements of constancy, simplicity, and heroism.

It was my fortune to pay a visit to this extraordinary people under
favourable circumstances. Visits to them are very rare. Sometimes a
stray soldier's yacht, from Corfu, finds its way to Cattaro; but
generally only in its course up the Adriatic. These military visitants
are commonly more intent on woodcocks than the picturesque, and game
does not particularly enrich these regions. For very many years there
has been an account of only one English visiting-party besides
ourselves. We were led thither by the happy favour of circumstance. Our
party was numerous, and certainly must have been the most distinguished
that the Vladika has had the opportunity of entertaining. It consisted
of the captain and several officers of an English man-of-war, reinforced
by the accession of a couple of volunteers from the officers of the
Austrian garrison of Cattaro.

We were all glad to have the opportunity of satisfying our eyes on the
subject of the marvellous tales whose confused rumour had reached us. We
were not young travellers, and it was not a little that would astonish
us--but we felt that if the reality in this case were at all like the
report, we might all afford to be astonished. It was a singular thing
that so little should be known about these people almost in their
neighbourhood--for Corfu is not two hundred miles distant. But perhaps
the reason may be, that they are not to be seen beyond their own
confined region, and are easily confounded with the irregular tribes of
Albanians.

The wonders of our visit opened upon us before reaching the land of
romance--a wonder of beauty in the nature of the entrance to Cattaro.
The Bocca di Cattaro is of the same kind as, and not much inferior to,
the Bosphorus. The man who has seen neither the one nor the other of
these fairy streams must be content to rest without the idea. The
nearest things to them, probably, would be found in the passages of the
Eastern Archipelago. The entrance from the sea is by a narrow mouth,
which seems to be nothing but a small indentation of the coast, till you
are pretty well arrived at the inner extremity. You then pass into
another canal, whose tortuous course shuts out the sight of the sea, and
puts you in the most landlocked position in which it is possible to see
a ship of war. High hills rise on either side, beautifully planted, and
verdant to the waters edge. Villages are not wanting to complete the
effect; and here and there single houses peep out beautiful in
isolation. Another turn brings into view a point of divergence in the
stream, where, on a little island, stands a simple devout-looking
chapel. It looks as though intended to call forth the pious gratitude of
the returning sailor, and help him to the expression of his thanks. The
whole length of the channel is something more than twenty miles--and all
of the same beautiful description--not seen at once, but opening
gradually as the successive bends of the stream are passed. The wind
failed us, and for a considerable distance we had to track ship, which
we were easily able to do, as there is plenty of water close to the very
edge. At the bottom of all lies Cattaro--occupying a narrow level, with
the sea before, and the frowning mountains behind.

Our arrival set the little place quite in a commotion. Indeed, this was
but the second time that a ship of war had carried our flag up these
waters--the other visitant was, I believe, from the squadron of Sir W.
Hoste. The whole place turned out to see us, and the harbour was covered
with boat-loads of the nobility and gentry. They were like all Austrians
that I have met, exceedingly kind, and well-disposed to the English
name. We soon made acquaintances, and exchanged invitations. Their
musical souls were charmed with the performances of our really fine
band, and we were equally charmed with their pleasing hospitality. The
couple of days occupied in the interchange of agreeable civilities were
useful in the promotion of our scheme. From our friends we learned the
prescriptions of Montenegrino etiquette. An unannounced visit, in
general cases, is by them regarded as neither friendly nor courteous: an
evidence of habitual caution that we should expect among a people
against whom open violence is ineffectual, and only treachery dangerous.
Our friends provided a messenger, and we awaited his return amidst the
amenities of Cattaro. These combined so much good taste with good will,
that it was difficult to credit the stories of barbarism subsisting
within a short day's journey: stories that here, in the immediate
neighbourhood of the scene of action, became more vivid in character.

The appearance of the country was in keeping with tales of romance.
Almost immediately behind the town rises the mountain district, very
abruptly, and affording at first view an appearance of inaccessibility.
It is not till the eye has become somewhat habituated to the search that
one perceives a means of ascent. A narrow road of marvellous
construction has been cut up the almost perpendicular mountain. But the
word _road_ would give a wrong idea of its nature. It is rather a giant
staircase, and like a staircase it appears from the anchorage. The lines
are so many, and contain such small angles, that when considered with
the height of the work, they may aptly be compared to the steps of a
ladder. It is of recent construction, and how the people used to manage
before this means of communication existed, it is difficult to say.
Probably this difficulty of intercourse has mainly tended to the
preservation of barbarism. Now, the route is open to horses, sure-footed
and carefully ridden. The highlanders occasionally resort to the town
for traffic in the coarse commodities of their manufacture. On these
occasions they have to leave their arms in a guard-house without the
gates, as indeed have all people entering the town; and a pretty
collection is to be seen in these depots, of the murderous long guns of
which the Albanians make such good use.

It was on the evening of the second day that we first saw an accredited
representative of the tribe. A party of us had strolled out towards the
foot of the mountain, and in the repose of its shadows were speculating
on the probable adventures of the morrow. A convenient bridge over a
mountain stream afforded a seat, whence we looked wistfully up to the
heights. The contrast between the neatness of the suburb, the hum of the
town, the noisy activity of the peasantry, and the black desolation of
the mountain, engaged our admiration. This desolation was presently
relieved by the emerging into view of a descending group. One figure was
on horseback, with several footmen attending his steps. The dress of the
cavalier would have served to distinguish him as of consequence, without
the distinction of position. His dress affected a style of barbaric
magnificence that disdained the notion of regularity. The original idea
perhaps was Hungarian, to which was added, according to the fancy of the
wearer, whatever went to make up the magnificent. His appearance was
very much, but not exactly, that of a Turk--not the modernised Turk in
frock-coat and trousers, but him of the old school, who despises, or
only partially adopts, sumptuary reform. This splendid individual was
attended by several "gillies," who were genuine specimens of the tribe.
They are almost, without exception, (an observation of after
experience,) of enormous stature, swarthy, and thin. Their dark locks
give an air of wildness to their face. Their long limbs afford token of
the personal activity induced and rendered necessary by the
circumstances of their life. Their garments are scanty, and such as very
slightly impede motion. The whole party were abundantly armed, and a
brave man might confess them to be formidable. We naturally stared at
these gentry, who, at length on level ground, approached rapidly. It is
not every thing uncommon that deserves a stare, and we were accustomed
to strangeness. But we had not met any thing so striking as the wild
figures of these barbarians, thrown into relief by the appropriate
background of the mountain. The horseman reciprocated our stare, as was
fit, on the unusual meeting with the British uniform. Presently he
pulled up his animal, and, dismounting, invited our approach. The
recognition was soon complete. He introduced himself as the aide-de-camp
of his highness the Vladika of the Montenegrini, who received with
pleasure our communication, and invited our visit. The party had been
sent down as guides and honourable escort into his territory; and a led
horse that they brought for the special convenience of the captain,
completed the assurance of the gracious hospitality of the prince. Now
this was a very propitious beginning of the enterprise. We had hit upon
a time when a short truce allowed him to do the honours of his
establishment. One might go, perhaps, fifty times that way without a
similar advantage. You would hear, probably, that he was out fighting on
one of the frontiers, or laying an ambuscade, or perhaps that he had
been shot the day before. The least likely thing of all for you to hear
would be, as we did, that he was at home, would be happy to see you, and
begged the pleasure of your company to dinner. We became at once great
friends with our new acquaintance, and carried him off to dine on board.
He proved not to be one of the indigenous, a fact we might have inferred
from his comparatively diminutive stature and fair complexion. He was a
Hungarian who had taken service under the Vladika. As it is not probable
that this paper will ever find its way into those remote fastnesses, it
may be permitted to say, that he exhibited in his person one of the
evils inseparable from the independent sovereign existence of
uncivilised borderers on civilisation. In such a position they afford an
ever-present refuge to civilised malefactors. Any person of Cattaro who
offends against the laws of Austria, has before him a secure refuge, if
he can manage to obtain half-an-hour's start of the police. The _pes
claudus_ of human retribution must halt at the foot of the mountain,
whence the fugitive may insult justice.

Of this evil we saw further instances besides that presented in the
person of our visitor. By his own account, he was a sort of Captain
Dalgetty, who had seen service as a mercenary under many masters, and
had finally come to dedicate his sword to the interests of the Vladika.
The account of some of the Austrian officers deprived him of even the
little respectability attached to such a character as this. The
gallantry of martial excellence was in him tarnished by the imputation
of tampering with the military chest; so that it was either indignant
virtue, (for which they did not give him credit,) or conscious guilt,
that had driven him to devote his laurels to the cause of an obscure
tribe. Such moral blemishes are not likely to cloud the reception of a
fugitive to this court: first, because rumour would hardly travel so
far; and next, because the arts of civilisation, and especially military
excellence, are such valuable accessions to the weal of Montenegro, that
their presence almost precludes the consideration of qualifying defects.
Our Hungarian acquaintance was, however, notwithstanding his supposed
delinquencies, and barbarous residence, a polite and courteous person.
We learned from him much concerning the people we were about to visit.
It was a sad picture of violence that he drew. Blood and rapine were the
prominent features. War was not an accidental evil--a sharp remedy for
violent disorder--but a habitual state. The end and object of their
institutions was the destruction of the Turks; scarcely coloured in his
narrative with the palliation of religious zeal. Indeed, it required
every allowance for circumstances to avoid the idea of downright
brigandage. But great, certainly, are the allowances to be made. We must
consider the many years during which the little band has been exposed to
the wrath of the Turks, when that wrath was more efficient than it is at
present. Their present bitterness of feeling must be ascribed to long
years of struggle, to many seasons of cruelty, and to the constant
stream of desperate enthusiasm. Their war has become necessarily one of
extinction; and probably there are few or none of the people to whom a
slaughtered father or brother has not bequeathed a debt of revenge.
These personal feelings are aggravated by the sense that they exist in
the midst of a people who want but the opportunity to extinguish their
name and their religion; and this feeling is maintained by bloody feats
on every available occasion.

The conversation of our informant was all in illustration of this state
of things. Such a horse he rode when going to battle--such a sabre he
wore, and such pistols. The Vladika took such a post, and executed such
or such manA"uvres. At last we ventured to enquire--"But is this sort
of thing always going on? have you never peace by any accident?" "Oh
yes!" replied he, "we have peace sometimes--_for two or three days_." He
varied his narrative with occasional accounts of service he had seen in
Spain; showing us that he, at any rate, was not scrupulous in what cause
he shed blood, provided it was for a "consideration."

But we were now approaching the moment when our own eyes were to be our
informants. The evening was given to an entertainment by the Austrian
officers, of whom two, as already mentioned, volunteered to join our
expedition, and the next morning assigned to the start. The sun beamed
cheerfully after several days' rain. In this spot, shut in on all sides,
except seawards, by highlands, the rains are very frequent. It cleared
up during our visit, but, with the exception of two days, rained pretty
constantly during the week of our stay at Cattaro. On the morning of our
start, however, all was bright, and any defence against the rain was
voted superfluous. Our trysting-place was on board, and true to their
time our friends appeared. They amused us much by their astonishment at
the preparation we were making for the expedition, of which a prominent
particular was the laying in of a good store of provant, as a contingent
security against deficiencies by the road. Our breakfast was proceeding
in the usual heavy style of nautical housekeeping, when the scene was
revealed to our allies. These gentlemen, who are in the habit of
considering a pipe and a cup of coffee as a very satisfactory morning
meal, could not restrain their exclamations at the sight of the beef
and mutton with which we were engaged. The A. D. C. was anxious to
explain that it was no region of famine into which we were going. We
were to dine with the Vladika, and, moreover, care had been taken to
provide a repast at a station midway on the journey. "En route, en
route," cried the impatient warrior, "we shall breakfast at twelve
o'clock; what's the use of all this set-out now?" But whatever form of
argument it might require to cry back his warlike self and myrmidons
from the Albanian cohorts, it proved no less difficult a task to check
us in this our onslaught. We assured him with our mouths full, that we
considered a meal at mid-day to be lunch; and that this our breakfast
was without prejudice to the honour we should do to his hospitable
provision by the way. The Austrians relented under the force of our
arguments and example, and, turning to, ate like men; while the
inexorable A. D. C. gazed impatiently, almost pityingly, on the scene,
as though in scorn, that men wearing arms should so delight to use
knives and forks. But at last we were mounted, and started with the
rabble of the town at our heels, and a wilder rabble performing the part
of military escort. There is no such thing as riding in Cattaro, because
the town is paved with stones smooth as glass, on which it requires care
even to walk. This is so very singular a feature of this town that it
deserves remark. The horses have to be taken without the town, and must,
in their course thither, either avoid the streets altogether, or be
carefully led. On leaving the town the ascent begins almost immediately,
and most abruptly. The very singular road, which has been cut with
immense labour, is the work of the present Emperor. There was no other
spot which we could perceive to afford the possibility of ascent,
without the use of hands as well as legs, and by the road it was no easy
matter. At the commencement almost of the ascent, and just outside the
town, we passed the last stronghold of Austria in this direction. It is
a fort in a commanding position, but dismantled, and allowed to fall
into decay. This is the last building of any pretension, or of brick,
that you see till well into the Montenegrini territory. We could not
ascertain the exact line of demarcation between the dominions of the
Emperor of Austria and him of the mountains; but probably the stoppage
of the road may serve to mark the point. The barbarians would neither be
able to execute, nor likely to desire, such a highway into their region,
whose safety consists in its inaccessibility. It is no other than a
difficult ascent, even so far as the road extends, which, though of
considerable length on account of its winding course, reaches no further
than up the face of the first hill.

It was when abreast of this ruined fort that our guides took a formal
farewell of the city. A general discharge of musketry expressed their
salutation; which, in this favourite haunt of echo, made a formidable
din. They do this not only in compliment to those they leave, but as a
customary and necessary precaution to those they approach. We soon
turned a point which shut out the valley, and were in the wilderness
with our wild scouts. Encumbered with their long and heavy guns, they
easily kept pace with the horses, as well on occasional levels as during
the ascent. We were much struck with their vigorous activity, which
seemed to surpass that of the animals; and subsequently had occasion to
observe that even children are capable of supporting the toil of this
difficult and rapid march. The two foreigners in nation, but brothers in
adventure, whom we had adopted into our fellowship, proved to be
agreeable companions. One was an Italian, volatile and frivolous; the
other a grave German, clever and solidly informed; he had been a
professor in one of their military colleges. The Italian was up to all
sorts of fun, and ready to joke at the expense of us all. His companion
afforded some mirth by his disastrous experience on horseback. The
continual ascent which we had to pursue during the early stages of our
journey, had aided the motion of his horse's shoulder in rejecting to
the stern-quarters his saddle, till at length the poor man was almost
holding on by the tail. The figure that he cut in this position,
dressed in full military costume, (your Austrian travels in panoply,)
was finely ridiculous, and was enjoyed by the assistants, civilised and
barbarous.

The country over which we were passing was of an extraordinary
character, when considered as the nurse of some hundred and fifty
thousand sons. It well deserves the name of bleak; for any thing more
_stepmother-like_, in the list of inhabited countries, it would be
difficult to find. In the earlier stages, we were content to think that
we were but at the beginning, and should come down to the cultivated
region. That cultivation there must be here, we knew; because the people
have to depend on themselves for supplies, and have very little money
for extra provision. But we passed on, and still saw nothing but rugged
and barren rocks--a country from which the very goats might turn in
disgust. We presently observed certain appearances, which, but for the
general utter want of verdure, we should scarcely have noticed. Here and
there, the disposition of the rocks leaves at corners of the road, or
perhaps on shelves above its level, irregular patches of more generous
soil, but scantily disposed, and of difficult access. These are improved
by indefatigable industry into corn-plots. When we consider with how
much trouble the soil must be conveyed to these places, the seed
bestowed, and the crop gathered, we feel that land must be indeed scanty
with these barbarians, who can take so much trouble for the improvement
of so little. It may be supposed that their resources are not entirely
in lands of this description. But, excepting one plain, we did not pass,
in our day's journey, what might fairly be called arable land, till we
arrived at ZettiniA(C), the capital. Like many uncivilised tribes, they
behave with much ungentleness to their women. They are not worse in this
respect than the Albanians, or perhaps than the Greeks in the remote
parts of Peloponnesus; but still they appear to lay an undue burden on
the fair sex. Much of the out-door and agricultural work seems to be
done by the women; perhaps all may be--since the constant occupations of
war, which demand the attention of their husbands, induce a contempt for
domestic labour. I would hope, for the honour of the Montenegrini, that
the labours of their weaker assistants are confined to the plain; the
detached and rocky plots must demand patience from even robust men. The
women--I speak by a short anticipation--are a patient, strong, and
laborious race. As a consequence, they are hard-featured, and harsh in
bony developments. Like the men, they are tall and active, though
perhaps ungainly in gesture. Unlike the men, they have sacrificed the
useful to the ornamental in their dress. Of this a grand feature is a
belt, composed of many folds of leather, and, of course, quite
inflexible. This awkward trapping is perhaps a foot broad. This ornament
must, in spite of custom, be very inconvenient to the wearer, as well by
its weight as by its inflexibility. It is, however, thickly embellished
with bright-coloured stones, rudely set in brass; thus we find the
Montenegrini women obeying the same instinct that leads the dames of
civilisation to suffer that they may shine. This belt is the obvious
distinction in dress between the two sexes; and when it is hidden by the
long rug, or scarf, which is common to both men and women, there remains
between them no striking difference of costume. This rug is to the
Montenegrino what the capote is to the Greek and Albanian, his companion
in all weathers--his shelter against the storm, and his bed at night.
The manufactures here are of course rude; and, in this instance, their
ingenuity has not ascended to the device of sleeves. The article is
_bona fide_ a rug, much like one of our horse-rugs, but very long and
very comfortable, enveloping, on occasion, nearly the whole person. It
is ornamented by a long and knotted fringe, and depends from the
shoulders of the natives not without graceful effect. This light
habiliment constitutes the mountaineers' house and home, rendering him
careless of weather by day, and independent of shelter by night. Be it
observed as a note of personal experience, that as a defence against
weather, this scarf is really excellent, and will resist rain to an
indefinite extent.

As we proceeded on our road, we learned fully to comprehend the secret
of their long independence. The country is of such a nature that it may
be pronounced positively impregnable. Our thoughts fell back to the
recollection of Affghanistan, and we felt that we had an illustration of
the difficulties of that warfare. The passage is throughout a continual
defile. The road, after the first hour or so, relents somewhat of its
abruptness. But it pursues a course shut in on both sides by rocks, that
assert the power of annihilating passengers. The rocks are inaccessible
except to those familiar with the passages, perhaps except to the
aborigines, who combine the knowledge with the necessary activity.
Behind these barriers, the natives in security might sweep the defile,
from the numerous gulleys that branch from it in all directions. It is
difficult to imagine what conduct and valour could do against a deadly
and unseen enemy. It is not only here and there that the road assumes
this dangerous character; it is such throughout, with scarcely the
occasional exception of some hundred yards, till it opens into the
valley of ZettiniA(C). One of our Austrian friends was of opinion that
their regiment of Tyrolean chasseurs would be able to overrun and subdue
the territory. If such an achievement be possible, those, of course,
would be the men for the work. But it would be an unequal struggle that
mere activity would have to maintain against activity and local
knowledge. During our course, we kept close order; two of us did attempt
an episode, but were soon warned of the expediency of keeping with the
rest. A couple of minutes put us out of sight of our friends, which we
did not regain till after some little suspense. Fogs here seem ever
ready to descend; and one which at precisely the most awkward moment
enveloped us, obscured all around beyond the range of a few feet. For
our comfort, we knew that the people would be expecting visitors to
their prince, and thus be less suspicious of strangers, if haply they
should fall in with us.

Some three hours after our start, we perceived symptoms of excitement
amongst the foremost of our band, and hastened to the eminence from
which they were gesticulating. At our feet was disclosed a plain, not
level nor extensive, but a plain by comparison. It bore rude signs of
habitation, the first we had met. There was a single log-hut, much of
the same kind as the inland Turkish guard-houses, only without the
luxury of a divan. Around this were several people eagerly looking out
for our approach. They had good notice of our coming; for as we rose
into sight, our party gave a salute of small arms. This was returned by
their brethren below, and the whole community (not an alarming number)
hastened to tender us the offices of hospitality. Our horses were
quickly cared for, seats of one kind or other were provided, and we sat
down beneath the shade of the open forest, to partake of their bounty.

The valley was a shade less wild than the country we had passed, but
still a melancholy place for human abode. It must be regarded as merely
a sort of outpost--not professing the extent of civilisation attained by
the capital; but, with every allowance, it was a sorry place. It did
certainly afford some verdure; but probably they do not consider the
situation sufficiently central for secure pasturage. That their sheep
are excellent we can bear witness, for the repast provided consisted in
that grand Albanian dish--the sheep roasted whole. Surely there can be
nothing superior to this dish in civilised cookery. Common fragmentary
presentations of the same animal are scarcely to be considered of the
same kin--so different are the juices, the flavour, and generally,
thanks to their skill, the degree of tenderness. It happens
conveniently, that the proper mode of treating this dish is without
knives, forks, or plates. It was therefore of little moment that our
retreat afforded not these luxuries; we were strictly observant of
propriety, when with our fingers we rent asunder the morsels, and
devoured. The wine that assisted on this occasion was quite comparable
to the ordinary country wines to be met, though it must be far from
abundant. We saw here some of the children. Poor things, theirs is a
strange childhood! Edged tools are familiar to their cradles. Sharp
anguish, sudden changes, violent alarms, compose the discipline of their
infancy. I saw one of them hurt by one of the horses having trodden on
his foot, and, as he was without shoes, he must have suffered cruelly. A
woman was comforting, and doubtless tenderly sympathised with him; but
the expression of feeling was suppressed--she spoke as by stealth,
without looking at him, and he listened in the same mood, withholding
even looks of gratitude, as he did cries of pain. He was young enough,
had he been a Frank, to have cried without disgrace, but his lesson was
learnt. Suffering, he knew, was a thing too common to warrant particular
complaint, or to require particular compassion. Expressed lamentation is
the privilege of those who are accustomed to condolence. The husband,
the son, the friend, bewail themselves--the lonely slave suffers in
silence. Tears, even the bitterest of them, have their source in the
spring of joy; when this spring is dried up, when all is joyless, man
ceases to weep.

While we partook of this entertainment, the natives were preparing a
grand demonstration in honour of our arrival. They had made noise
enough, in all conscience, with their muskets, but small arms would not
satisfy them, now that we were on their territory. They were preparing a
salute from great guns--and such guns! They were made of wood, closely
hooped together. Of these they had four, well crammed with combustibles.
We had not the least idea that they would go off without being burst
into fragments, and would have given something to dissuade our zealous
friends from the experiment. But it was in vain that we hinted our
fears--gently, of course, in deference to their self-esteem. A bold
individual kept coaxing the touch-hole with a bit of burning
charcoal--so long without effect that we began to hope the thing would
prove a failure. Most people will acknowledge it to be a nervous thing
to stand by, expecting an explosion that threatens, but will not come
off. If it be so with a sound gun, what must it have been with such
artillery as was here? Nothing less than serious injury to the life or
limbs of the operator seemed to impend. To mend matters, our Italian
friend, smitten with sudden zeal, usurped the office of bombardier; and
it is perhaps well that he did for he had the common sense to keep as
much out of the way as he could, under the circumstances. He kept well
on one side, and made a very long arm, then dropped the fiery particle
right into the touch-hole, and off went the concern, kicking right over,
but neither bursting nor wounding our friend. It required minute
inspection to satisfy ourselves that the guns had survived the effort,
and their construction partly explained the wonder--the vents are nearly
as wide-mouthed as the muzzles.

The interest of our day increased rapidly during the latter part of our
journey. We were fairly enclosed in the country, drawing near the
capital, and felt that every step was bringing us nearer the redoubted
presence of the Vladika. The A. D. C. was curiously questioned touching
the ceremonies of our reception, and uttered many speculations as to the
mode in which the great man would present himself to us--whether _with
his tail on_, or more unceremoniously. All that we heard, raised
increased curiosity about the person of this martial bishop--one so very
boldly distinguished from his fraternity. The Greek bishops are so
singularly reverend in appearance, with flowing black robes, and
venerable beards, supporting their grave progress with a staff, and
seldom unattended by two or three deacons, that it became difficult to
imagine one of their body charging at the head of warriors, or adorned
with the profane trappings of a soldier. We kept a bright look-out as we
rode on, our cavalcade being now attended by a fresh levy from our last
halting-place. The country through which we passed was of somewhat
mitigated severity, but still bare, and occasionally dangerous. There
was a hamlet, in our course, of pretension superior to the first, as
behoved--seeing that it was much nearer the metropolis, and security.
Here was a picturesque church, a well, and a wide-spreading tree--the
last a notable object in this district, where even brushwood becomes
respectable.

The road at length became decidedly and sustainedly better. The rocks
began to assume positions in the distance, and trotting became possible.
We learned that we were drawing near the end of our journey, and our
anxious glances ahead followed the direction of the A. D. C. At last the
cry arose--"Vladika is coming," and in high excitement we pressed
forward to the meeting. A body of horsemen were approaching at a rapid
pace, and in a cloud of dust; and no sooner were we distinctly in sight
than they set spurs to their horses, and quickly galloped near enough to
be individually scanned. We could do no less than manifest an equal
impatience for the meeting. This, to some of us, poor riders at the
best, which sailors are privileged to be, and just at that time rather
the worse for wear, was no light undertaking. In some of our cases it is
to be feared that the mists of personal apprehension dimmed this our
first view of the Vladika. The confusion incidental to the meeting of
two such bodies of horse, was aggravated by the zeal of the wretched
barbarians, who poured forth volley after volley of musketry. They
spurred and kicked their horses, which, seeing that they had probably
all at one time or an other been stolen from tip-top Turks, like noble
brutes as they were, showed pluck, and kicked in return. Happily our
animals were peaceful--more frightened by the noise than excited by the
race, and much tired with their morning's work. Had they behaved as did
those of our new friends, the narrator of this account would hardly have
been in a condition to say much of the country, for he would probably
have been run away with right through Montenegro, and have pulled up
somewhere about Herzogovinia.

The confusion had not prevented our being struck with the one figure in
the group, that we knew must be the Vladika. He was distinguished by
position and by dress, but more decidedly by nature. His gigantic
proportions would have humbled the largest horse-guard in our three
regiments; and when he dismounted we agreed that he must be upwards of
seven feet in stockings. This was our judgment, subsequently and
deliberately. Captain ---- was of stature exceeding six feet, and
standing close alongside of Monseigneur reached about up to his
shoulders. His frame seems enormously strong and well proportioned,
except that his hand is perhaps too small for the laws of a just
symmetry. This, by the by, we afterwards perceived to be a cherished
vanity with the Vladika, who constantly wears gloves, even in the house.
His appearance bore not the least trace of the clerical; his very
moustache had a military, instead of an ecclesiastical air; and though
he wore something of a beard, it was entirely cheated of episcopal
honours. It was merely an exaggeration of the imperial. His garments
were splendid, and of the world, partly Turkish, and partly _ad
libitum_. The ordinary fez adorned his head, and his trousers were
Turkish. The other particulars were very splendid, but I suppose hardly
to be classed among the recognised fashions of any country. One might
imagine that a huge person, and enormous strength, when fortified with
supreme power among a wild tribe, would produce savageness of manner.
But the Vladika is decidedly one of nature's gentlemen. His manners are
such as men generally acquire only by long custom of the best society.
His voice had the blandest tones, and the reception that he gave us
might have beseemed the most graceful of princes. He was attended more
immediately by a youth some eighteen years of age, his destined
successor, and by another whom we learned to be his cousin. The rest of
the group were well dressed and armed, and, indeed, a respectable troop.
The Vladika himself bore no arms.

We did not waste much time in ceremony, though during the short interval
of colloquy we must have afforded a fine subject had an artist been
leisurely observant. All dismounted and formed about the two chiefs of
our respective parties, and made mutual recognisances. The confusion was
considerable, and the continual noise of guns gave our poor beasts, who
were not proof to fire, no quiet. The men, who were now about us in
numbers sufficient to afford a fair sample of the stock, were most of
them, at a guess, upwards of six feet high--some considerably so; and a
wild set they seemed, though they looked kindly upon us. We were
formally presented by our captain to the prince, and received the
welcome of his smiles. His polite attention had provided a fresh and
fiery charger for our chief, and the two headed the cavalcade, which in
order dashed forward to the royal city. It was a grand progress that we
made through a line of the people, who turned out to watch and honour
our entry. The discharge of muskets was sustained almost uninterruptedly
throughout the line. It was not long before the city of ZettiniA(C) opened
to our view, situated in an extensive valley, quite amphitheatrical in
character. As we turned the corner of the defile leading into the
valley, a salute was opened from a tower near the palace, which mounts
some respectable guns. We rode at a great pace into the town, and dashed
into the inclosure that surrounds the palace, amidst a grand flourish of
three or four trumpets reserved for the climax.

To a bad rider like myself it was the occupation of the first few
minutes to assure myself that I had passed unscathed through such a
scene of kicking and plunging; one's first sensation was that of
security in treading once more the solid earth. When I looked up I saw
the Vladika in separate conference with the A. D. C., and then he passed
into the building. His hospitable will was signified to us by this
functionary. The captain was invited to sojourn in the palace; we, whose
rank did not qualify for such a distinction, were to be bestowed in two
locandas; and all were bidden to dinner in the evening. Meanwhile the
localities were open to our investigation.

One of the first curiosities was the locanda itself; curious as existing
in such a place, and expected by us to be something quite out of the
general way of such establishments. We proceeded to inspect our
quarters, and to our astonishment found two houses of a most
satisfactory kind. The rooms were neat, and perfectly clean, far
superior in this respect to many inns of much higher pretensions. An
honourable particular (almost exception) in their favour, is, that the
beds contain no vermin. This virtue will be appreciated by any one who
has travelled in Greece. The hostesses were not of the aborigines, they
were importations from Cattaro. One was a widow, tearful under the
recent stroke; the other was a talkative woman, delighted with the visit
of civilised strangers. The fare to be obtained at these places is
exceedingly good, and the solids are relieved by champagne, no less--and
excellent champagne too. We were much surprised at the discovery of
these places, so distinct from the popular rudeness, and puzzled to
conceive who were the guests to support the establishments. Besides
these two we did not observe any cafA(C)s or wine-shops, so probably they
flourish the rather that their custom, such as it is, is subject but to
one division. The good-will of the landladies was not the least
admirable part of their economy. Though our numbers might have alarmed
them, they with the best grace made up beds for us on the floor, and
supplied us with such helps to the toilette as occurred.

We soon were scattered over the place, each to collect some contribution
to the general fund of observation. But one object, conspicuous, and
portentous of horrid barbarism, attracted us all at first. It was the
round white tower from which the salute had been fired at our entrance.
A solitary hillock rises in the plain, on the top of which, clearly
defined, stands this tower. We had heard something of a custom among the
Montenegrini of cutting off, and exposing the heads of vanquished
enemies; but the story was one of so many coloured with blood, that it
made no distinct impression. As we had ridden into the plain, this tower
had attracted our observation, and we had perceived its walls to be
garnished with some things that, in the distance, looked like large
drum-sticks--that is to say, we saw poles each with some thing round at
its end. These things we were told were human heads, and our eyes were
now to behold the fact. And we did, indeed, look upon this spectacle,
such as Europe, except in these wilds, would abhor. There were heads of
all ages, and of all dates, and of many expressions; but from all
streamed the single lock that marks the follower of Mahomet. Some were
entire in feature, and looked even placid--others were advanced in
decomposition. Of some only fragments remained, the exterior bones
having fallen away, and left only a few teeth grinning through impaled
jaws. The ground beneath was strewed with fragments of humanity, and the
air was tainted with the breath of decomposition. It was truly a savage
sight, unworthy of Christians; and, doubtless, such an exhibition tends
to maintain the thirst of blood in which it originated. This hillock is
a good point of view for the survey of the place. It looks immediately
upon the palace, and over it upon the town. Near it stand the church and
monastery; and that monastery affords the only specimen of a priest in
priest's garments that I saw here. The palace is really a commodious,
well-built house, of considerable extent. Its site occupies three sides
of a parallelogram, and it is completely enclosed by a wall, furnished
at the four angles of its square with towers. The part of this inclosure
that is towards the front of the palace is kept clear, as a sort of
parade. In its centre are some dismounted guns of small calibre. On the
opposite side of the building are the royal kitchen gardens; neither
large nor well-looking. The interior of the building is superior to its
outside pretence. The rooms into which we were more immediately
introduced, may be supposed to be kept as show-rooms. At any rate they
were worthy of such appliance--lofty, well built, and highly picturesque
in their appointments. But I went also into some of the more remote
parts of the building, the room, for instance, of the A. D. C., and that
was equally unexceptionable. It is to be presumed that they gave our
captain one of their best bedrooms--and it might have been a best
bedroom in London or Paris. Indeed, in so civilized fashion was the
place furnished, that it heightened, by contrast, the horrors of the
scene outside. Barren rocks, savage caverns, naked barbarian, should
have been associated with the spectacle on the white tower. It was
caricaturing refinement to practise it in such a neighbourhood; the
transition was too abrupt from the urbanities within to the bloody
spectacle that met you if you put your head out of the window.

The City of ZettiniA(C)--it has a double title to the name, from its bishop
and its prince--consists of little more than two rows of houses, not
disposed in a street, but angularly. Besides these there are a few
scattered buildings. The palace, the monastery, and church, are at the
upper end of the plain. The valley is level to a considerable extent,
and not without cultivation. It has no artificial fortification, being
abundantly protected by nature. The hills that shut in the valley
terminate somewhat abruptly, and impart an air of seclusion. The houses
are far more comfortable than might be expected. The occupations of the
people, so nearly entirely warlike, are not among the higher branches of
domestic economy. What industry they exhibit at home is only by favour
of occasional leisure, and at intervals. Yet they are not without their
manufactures, rude though they be. Specimens were exhibited to us of
their doings in the way of coarse cloth. They manufacture the cloth of
which their large scarfs or rugs are made, and fashion the same stuff
into large bags for provisions; a useful article to those who are so
constantly on the march. We also procured one of the large girdles worn
by their women, to astonish therewith the eyes of ladies, as, indeed,
they might well astonish any body. They brought to us, also, some of the
elaborately wrought pipe-bowls peculiar to them. They are ornamented
with fine studs of brass, in a manner really ingenious; and so highly
esteemed that a single bowl costs more than a couple of beautiful
Turkish sticks elsewhere. These articles are the sum of our experience
in their manufactures.

The monastery and church are of considerable antiquity, and contrast
pleasingly with the general fierceness. It cannot be said that the
priests generally exhibit much of the reverential in their appearance.
They follow the example of their warlike chief, being mostly clad in gay
colours, and armed to the teeth. But in the monastery we found one
reverend in aspect. He kindly exhibited to us the treasures of the
sanctuary. They may claim at least one mark of primitive institution,
which is poverty. Their shrine displays no show of silver and gold, yet
it is not without valued treasure. A precious relic exists in the
defunct body of the late Vladika, to which they seem to attach the full
measure of credence prescribed in such cases. He is exhibited in his
robes, and preserves a marvellously lifelike appearance. According to
their account, he has conferred signal benefit on them since his
departure, and well merited his canonisation. His claims ought to be
unusual, since, in his instance, the salutary rule which requires the
lapse of a considerable interval between death and canonisation, that
the frailties of the man may be forgotten in the memory of the saint,
has been superseded. The part of the monastery which we inspected,
little more than the gallery however, was kept quite clean--an obvious
departure from the mode of Oriental monasteries generally, than which
few things can be more piggish.

The Vladika pays great attention to education, both for his people and
himself. It is much to his praise that he has acquired the ready use of
the French language, which he speaks fluently and well. He entertains
masters in different subjects, with whom he daily studies. His tutor in
Italian is a runaway Austrian, whose previous bad character does not
prevent his honourable entertainment. For his people he has a school
well attended, and taught by an intelligent master. It was not easy to
proceed to actual examination when we had no common language; but it was
pleasing to find here a school, and apparent studiousness. They not only
read books, but print them; and a specimen of their typography was among
the memorials of our visit that we carried away with us; unhappily we
could not guess at its subject. The Vladika is a great reader, though
his books must be procured with difficulty. He reads, too, the
ubiquitous _Galignani_, and thus keeps himself _au fait_ to the doings
of the world. We were astonished at the extent and particularity of his
information, when dinner afforded opportunity for small talk. This was
the grand occasion to which we looked forward as opportune to personal
conclusions; his conversation and his _cuisine_ would both afford
_indicia_ of his social grade.

But when this time arrived, it found us under considerable
self-reproach. We had found our host to be a much more polished person
than we had expected. In this calculation we had perhaps, only
vindicated our John Bullism, which assigns to semi-barbarism all the
world beyond the sound of Bow Bells, and of which feeling, be it
observed, the exhibition so often renders John Bull ridiculous. The
Austrian officers had come in proper uniform; the English had brought
with them only undress coats, without epaulettes or swords, thinking
such measure of ceremony would be quite satisfactory. We now found that
the intelligence of the Vladika, and the usage of his reception,
demanded a more observant respect. But this same intelligence accepted,
and even suggested, our excuses, and, in spite of deficiencies we were
welcomed with gracious smiles. The strange mixture of the respectable
with the disrespectable, was, however, maintained in our eyes to the
last. The messenger sent to summon us to the banquet could hardly be
esteemed worthy of so honourable an office. "See that man," said the
grave Austrian to me, "he is a scamp of the first water--a deserter from
my regiment, a man of education, and an officer reduced for misconduct
to the ranks--one who, for numerous acts of misbehaviour and dishonesty,
was repeatedly punished. He at last deserted, fled over the border, and
now beards me to my face." He nevertheless proved a good herald, and led
us to an excellent and most welcome dinner.

The table was perfectly well spread, somewhat in the modern style, which
eschews the exhibition of dishes, and presents fruits and flowers. Some
lighter provision was there, in the shape of plates of sliced sausages
and so forth, but the dishes of resistance were in reserve. There was an
unexceptionable array of plate, and crockery, and _neatness_. The
dining-room was worthy of the occasion. It is a large and lofty
apartment, containing little more furniture than a few convenient
couches and chairs. The walls are profusely ornamented with arms of
various kinds, hung round tastefully, so that it has the air of a tent
or guard-room. There is a small apartment leading into it, which
contains a really valuable and curious collection of arms, trophies of
victory, and associated with strange legends. It contains many guns,
with beautifully inlaid stocks, and several rare and valuable swords of
the most costly kind, such as you might seek in vain in the Bezenstein
of Constantinople. Among others was one assumed to be the sword of
Scanderbeg: strange if the sword, once so fatal to the Turks in
political rebellion, should be pursuing its work no less truculently now
in religious strife! Our host was seated, waiting our arrival, having
adapted his dress to the civilities of life, by rejecting his hussar
pelisse, and assuming another vest: he still retained his kid gloves.
The waiters were a most formidable group, and such as could hardly have
been expected to condescend to a servile office. They were chosen from
among his body guard, and were conspicuous for their stature. They wore,
even in this hour of security and presumed relaxation, their weighty
cuirasses, formed of steel plates that shone brilliantly. Their presence
must secure the Vladika against the treachery to which the banquets of
the great have been sometimes exposed.

One little trait of the ecclesiastic peeped out in the disposition of
the table, which showed that our host had not quite lost the _esprit du
corps_: a clergyman who was of our party, and who had been introduced as
a churchman, was placed in the second place of honour after our captain.
The party generally arranged themselves at will, and throughout the
affair, though there was all due observance, we were not oppressed with
ceremony. The dinner went off like most dinners, and our host did the
honours with unexceptionable grace. The cookery was in the Turkish
style, both as to composition and quantity--and we all voted his wines
very good. Champagne flowed abundantly, and unexpectedly. The Vladika
talked in a gentle manner of the most ungentle subject. War was the
subject on which he descanted with pleasure and judgment, and on which
those who sat near him endeavoured to draw him out. But he also proved
himself conversant with several subjects, and inquisitive on European
affairs. His hostility to the Turks was obviously a matter of deep
reality--his hatred was evident in the description which he gave of them
as bad, wicked men, who observed no faith, and with whom terms were
impossible. The Albanians especially were marked by his animadversions.
Our clergyman nearly produced an explosion by an ill-timed remark. As he
listened open-mouthed to the right reverend lecturer on war, he was
betrayed into an expression of his sense of the incongruity. The brow of
the Bishop was for a moment darkened, and his lip curled in contempt, of
which, perhaps, the social blunder was not undeserving. "And would not
you fight," said he, "if you were attacked by pirates?" The wrath of
such a man was to be deprecated. It would have been awkward to see the
head of our companion decorating the fatal white tower, and a nod to one
of the martial waiters would have done the business. We changed the
subject, and asked what was the Montenegro flag? "The cross," said he,
"as befits; what else should Christians carry against infidels?" We
ventured to inquire whether he, on occasion, wore the robes, and
executed the office of bishop, as we had seen a portrait of him in the
episcopal robes. "Very seldom," he told us: "and that only of
necessity." He excused the practice of exposing the heads on the tower
by the plea of necessity. It was necessary for the people, who were
accustomed to the spectacle, and whose zeal demanded and was enlivened
by the visible incentive. He gave us the account of a visit paid to him
by the only lady who has penetrated thus far. He was at the time in the
field, engaged in active operations against the enemy, and the lady, for
the sake of an interview, ventured even within range of the Turkish
battery. He expressed his astonishment that a lady should venture into
such a scene, and asked her what could have induced her so to peril her
life. "Curiosity," said the lady: "I am an Englishwoman;" and this fact
of her nationality seems quite to have satisfied him. She farther won
his admiration by partaking of lunch coolly, under only partial shelter
from the surrounding danger.

The most picturesque part of our day's experience was the evening
assembly. Between the lights we sallied forth, headed by the chief, to
look about us. For our amusement he made the people exhibit their
prowess in jumping, which was something marvellous. The wonder was
enhanced by the comparison of Frank activity which our Italian friend
insisted on affording. But Bacchus, who inspirited to the attempt, could
not invigorate to the execution; and the good-natured barbarians were
amused at the puny effort which set off their own achievements. After
showing us the neighbouring lands, the Vladika conducted us back to the
palace, where we were promised the spectacle of a Montenegro soirA(C)e. It
seems that custom has established a public reception of evenings, and
that any person may at this time attend without invitation. The whole
thing put one in mind of Donald Bean Lean's cavern, or rather, perhaps,
of Ali Baba. The picturesque ornaments of the walls waxed romantic in
the lamp-light; and costumes of many sorts were moving about, or grouped
in the chamber. We were invited to play at different games that were
going on, but preferred to remain quiet in corners, where we enjoyed
pipes and coffee, and observed the group. Among the servants was a
Greek, for whom it might have been supposed that his own country would
have been sufficiently lawless. The body-guard who, during dinner, had
acted as servants, were now gentlemen; and very splendid gentlemen they
made. The universal passion of gaming is not without a place here; it
occupied the greater part of the company. The Vladika sat smoking,
overlooking the noisy group, and talking with our captain. There were
some who did not lay aside their arms even in this hour and place--one
big fellow was pointed out to me who would not stir from one room to
another unarmed; so ever present to his fancy was the idea of the Turks.

Our host throughout the evening maintained the character of a hospitable
and dignified entertainer; comporting himself with that due admixture of
conscious dignity and affability, which seems necessary to the courtesy
of princes. He occasionally addressed himself to one or other of us, and
always seemed to answer with pleasure the questions that we ventured to
put to him. It was with reluctance that we took our leave. The night
passed comfortably at our several locandas, and not one of us had to
speak in the morning of those wretched vermin that plague the
Mediterranean. A capital breakfast put us in condition for an early
start, and the hospitable spirit of the Vladika was manifested in the
refusal of the landladies to produce any bill. With difficulty we
managed to press on them a present. The Vladika, attended by his former
suite, accompanied our departure, which was honoured with the ceremonies
that had marked our entrance. He did not leave us till arrived at the
spot where the day before we had met him.

As we halted here, and dismounted for a moment, the Vladika took from an
attendant a specimen of their guns, with inlaid stocks, and with
graceful action presented it to the captain as a memorial of his visit.

The whole party remounted. The Vladika waved to us his parting salute.
"Farewell, gentlemen; remember Montenegro!"

FOOTNOTE:

[3] Methodius and Cyril, who were sent missionaries to the Sclavonians
in the ninth century.




ELINOR TRAVIS.

A TALE IN THREE CHAPTERS.

CHAPTER THE LAST.


I RESOLVED to seek Rupert Sinclair no more, and I kept my word with
cruel fidelity. But what could I do? Had I not seen him with my own
eyes--had I not passed within a few feet of him, and beheld him, to my
indignation and bitter regret, avoiding his house, sneaking basely from
it, and retreating into the next street, because that house contained
his wife and her paramour? Yes--_paramour!_ I disbelieved the world no
longer. There could be no doubt of the fact. True, it was
incomprehensible--as incomprehensible as terrible! Rupert Sinclair,
pure, sensitive, high-minded, and incorrupt, was incapable of any act
branded by dishonour, and yet no amount of dishonour could be greater
than that attached to the conduct which I had heard of and then
witnessed. So it was--a frightful anomaly! a hideous discrepancy! Such
as we hear of from time to time, and are found within the experience of
every man, unhinging his belief, giving the lie to virtue, staggering
the fixed notions of the confiding young, and confirming the dark
conclusions of cold and incredulous age.

I hated London. The very air impure with the weight of the wickedness
which I knew it to contain; and I resolved to quit the scene without
delay. As for the mansion in Grosvenor Square, and its aristocratic
inhabitants, I had never visited then with my own free will, or for my
own profit and advantage: I forsook them without a sigh. For Rupert's
sake I had submitted to insult from the overbearing lackeys of Railton
House, and suffered the arrogance of the proud and imbecile lord
himself. Much more I could have borne gladly and cheerfully to have
secured his happiness, and to have felt that he was still as pure as I
had known him in his youth.

To say that my suspicions were confirmed by public rumour, is to say
nothing. The visits of Lord Minden were soon spoken of with a sneer and
a grin by every one who could derive the smallest satisfaction from the
follies and misfortunes of one who had borne himself too loftily in his
prosperity to be spared in the hour of his trial. The fact, promulgated,
spread like wildfire. The once fashionable and envied abode became
deserted. There was a blot upon the door, which, like the plague-cross,
scared even the most reckless and the boldest. The ambitious father lost
sight of his ambition in the degradation that threatened his high name;
and the half-conscientious, half-worldly mother forgot the instincts of
her nature in the tingling consciousness of what the world would say.
Rupert was left alone with the wife of his choice, the woman for whom he
had sacrificed all--fortune, station, reputation--and for whom he was
yet ready to lay down his life. Cruel fascination! fearful sorcery!

London was no place for such a man. Urged as much by the battling
emotions of his own mind as by the intreaties of his wife, he determined
to leave it for ever. And in truth the time had arrived. Inextricably
involved, he could no longer remain with safety within reach of the
strong arm of the law. His debts stared him in the face at every turn;
creditors were clamorous and threatening; the horrible fact had been
conveyed from the lips of serving-men to the ears of hungry tradesmen,
who saw in the announcement nothing but peril to the accounts which they
had been so anxious to run up, and now were equally sedulous in keeping
down. It had always been known that Rupert Sinclair was not a rich man;
it soon was understood that he was also a forsaken one. One morning
three disreputable ill-looking characters were seen walking before the
house of Mr Sinclair. When they first approached it, there was a sort of
distant respect in their air very foreign to their looks and dress,
which might indeed have been the result of their mysterious occupation,
and no real respect at all. As they proceeded in their promenade, became
familiar with the place, and attracted observation, their confidence
increased, their respect retreated, and their natural hideous vulgarity
shone forth. They whistled, laughed, made merry with the gentleman out
of livery next door, and established a confidential communication with
the housemaid over the way. Shortly one separated from the rest--turned
into the mews at the corner of the street, and immediately returned with
a bench that he had borrowed at a public-house. His companions hailed
him with a cheer--the bench was placed before the door of Sinclair's
house; the worthies sat and smoked, sang ribald songs, and uttered
filthy jokes. A crowd collected, and the tale was told. Rupert had fled
the country; the followers of a sheriff's officer had barricadoed his
once splendid home, and, Cerberus-like, were guarding the entrance into
wretchedness and gloom.

Heaven knows! there was little feeling in Lord Railton. Some, as I have
already intimated, still existed in the bosom of his wife, whom
providence had made mother to save her from an all-engrossing
selfishness; but to do the old lord justice, he was shaken to the heart
by the accumulated misfortunes of his child--not that he regarded those
misfortunes in any other light than as bringing discredit on himself,
and blasting the good name which it had been the boast of his life to
uphold and keep clear of all attaint. But this bastard sympathy was
sufficient to unman and crush him. He avoided the society of men, and
disconnected himself from all public business. Twenty years seemed added
to his life when he walked abroad with his head turned towards the
earth, as though it were ashamed to confront the public gaze; the
furrows of eighty winters were suddenly ploughed into a cheek that no
harsh instrument had ever before impaired or visited. In his maturity he
was called upon to pay the penalty of a life spent in royal and
luxurious ease. He had borne no burden in his youth. It came upon him
like an avalanche in the hour of his decline. It is not the strong mind
that gives way in the fiery contest of life; the weakest vessel has the
least resistance. About six months after Rupert had quitted England,
slight eccentricities in the conduct of Lord Railton attracted the
notice of his lordship's medical attendant, who communicated his
suspicions to Lady Railton, and frightened her beyond all expression
with hints at lunacy. Change of air and scene were recommended--a visit
to Paris--to the German baths--any where away from England and the scene
of trouble. The unhappy Lady Railton made her preparations in a day.
Before any body had time to suspect the cause of the removal, the family
was off, and the house in Grosvenor Square shut up.

They travelled to Wiesbaden, two servants only accompanied them, and a
physician who had charge of his lordship, and towards whom her ladyship
was far less patronising and condescending than she had been to the
tutor of her son. If misfortune had not elevated her character, it had
somewhat chastened her spirit, and taught her the dependency of man upon
his fellow man, in spite of the flimsy barriers set up by vanity and
pride. Lord Railton was already an altered man when he reached the
capital of Nassau. The separation from every object that could give him
pain had at once dispelled the clouds that pressed upon his mind; and
the cheerful excitement of the journey given vigour and elasticity to
his spirit. He enjoyed life again; and his faculties, mental and
physical, were restored to him uninjured. Lady Railton would have wept
with joy had she been another woman. As it was, she rejoiced amazingly.

The first day in Wiesbaden was an eventful one. Dinner was ordered, and
his lordship was dressing, whilst Lady Railton amused herself in the
charming gardens of the hotel at which they stopped. Another visitor was
there--a lady younger than herself, but far more beautiful, and
apparently of equal rank. One look proclaimed the stranger for a
countrywoman, a second was sufficient for an introduction.

"This is a lovely spot," said Lady Railton, whose generally silent
tongue was easily betrayed into activity on this auspicious morning.

"Do you think so?" answered the stranger, laughing as she spoke; "you
are a new comer, and the loveliness of the spot is not yet darkened by
the ugliness of the creatures who thrive upon it. Wait awhile."

"You have been here some time?" continued Lady Railton, inquiringly.

"_Ja wohl!_" replied the other, mimicking the accent of the German.

"And the loveliness has disappeared?"

"_Ja wohl!_" repeated the other with a shrug.

"You speak their language, I perceive?" said Lady Railton.

"I can say '_Ja wohl_,' '_Brod_,' and '_Guten morgen_'--not another
syllable. I was entrapped into those; but not another step will I
advance. I take my stand at '_Guten morgen_.'"

Lady Railton smiled.

"'Tis not a sweet language, I believe," she continued.

"As sweet as the people, believe me, who are the uncleanest race in
Christendom. You will say so when you have passed three months at
Wiesbaden."

"I have no hope of so prolonged a stay--rather, you would have me say
'no fear.'"

"Oh! pray remain and judge for yourself. Begin with his Highness the
Duke, who dines every day with his subjects at the _table-d'hA'te_ of
this hotel, and end with that extraordinary domestic animal, half little
boy half old man, who fidgets like a gnome about him at the table. Enter
into what they call the gaieties of this horrid place--eat their
food--drink their wine--look at the gambling--talk to their greasy
aristocracy--listen to their growl--contemplate the universal dirt, and
form your own conclusions."

"I presume you are about to quit this happy valley!"

The lovely stranger shook her head.

"Ah no! Fate and--worse than fate!--a self-willed husband!"

"I perceive. He likes Germany, and you"----

"Submit!" said the other, finishing the sentence with the gentlest sigh
of resignation.

"You have amusements here?"

"Oh, a mine of them! We are the fiercest gamesters in the world; we eat
like giants; we smoke like furnaces, and dance like bears."

The ladies had reached the open window of the _saal_ that led into the
garden. They stopped. The dinner of one was about to be served up; the
husband of the other was waiting to accompany her to the public gardens.
They bowed and parted. A concert was held at the hotel that evening. The
chief singers of the opera at Berlin, passing through the town, had
signified their benign intention to enlighten the worthy denizens of
Nassau, on the subject of "high art" in music. The applications for
admission were immense. The chief seats were reserved by mine host, "as
in private duty bound," for the visitors at his hotel; and the chiefest,
as politeness and interest dictated, for the rich and titled foreigners:
every Englishman being rich and noble in a continental inn.

The young physician recommended his lordship by all means to visit the
concert. He had recommended nothing but enjoyment since they quitted
London. His lordship's case was one, he said, requiring amusement; he
might have added that his own case was another--requiring, further, a
noble lord to pay for it. Lord Railton obeyed his medical adviser always
when he suggested nothing disagreeable. Lady Railton was not sorry to
have a view of German life, and to meet again her gay and fascinating
beauty of the morning.

The hall was crowded; and at an early hour of the evening the lovely
stranger was established in the seat reserved for her amidst "the
favoured guests." Her husband was with her, a tall pale man, troubled
with grief or sickness, very young, very handsome, but the converse of
his wife, who looked as blooming as a summer's morn, as brilliant and as
happy. Not the faintest shadow of a smile swept across his pallid face.
Laughter beamed eternally from her eyes, and was enthroned in dimples on
her cheek. He was silent and reserved, always communing with himself,
and utterly regardless of the doings of the world about him. _She_ had
eyes, ears, tongue, thought, feeling, sympathy only for the busy
multitude, and seemed to care to commune with herself as little--as with
her husband. A movement in the neighbourhood announced the arrival of
fresh comers. Lord Railton appeared somewhat flustered and agitated by
suddenly finding himself in a great company, and all the more nervous
from a suspicion that he was regarded as insane by every one he passed:
then came the young physician, as if from a bandbox, with a white
cravat, white gloves, white waistcoat, white face, and a black suit of
clothes, supporting his lordship, smiling upon him obsequiously, and
giving him professional encouragement and approval: and lastly stalked
her ladyship herself with the airs and graces of a fashionable duchess,
fresh as imported, and looking down upon mankind with touching
superciliousness and most amiable contempt. She caught sight of her
friend of the morning on her passage, and they exchanged bland looks of
recognition.

The youthful husband had taken no notice of the fresh arrival. Absorbed
by his peculiar cares, whatever they might be, he sat perfectly still,
unmoved by the preparations of the actors and the busy hum of the
spectators. His head was bent towards the earth, to which he seemed fast
travelling, and which, to all appearances, would prove a happier home
for him than that he found upon its surface. Two or three songs had been
given with wonderful effect. Every one had been encored, and _bouquets_
had already been thrown to the _prima donna_ of the Berlin opera. Never
had Wiesbaden known such delight. Mine host, who stood at the entrance
of the _saal_, perspiring with mingled pride and agitation, contemplated
the scene with a joy that knew no bounds. He was very happy. Like Sir
Giles Overreach, he was "joy all over." The young physician had just put
an eye-glass to an eye that had some difficulty in screwing it on, with
the intention of killing a young and pretty vocalist with one
irresistible glance, when he felt his arm clenched by his patient with a
passionate vigour that not only seriously damaged his intentions with
respect to the young singer, but fairly threw him from his equilibrium.
He turned round, and saw the unhappy nobleman, as he believed, in an
epileptic fit. His eyes were fixed--his lip trembling--his whole frame
quivering. His hand still grasped the arm of the physician, and grasped
it the firmer the more the practitioner struggled for release. There was
a shudder, a cry--the old man fell--and would have dropped to the floor
had he not been caught by the expert and much alarmed physician. A scene
ensued. The singer stopped, the audience rose--the fainting man was
raised and carried out. The noise had attracted the notice of one who
needed an extraordinary provocation to rouse him from his accustomed
lethargy. As the invalid passed him, the husband of the merry beauty
cast one glance towards his deathlike countenance. It was enough. No,
not enough. Another directed to the unhappy lady who followed the
stricken lord, was far more terrible, more poignant and acute. It sent a
thousand daggers to his heart, every one wounding, hacking, killing. He
sunk upon his seat, and covered his streaming eyes with wan and
bloodless hands.

"Rupert!" said Elinor, whispering in his ear, "you are ill--let us go."

"Elinor, it's he, it's he!" he stammered in the same voice.

"Who?"

"My father!"

"And that lady?"

"My mother!"

"Good heaven! Lady Railton!"

"I have killed him," continued Rupert. "I have killed him!"

Before the confusion consequent upon the removal of Lord Railton had
subsided, Elinor, with presence of mind, rose from her seat, and
implored her husband to do the like. He obeyed, hardly knowing what he
did, and followed her instinctively. Like a woman possessed, she ran
from the scene, and did not stop until she reached her own apartments.
Rupert kept at her side, not daring to look up. When he arrived at his
room, he was not aware that he had passed his parents in his
progress--that the eyes of his wife and his mother had again
encountered, and that the sternest scowl of the latter had been met by
the most indignant scorn of the former. To this pass had arrived the
pleasant acquaintance established three hours before in the hotel
garden.

Whilst Elinor Sinclair slept that melancholy night, Rupert watched at
his father's door. He believed him to be mortally ill, and he accused
himself in his sorrow of the fearful crime of parricide. He had made
frequent inquiries, and to all one answer had been returned. The noble
lord was still unconscious: her ladyship could not be seen. It was not
until the dawn of morning that a more favourable bulletin was issued,
and his lordship pronounced once more sensible and out of danger. Rupert
withdrew--not to rest, but to write a few hurried lines to his
mother--begging one interview, and conjuring her to concede it, even if
she afterwards resolved to see him no more. The interview was granted.

It led to no good result. Another opportunity for reconciliation and
peace came only to be rejected. It availed little that Providence
provided the elements of happiness, whilst obstinacy and wilful pride
refused to combine them for any useful end. Lady Railton loved her son
with the fondness of a mother. Life, too, had charms for so worldly a
soul as hers; yet the son could be sacrificed, and life itself parted
with, ere the lofty spirit bend, and vindictive hatred give place to
meek and gentle mercy. The meeting was very painful. Lady Railton wept
bitter tears as she beheld the wreck that stood before her--the
care-worn remains of a form that was once so fair to look at--so
grateful to admire; but she stood inflexible. She might have asked every
thing of her son which he might honourably part with, and still her
desires have fallen short of the sacrifices he was prepared to offer for
the misery he had caused. She had but ONE request to make--it was the
condition of her pardon--but it was also the test of his integrity and
manhood.

_He must part with the woman he had made his wife!_

The evening of the day found Rupert Sinclair and his wife on the road
from Wiesbaden, and his parents still sojourners at the hotel.

Rupert had not told Elinor of the sum that had been asked for the
forgiveness of a mother he loved--the friendship of a father at whose
bed-side nature and duty summoned him with appeals so difficult to
resist. He would not grieve her joyous spirit by the sad announcement.
He had paid the price of affection, not cheerfully--not
triumphantly--but with a breaking and a tortured heart. He knew the
treasure to be costly: he would have secured it had it been twice as
dear. They arrived at Frankfort.

"And whither now?" asked Elinor, almost as soon as they alighted.

"Here for the present, dearest," answered Rupert. "To-morrow whither you
will."

"Thank heaven for a safe deliverance from the Duke of Nassau!" exclaimed
the wife. "Well, Rupert, say no more that I am mistress of your actions.
I have begged for months to be released from that dungeon, but
ineffectually. This morning a syllable from the lips of another has
moved you to do what was refused to my long prayers."

Rupert answered not.

"To-morrow, then, to Paris?" coaxingly inquired the wife.

A shadow passed across the countenance of the husband.

"Wherefore to Paris?" he answered. "The world is wide enough. Choose an
abiding-place and a home any where but in Paris."

"And why not there?" said Elinor, with vexation. "Any where but where I
wish. It is always so--it has always been so."

"No, Elinor," said Rupert calmly--"not always. You do us both
injustice."

"I have no pleasure," she continued, "amongst these dull and
addle-headed people--who smoke and eat themselves into a heaviness
that's insupportable. But Paris is too gay for your grave spirit,
Rupert; and to sacrifice your comfort to my happiness would be more than
I have any right to hope for or to ask."

Sinclair answered not again. Reproach had never yet escaped his lips:
it was not suffered to pass now. How little knew the wife of the
sacrifices which had already been wrung from that fond and faithful
bosom: and which it was still disposed to make, could it but have
secured the happiness of one or both!

Is it necessary to add, that within a week the restless and wandering
pair found themselves in the giddy capital of France! Sinclair, as in
every thing, gave way before the well-directed and irresistible attacks
of one whose wishes, on ordinary occasions, he was too eager to
forestall. His strong objections to a residence in Paris were as nothing
against the opposition of the wife resolved to gain her point and
vanquish. Paris was odious to him on many grounds. It was paradise to a
woman created for pleasure--alive and herself only when absorbed in the
mad pursuit of pleasure. Sinclair regarded a sojourn in Paris as fatal
to the repose which he yearned to secure: his wife looked upon it as a
guarantee for the joyous excitement which her temperament rendered
essential to existence. General Travis was in Paris; so was the Earl of
Minden; so were many other stanch allies and friends of the lady, who
had so suddenly found herself deprived of friends and supporters in the
very height of her dominion and triumph. Sinclair had no desire to meet
with any of these firm adherents; but, on the contrary, much reason to
avoid them. He made one ineffectual struggle, and as usual--submitted to
direction.

If the lady had passed intoxicating days in London, she led madder ones
in France. Again she became the heroine and queen of a brilliant circle,
the admired of all admirers, the mistress of a hundred willing and too
obedient slaves. Nothing could surpass the witchery of her power:
nothing exceed the art by which she raised herself to a proud eminence,
and secured her footing. The arch smile, the clever volubility, the
melting eye, the lovely cheek, the incomparable form, all united to
claim and to compel the admiration which few were slow to render. Elinor
had been slighted in England: she revenged herself in France. She had
been deserted--forsaken by her own: she was the more intent upon the
glowing praise and worship of the stranger. Crowds flocked around her,
confessing her supremacy: and whilst women envied and men admired,
Rupert Sinclair shrunk from publicity with a heart that was near to
breaking--and a soul oppressed beyond the power of relief.

A gleam of sunshine stole upon Rupert Sinclair in the midst of his gloom
and disappointment. Elinor gave promise of becoming a mother. He had
prayed for this event; for he looked to it as the only means of
restoring to him affections estranged and openly transferred to an
unfeeling world. The volatile and inconsiderate spirit, which no
expostulation or entreaties of his might tame, would surely be subdued
by the new and tender ties so powerful always in riveting woman's heart
to duty. His own character altered as the hour approached which must
confer upon him a new delight as well as an additional anxiety. He
became a more cheerful and a happier man: his brow relaxed; his face no
longer bore upon it the expression of a settled sorrow and an abiding
disappointment. He walked more erect, less shy, grew more active, less
contemplative and reserved. Months passed away, quickly, if not
altogether happily, and Elinor Sinclair gave birth to a daughter.

Rupert had not judged correctly. However pleasing may be the sacred
influence of a child upon the disposition and conduct of a mother in the
majority of instances, it was entirely wanting here. Love of
distinction, of conquest, of admiration, had left no room in the bosom
of Elinor Sinclair for the love of offspring, which Rupert fondly hoped
would save his partner from utter worldliness, and himself from final
wretchedness. To receive the child from heaven, and to make it over for
its earliest nourishment and care to strange cold hands, were almost one
and the same act. The pains of nature were not assuaged by the mother's
rejoicings: the pride of the father found no response in the heart of
his partner. The bitter trial of the season past--returning strength
vouchsafed--and the presence of the stranger was almost forgotten in
the brilliancy of the scene to which the mother returned with a
whettened appetite and a keener relish.

Far different the father! The fountain of love which welled in his
devoted breast met with no check as it poured forth freely and
generously towards the innocent and lovely stranger, that had come like
a promise and a hope to his heart. Here he might feast his eyes without
a pang: here bestow the full warmth of his affection, without the fear
of repulse or the torture of doubt. His home became a temple--one small
but darling room an altar--his daughter, a divinity. He eschewed the
glittering assemblies in which his wife still dazzled most, and grew
into a hermit at the cradle of his child. It was a fond and passionate
love that he indulged there--one that absorbed and sustained his
being--that gave him energy when his soul was spent, and administered
consolation in the bitterest hour of his sad loneliness--the bitterest
he had known as yet.

I have said that Lord Minden was in Paris when Sinclair and his wife
arrived there. The visits of this nobleman to the house of Rupert in
London, and the strange conduct of Rupert himself in connexion with
those visits, had helped largely to drive the unfortunate pair from
their native country. Still those visits were renewed in the French
capital, and the conduct of Sinclair lost none of its singularity. The
Parisians were not so scandalized as their neighbours across the water
by the marked attentions of his lordship to this unrivalled beauty.
Nobody could be blind to the conduct of Lord Minden, yet nobody seemed
distressed or felt morally injured by the constant contemplation of it.
If the husband thought proper to approve, it was surely no man's
business to be vexed or angry. Mr Sinclair was a good easy gentleman,
evidently vain of his wife's attractions, and of his lordship's great
appreciation of them. His wife was worshipped, and the fool was
flattered. But was this all? Did he simply look on, or was he basely
conniving at his own dishonour? In England public opinion had decided in
favour of the latter supposition; and public feeling, outraged by such
flagrant wickedness, had thrust the culprits, as they deserved, from the
soil which had given them birth, and which they shamefully polluted.

Nearly two years had elapsed, and the exiles were still in the
fascinating city to which the ill-fated Elinor had carried her too
easily-led husband. The time had passed swiftly enough. Elinor had but
one occupation--the pursuits of pleasure. Sinclair had only one--the
care of his daughter. He had bestowed a mother's tenderness upon the
neglected offspring, and watched its young existence with a jealous
anxiety that knew no rest--and not in vain. The budding creature had
learned to know its patient nurse, and to love him better than all its
little world. She could walk, and prattle in her way, and her throne was
upon her father's lap. She could pronounce his name; she loved to speak
it;--she could distinguish his eager footstep; she loved to hear it.
Rupert was born for this. To love and to be loved with the truth,
simplicity, and power of childhood, was the exigency of his being and
the condition of his happiness. Both were satisfied--yet he was not
happy.

It was a winter's evening. For a wonder, Elinor was at home: She had not
been well during the day, and had declared her intention of spending the
evening with her child and husband--rare indulgence! The sacrifice had
cost her something, for she was out of spirits and ill at ease in her
new character. Her husband sat lovingly at her side--his arm about her
waist--his gleeful eye resting upon the lovely child that played and
clung about his feet.

[And this man was a party to his own dishonour! a common pandar! the
seller of yonder wife's virtue, the destroyer of yonder child's whole
life of peace! Reader, believe it not!--against conviction, against the
world, believe it not!]

"To-morrow, Elinor," said Sinclair musingly, "is your birthday. Had you
forgotten it?"

Elinor turned pale. Why, I know not.

"Yes," she answered hurriedly, "I had. It _is_ my birthday."

"We must pass the day together: we will go into the country. Little
Alice shall be of the party, and shall be taught to drink her mamma's
health. Won't you, Alice?"

The child heard its name spoken by familiar lips, and laughed.

"Will Lord Minden, dear, be back? He shall accompany us."

"He will not," said Elinor, trembling with illness.

"More's the pity," replied Rupert. "Alice will hardly be happy for a day
without Lord Minden. She has cried for him once or twice already. But
you are ill, dearest. Go to rest."

"Not yet," said Elinor, "I shall be better soon. Come, Alice, to mamma."

It was an unwonted summons, and the child stared. She had seldom been
invited to her mother's arms; and the visits, when made, were generally
of short duration. There seemed some heart in Elinor to-night. Rupert
observed it. He caught the child up quickly, placed her in her mother's
lap, and kissed them both.

In the act, a tear--a mingled drop of bitterness and joy--started to his
eye and lingered there.

Strange contrast! His face suddenly beamed with new-born delight: hers
was as pale as death.

"Is she not lovely, Elinor?" asked Rupert, looking on them both with
pride.

"Very!" was the laconic and scarce audible answer; and the child was put
aside again.

"Elinor," said Sinclair, with unusual animation, "rest assured this
precious gift of Heaven is sent to us for good; our days of trouble are
numbered. Peace and true enjoyment are promised in that brow."

A slight involuntary shudder thrilled the frame of the wife, as she
disengaged herself from her husband's embrace. She rose to retire.

"I will go to my pillow," she said. "You are right. I need rest.
Good-night!"

Her words were hurried. There was a wildness about her eye that denoted
malady of the mind rather than of body. Rupert detained her.

"You shall have advice, dearest," said he. "I will go myself"----

"No, no, no," she exclaimed, interrupting him; "I beseech you. Suffer me
to retire. In the morning you will be glad that you have spared yourself
the trouble. I am not worthy of it; good-night!"

"Not worthy, Elinor!"

"Not ill enough, I mean. Rupert, good-night."

Sinclair folded his wife in his arms, and spoke a few words of comfort
and encouragement. Had he been a quick observer, he would have marked
how, almost involuntarily, she recoiled from his embrace, and avoided
his endearments.

She lingered for a moment at the door.

"Shall Alice go with you?" inquired the husband.

"No. I will send for her; let her wait with you. Good-night, Alice!"

"Nay; why good-night? You will see her again."

"Yes," answered Elinor, still lingering. The child looked towards her
mother with surprise. Elinor caught her eye, and suddenly advanced to
her. She took the bewildered child in her arms, and kissed it
passionately. The next moment she had quitted the apartment.

New feelings, of joy as much as of sorrow, possessed the soul of Rupert
Sinclair as he sat with his little darling, reflecting upon the singular
conduct of the dear one who had quitted them. It found an easy solution
in his ardent and forgiving breast. That which he had a thousand times
prophesied, had eventually come to pass. The _mother_ had been checked
in her giddy career, when the _wife_ had proved herself unequal to the
sacrifice. In the mental suffering of his partner, Rupert saw only
sorrow for the past, bitter repentance, and a blest promise of
amendment. He would not interfere with her sacred grief; but, from his
heart, he thanked God for the mercy that had been vouchsafed him, and
acknowledged the justice of the trials through which he had hitherto
passed. And there he sat and dreamed. Visions ascended and descended. He
saw himself away from the vice and dissipation of the city into which he
had been dragged. A quiet cottage in the heart of England was his chosen
dwelling-place; a happy smiling mother, happy only in her domestic
paradise, beamed upon him; and a lovely child, lovelier as she grew to
girlhood, sat at his side, even as the infant stood whilst he dreamed
on; an aged pair were present, the most contented of the group, looking
upon the picture with a calm and grateful satisfaction.

For a full hour he sat lost in his reverie; his glowing heart relieved
only by his swelling tears.

The child grew impatient to depart. Why had Elinor not sent for her?

He summoned a servant, and bade her take the little Alice to her
mother's room. Thither she was carried--to the room, not to the mother.

The mother had quitted the room, the house, the husband--for ever!

A broken-hearted man quitted Paris at midnight. The damning intelligence
had been conveyed to him by one who was cognisant of the whole affair,
who had helped to his disgrace, but whose bribe had not been sufficient
to secure fidelity. _Elinor Sinclair had eloped with the Earl of
Minden._ Flattered by his lordship's attention, dazzled by his amazing
wealth, impatient of the limits which her own poverty placed to her
extravagance, dissatisfied with the mild tenor of her husband's life,
she had finally broken the link which at any time had so loosely united
her to the man, not of her heart or her choice, but of her ambition.

She had fled without remorse, without a pang, worthy of the name. Who
shall describe the astonishment of the aggrieved Rupert?--his
disappointment, his torture! He was thunderstruck, stunned; but his
resolution was quickly formed. The pair had started southwards. Sinclair
resolved to follow them. For the first time in his life he was visited
with a desire for vengeance, and he burned till it was gratified. Blood
only could wash away the stain his honour had received, the injury his
soul had suffered--and it should be shed. He grew mad with the idea. He
who had never injured mortal man, who was all tenderness and meekness,
long-suffering, and patient as woman, suddenly became, in the depth and
by the power of his affliction, vindictive and thirsty for his brother's
life. Within two hours from the period of the accursed discovery, all
his preparations were made, and he was on the track. He had called upon
a friend; explained to him his wrong; and secured him for a companion
and adviser in the pursuit. He took into his temporary service the
creature who had been in the pay of his lordship, and promised him as
large a sum as he could ask for one week's faithful duty. He paid one
hasty, miserable visit to the bed-side of his innocent and sleeping
child--kissed her and kissed her in his agony--and departed like a tiger
to his work.

The fugitives had mistaken the character of Sinclair. They believed that
he would adopt no steps either to recover his wife or to punish her
seducer, and their measures were taken accordingly. They proceeded
leisurely for a few hours, and stopped at the small hotel of a humble
market town. Rupert arrived here at an early hour of the morning. His
guide, who had quitted his seat on the carriage to look for a relay,
learned from the hostler that a carriage had arrived shortly before,
containing an English nobleman and his lady, who, he believed, were then
in the hotel. Further inquiries, and a sight of the nobleman's carriage,
convinced him that the object of the chase was gained. He came with
sparkling eyes to acquaint his master with his good success, and rubbed
his hands as he announced the fact that sickened Rupert to the heart.
Rupert heard, and started from the spot, as though a cannonball had
hurled him thence.

"Fortescue," he said, addressing his friend, "we must not quit this spot
until he has rendered satisfaction. Hoary villain as he is, he shall not
have an hour's grace."

"What would you do?"

"Abide here till morning; watch every door; intercept his passage, and
take my vengeance."

"You shall have it, but it must be on principles approved and
understood. We are no assassins, let him be what he may. Go you to rest.
Before he is awake, I will be stirring. He shall give me an interview
ere he dispatches his breakfast; and rely upon me for seeing ample
justice done to every party."

Fortescue, who was an Englishman done into French, coolly motioned to
Sinclair to enter the hotel. The latter retreated from it with loathing.

"No, Fortescue," continued Sinclair, "I sleep not to-night. Here I take
my dismal watch--here will I await the fiend. He must not escape me. I
can trust you, if any man; but I will trust no man to-night but one."

"As you please, Sinclair," answered the other. "Your honour is in my
keeping, and, trust me, it shall not suffer. I will be up betimes, and
looking to your interest. Where shall we meet?"

"Here. I shall not budge an inch."

"Good night, then, or rather morning. The day is already breaking. But I
shall turn in, if it be but for an hour. I must keep my head clear for
the early work."

And saying these words, the worthy Fortescue sought shelter and repose
in the hotel.

Rupert counted the heavy moments with a crushed and bleeding spirit, as
he paced the few yards of earth to which he had confined his wretched
watch. He was alone. It was a bitter morning--cold and sad as his own
being. He could not take his eyes from the polluted dwelling; he could
not gaze upon it and not weep tears of agony. "Heaven!" he cried, as he
walked on, "what have I done, what committed, that I should suffer the
torment thou hast inflicted upon me for so many years! Why hast thou
chosen me for a victim and a sacrifice! Have I deserved it? Am I so
guilty that I should be so punished?" He would have given all that he
possessed in the world to be released from the horrid task he had
imposed upon himself; yet, for all that the world could give, he would
not trust another with that important guard. Oh! it was the excruciating
pang of perdition that he was conscious of, as he stood and gazed, until
his swelling heart had wellnigh burst, upon the house of shame. He had
brought pistols with him--he had taken care of that; at least, he had
given them to Fortescue, and enjoined him not to lose sight of them.
Were they in safety? He would go and see. He ran from his post, and
entered the stable-yard of the hotel. There were two carriages--his own
and the Earl of Minden's. His pistol-case was safe--so were the pistols
within. A devilish instinct prompted him to look into the carriage of
the lord, that stood beside his own; why he should do it he could not
tell. He had no business there. It was but feeding the fire that already
inflamed him to madness. Yet he opened it. His wife's cloak was there,
and a handkerchief, which had evidently been dropped in the owner's
anxiety to alight. Her initials were marked upon the handkerchief with
the hair of the unhappy man, who forgot her guilt, his tremendous loss,
his indignation and revenge, in the recollection of one bright distant
scene which that pale token suddenly recalled. The battling emotions of
his mind overpowered and exhausted him. He sobbed aloud, dropped on his
knees, and pressed the handkerchief to his aching brain.

It could not last. Madness--frenzy--the hottest frenzy of the lost
lunatic possessed him, and he grasped a pistol. The muzzle was towards
his cheek--his trembling finger was upon the trigger--when a shrill cry,
imaginary or real, caused the victim to withhold his purpose--to look
about him and to listen. It was nothing--yet very much! The voice had
sounded to the father's ear like that of an infant; and the picture
which it summoned to his bewildered eye recalled him to reason--started
him to a sense of duty, and saved him from self-murder.

There was an impulse to force an entrance to the hotel, and to drag the
sinful woman from the embrace of her paramour; but it was checked as
soon as formed. He asked not to look upon her face again; in his hot
anger he had vowed never to confront her whilst life was still permitted
him, but to avoid her like a plague-curse or a fiend. He asked only for
revenge upon the monster that had wronged him--the false friend--the
matchless liar--the tremendous hypocrite. Nothing should come between
him and that complete revenge. There was connected with Lord Minden's
crime, all the deformity that attaches to every such offence; but, over
and above, there was a rankling injury never to be forgotten or
forgiven. What that was _he_ knew, _he_ felt as his pale lip grew white
with shame and indignation, and a sense of past folly, suddenly, but
fearfully awakened. A thousand recollections burst upon his brain as he
persevered in his long and feverish watch. Now mysterious looks and nods
were easily interpreted. Now the neglect of the world, the unkind word,
the inexplicable and solemn hints were unraveled as by magic. "Fool,
dolt, mad-man!" he exclaimed, striking his forehead, and running like
one possessed along the silent road. "A child would have been wiser, an
infant would have known better,--ass--idiot--simple, natural, fool!"

The fault of a life was corrected in a moment, but at an incalculable
cost, and with the acquisition of a far greater fault. Rupert Sinclair
could be no longer the credulous and unsuspecting victim of a subtile
and self-interested world. His affliction had armed him with a shield
against the assaults of the cunning; but it had also, unfortunately,
given him a sword against the approaches of the generous and good.
Heretofore he had suspected none. Now he trusted as few. Satan himself
might have played upon him in the days of his youth. An angel of light
would be repelled if he ventured to give comfort to the bruised soul
broken down in its prime.

The guard as well as the sleeping friend were doomed to disappointment.
Lord Minden and Elinor were not in the hotel. Shortly after their
arrival, his lordship had determined to proceed on his journey, and with
a lighter carriage than that which had brought the pair from Paris. He
privately hired a vehicle of the landlord, and left his own under the
care of a servant whose slumbers were so carefully guarded by the
devoted Sinclair. Great was the disappointment of Fortescue, unbounded
the rage of Rupert, when they discovered their mistake, and reflected
upon the precious hours that had been so wofully mis-spent. But their
courage did not slacken, nor the eagerness--of one at least--abate. The
direction of the fugitives obtained, as far as it was possible to obtain
it, and they were again on the pursuit.

At the close of the second day, fortune turned against the guilty. When
upon the high-road, but at a considerable distance from any town, the
rickety chariot gave way. Rupert caught sight of it, and beckoned his
postilion to stop. He did so. A boor was in charge of the vehicle, the
luckless owners of which had, according to his intelligence, been
compelled to walk to a small roadside public-house at the distance of a
league. The party was described. A grey-headed foreigner and a beautiful
young woman--a foreigner also. Rupert leaped into his carriage, and bade
the postilion drive on with all his might. The inn was quickly reached.
The runaways were there.

Fortescue's task was very easy. He saw lord Minden, and explained his
errand. Lord Minden, honourable man, was ready to afford Mr Sinclair all
the satisfaction a gentleman could demand, at any time or place.

"No time like the present, my lord," said Fortescue; "no place more
opportune. Mr Sinclair is ready at this moment, and we have yet an
hour's daylight."

"I have no weapons--no friend."

"We will furnish your lordship with both, if you will favour us with
your confidence. Pistols are in Mr Sinclair's carriage. I am at your
lordship's service and command: at such a time as this, forms may easily
be dispensed with."

"Be it so. I will attend you."

"In half an hour; and in the fallow ground, the skirts of which your
lordship can just discover from this window. We shall not keep you
waiting."

"I place myself in your hands, Mr Fortescue. I will meet Mr Sinclair. I
owe it to my order, and myself, to give him the fullest satisfaction."

The fullest! mockery of mockeries!

The husband and the seducer met. Not a syllable was exchanged. Lord
Minden slightly raised his hat as he entered the ground; but Rupert did
not return the salute. His cheek was blanched, his lips bloodless and
pressed close together; there was wildness in his eye, but, in other
respects, he stood calm and self-possessed, as a statue might stand.

Fortescue loaded the pistols. Rupert fired, not steadily, but
determinedly--and missed.

Lord Minden fired, and Rupert fell. Fortescue ran to him.

The ball had struck him in the arm, and shattered it.

The nobleman maintained his position, whilst Fortescue, as well as he
was able, stanched the flowing wound, and tied up the arm. Fortunately
the mutual second had been a surgeon in the army, and knowing the duty
he was summoned to, had provided necessary implements. He left his
patient for one instant on the earth, and hastened to his lordship.

"Mr. Sinclair," he said, hurriedly, "must be conveyed to yonder house.
Your lordship, I need not say, must quit it. That roof cannot shelter
you, him, and----no matter. Your carriage has broken down. Ours is at
your service. Take it, and leave it at the next post-town. Yours shall
be sent on. There is no time to say more. Yonder men shall help me to
carry Mr Sinclair to the inn. When we have reached it, let your lordship
be a league away from it."

Fortescue ran once more to his friend. Two or three peasants, who were
entering the field at the moment, were called to aid. The wounded man
was raised, and, on the arms of all, carried fainting from the spot.

Elinor and her companion fled from the inn, wherefore one of them knew
not. The luggage of Sinclair had been hastily removed from the carriage,
and deposited in the house, but not with necessary speed. As the
ill-fated woman was whirled from the door, her eye caught the small and
melancholy procession leisurely advancing. One inquiring gaze, which
even the assiduity of Lord Minden could not intercept, made known to her
the PRESENCE, and convinced her of the FACT. She screamed,--but
proceeded with her paramour, whilst her husband was cared for by his
friend.

A surgeon was sent for from the nearest town, who, arriving late at
night, deemed it expedient to amputate the patient's arm without delay.
The operation was performed without immediately removing the fears
which, after a first examination, the surgeon had entertained for the
life of the wounded man. The injury inflicted upon an excited system
threw the sufferer into a fever, in which he lay for days without relief
or hope. The cloud, however, passed away, after much suffering during
the flitting hours of consciousness and reason. The afflicted man was
finally hurled upon life's shore again, prostrate, exhausted, spent. His
first scarce-audible accents had reference to his daughter.

"My child!" he whispered imploringly, to a sister of charity ministering
at his side.

"Will be with you shortly," replied the devoted daughter of heaven, who
had been with the sufferer for many days.

Rupert shook his head.

"Be calm," continued the religious nurse; "recover strength; enable
yourself to undergo the sorrow of an interview, and you shall see her.
She is well provided for: she is happy--she is here!"

"Here!" faintly ejaculated Rupert, and looking languidly about him.

"Yes, and very near you. In a day or two she shall come and comfort
you."

The benevolent woman spoke the truth. When she had first been summoned
to the bed-side of the wounded man, she diligently inquired into the
circumstances of the case, and learned as much as was necessary of his
sad history from the faithful Fortescue. It was her suggestion that the
child should forthwith be removed from Paris, and brought under the same
roof with her father. She knew, with a woman's instinct,--little as she
had mixed with the world,--how powerful a restorative would be the
prattle of that innocent voice, when the moment should arrive to employ
it without risk.

Rupert acknowledged the merciful consideration. He put forth his thin
emaciated hand, and moved his lips as though he would express his
thanks. He could not, but he wept.

The nurse held up her finger for mild remonstrance and reproof. It was
not wanting. The heart was elevated by the grateful flow. He slumbered
more peacefully for that outpouring of his grateful soul.

The child was promised, as soon as leave could be obtained from the
medical authorities to bring her to her father's presence. If he should
continue to improve for two days, he knew his reward. If he suffered
anxiety of mind and the thought of his calamity to retard his progress,
he was told his punishment. He became a child himself, in his eagerness
to render himself worthy of the precious recompense. He did not once
refer to what had happened. Fortescue sat hour after hour at his side,
and he heard no syllable of reproach against the woman who had wronged
him--no further threat of vengeance against the villain who had
destroyed her.

The looked-for morning came. Rupert was sitting up, and the sister of
charity entered his humble apartment with the child in her hand. Why
should that holy woman weep at human love and natural attachments? What
sympathy had she with the vain expressions of delight and woe--with
paternal griefs and filial joys? The lip that had been fortified by
recent prayer, trembled with human emotion;--the soul that had
expatiated in the passionless realms to which its allegiance was due,
acknowledged a power from which it is perilous for the holiest to
revolt. _Nature_ had a moment of triumph in the sick-chamber of a
broken-hearted man. It was brief as it was sacred. Let me not attempt to
describe or disturb it!

The religious and benevolent sister was an admirable nurse, but she was
not to be named in the same day with Alice. She learned her father's
little ways with the quickness of childhood, and ministered to them with
the alacrity and skill of a woman. She knew when he should take his
drinks--she was not happy unless permitted to convey them from the hands
of the good sister to those of the patient. She was the sweetest
messenger and ambassadrix in the world: so exact in her messages--so
brisk on her errands! She had the vivacity of ten companions, and the
humour of a whole book of wit. She asked a hundred questions on as many
topics, and said the oddest things in life. When Sinclair would weep,
one passing observation from her made him laugh aloud. When his
oppressed spirit inclined him to dulness, her lighter heart would lead
him, against his will, to the paths of pleasantness and peace!

Was it Providence or chance that sealed upon her lips the name of one
who must no longer be remembered in her father's house? Singularly
enough, during the sojourn of Rupert Sinclair and his daughter in the
roadside inn, neither had spoken to the other of the wickedness that had
departed from them; and less singular was it, perhaps, that the acutest
pang that visited the breast of Elinor was that which accompanied the
abiding thought, that Rupert was ever busy referring to the mother's
crime, and teaching the infant lip to mutter curses on her name.

In the vicinity of the inn was a forest of some extent. Hither, as
Sinclair gathered strength, did he daily proceed with his little
companion, enjoying her lively conversation, and participating in her
gambols. He was never without her. He could not be happy if she were
away: he watched her with painful, though loving jealousy. She was as
unhappy if deprived of his society. The religious sister provided a
governess to attend upon her, but the governess had not the skill to
attach her to her person. At the earliest hour of the morning, she awoke
her father with a kiss: at the last hour of the night, a kiss from his
easily recognised lips sealed her half-conscious half-dreaming slumbers.
Alice was very happy. She could not guess why her father should not be
very happy too, and always so.

For one moment let us follow the wretched Elinor, and trace her in her
flight. Whilst her own accusing conscience takes from her pillow the
softness of its down, and the vision of her husband, as she last saw
him, haunts her at every turn like a ghost--striking terror even to her
thoughtless heart, and bestowing a curse upon her life which she had
neither foreseen nor thought of, let us do her justice. Vice itself is
not all hideousness. The immortal soul cannot be all pollution. Defaced
and smirched it may be--cruelly misused and blotted over by the sin and
passion of mortality; but it will, and must, proclaim its origin in the
depths of degradation. There have been glimpses of the heavenly gift
when it has been buried deep, deep in the earth--beams of its light in
the murkiest and blackest day! Elinor was guilty--lost here beyond the
power of redemption--she was selfish and unworthy; yet not wholly
selfish--not utterly unworthy. I am not her apologist--I appear not here
to plead her cause. Heaven knows, my sympathy is far away--yet I will do
her justice. I will be her faithful chronicler.

Upon the fourth day of her elopement she had reached Lyons. Here,
against the wish of the Earl of Minden, she expressed a determination to
remain for at least a day: she desired to see the city--moreover, she
had friends--one of whom she was anxious to communicate with, and might
never see again. Who he was she did not say, nor did his lordship learn,
before they quitted the city on the following day. The reader shall be
informed.

It was on the afternoon of the day of their arrival in Lyons that Elinor
paid her visit to the friend in question. He resided in a narrow street
leading from the river-side into the densest and most populous
thoroughfares of that extensive manufacturing town: the house was a
humble one, and tolerably quiet. The door was open, and she entered. She
ascended a tolerably-wide stone staircase, and stopped before a door
that led into an apartment on the fourth floor. She knocked softly: her
application was not recognised--but she heard a voice with which she was
familiar.

"Cuss him imperence!" it said; "him neber satisfied. I broke my heart,
sar, in your service, and d--n him--no gratitude."

"Don't you turn against me, too," answered a feeble voice, like that of
a sick man. "I shall be well again soon, and we will push on, and meet
them at Marseilles."

"Push on! I don't understand 'push on,' when fellow's not got half-penny
in the pocket. Stuck to you like a trump all my life; it's not the ting
to bring respectable character into dis 'ere difficulty."

"Give me something to drink."

"What you like, old genl'man?" was the answer. "Course you call for what
you please--you got sich lots of money. You have any kind of water you
think proper--from ditch water up to pump."

"You are sure there were no letters for me at the post?" inquired the
feeble voice.

"Come, stop dat, if you please. That joke's damned stale and
aggravating. Whenever I ask you for money, you send me to the post. What
de devil postman see in my face to give me money?"

Elinor knocked again and again; still unanswered, she opened the door.
In the apartment which she entered, she perceived, grinning out of the
window, with his broad arms stretched under his black face, the nigger
of our early acquaintance--the old servant of her father's house--the
gentleman who had represented the yahoo upon the evening of my
introduction to the general--the fascinating Augustus. Behind him, on a
couch that was drawn close to the wall, and surmounted by a dingy
drapery, lay--her father--a shadow of his former self--miserably
attired, and very ill, as it would seem, mentally and bodily. Both the
yahoo and the general started upon her entrance, for which they were
evidently wholly unprepared.

"Elinor!" said the general, "you have received my letter?"

"I have," was the reply--scarcely heard--with such deep emotion was it
spoken!

"And you cannot help me?" he asked again, with a distracted air.

"I can," she answered--"I will--it is here--all you ask--take it--repair
to my mother--save her--yourself."

She presented him with a paper as she spoke. He opened it eagerly, and
his eye glittered again as he perused it.

"Did you get it easily, child?" he said.

"No--with difficulty--great difficulty," she answered wildly. "But there
it is. It will relieve you from your present trouble, and pay your
passage."

"Augustus--we will start to-night," said the general anxiously, "we will
not lose a moment."

"Father," said Elinor, with agitation, "I must be gone. Give my love to
my mother. I have sent all that I could procure for her comfort and
happiness. I tell you, father, it was not obtained without some
sacrifice. Spend it not rashly--every coin will have its value. I may
not be able to send you more. Tell her not to curse me when she hears my
name mentioned as it will be mentioned, but to forgive and forget me."

The old man was reading the bank-bill whilst his daughter spoke, and had
eyes and ears for nothing else.

"We shall never forget you, dear child," he said, almost mechanically.

He folded the bill carefully, put it into his pocket, buttoned that as
carefully, and looked up. The daughter had departed.

Rupert Sinclair recovered from the wound he had received, and from the
subsequent operation; but strength came not as quickly as it had been
promised, or as he could wish. He removed, after many months, from the
inn, and commenced his journey homewards. To be released from the tie
which still gave his name to her who had proved herself so utterly
unworthy of it, was his first business; his second, to provide
instruction and maternal care for the young creature committed to his
love. He travelled by short and easy stages, and arrived at length in
London. He was subdued and calm. All thoughts of revenge had taken leave
of his mind; he desired only to forget the past, and to live for the
future. He had witnessed and suffered the evil effects of a false
education. He was resolved that his child should be more mercifully
dealt with. He had but one task to accomplish in life. He would fulfil
it to the letter.

Sinclair waited upon his legal adviser as soon as he reached the
metropolis. That functionary heard his client's statement with a
lugubrious countenance, and sighed profoundly, as though he were very
sorry that the affair had happened.

"These are cases, sir," said he, "that make the prosecution of a noble
profession a painful and ungrateful labour. Surgeons, however, must not
be afraid to handle the knife. What we must do, it is better to do
cheerfully. Don't you think so?"

Sinclair nodded assent.

"And now your witnesses, Mr Sinclair. We must look them up. The chief, I
presume, are abroad."

"Many are, necessarily," answered Rupert. "There is one gentleman
however, in England, with whom I am anxious that you should put yourself
in immediate communication. When I went abroad, he was at Oxford,
residing in the college, of which he is a fellow. He is my oldest
friend. He is well acquainted with my early history, and is aware of all
the circumstances of my marriage. He may be of great service to us both:
you, he may save much trouble--me, infinite pain."

"Just so," said the lawyer. "And his name?"

"Walter Wilson, Esq. of ---- College, Oxford."

"I will fish him up to-day," said the legal man. "We shall have an easy
case. There will be no defence, I presume?"

"Hardly!" answered Sinclair.

"Judgment by default! You will get heavy damages, Mr Sinclair. Lord
Minden is as rich as CrA"sus; and the case is very aggravated.
Violation of friendship--a bosom-friend--one whom you had admitted to
your confidence and hearth. We must have these points prominently put. I
shall retain Mr Thessaly. That man, sir, was born for these aggravated
cases."

"You will write to Mr Wilson?" said Sinclair, mournfully.

"This very day. Don't be unhappy, Mr Sinclair--you have a capital case,
and will get a handsome verdict."

"When you have heard from Mr Wilson, let me know. I wish to arrange an
interview with him, and have not the heart to write myself. Tell him I
am in town--that I must see him."

"I will do it. Can I offer you a glass of wine, Mr Sinclair, or any
refreshment? You look pale and languid."

"None, I thank you!"

"And the little lady in the parlour?"

"I am obliged to you--nothing. I must go to her--I have kept her
waiting. Good-morning, sir."

Sinclair joined his daughter, and proceeded with her to his hotel. She
was still his constant companion. He did not move without her. His
anxiety to have the child always at his side bordered on insanity.
Whether he quitted his home for amusement or business, she must
accompany him, and clasp the only hand that he had now to offer her. He
dreaded to be alone, and no voice soothed him but that of the little
chatterer. How fond he was of it--of her--who shall say! or how
necessary to his existence the treasure he had snatched from ruin in the
hour of universal wreck!

Before visiting his lawyer, Sinclair had dispatched a private
communication to his old serving-man, John Humphreys, who, upon the
breaking up of Rupert's establishment, had returned to the service of
Lord Railton, his ancient master. That trusty servant was already at the
hotel when Sinclair reached it.

"You have spoken to nobody of my being here, Humphreys," said Rupert,
when he saw him.

"To nobody, your honour."

"Then follow me!"

When they had come to Sinclair's private room, he continued--

"My father, Humphreys--Tell me quickly how he is."

"Oh, a world better, sir."

"Thank God! And my mother?"

"Breaking, sir. This last affair"--

"They are in town?"

"Yes, your honour--you will call upon them, won't you? It will do her
ladyship's heart good to see you again--though, saving your honour's
presence, you looks more like a spectre than a human being."

"No, Humphreys, I cannot see them. They must not even know that I am now
in London. I would have avoided this interview, could I have quitted
England again without some information respecting them. I shall be
detained here for a few days--it may be for weeks--but I return again to
the Continent, never again to leave it."

"Do you think them foreign doctors understand your case, sir?"

"My case!"

"Yes, sir--you are not well, I am sure. You want feeding and building
up--English beef and beer. Them foreigners are killing you."

Rupert smiled.

"You'll excuse me, sir, but laughing isn't a good sign, when a man has
reason to cry."

Rupert shuddered.

"I beg your pardon, sir--I didn't mean that," continued the honest
fellow. "I did not refer to your feelings. I meant your health, sir.
Live well, sir; eat good English fare, and take the bilious pills when
you are out of sorts."

John Humphreys was dismissed with many thanks for his sympathy and
advice, and with strict injunctions to maintain silence respecting
Rupert's movements. Had Sinclair learned that his parents were ill, or
needful of his presence, he would have gone to them at once. They were
well--why should he molest them, or bring fresh anguish to their
declining years?

I received the communication of Sinclair's lawyer, and answered it
respectfully, refusing the interview that was asked. As I have already
intimated, I had avoided his house and himself from the very moment that
I had obtained what seemed ocular demonstration of guilt, which that of
his friend and patron, the Earl of Minden himself, could not surpass.
Whilst reports of that guilt came to me through the medium of servants,
however trustworthy, and strangers, however disinterested, I had
resisted them as cruel inventions and palpable slanders. With the
attestation of my own eyes, I should have been an idiot had I come to
any but one conclusion, how degrading soever that might be to my friend,
or contradictory to all my past experience or preconceived hopes.
Nothing, I solemnly vowed, should induce me to speak again to the man,
branded with infamy so glaring, brought by his own folly and vice so
low. I had heard, in common with the rest of the world, of the
elopement, and possibly with less surprise than the majority of my
fellow-men. If I wondered at all at the affair, it was simply as to how
much Rupert had been paid for his consent, and as to the value he had
fixed upon his reputation and good name. I received the application of
the lawyer, and declined to accede to it.

As I sat reading in my room, upon the second morning after I had
dispatched my answer to Mr Cribbs, of Carey Street, Lincoln's Inn
Fields, I was roused by a knock at the inner door. I requested my
visitor to walk in. He did so.--Rupert Sinclair, and his child, stood
before me!

I was fearfully shocked. He looked, indeed, more like a ghost than a
living man. Fifty years of pain and anxiety seemed written on a brow
that had not numbered thirty summers. His eye was sunk, his cheek was
very wan and pallid. There was no expression in his countenance; he
stood perfectly passionless and calm. The little girl was a lovely
creature. A sickening sensation passed through me as I mentally compared
her lineaments with those of the joyous creature whom I had met in Bath,
and then referred to those of the poor father, so altered, so wofully
and so wonderfully changed! She clung to that father with a fondness
that seemed to speak of his desertion, and of his reliance upon her for
all his little happiness. I was taken by surprise; I knew not what to
do; the memory of past years rushed back upon me. I saw him helpless and
forsaken. I could not bid him from my door; I could not speak an unkind
word.

I placed a chair before the man, whose strength seemed scarce sufficient
to support its little burden.

"Sinclair," I exclaimed, "you are ill!"

"I am!" he answered. "Very ill; worse than I had feared. They tell me I
must leave the country, and seek milder air. I shall do so shortly; for
her sake, not my own."

The little Alice put her delicate and alabaster hand about her parent's
face, and patted it to express her gratitude or warm affection. My heart
bled in spite of me.

"You refused to meet me, Wilson," said Sinclair quietly.

I blushed to think that I had done so; for I forgot every thing in the
recollection of past intimacy, and in the consciousness of what I now
beheld. I made no answer.

"You refused to meet me," he repeated. "You did me injustice. I know
your thoughts, your cruel and unkind suspicions. I have come to remove
them. Walter, you have cursed my name; you shall live to pity my
memory."

"Rupert," I stammered, "whatever I may have thought or done, I assert
that I have not willingly done you injustice. I have"----

I looked at the child, unwilling to say more in that innocent and holy
presence.

Sinclair understood me. He asked permission for her to retire into an
adjoining room. I told him that there was no one there to keep her
company. He answered, that it did not matter; she was used to be alone,
and to wait hours for her parent when business separated them in a
stranger's house. "They made it up at home," he added, "and she was
happier so than in the society of her governess."

"Is it not so, Alice?" he asked, kissing her as he led her from the
apartment.

She answered with a kiss as warm as his, and a smile brighter than any
he could give.

"Wilson," began Sinclair, as soon as he returned to me, "you know my
history. The whole world knows it, and enjoys it. I have come to England
to disannul our marriage. That over, I must save this life if possible:
the doctors tell me I am smitten--that I shall droop and die. The mild
air of Italy alone can save me. Oh, I wish to live for that young
creature's sake! I cannot yet afford to die."

"Things are not so bad, I trust."

He shook his head, and proceeded.

"You, Wilson, must further my views. I have acquainted my solicitor with
our former intimacy, and of the part which you took in this unfortunate
business. You may accelerate the affair by your co-operation and aid.
You must not deny it! Three months to me now are worth ten times as many
years. I need peace of mind--repose. I would seek them in the grave, and
gladly, but for her. I must find them in a land that will waft health to
me, and give me strength for coming duties. You must stand by me now,
if ever; you must not leave me, Wilson, till we have reached the
opposite shore, and are safely landed."

"What can I do!"

"Much! The solicitor says, every thing. Your evidence is of the utmost
consequence. Your assistance cannot be dispensed with. See him, and he
will tell you more. We cannot depart until the marriage is dissolved.
Should I die, she must have no claim upon that tender innocent!"

"Rupert," I exclaimed, "shall I speak plainly to you?"

"Ay," he answered, growing erect, and looking me full in the face, "as a
man!"

"You demand of me," I continued, "a simple impossibility! I can do
nothing for you. I can give you no help, no counsel. Ask your own
once-faithful conscience, that once stern and honest monitor, how I, of
all men, can befriend you? I may speak only to destroy you and your
cause together. Seek a better ally--a less shackled adviser. Is it not
publicly known?--do I not know it? Rupert, you have told me to speak
plainly, and I will, I must. I say, do I not know that you yourself
pandered to her profligacy? Did I not, with these eyes, which, would to
Heaven, had been blind ere they had seen that miserable day--did I not,
with these eyes, behold you walking before your door, whilst Lord Minden
was closeted with your wife? Did you not turn back when you discovered
he was there? Did I not see you turn back? Answer me, Rupert. Did
I?--did I?"

"You did," he answered, with perfect equanimity.

"And," I continued, "acknowledging this horror, you ask me to advance
your cause, and to speak on your behalf!"

"I do," he said, with a majestic calmness that confounded and abashed
me--so prophetic was it of an approaching justification, so thoroughly
indicative of truth and innocence.

"I do," he repeated, looking at me steadily, and speaking with more
emotion as he proceeded. "Listen to me, Walter. I am a dying man! Say
what they will, the seeds of an incurable disease are sown within me. Do
what I may, my hours are numbered, and life is nearly spanned. I speak
to you as a dying man. You saw that child! She is friendless,
motherless, and will be shortly fatherless. I am about to consign her to
Heaven and its mercy. I cannot utter falsehood upon the verge of
eternity, leaving that dear pledge behind me. Upon my sacred honour, I
speak the truth. Listen to it, and believe, as you would believe a
messenger accredited from the skies. I have been a fool, an idiot,
weaker than the creature whom the law deprives of self-control, and
places in the custody of guards and keepers; but my honour is as
spotless as you yourself could wish it. You knew of my difficulties:
something you knew also of my introduction to the Earl of Minden--an
aged villain--yes _aged_ and old enough to disarm suspicion, if no
stronger reason existed to destroy it; but there was a stronger. I
marvelled at the extraordinary interest evinced for a stranger by this
powerful and wealthy nobleman; but wonder ceased with explanation--and
explanation from whom? from one whom I trusted as myself--from my wife,
whom I loved better than myself. It is nothing that I look back with
sickening wonder _now_. I was her devoted husband _then_, and I believed
her. I would have believed her had she drawn upon my credulity a
thousand times more largely. What devil put the lie into her soul I know
not, but early in the friendship of this lord, she confided to me the
fact that General Travis was not her father; she had been consigned to
him, she said, at an early age, but her actual parent was who?--the
brother of this same Lord Minden. It was a plausible tale coming from
her lips. I did not stay to doubt it. Other lies were necessary to
maintain the great falsehood; but the fabric which they raised was
well-proportioned and consistent in its parts. Why did I not enter my
home when Lord Minden was closeted with my wife? You will remember that
we speak of a time when there was daily discussion concerning my
promotion. 'Her uncle,' she said again and again, 'would do nothing for
me if I were present. He was a singular and obstinate man, and would
make our fortune in his own way. He was angry with me for running off
with his niece--whom, though illegitimate, he had destined for greater
honour than even an alliance with Lord Railton's heir; he was further
hurt at Lord Railton's treatment of Elinor, and the proud neglect of my
mother; the conduct of my parents had inspired him with a dislike for
their son, and although for Elinor's sake he would advance our
interests, yet he would not consult me, or meet me in the matter. If I
were present, her uncle would say nothing--do nothing. This was
reiterated day after day. From fountains that are pure, we look not for
unclean waters. Trusting her with my whole heart and soul, I should have
committed violence to my nature had I doubted her. It was impossible:
with the plausibility of Satan, she had the loveliness of angels! Now I
see the artifice and fraud--now I feel the degradation--now the horrible
position in which I stood is too frightfully apparent! But what avails
it all! God forgive me for my blindness! He knows my innocence!"

The injured and unhappy husband stopped from sheer exhaustion. Shame
overspread my face; bitter reproaches filled my heart. I had done him
cruel wrong. I rose from my seat, and embraced him. I fell upon my
knees, and asked his forgiveness.

"Walter," he said, with overflowing eyes; "you do not think me guilty?"

"Punish me not, Rupert," I answered, "by asking me the question. The
sorceress was a subtle one. I knew her to be so."

"Name her not, friend," proceeded Sinclair; "I have already forgiven
her. I seek to forget her. Life is hateful to me, yet I must live if
possible for my darling Alice. You will return to town with me, will you
not, and hasten on this business?"

"I will not leave you, Rupert," I replied, "till I have seen you safely
through it, and on the seas. We will lose no time. Let us go to London
this very day."

No time was lost. We set out in the course of a few hours, and the next
day were closeted with Mr Cribbs. Letters produced by Sinclair
corroborated all that he had said touching the cheat that had been
played upon him. Astounded as I had been by his explanation, it would
have argued more for my wisdom, to say nothing of my friendship, had I
suspected at the outset some artifice of the kind, and shown more
eagerness to investigate the matter, than to conclude the hitherto
unspotted Sinclair so pre-eminently base. The fault of his nature was
credulity. Did I not know that he trusted all men with the simplicity of
childhood, and believed in the goodness of all things with the faith and
fervour of piety itself? Had I no proofs of the wilyness of the woman's
heart, and of the witchery of her tongue? A moment's reflection would
have enabled me to be just. It was not the smallest triumph of the
artful Elinor that her scheme robbed me of that reflection, and threw
me, and all the world besides, completely off the scent.

Mr Cribbs was the very man to carry on this interesting case. He lost
not a moment. He had been concerned, as he acknowledged, in more actions
of the kind than could be satisfactory to himself, or complimentary to
the virtue of his country, and he knew the salient points of a case by a
kind of moral instinct. His witnesses were marshaled--his plan was drawn
out; every thing promised complete success, and the day of trial rapidly
approached.

That day of trial, however, Rupert was not to see. The great anxiety
which he suffered in the preparation of his unhappy cause--the
affliction he had already undergone, preying upon a shattered frame,
proved too great an obstacle to the slow appliances of healing nature.
He sank gradually beneath the weight of his great sorrows. About a month
previously to the coming off of the suit which he had brought against
the Earl of Minden, conscious of growing still weaker and weaker, he
resolved to have a consultation of his physicians, and to obtain from
them their honest opinion of his condition. That consultation was held.
The opinion was most unfavourable. Rupert heard it without a sigh, and
prepared for his great change.

He spent the day upon which his doom was pronounced--alone. The
following day found him at an early hour at the family mansion in
Grosvenor Square,--not alone,--for his little Alice was with him. He
knocked at the door,--the well-known porter opened it, and started at
the melancholy man he saw. Sorrow and sickness claim respect, and they
found it here. The porter knew not whether he should please his master
by admitting the visitors, but he did not think of turning them away.
They passed on. His name was announced to his mother. She came to him at
once.

"Rupert!" cried Lady Railton, looking at him with astonishment.

"Mother," he answered placidly, "I have brought you my child--the
innocent and unoffending. She will be an orphan soon--as you may guess.
You will protect and be a mother to her?"

The proudest of women was sufficiently humbled. The prodigal was
received with a tenderness that came too late--a welcome that had
nothing of rejoicing. He was forgiven, but his pardon availed him
nothing. He was watched and attended with affectionate care, when
watching and attention could not add an hour to his life, or one
consolation to his bruised spirit. The trial came on, a verdict was
pronounced in favour of the plaintiff. The knot that had been violently
tied was violently broken asunder. Upon the evening preceding that day,
Rupert Sinclair had finished with the earth. He died, with his little
darling kneeling at his side. He died, breathing her name.

       *       *       *       *       *

Years have passed since that hour. I have seen much since I followed my
poor friend to his last resting-place. It has been my lot to behold a
proud and haughty woman instructed by misfortune, and elevated by human
grief. Lady Railton repaired the folly of a life by her conduct towards
the child committed to her charge. She did her duty to the lovely Alice;
she fulfilled her obligations to her father.--I have seen vice terribly
punished. A few months ago, I stood at a pauper's grave. It was the
grave of ELINOR TRAVIS. Deserted by Lord Minden, she descended in the
scale of vice,--for years she lived in obscurity,--she was buried at the
public charge. The family of General Travis has long since been extinct.
The money with which his daughter supplied him in Lyons enabled him to
compound with a merchant, whose name he had forged, and to leave Europe
for ever.

The little Alice is a matron now, but lovely in the meridian of her
virtuous life, as in her earlier morn. She is the mother of a happy
family--herself its brightest ornament.




HOCHELAGA.[4]


LET not the unsophisticated reader be alarmed at the somewhat barbarous
and unintelligible word that heads this article. Let him not be deterred
by a name from the investigation of facts, nor hindered by the repulsive
magic of harshly-sounding syllables from rambling with us through the
pages of an amusing and clever book. HOCHELAGA is neither a heathen god
nor a Mohawk chief, an Indian cacique nor a Scandinavian idol, but
simply the ancient and little known name of a well-known and interesting
country. Under it is designated a vast and flourishing territory, a
bright jewel in England's crown, a land whose daily increasing
population, if only partially of British origin, yet is ruled by British
laws, and enjoys the blessings of British institutions. On the continent
of North America, over whose southern and central portions the banner of
republicanism exultingly floats, a district yet remains where
monarchical government and conservative principles are upheld and
respected. By nature it is far from being the most favoured region of
that New World which Columbus first discovered and Spaniards and English
first colonized. It has neither the mineral wealth of Mexico nor the
luxuriant fertility of the Southern States. Within its limits no cotton
fields wave or sugar-canes rustle; the tobacco plant displays not its
broad and valuable leaf; the crimson cochineal and the purple indigo are
alike unknown; no mines of silver and gold freight galleons for the
Eastern world. Its produce is industriously wrung from stubborn fields
and a rigid climate--not generously, almost spontaneously, yielded by a
glowing temperature and teeming soil. The corn and timber which it
exchanges for European manufactures and luxuries, are results of the
white man's hard and honest labour, not of the blood and sweat and
ill-requited toil of flagellated negroes and oppressed Indians. From the
Lakes and the St Lawrence to Labrador and the Bay of Hudson this country
extends. Its name is CANADA.

Mr Eliot Warburton, a gentleman favourably known to the English public,
as author of a pleasant book of travel in the East, has given the
sanction and benefit of his editorship to a narrative of rambles and
observations in the Western hemisphere. We put little faith in
editorships; favour and affection have induced many able men to endorse
indifferent books; and we took up _Hochelaga_ with all due disposition
to be difficult, and to resist an imposition, had such been practised.
Even the tender and touching compliments exchanged between author and
editor in their respective prefaces, did not mollify us, or dispose us
to look leniently upon a poor production. We are happy to say that we
were speedily disarmed by the contents of the volumes; that we threw
aside the critical cat-o'-nine-tails, whose deserved and well-applied
lashes have made many a literary sinner to writhe, and prepared for the
more grateful task of commending the agreeable pages of an intelligent
and unprejudiced traveller. Since the latter chooses to be anonymous, we
have no right to dispel his incognito, or to seek so to do. Concerning
him, therefore, we will merely state what may be gathered from his book;
that he is plump, elderly, good-tempered, and kind-hearted, and, we
suspect, an ex-_militaire_.

Before opening the campaign in Canada, let us, for a moment, step ashore
in what our author styles the fishiest of modern capitals, St John's,
Newfoundland. Here codfish are the one thing universal; acres of sheds
roofed with cod, laid out to dry, boats fishing for cod, ships loading
with it, fields manured with it, and, best of all, fortunes made by it.
The accomplishments of the daughter, the education of the son, the
finery of the mother, the comforts of the father, all are paid for with
this profitable fish. The population subsist upon it; figuratively, not
literally. For, although the sea is alive with cod, the earth covered
with it, and the air impregnated with its odour, it is carefully
banished from the dinner table, and "an observation made on its absence
from that apparently appropriate position, excited as much astonishment
as if I had made a remark to a Northumberland squire that he had not a
head-dish of Newcastle coals." But the abundance which renders it
unpalatable to the Newfoundlanders, procures them more acceptable
viands, and all the luxuries of life. The climate ungenial, the soil
barren, crops are difficult to obtain, and rarely ripen; even potatoes
and vegetables are but scantily compelled from the niggard earth; fish,
the sole produce, is the grand article of barter. In exchange for his
lenten ration of _bacallao_, the Spaniard sends his fruits and Xeres,
the Portuguese his racy port, the Italian his Florence oil and Naples
maccaroni. Every where, but especially in those "countries of the
Catholic persuasion" where the fasts of the Romish church are most
strictly observed, Newfoundland finds customers for its cod and
suppliers of its wants.

Excepting in the case of a boundary question to settle, or a patriot
revolt to quell, Canada obtains in England a smaller share than it
deserves of the public thoughts. It does not appeal to the imagination
by those attractive elements of interest which so frequently rivet
attention on others of our colonies. India is brought into dazzling
relief by its Oriental magnificence and glitter, and by its feats of
arms; the West Indies have wealth and an important central position; our
possessions towards the South pole excite curiosity by their distance
and comparative novelty. But Canada, pacific and respectable, plain and
unpretending, to many suggests no other idea than that of a bleak and
thinly-peopled region, with little to recommend it, even in the way of
picturesque scenery or natural beauty. Those who have hitherto
entertained such an opinion may feel surprised at the following
description of Quebec.

"Take mountain and plain, sinuous river and broad tranquil waters,
stately ship and tiny boat, gentle hill and shady valley, bold headland
and rich fruitful fields, frowning battlement and cheerful villa,
glittering dome and rural spire, flowery garden and sombre forest--group
them all into the choicest picture of ideal beauty your fancy can
create--arch it over with a cloudless sky--light it up with a radiant
sun, and, lest the sheen should be too dazzling, hang a veil of lighted
haze over all, to soften the lines and perfect the repose; you will then
have seen Quebec on this September morning."

The internal arrangements of the chief port and second town of Canada do
not correspond with its external appearance and charming environs. The
public buildings are ugly; the unsymmetrical streets twist and turn in
every possible direction--are narrow and of quaint aspect, composed of
houses irregularly placed and built. The suburbs, chiefly peopled by
French Canadians, are of wood, with exception of the churches,
hospitals, and convents. The population of the city, which now amounts
to forty thousand souls, has increased fifteen thousand during the last
fifteen years. The people are as motley as their dwellings; in all
things there is a curious mixture of French and English. "You see over a
corner house, 'Cul de Sac Street;' on a sign-board, 'Ignace
Bougainville, chemist and druggist.' In the shops, with English money
you pay a Frenchman for English goods; the piano at the evening party of
Mrs What's-her-name makes Dutch concert with the music of Madame Chose's
_soirA(C)e_ in the next house. Sad to say, the two races do not blend; they
are like oil and water--the English the oil, being the richer and at the
top." The difference of descent tells its tale; the restless, grumbling
Anglo-Saxon pushes his way upwards, energetic and indefatigable; the
easy-going, contented French-Canadian, remains where he is, or rather
sinks than rises. The latter has many good qualities; he is honest,
sober, hardy, kind, and courteous. Brave and loyal, he willingly takes
the field in defence of the established government and of British
rights. The most brilliant exploit of the last American war is recorded
of three hundred French Canadians under M. de Salaberry, who, by their
resolute maintenance of a well-selected position, compelled General
Hampton, with a park of artillery and a body of troops twenty times as
numerous as themselves, to evacuate Lower Canada. Simple, credulous, and
easily worked upon, it was at the incitation of a few knaves and
adventurers that a portion of the French population were brought to
share in the rebellion of 1837. There is little danger of another such
outbreak, even though colonial demagogues should again agitate, French
republicans again rave about British tyranny towards their oppressed
brethren, and though the refuse and rabble of the States should once
more assemble upon the frontier to aid and abet an insurrection. The
abortive result of the last revolt, the little sympathy it found amongst
the masses of the population, the judicious and conciliatory measures of
recent governors, have combined to win over the disaffected, and to
convince them that it is for their true interest to continue under the
mild rule of Great Britain. An excellent feeling has been shown by all
parties during our late difficult relations with the United States. "The
Americans are altogether mistaken," said the leader of the Upper Canada
reformers, "if they suppose that political differences in Canada arise
from any sympathy with them or their institutions; we have our
differences, but we are perfectly able to settle them ourselves, and
will not suffer their interference."

"My countrymen," said one of the most influential French Canadians,
during a discussion on the militia bill, "would be the first to rush to
the frontier, and joyfully oppose their breasts to the foe; the last
shot fired on this continent in defence of the British crown will be by
the hand of a French Canadian. By habits, feeling, and religion, we are
monarchists and conservatives."

When such sentiments are expressed by the heads of the opposition, there
is little fear for Canada, and ambitious democrats must be content to
push southwards. In a northerly direction it would be absurd for them to
expect either to propagate their principles or extend their territory.
They believe that in the event of a war with England, twenty or thirty
thousand militia would speedily overrun and conquer Canada. In a clear
and comprehensive statement of Canada's means of defence, the author of
_Hochelaga_ shows the folly of this belief, which assuredly can only be
seriously entertained by men overweeningly presumptuous or utterly
oblivious of the events of thirty years ago. When, in 1812, we came to
loggerheads with our Yankee cousins, and they walked into Canada,
expecting, as they now would, to walk over it, they soon found that they
were to take very little by their motion. The whole number of British
troops then in the colony was under two thousand four hundred men. Upper
Canada was comparatively a wilderness, occupied by a few scattered
labourers, difficult to organise into militia, and including no class
out of which officers could be made. Yet, even with this slender
opposition, how did the invaders fare? Where were the glorious results
so confidently anticipated? Let the defeat at Chrystler's farm, the rout
and heavy loss at Queenstown, the surrender of General Hall with his
whole army and the territory of Michigan, reply to the question. And
to-day how do matters stand? "Within the last twenty years, several
entire Scottish clans, under their chiefs--M'Nabs, Glengarys, and
others, worthy of their warlike ancestors--have migrated hither. Hardy
and faithful men from the stern hills of Ulster, and fiery but
kind-hearted peasants from the south of Ireland, with sturdy honest
yeomen from Yorkshire and Cumberland, have fixed their homes in the
Canadian forests. These immigrants, without losing their love and
reverence for the crown and laws of their native country, have become
attached to their adopted land, where their stake is now fixed, and are
ready to defend their properties and their government against foreign
invasion or domestic treason." The militia, composed in great part of
the excellent materials just enumerated, is of the nominal strength of
140,000 men. Of these a fourth might take the field, without their
absence seriously impeding the commerce and industry of the country.
The Canadian arsenals are well supplied, and nearly eight thousand
regular troops occupy the various garrisons. Quebec, with its strong
fortifications and imposing citadel, may bid defiance to any force that
could be brought against it from the States; important works have been
erected upon the island of Montreal; Kingston and its adjacent forts
would require a large army and corresponding naval force to subdue it;
Toronto would give the invaders some trouble. Defensive works exist
along the frontier of Lower Canada. In no way has the security of the
colonies been neglected, or the possibility of a war overlooked. But
there is yet one measure whose adoption the author of _Hochelaga_
strongly urges, whose utility is obvious, and which we trust in due time
to see carried out. This is the construction of a railroad, connecting
the whole of British America; commencing at Halifax and extending, by
Quebec, Montreal, Kingston, and Toronto, to Amherstburg and the far
west. The essential portion of the line is that from Halifax to Quebec,
by which, when the St Lawrence is closed by ice, troops might be
forwarded in a couple of days to the latter city. In the spring of 1847,
we are told, the canals will be completed which are to open the great
lakes to our fleets. For summer time that may suffice. But the five
months' winter must not be overlooked. And apart from the military view
of the case, the benefit of such a railway would be enormous. "It will
strengthen the intimacy between this splendid colony and the seat of
government: the emigrant from home, and the produce from the west, will
then pass through British waters and over British territories only,
without enriching the coffers of a foreign state. The Americans, with
their great mercantile astuteness, are making every effort to divert the
trade of Canada into their channels, and to make us in every way
dependent on them for our communications. The drawback bill, by which
the custom-duties on foreign goods are refunded on their passing into
our provinces, has already been attended with great success in obtaining
for them a portion of our carrying trade, especially during the winter,
when our great highway of the St Lawrence is closed."

The estimated cost of the railway, as far as Quebec, is three millions
sterling--a sum far too large to be raised by private means in the
colony. The advantages would be manifold, and a vast impulse would be
given to the prosperity of Canada. The Canadians are anxious to see the
scheme carried out, but they look to this country for aid. As one means
of repaying the expenses of construction, it has been proposed that
tracts of land along the line of road should be granted to the company:
the railway once completed, these would speedily become of great value.
The engineering difficulties are stated to be very slight.

This proposed railway brings us back to Quebec, whence we have been
decoyed sooner than we intended, by the discussion of Canada's military
defences. We sincerely wish that these may never be needed; that no
clouds may again overshadow our relations with the States, and that,
should such arise, they may promptly and amicably be dissipated. In
disputes and discussions with the great American republic, this country
has ever shown itself yielding; far too much so, if such pliancy
encourages to further encroachment. But if we are at last met in a good
spirit, if our forbearance and facility are read aright, it will be some
compensation to Great Britain for having more than once ceded what she
might justly have maintained. We shall not at present enter into the
subject, or investigate how far certain English governments have been
justified in relinquishing to American clamour, and for the sake of
peace, tracts of territory which it would have been more dignified to
retain, even by the strong hand. Insignificant though these concessions
may individually have appeared, their sum is important. Were evidence of
that fact wanting, we should find it in the book before us.

"Extensive though may be this splendid province of Canada, it is yet
very different indeed from what it originally was. In the fourteenth
year of the reign of George the Third, the boundaries of the province of
Quebec, as it was then called, were defined by an act of the Imperial
Parliament. By that act it included a great extent of what is now New
England, and the whole of the country between the state of Pennsylvania,
the river Ohio and the Mississipi, north to the Hudson's Bay territory,
where now a great portion of the rich and flourishing Western States add
their strength to the neighbouring republic. By gradual encroachments on
the one hand, and concessions on the other, by the misconstruction of
treaties and division of boundaries, have these vast and valuable tracts
of country been separated from the British empire."

England has the reputation of holding her own with a firm and tenacious
grasp; and by foreign rivals it is imputed to her as a crime that she is
greedy and aggressive, more apt to take with both hands, than to give up
with either. If such be really the general character of her policy, in
North America she has strangely relaxed it. None, it is true, not even
our kinsmen beyond the Atlantic, highly as they estimate their own
weight and prowess, will suspect this country of giving way from other
motives than a wish to remain on amicable terms with a relative and a
customer. But such considerations must not be allowed undue influence.
It would be unworthy the British character to fly to arms for a pique or
a bauble; it would be still more degrading to submit patiently to a
systematic series of encroachments. Unquestionably, had France stood
towards America in the same position that we do, with respect to Canada,
and if America had pursued with France the same course that she has done
with us, there would long since have been broken heads between Frenchmen
and Yankees; probably at this very moment the tricolor and the stars and
stripes would have been buffeting each other by sea and land. We do not
set up France as an example to this country in that particular. We are
less sensitive than our Gallic neighbours, and do not care to injure or
peril substantial interests by excessive punctiliousness. But there is a
point at which forbearance must cease. Governments have patched up
disputes, and made concessions, through fear of complicating their
difficulties, and of incurring blame for plunging the country into a
war. The country has looked on, if not approvingly, at least passively;
and, the critical moment past, has borne no malice, and let bygones be
bygones. But if war became necessary, the people of England would,
whilst deploring that necessity, enter upon it cheerfully, and feel
confident of its result. There must be no more boundary questions
trumped up, no more attempts to chip pieces off our frontier; or, strong
as the desire is to keep friends with Brother Jonathan, something
serious will ensue. Meanwhile, and in case of accidents, it is proper
and prudent to keep our bayonets bright, and to put bolts and bars upon
the gates of Canada.

In Quebec, our Hochelagian friend seems greatly to have enjoyed himself.
Judging from his account, it must be a pleasant place and eligible
residence. Such quadrilling and polkaing, and riding and
sleighing--picnics in the summer to the ChaudiA"re falls and other
beautiful places, fishing-parties to Lake Beaufort in the fine Canadian
autumn, snow-shoing in the winter, fun and merriment at all seasons. In
the Terpsichorean divertisements above cited, our author--being, as
already observed, obese and elderly--took no share, but looked on
good-humouredly, and slily noted the love-passages between the handsome
English captains and pretty Canadian girls. The latter are most
attractive. Brought out young, and mixing largely in society, they are
not very deeply read, but are exceedingly loveable, and possess an
indescribable charm of manner. Owing probably to the extremes of heat
and cold in Canada, beauty is there less durable than in the mother
country. Early matured, it speedily fades. The fair Canadians make good
use of the interval, and find it abundantly long to play havoc with the
hearts of the other sex. The English officers are particularly
susceptible to their fascinations, and many marry in Canada; as do also
a large proportion of the English merchants who go over there. The style
of dress of these seductive damsels is simple, but tasteful. In winter,
of course, they are furred to the eyes, as a protection from the
piercing cold, which rivals that of Siberia. Muffed and gauntleted, well
packed in bear and buffalo skins, they are driven about in sledges by
their male friends, who wear huge fur caps, flapped over the ears,
enormous blanket or buffalo coats, jack-boots, moose-skin moccasins, and
other contrivances equally inelegant and comfortable. The extreme
dryness of the air renders the cold much more endurable than might be
supposed. The sun shines brightly, the atmosphere is crisp and
exhilarating; there is rarely much wind. Under these circumstances, the
thermometer may go down, as it frequently does, to thirty or forty
degrees below zero, without any serious inconvenience or suffering being
felt. When a gale comes during the cold season, the effect is very
different. Our author tells us of a certain Sunday, "when the
thermometer was at thirty degrees below zero, and a high wind blew at
the same time. The effect, in many respects, was not unlike that of
intense heat; the sky was very red about the setting sun, and deep blue
elsewhere; the earth and river were covered with a thin haze, and the
tin cross and spires, and the new snow, shone with almost unnatural
brightness; dogs went mad from the cold and want of water; metal exposed
to the air blistered the hand, as if it had come out of a fire; no one
went out of doors but from necessity, and those who did, hurried along
with their fur-gloved hands over their faces, as if to guard against an
atmosphere infected with the plague; for as the icy wind touched the
skin, it scorched it like a blaze. But such a day as this occurs only
once in many years."

There is tolerable fishing and shooting around Quebec; trout in
abundance, salmon within five-and-twenty miles, snipe and woodcock, hare
and partridge. Angling, however, is rendered almost as unpleasant an
operation for the fisher as for the fish, by the mosquitoes, which
abound in the summer months, and are extremely troublesome in country
places, though they do not venture into towns. To get good shooting it
is necessary to go a considerable distance. But the grand object of the
Canadian chase is the enormous moose-deer, which grows to the height of
seven feet and upwards, and is sometimes fierce and dangerous. In the
month of February, our author and a military friend started on a
moose-hunting expedition, which lasted six days, and ended in the
slaughter of two fine specimens. They were guided by four Indians,
belonging to a remnant of the Huron tribe, settled at the village of
Sorette, near Quebec; a degenerate race, mostly with a cross of the
French Canadian in their blood, idle, dirty, covetous, and especially
drunken. There are other domesticated Indians in Canada who bear a
higher character. During the insurrection, a party of rebels having
approached the Indian village of Caughrawaga, the warriors of the tribe
hastily armed themselves, and sallied forth to attack them. Taken by
surprise, the insurgents were made prisoners, bound with their own
sashes, and conveyed to Montreal jail. The victors were of the once
powerful and ferocious tribe of the Six Nations. Their chief told the
English general commanding, that, if necessary, he would bring him,
within four-and-twenty hours, the scalps of every inhabitant of the
neighbourhood. None of the Red men's prisoners had been injured.

The moose-hunting guides were of a very different stamp to the brave,
loyal, and humane Indians of Caughrawaga. They were most disgusting and
sensual ruffians, eating themselves torpid, and constantly manA"uvring
to get at the brandy bottle. As guides, they proved tolerably efficient.
The account of the snow houses they constructed for the night, and of
their proceedings in the "bush," is highly interesting. Large fires were
lighted in the sleeping cabins, but they neither melted the snow nor
kept out the intense cold. "About midnight I awoke, fancying that some
strong hand was grasping my shoulders: it was the cold. The fire blazed
away brightly, so close to our feet that it singed our robes and
blankets; but at our heads diluted spirits froze into a solid mass."
Another curious example is given of the violence of Canadian cold. A
couple of houses were burned, and "the flames raged with fury in the
still air, but did not melt the hard thick snow on the roof till it fell
into the burning ruins. The water froze in the engines; hot water was
then obtained, and as the stream hissed off the fiery rafters, the
particles fell frozen into the flames below." A sharp climate this! but
in spite of it and of various inconveniences and hardships, the hunters
reached the _ravagA(C)_ or moose-yard, bagged their brace of deer, and
returned to Quebec, satisfied with their expedition, still better
pleased at having it over, and fully convinced that once of that sort of
thing is enough for a lifetime.

From Quebec to Montreal, up the St Lawrence, in glorious midsummer
weather, our traveller takes us, in a great American river-steamer, like
a house upon the water, with a sort of upper story built upon deck, and
a promenade upon its roof, gliding past green slopes and smiling
woodlands, neat country-houses and white cottages, and fertile fields,
in which the _habitans_, as the French Canadian peasants are called, are
seen at work, enlivening their toil by their national song of _La Claire
Fontaine_, and by other pleasant old ditties, first sung, centuries ago,
on the flowery banks of the sunny Loire. Truly there is something
delightful and affecting in the simple, harmless, contented life of
these French Canadians, in their clinging to old customs--their very
costume is that of the first settlers--and to old superstitions, in
their unaffected piety and gentle courtesy. They do not "progress," they
are not "go-a-head;" of education they have little; they are neither
"smart" nor "spry;" but they are virtuous and happy. Knowing nothing of
the world beyond _La belle Canada_, they have no desires beyond a
tranquil life of labour in their modest farms and peaceful homesteads.

Montreal is a handsome bustling town, with a prosperous trade and
metropolitan aspect, and combines the energy and enterprise of an
American city with the solidity of an English one. In size, beauty, and
population, it has made astonishing strides within the last few years.
It owes much to the removal thither of the seat of government, more
still to a first-rate commercial position and to the energy of its
inhabitants. Its broad and convenient stone wharf is nearly a mile in
length; its public buildings are large and numerous, more so than is
necessary for its present population of fifty thousand persons, and
evidently built in anticipation of a great and speedy increase. The most
important in size, and the largest in the New World, is the French
cathedral, within which, we are told, ten thousand persons can at one
time kneel. The people of Montreal are less sociable than those of
Quebec; the entertainments are more showy but less agreeable. Party
feeling runs high; the elections are frequently attended with much
excitement and bitterness; occasional collisions take place between the
English, Irish, and French races. Employment is abundant, luxury
considerable, plenty every where.

It was during his journey from Montreal to Kingston, performed
principally in steam-boats, that the author of _Hochelaga_ first had the
felicity of setting foot on the soil of the States. Happening to mention
that he had never before enjoyed that honour, a taciturn, sallow-looking
gentleman on board the steamer, who wore a broad-brimmed white hat,
smoked perpetually, but never spoke, waited till he saw him fairly on
shore, and then removed the cigar from his mouth and broke silence. "'I
reckon, stranger,' was his observation, 'you have it to say now that you
have been in a free country.' It was afterwards discovered that this
enthusiast for 'free' countries was a planter from Alabama, and that, to
the pleasures of his tour, he united the business of inquiring for
runaway slaves." On this occasion, however, the singular advantage of
treading republican ground was luxuriated in by our traveller but for a
very brief time. He had disembarked only to stretch his legs, and
returning on board, proceeded to Lake Ontario and to Kingston--an
uncomfortable-looking place, with wide dreary streets, at the sides of
which the grass grows. Nevertheless, it has some trade and an increasing
population--the latter rather Yankeefied, from the proximity to, and
constant intercourse with, the States. They "guess" a few, and
occasionally speak through the nose more than is altogether becoming in
British subjects and loyal Canadians, both of which, however, they
unquestionably are. Kingston is a favourite residence with retired
officers of the English army and navy. The necessaries of life are very
cheap; shooting and fishing good; and for those who love boating, the
inland ocean of Ontario spreads its broad blue waters, enlivened by a
host of steam and sailing vessels, fed by numerous streams, and
supplying the dwellers on its banks with fish of varied species and
peculiar excellence. The majority of emigrants from the mother country
settle in the lake districts, where labour is well remunerated and
farmers' profits are good. But the five-and-twenty thousand who annually
arrive, are as a drop of water in the ocean; they are imperceptible in
that vast extent of country. Here and there, it is true, one finds a
tolerably well-peopled district. This is the case in the vicinity of the
Bay of QuintA(C), a narrow arm of Lake Ontario, eighty miles in length, and
in many places not more than one broad. "On its shores the forests are
rapidly giving way to thriving settlements, some of them in situations
of very great beauty."

To be in Canada without visiting Niagara, would be equivalent to going
to Rome without entering St Peter's. As in duty bound, our traveller
betook himself to the Falls; and he distinguishes himself from many of
those who have preceded him thither by describing naturally and
unaffectedly their aspect, and the impression they made upon him. The
"everlasting fine water privilege," as the Americans call this
prodigious cataract, did not at first strike him with awe; but the
longer he gazed and listened, the greater did his admiration and
astonishment become. Seated upon the turf, near Table Rock, whence the
best view is obtained, he stared long and eagerly at the great wonder,
until he was dragged away to inspect the various accessories and smaller
marvels which hungry cicerrones insist upon showing, and confiding
tourists think it incumbent upon them to visit. Cockneyism and bad taste
have found their way even to Niagara. On both the English and the
American side, museum and camera-obscura, garden, wooden monument, and
watch-tower abound; and boys wander about, distributing Mosaic puffs of
pagodas and belvideres, whence the finest possible views are to be
obtained. Niagara, according to these disinterested gentry and their
poetical announcements, must be seen from all sides; from above and from
below, sideways and even from behind. The traveller is rowed to the foot
of the Falls, or as near to it as possible, getting not a little wet in
the operation; he is then seduced to the top of the pagoda, twenty-five
cents being charged for the accommodation; then hurried off to Iris
island, where the Indians, in days long gone by, had their
burying-ground; and, finally, having been inducted into an oil-cloth
surtout, and a pair of hard, dirty shoes, he is compelled to shuffle
along a shingly path cut out of the cliff, within the curve described by
the falling water--thus obtaining a posterior view of the cataract.
Chilled with cold, soaked and blinded by the spray, deafened with the
noise, sliding over numerous eels, which wind themselves, like wreathing
snakes, round his ankles and into his shoes, he undergoes this last
infliction; and is then let loose to wander where he listeth, free from
the monotonous vulgarity of guides and the wearisome babble of visitors,
and having acquired the conviction that he might as well have saved
himself all this plague and trouble, for that, "as there is but one
perfect view for a painting, so there is but one for Niagara. See it
from Table Rock: gaze thence upon it for hours, days if you like, and
then go home. As for the Rapids, Cave of the Winds, Burning Springs,
&c., &c., you might as well enter into an examination of the gilt
figures on the picture frame, as waste your time on them."

With the first volume of _Hochelaga_, the author concludes his Canadian
experiences, and rambles into the States--beyond a doubt the most
ticklish territory a literary tourist can venture upon. Of the very many
books that have been written concerning America, not one did we ever
hear of that was fortunate enough to find approval in the eyes of
Americans. And we are entirely at a loss to conjecture what sort of
notice of them and their country _would_ prove satisfactory to these
very difficult gentry. None, we apprehend, that fell short of
unqualified praise; none that did not depreciate all other nations to
their greater glorification, and set America and her institutions on
that pinnacle of perfection which her self-satisfied sons persuade
themselves they have attained. To please their pampered palates, praise
must be unlimited; no hints of positive deficiency, or even of possible
improvement, must chill the glowing eulogium. Censure, even conditional
commendation, they cannot stomach. Admit that they are brave and
hospitable, energetic and industrious, intelligent and patriotic; it
will advance you little in their good graces, unless you also aver that
they are neither braggarts nor jealous; that, as a nation, they are
honest and honourable; as individuals, models of polished demeanour and
gentlemanly urbanity. Nay, when you have done all that, the chances are
that some red-hot planter from the southern States calls upon you to
drink Success to slavery, and the Abolitionists to the tar-barrel! The
author of _Hochelaga_ is aware of this weak point of the American
character: he likes the Americans; considers them a wonderful people;
praises them more than we ever heard them praised, save by themselves;
and yet, because he cannot shut his eyes to their obvious failings, he
feels that he is ruined in their good opinion. On his way to Saratoga,
he fell in with a Georgian gentleman and lady, pleasant people, who
begged him frankly to remark upon any thing in the country and its
customs which appeared to him unusual or strange. He did so, and his
criticisms were taken in good part till he chanced upon slavery. This
was the sore point. Luckily there was a heavy swell upon the lake, and
the Georgian became sea-sick, which closed the discussion as it began to
get stormy. With other Americans on board the steamer, our traveller
sought opportunities of discoursing. He found them courteous and
intelligent; with a good deal of superficial information, derived
chiefly from newspaper reading; partial to the English, as
individuals--but not as a nation; prone to judge of English institutions
and manners from isolated and exceptional examples; to reason "on the
state of the poor from the Andover workhouse: on the aristocracy, from
the late Lord Hertford; on morality, from Dr Lardner." Every where he
met with kindness and hospitality; but, on the other hand, he was not
unfrequently disgusted by coarseness of manners, and compelled to smile
at the utter want of tact which is an American characteristic, and which
inherent defect education, travel, good-humour, and kind-heartedness,
are insufficient to eradicate or neutralise in the natives of the Union.
"A friend, in giving me hints of what was best worth seeing in the
Capitol at Washington, said, 'there are some very fine pictures. Oh, I
beg pardon; I mean that there is a splendid view from the top of the
building.' I knew perfectly well that those paintings, which his
good-nature rebuked him for having incautiously mentioned, represented
the surrender of Burgoyne, and other similar scenes--in reality about as
heart-rending to me as a sketch of the battle of Hexham would be. To
this day, I admire my friend's kind intentions more than his tact in
carrying them out."

The expectoration, chewing, and other nastinesses indulged in by many
classes of Americans, and which have proved such fruitful themes for the
facetiousness of book-writers, are very slightly referred to by the
author of _Hochelaga_, who probably thinks that enough has already been
said on such sickening subjects. He attributes some of these
peculiarities to a sort of general determination to alter and improve on
English customs. In driving, the Americans keep the right side of the
road instead of the left; in eating, they reverse the uses of the knife
and fork; perhaps it is the same spirit of opposition that prompts them
to bolt their food dog-fashion and with railroad rapidity, instead of
imitating the cleanly decorum with which Englishmen discuss their meals.
Talking of knives--in most of the country inns they are broad, round,
and blunt at the point, in order that they may be used as spoons, and
even thrust half-way down the throats of tobacco-chewing republicans,
who do not hesitate to cut the butter, and help themselves to salt, with
the same weapon that has just been withdrawn from the innermost recesses
of their mouth, almost of their gullet. In America, people seem to be
for ever in a hurry; every thing is done "on the rush," and as if it
were merely the preliminary to something else much more important, to
which it is essential to get as speedily as possible. At Boston our
traveller was put into a six-bedded room, the only empty one in the
hotel. Three of the beds were engaged by Americans. "I as fortunate to
awaken just as the American gentlemen came in; for it gave me an
opportunity of seeing a dispatch in going to rest rivalling that in the
dinner department. From the time the door opened, there appeared to be
nothing but a hop-step-and-jump into bed, and then a snore of the
profoundest repose. Early in the morning, when these gentlemen awoke
from their balmy slumbers, there was another hop-step-and-jump out of
bed, and we saw no more of them." We are happy to learn, however, that a
great change has of late years been wrought in the coarser and more
offensive points of American manners and habits--chiefly, we are
assured, by the satirical works of English writers. Much yet remains to
be done, as is admitted in the book before us, where it is certain that
as good a case as possible, consistent with truth, has been made out for
the Americans. "Even now I defy any one to exaggerate the horrors of
chewing, and its odious consequences; the shameless selfishness which
seizes on a dish, and appropriates the best part of its contents, if the
plate cannot contain the whole; and the sullen silence at meal times."
The class to which this passage refers is a very numerous one, and far
from the lowest in the country--as regards position and circumstances,
that is to say. Its members are met with in every steam-boat and railway
carriage, at boarding-houses and public dinner tables. They have dollars
in plenty, wear expensive clothes, and live on the fat of the land; but
their manners are infinitely worse than those of any class with which a
traveller in England can possibly be brought in contact. Most of them,
doubtless, have risen from very inferior walks of life. Their
circumstances have improved, themselves have remained stationary,
chiefly from the want of an established standard of refinement to strain
up to. It would be as absurd as illiberal to assert that there are no
well-bred, gentlemanly men in the States; but it is quite certain that
they are the few, the exceptions, insufficient in number to constitute a
class. Elegance and republicanism are sworn foes; the latter condemns
what the first depends upon. An aristocracy, an army, an established
church, mould, by their influence and example, the manners of the
masses. The Americans decline purchasing polish at such a price. The day
will come when they shall discover their error, and cease to believe
that the rule of the many constitutes the perfection of liberty and
happiness. At present, although they eagerly snatch at the few titles
current in their country, and generals and honourables are every where
in exceeding abundance, the only real eminence amongst them is money.
Its eager and unremitting pursuit leaves little time for the cultivation
of those tastes which refine and improve both mind and manners.
Nevertheless, as above mentioned, there _is_ an improvement in the
latter item; and certain gross inelegancies, which passed unnoticed half
a score years ago, now draw down public censure upon their perpetrators.
"A Trollope! a Trollope!" was the cry upon a certain evening at the
Baltimore theatre, when one of the sovereign people fixed his feet upon
the rail of the seat before him, and stared at the performance through
his upraised legs. However they may sneer at "benighted Britishers," and
affect to pity and look down upon their oppressed and unhappy condition,
the Americans secretly entertain a mighty deference for this country and
the opinion of its people. The English press is looked upon with
profound respect; a leading article in the _Times_ is read as an oracle,
and carries weight even when it exasperates. And with all his assumed
superiority, the American is never displeased, but the contrary, at
being mistaken for an Englishman. The stinging missiles fired from this
side of the Atlantic at Pennsylvanian repudiators had no small share in
bringing about the recent tardy payment of interest. The satire of
Sydney Smith spoke more loudly to American ears than did the voices of
conscience and common honesty.

The old Hibernian boast, revived and embalmed by Moore in a melody, that
a fair and virtuous maiden, decked with gems both rich and rare, might
travel through Ireland unprotected and unmolested, may now be made by
America. So, at least, the author of _Hochelaga_ instructs us, avouching
his belief that a lady of any age and unlimited attractions may travel
through the whole Union without a single annoyance, but aided, on the
contrary, by the most attentive and unobtrusive civility. And many
American ladies do so travel; their own propriety of behaviour, and the
chivalry of their countrymen, for sole protectors. The best seat in
coach and at table, the best of every thing, indeed, is invariably given
up to them. This practical courtesy to the sex is certainly an excellent
point in the American character. A humorous exemplification is given of
it in _Hochelaga_. An Englishman at the New York theatre, having
engaged, paid for, and established himself in a snug front corner of a
box, thought himself justified in retaining it, even when summoned by an
American to yield it to a lady. A discussion ensued. The pit inquired
its cause; the lady's companion stepped forward and said, "There is an
Englishman here who will not give up his place to a lady." Whereupon the
indignant pit swarmed up into the box, gently seized the offender, and
carried him out of the theatre, neither regarding nor retaliating his
kicks, blows, and curses, set him carefully down upon the steps, handed
him his hat, his opera-glass, and the price of his ticket, and shut the
door in his face. "The shade of the departed Judge Lynch," concludes the
narrator of the anecdote, "must have rejoiced at such an angelic
administration of his law!"

On his route from New York to Boston, the Yankee capital, our author
made sundry observations on his fellow travellers by railway and
steam-boat. They were very numerous, and the fares were incredibly low.
There was also a prodigious quantity of luggage, notwithstanding that
many American gentlemen travel light, with their linen and brushes in
their great-coat pocket. Others, on the contrary, have an addiction to
very large portmanteaus of thin strong wood, bound with iron, nailed
with brass, initialed, double-locked and complicated, and possessing
altogether a peculiarly cautious and knowing look, which would stamp
them as American though they were encountered in Cabul or Algeria. Round
the walls of the reading-room at the Boston hotel were hung maps of the
States, the blue of the American territory thrusting itself up into the
red of the English to the furthest line of the different disputed
points. "At the top they were ornamented by some appropriate national
design, such as the American eagle carrying the globe in its talons,
with one claw stuck well into Texas, and another reaching nearly to
Mexico."

A remarkably clean city is Boston, quite Dutch in its propriety,
spotless in its purity; smoking in the streets is there prohibited, and
chewing has fewer proselytes than in most parts of the States. It is one
of the most ancient of American towns, having been founded within ten
years after the landing of the first New England settlers. The
anniversary of the day when

    "A band of exiles moor'd their bark
    On the wild New England shore,"

the 21st December 1620, is still celebrated at Plymouth, the earliest
settlement of the pilgrim fathers. Thousands flock from Boston to assist
at the ceremony. On the last anniversary, the author of _Hochelaga_ was
present. The proceedings of the day commenced with divine service,
performed by Unitarian and Baptist ministers. This over, a marshal of
the ceremonies proclaimed that the congregation were to form in
procession and march to the place where the "Plymouth Rock" had been,
there "to heave a sigh." The "heaving" having been accomplished with all
due decorum and melancholy--barring that a few unprincipled individuals
in the tail of the procession, fearing to be late for dinner, shirked
the sighing and took a short cut to the hotel--the banquet, not the
least important part of the day's business, commenced. The president sat
in a chair which came over with the pilgrims in their ship, the
Mayflower. Beside each plate were placed a few grains of dried maize--a
memento of the first gift of the friendly natives to the exiles. The
dinner went off with much order. A large proportion of the persons
present were members of temperance societies, and drank no wine. The
grand treat of the evening, at least to an Englishman, was the
speechifying. The following _resumA(C)_ is given to us as containing the
pith and substance of the majority of the speeches, which were all
prepared for the occasion, and, of course, contained much the same
thing. The orators usually commenced with "English persecution,
continued with,--landing in the howling wilderness--icebound
waters--pestilence--starvation--so on to foreign tyranny--successful
resistance--chainless eagles--stars and stripes--glorious
independence;--then; unheard of progress--wonderful industry--stronghold
of Christianity--chosen people--refuge of liberty;--again; insults of
haughty Albion--blazes of triumph--queen of the seas deposed for
ever--Columbia's banner of victory floating over every thing--fire and
smoke--thunder and lightning--mighty republic--boundless empire. When
they came to the 'innumerable millions' they were to be a few years
hence, they generally sat down greatly exhausted." Mr Everett, the late
American minister in London, was present at this dinner, and replied
with ability, eloquence, and good feeling, to a speech in which the
president had made a neatly turned and friendly reference to Great
Britain.

We prefer the American volume of _Hochelaga_ to the Canadian one,
although both are highly interesting. But, as he proceeds, the author
gains in vivacity and boldness. There is a deal of anecdote and lively
sketching in his account of the States; there are also some novel
opinions and sound reasoning. The chapter on the prospects of America
affords themes for much curious speculation concerning the probable
partition of the great republic. The discussion of the subject is,
perhaps, a little premature; although our author affirms his belief that
many now living will not die till they have seen monarchy introduced
into the stronghold of republicanism, and a king governing the slave
states of North America. He recognises, in the United States, the germs
of three distinct nations, the North, the West, and the South. Slavery
and foreign warfare, especially the former, are to be the apples of
discord, the wedges to split the now compact mass. The men of the North,
enlightened and industrious, commercial and manufacturing, are strenuous
advocates of peace. They have shown that they do not fear war; they it
was who chiefly fought the great fight of American independence; but
peace is essential to their prosperity, and they will not lightly forego
its advantages. This will sooner or later form the basis of differences
between them and the Western States, whose turbulent sons, rapid in
their increase, adventurous and restless, ever pushing forward, like
some rolling tide, deeper and deeper into the wilderness, and ever
seeking to infringe on neighbours' boundaries, covet the rich woods of
Canada, the temperate shores of Oregon, the fertile plains of
California. They have dispossessed, almost exterminated, the aborigines;
the wild beasts of the forest have yielded and fled before them, the
forest itself has made way for their towns and plantations. Growing in
numbers and power with a rapidity unparalleled in the world's history,
expansion and invasion are to them a second nature, a devouring
instinct. This unrestrained impulse will sooner or later urge them to
aggressions and produce a war. This they do not fear or object to;
little injury can be done to them; but the Northern States, to whose
trade war is ruin, will not be passively dragged into a conflict on
account of the encroaching propensities of their western brethren. These
differences of interests will lead to disputes, ill blood, and finally
to separation.

Between South and North, the probabilities of a serious, and no very
distant rupture, are strong and manifest. "Slavery" and "Abolition" will
be the battle-cries of the respective parties. It may almost be said
that the fight has already begun, at least on one side. An avowed
abolitionist dare not venture into the South. There are laws for his
chastisement, and should those be deemed too lenient, there are plenty
of lawless hands outstretched to string him to a tree. A deputy from
South Carolina openly declared in the House of Representatives at
Washington, that if they caught an abolitionist in their State, they
would hang him without judge or jury. A respectable Philadelphian and
ardent abolitionist confessed to us, a short time ago, not without some
appearance of shame at the state of things implied by the admission,
that it would be as much as his life was worth to venture into certain
slave-holding states. Hitherto the pro-slavery men have had the best of
it; the majority of presidents of the Union have been chosen from their
candidates, they have succeeded in annexing Texas, and latterly they
have struck up an alliance with the West, which holds the balance
between the South and the North, although, at the rate it advances, it
is likely soon to outweigh them both. But this alliance is rotten, and
cannot endure; the Western men are no partizans of slavery. Meantime,
the abolitionists are active; they daily become more weary of having the
finger of scorn pointed at them, on account of a practice which they
neither benefit by nor approve. Their influence and numbers daily
increase; in a few years they will be powerfully in the ascendant, they
will possess a majority in the legislative chambers, and vote the
extinction of slavery. To this, it is greatly to be feared, the fiery
Southerns will not submit without an armed struggle. "Then," says the
author of _Hochelaga_, "who can tell the horrors that will ensue? The
blacks, urged by external promptings to rise for liberty, the furious
courage and energy of the whites trampling them down, the assistance of
the free states to the oppressed, will drive the oppressors to
desperation: their quick perception will tell them that their loose
republican organization cannot conduct a defence against such odds; and
the first popular military leader who has the glory of a success, will
become dictator. This, I firmly believe, will be the end of the pure
democracy."

May such sinister predictions never be realised! Of the instability of
American institutions, we entertain no doubt; and equally persuaded are
we, that so vast a country, the interests of whose inhabitants are in
many respects so conflicting, cannot remain permanently united under one
government. But we would fain believe, that a severance may be
accomplished peaceably, and without bloodshed; that the soil which has
been converted from a wilderness to a garden by Anglo-Saxon industry and
enterprise, may never be ensanguined by civil strife, or desolated by
the dissensions and animosities of her sons.

FOOTNOTE:

[4] _Hochelaga; or, England in the New World._ Edited by ELIOT
WARBURTON, Esq. Two Volumes. London: 1846.




LETTERS ON ENGLISH HEXAMETERS.

LETTER III.


DEAR MR EDITOR,--I hope you will be of opinion that I have, in my two
preceding letters, proved the hexameter to be a good, genuine English
verse, fitted to please the unlearned as well as the learned ear; and
hitherto prevented from having fair play among our readers of poetry,
mainly by the classical affectations of our hexameter writers--by their
trying to make a distinction of long and short syllables, according to
Latin rules of quantity; and by their hankering after spondees, which
the common ear rejects as inconsistent with our native versification. If
the attempt had been made to familiarise English ears with hexameters
free from these disadvantages, it might have succeeded as completely as
it has done in German. And the chance of popular success would have been
much better if the measure had been used in a long poem of a religious
character; for religious poetry, as you know very well, finds a much
larger body of admirers than any other kind, and fastens upon the minds
of common readers with a much deeper hold. Religious feeling supplies
the deficiency of poetical susceptibility, and imparts to the poem a
splendour and solemnity which elevates it out of the world of prose. I
do not think it can be doubted that Klopstock's _Messiah_ did a great
deal to give the hexameters a firm hold on the German popular ear; and I
am persuaded that if Pollok's _Course of Time_ had been written in
hexameters, its popularity would have been little less than it is, and
the hexameter would have been by this time in a great degree
familiarised in our language. Perhaps it may be worth while to give a
passage of the _Messiah_, that your readers may judge whether a
hexameter version of the whole would not have been likely to succeed in
this country, at the time when the prose translator was so generally
read and admired. The version is by William Taylor of Norwich.

The scene is the covenant made between the two first persons of the
Trinity on Mount Moriah. The effect is thus described:--

                                    "While spake the eternals,
    Thrill'd through nature an awful earthquake. Souls that had never
    Known the dawning of thought, now started, and felt for the first time.
    Shudders and trembling of heart assail'd each seraph; his bright orb
    Hush'd as the earth when tempests are nigh, before him was pausing.
    But in the souls of future Christians vibrated transports,
    Sweet pretastes of immortal existence. Foolish against God,
    Aught to have plann'd or done, and alone yet alive to despondence,
    Fell from thrones in the fiery abyss the spirits of evil,
    Rocks broke loose from the smouldering caverns, and fell on the
        falling:
    Howlings of woe, far-thundering crashes, resounded through hell's
        vaults."

It seems to me that such verses as these might very well have satisfied
the English admirers of Klopstock.

You will observe, however, that we have, in the passage which I have
quoted, several examples of those _forced trochees_ which I mentioned in
my first letter, as one of the great blemishes of English hexameters;
namely, these--_first tAe-me_; _bright Arb_; _agaAe"nst GAd_;
_hAe"ll's vAefults_. And these produce their usual effect of making
the verse in some degree unnatural and un-English.

It is, however, true, that in this respect the German hexametrist has a
considerable advantage over the English. Many of the words which are
naturally thrown to the end of a verse by the sense, are monosyllables
in English, while the corresponding German word is a trochaic
dissyllable, which takes its place in the verse smoothly and familiarly.
In consequence of this difference in the two languages, the Englishman
is often compelled to lengthen his monosyllables by various artifices.
Thus, in _Herman and Dorothea_--

    "Und er wandte sich schnell; de sah sie ihm ThrAnen im _auge_."

    "And he turned him quick; then saw she tears in his _eyelids_."

In order that I may not be misunderstood, however, I must say that I by
no means intend to proscribe such final trochees as I have spoken of,
composed of two monosyllables, but only to recommend a sparing and
considerate use of them. They occur in Goethe, though not abundantly.
Thus in _Herman and Dorothea_, we have three together:--

    "Und es brannten die strassen bis zum markt, und das _Haus war_,
    Meines Vaters hierneben verzchrt und diesar zug_leich mit_,
    Wenig flA1/4chtehen wir. Ich safs, die traurige _Nacht durch_."

None of these trochees, however, are so spondaic as the English ones
which I formerly quoted, consisting of a monosyllable-adjective with a
monosyllable-substantive--"the weight of his _right hand_;" or two
substantives, as "the heat of a _love's fire_."

Yet even these endings are admissible occasionally. Every one assents to
Harris's recognition of a natural and perfect hexameter in that verse of
the Psalms--

    "Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a _vain thing_?"

The fact is, that though the English hexameter, well constructed, is
acknowledged by an English ear, as completely as any other dactylic or
anapA|stic measure, it always recalls, in the mind of a classical
scholar, the recollection of Greek and Latin hexameters; and this
association makes him willing to accept some rhythmical peculiarities
which the classical forms and rules seem to justify. The peculiarities
are felt as an _allusion_ to Homer and Virgil, and give to the verse a
kind of learned grace, which may or may not be pedantic, according to
the judgment with which it is introduced. Undoubtedly, if the hexameter
ever come to be as familiar in English as it is in German poetry, our
best hexametrists will, like theirs, learn to convey, along with the
pleasure which belongs to a flowing and familiar native measure, that
which arises from agreeable recollections of the rhythms of the great
epics of antiquity.

And, I add further, that the recollection of classical hexameters which
will thus, in the minds of scholars, always accompany the flow of
English hexameters, makes any addition to, or subtraction from, the six
standard feet of the verse altogether intolerable. And hence I earnestly
protest--and I hope you, Mr Editor, agree with me--against the license
claimed by Southey, of using _any foot_ of two or three syllables at the
beginning of a line, to avoid the exotic and forced character, which, he
says, the verse would assume if every line were to begin with a long
syllable. No, no, my dear sir; this will never do. If we are to have
hexameters at all, every line _must_ begin with a long syllable. It is
true, that this is sometimes difficult to attain. It is a condition
which forbids us to begin a line with _The_, or _It_, or many other
familiar beginnings of sentences. But it is a condition which must be
adhered to; and if any one finds it too difficult, he must write
something else, and leave hexameters alone. Southey, though he has
claimed the license of violating this rule, has not written many of such
licentious lines. I suppose the following are intended to be of this
description:--

    "That nAt for lawless devices, nor goaded by desperate fortunes."

    "UpAn all seas and shores, wheresoever her rights were offended."

    "His rAe"verend form repose; heavenward his face was directed."

The two former lines might easily be corrected by leaving out the first
syllable. The other is a very bad line, even if the licence be allowed.

For the same reason it must be considered a very bad fault to have
supernumerary syllables, or syllables which would be supernumerary if
not cut down by a harsh elision. A final dactyl, requiring an elision to
make it fit its place, appears to me very odious. Southey has such:--

                                              "wins in the chamber
    What he lost in the field, in fancy conquers the _conqueror_."

    "Still it deceiveth the weak, inflameth the rash and the _desperate_."

    "Rich in Italy's works and the masterly labours of _Belgium_."

And no less does the ear repudiate all other violent elisions. I find
several in the other translation of the Iliad referred to in your notice
of N. N. T.'s. And I am sure Mr Shadwell will excuse my pointing out one
or two of them, and will accept in a friendly spirit criticisms which
arise from a fellow feeling with him in the love of English hexameters.
These occur in his First Iliad.

    "_Wheth'r_ it's for vow not duly perform'd or for altar neglected."

    "Hand on his sword half drawn from its sheath, on a _sudd'n_ from
        Olympus."

    "Fail to regard in his envy the _daught'r_ of the sea-dwelling
        ancient."

Such crushing of words is intolerable. Our hexameters, to be generally
acceptable, must flow on smoothly, with the natural pronunciation of the
words; at least this is necessary till the national ear is more familiar
with the movement than it is at present.

I believe I have still some remarks upon hexameters in store, if your
patience and your pages suffice for them: but for the present I wish to
say a word or two on another subject closely connected with this; I mean
pentameters. The alternate hexameter and pentameter are, for most
purposes, a more agreeable measure than the hexameter by itself. The
constant double ending is tiresome, as constant double rhymes would be.
Southey says, in his angry way, speaking of his hexameters--"the double
ending may be censured as double rhymes used to be; but that objection
belongs to the duncery." This is a very absurd mode of disposing of one
objection, mentioned by him among many others equally formal and minute,
which others he pretends to discuss calmly and patiently. The objection
is of real weight. Though you might tolerate a double ending here and
there in an epic, I am sure, Mr Editor, you would stop your critical
ears at the incessant jingle of an epic in which every couplet had a
double rhyme. On the other hand, an alternation of double and single
endings is felt as an agreeable form of rhythm and rhyme. We have some
good examples of it in English; the Germans have more: and the French
manifest the same feeling in their peremptory rule for the alternation
of masculine and feminine rhymes. And there is another feature which
recommends the pentameter combined with the hexameter. This combination
carries into effect, on a large scale, a principle which prevails, I
believe, in all the finer forms of verse. The principle which I mean is
this;--that the metrical structure of the verse must be distinct and
pure _at the end_ of each verse, though liberties and substitutions may
be allowed at the beginning. Thus, as you know, Mr Editor, the iambics
of the Greek tragedians admit certain feet in the early part of the line
which they do not allow in the later portions. And in the same manner
the hexameter, a dactylic measure, must have the last two feet regular,
while the four preceding feet may each be either trissyllabic or
dissyllabic. Now, this principle of pure rhythm at the end of each
strain, is peculiarly impressed upon the hexameter-pentameter distich.
The end of the pentameter, rigorously consisting of two dactyls and a
syllable, closes the couplet in such a manner that the metrical
structure is never ambiguous; while the remainder of the couplet has
liberty and variety, still kept in order by the end of the hexameter;
and the double ending of the strain is avoided. I do not know whether
you, Mr Editor, will agree with me in this speculation as to the source
of the beauty which belongs to the hexameter-pentameter measure: but
there can be no doubt that it has always had a great charm wherever
dactylic measures have been cultivated. Schiller and GAethe have
delighted in it no less than TyrtA|us and Ovid: and I should conceive
that this measure might find favour in English ears, even more fully
than the mere hexameter.

But, in order that there may be any hope of this, it is very requisite
that the course of the verse should be natural and unforced. This is
more requisite even than in the hexameter; for, in the pentameter, the
verse, if it be at variance with the natural accent, subverts it more
completely, and makes the utterance more absurd. But it does not appear
to be very difficult to attain to this point. In the model distich
quoted by Coleridge--

    "In the hexameter rises the fountain's silvery column,
    In the pentameter still falling in melody back;"

the pentameter is a better verse than the hexameter. Surry's pentameters
often flow well, in spite of his false scheme of accentuation.

    "With strong foes on land, on sea, with contrary tempests,
    Still do I cross this wretch, whatso he taketh in hand."

I will here terminate my criticisms for the present, but I will offer
you, along with them, a specimen of hexameter and pentameter. It is a
translation from Schiller, and could not fail to win some favour to the
measure, if I could catch any considerable share of the charm of the
original, both in versification, language, and thought. Such as the
verses are, however, I shall utter them in your critical ear--and am,
dear Mr Editor, your obedient,

                                        M. L.




THE DANCE. FROM SCHILLER.


    See with floating tread the bright pair whirl in a wave-like
      Swing, and the wingA"d foot scarce gives a touch to the floor.
    Say, is it shadows that flit unclogg'd by the load of the body?
      Say, is it elves that weave fairy-wings under the moon?
    So rolls the curling smoke through air on the breath of the zephyr;
      So sways the light canoe borne on the silvery lake.
    --Bounds the well-taught foot on the sweet-flowing wave of the measure;
      Whispering musical strains buoy up the aA"ry forms.
    Now, as if in its rush it would break the chain of the dancers,
      Dives an adventurous pair into the thick of the throng.
    Quick before them a pathway is formed, and closes behind them;
      As by a magical hand, open'd and shut is the way.
    Now it is lost to the eye; into wild confusion resolvA"d--
      Lo! that revolving world loses its orderly frame.
    No! from the mass there it gaily emerges and glides from the tangle;
      Order resumes her sway, only with alterA"d charm.
    Vanishing still, it still reappears, the revolving creation,
      And, deep-working, a law governs the aspects of change.
    Say, how is it that forms ever passing are ever restorA"d?
      How still fixity stays, even where motion most reigns?
    How each, master and free, by his own heart shaping his pathway,
      Finds in the hurrying maze simply the path that he seeks?
    This thou would'st know? 'Tis the might divine of harmony's empire;
      She in the social dance governs the motions of each.
    She, like the Goddess[5] Severe, with the golden bridle of order,
      Tames and guides at her will wild and tumultuous strength.
    And around thee in vain the word its harmonies utters
      If thy heart be not swept on in the stream of the strain,
    --Not by the measure of life which beats through all beings around
        thee,
      --Not by the whirl of the dance, which through the vacant abyss
    Launches the blazing suns in the spacious sweeps of their orbits.
      Order rules in thy sports: so let it rule in thy acts.

                                        M. L.

FOOTNOTE:

[5] Nemesis.




A NEW SENTIMENTAL JOURNEY.


AT MOULINS.

"I DON'T think so," said the lady; and, pulling up the window of the
calA"che, she sank back on her seat: the postilion gave another crack
with his whip, another _sacre_ to his beasts, and they rolled on towards
Moulins.

It's an insolent unfeeling world this: when any one is rich enough to
ride in a calA"che, the poorer man, who can only go in a cabriolet, is
despised. Not but that a cabriolet is a good vehicle of its sort: I know
of few more comfortable. And then, again, for mine, why I have a kind of
affection for it. 'Tis an honest unpretending vehicle: it has served me
all the way from Calais, and I will not discard it. What though Maurice
wanted to persuade me at Paris that I had better take a britska, as more
fashionable? I resisted the temptation; there was virtue in that very
deed--'tis so rare that one resists; and I am still here in my
cabriolet: and when I leave thee, honest cab, may I----

"_A l'HA'tel de l'Europe?_" asked the driver; "'tis an excellent house,
and if Monsieur intends remaining there, he will find _une table
merveilleuse_."

Why to the Hotel de l'Europe? said I to myself. I hate these
cosmopolitic terms. Am I not in France--gay, delightful
France--partaking of the kindness and civility of the country? "A
l'Hotel de France!" was my reply.

The driver hereupon pulled up his horses short;--it was no difficult
task: the poor beasts had come far: there had been no horses at
Villeneuve, and we had come on all the way from St Imbert, six weary
leagues. "_Connais pas_," said the man: "Monsieur is mistaken; besides,
madame is so obliging. If there were an Hotel de France, it would be
another affair: add to this, that the voiture which has just passed us
is going to the hotel."

"Enough--I will go there too;" and, so saying, we got through the
BarriA"re of Moulins.

Now, I know not how it is, but, despite of the fellow's honest air, I
had a misgiving that he intended to cheat me. He was leading me to some
exorbitant monster of the road, where the unsuspecting traveller would
be flayed alive: he was his accomplice--his jackall; I was to be the
victim. Had he argued for an hour about the excellence of mine host's
table, I had been proof: my Franco-mania and my wish to be independent
had certainly taken me to some other hotel. But he said something about
the voiture: _it_ was going there. What was that to me? I hate people in
great carriages when I am not in them myself. But then, the lady! I had
seen nothing but her face, and for an instant. She said "she did not
think so." Think what? _Mais ses yeux!_

Reader, bear with me a while. There is a fascination in serpents, and
there is one far more deadly--who has not felt it?--in woman's eyes.
Such a face! such features, and such expression! She might have been
five-and-twenty--nay, more: girlhood was past with her: that quiet look
of self-possession which makes woman bear man's gaze, showed that she
knew the pains, perhaps the joys, of wedded life. And yet the fire of
youthful imagination was not yet extinct: the spirit of poetry had not
yet left her: there was hope, and gaiety, and love in that bright black
eye: and there was beauty, witching beauty, in every lineament of her
face. Her voice was of the softest--there was music in its tone: and her
hand told of other symmetry that could not but be in exquisite harmony.
"She did not think so:" why should she have taken the trouble to look
out of the carriage window at me as she said these words? Was I known to
her--or fancied to be so? As she did not think so, I was determined to
know why. "We will go to the Hotel de l'Europe, if you press it;" and
away the cabriolet joggled over the roughly paved street.

Moulins is any thing but one of the most remarkable towns in France: it
is large, and yet it is not important: as a centre of communication,
nothing: little trade: few manufactures: the houses are low, rather than
high; the streets wide, rather than narrow: you can breathe in Moulins,
though you may be stifled in Rouen. It is the quiet _chef lieu_ of the
Allier, and was once the capital of the Bourbonnais. An air of departing
elegance, and even of stateliness, still lingers over it: the streets
have the houses of the _ancienne noblesse_ still lining their sides:
high walls; that is to say, with a handsome gateway in the middle, and
the _corps-de-logis_ just peering above. Retired in their own dignity,
and shunning the vulgar world, the old masters of the province here
congregated in former days for the winter months; Moulins was then a gay
and stirring town; _piquet_ and _Boston_ kept many an old lady and
complaisant marquis alive through the long nights of winter; there was a
sociable circle formed in many a saloon; the harpsichord was sounded,
the minuet was danced, and the _petit souper_ discussed. The president
of the court, or the knight of Malta, or M. l'AbbA(C), came in; or perhaps
a gallant gentleman of the regiment of Bourbon or Auvergne joined the
circle; and conversation assumed that style of piquant brilliancy
tempered with exquisite politeness which existed nowhere but in ancient
France, and shall never be met with again. Sad was the day when the
Revolution broke over Moulins! all the ancient properties of the country
destroyed; blood flowing on many a scaffold; the deserving and the good
thrust aside or trampled under foot; the unprincipled and the base
pushed into places of power abused, and wealth ill-gotten but worse
spent. That bad time has passed away, and Moulins has settled down, like
an aged invalid of shattered constitution, the ghost of what it was,
into a dull country-town. Yet it is not without its redeeming qualities
of literary and even scientific excellence; somewhat of the ancient
spirit of disinterested gaiety still remains behind; and it is a place
where the traveller may well sojourn for many days.

In the court-yard of the hotel was standing the voiture, which had come
in some twenty minutes before us. The femme-de-chambre was carrying up
the last package: the postilion had got out of his boots, and had placed
them to lean against the wall. The good lady of the house came out to
welcome me, and the garASec.on was ready at the step. It's very true; the
freshness, if not the sincerity, of an inn welcome, makes one of the
amenities of life: it compensates for the wearisomeness of the road: it
is something to look forward to at the end of a fatiguing day; and, what
is best, you can have just as much or as little of it as you like. There
is no keeping on of your buckram when once you are seated in your
inn,--no stiffening up for dinner when you had infinitely rather be
quite at your ease. What you want you ask for, without saying, "by your
leave," or, "if you please;" and what you ask for, if you are a
reasonable man, you get. Let no traveller go to a friend's house if he
wants to be comfortable. Let him keep to an inn: he is there, _pro
tempore_, at home.

"I shall stop here to-night, Madame."

"As Monsieur pleases: and to-morrow--?"

"I will resume my route to Clermont."

"Monsieur is going to the baths of Mont Dor, no doubt?"

"Just so."

"Then, sir, you will have excellent company, and you have done well to
come here; Monsieur le Marquis is going on thither to-morrow: and if
Monsieur would be so obliging,--but I will run up and ask him and
Madame, the sweetest lady in the world,--they will be glad to have you
at dinner with them: you are all going to Mont Dor. You will be
enchanted: excuse me, I will be back in an instant."

How curious, thought I, that without any doings of my own, I should just
be thrown into the way of the person whom my curiosity--my impertinent,
or silly curiosity, which you will--prompted me with the desire to meet.
The superciliousness of the voiture vanished from my recollection, and
my national frigidity was doomed to be thawed into civility, if not into
amiableness.

"The Marquis de Mirepoix would be glad of the honour of Monsieur's
company at dinner, if he would be so obliging as to excuse ceremony, and
the refinements of the toilette." What a charming message! Surely there
is an innate grace in this people, notwithstanding their twenty years of
blood and revolution, that can never be worn out! Why, they did not even
know my name; and on the simple suggestion of the hostess, they consent
to sit with me at table! Truly this is the land of politeness, and of
kind accommodation: the land of ready access to the stranger, where the
ties of his home, withered, or violently snapped asunder, are replaced
by the engaging attractions of unostentatious and well-judged civility;
and where he is induced to leave his warmest inclinations, if not his
heart. Never give up this distinguishing attribute, France, thou land of
the brave and the gay! it shall compensate for much of thy waywardness:
it shall take off the rough edge of thy egotism: it shall disarm thy
ambition: it shall make thee the friend of all the world.

"Il m'a payA(C) trois francs la poste, te dis-je: c'est un gros milord: que
sais-je!"

"Diantre! for a cabriolet! Why, they only gave me the tariff and a
miserable piece of ten sous as my pour-boire, for a heavy calA"che! When
I fetched them from the chActeau this morning, I knew how it would
be--Monsieur le Marquis is so miserly, so exigeant!"

"I would not be his wife for any thing," said the fille-de-chambre, as
she came tripping down stairs, and passed between the two postilions;
"an old curmudgeon, to go on in that way with such a wife. Voyez-vous,
Pierre, elle est si belle, si douce! c'est une ange! She wants to know
who the young Englishman is; qu'en sais-tu, Jean-Marie?"

"He gave us three francs a post; that's all I know."

"Then we have two angels in the house instead of one."

I hate to be long at my toilette at any time; but to delay much in such
a matter while travelling is folly. Yet, how shall one get over the
interminable plains of France, and pass through those ever succeeding
simooms of dust which beset the high-roads of the "fair country,"
without contracting a certain dinginess of look that makes one
intolerable? Fellow-traveller, never take much luggage with thee, if
thou hast thy senses rightly awakened; leave those real "impediments" of
locomotion behind; take with thee two suits at the most; adapt them to
the climate and the land thou intendest to traverse; and, remember,
never cease to dress like a gentleman. Take with thee plenty of white
cravattes and white waistcoats; they will always make thee look clean
when thy ablutions are performed, despite of whatever else may be thy
habiliments; carry with thee some varnished boots; encourage the
laundresses to the utmost of thy power, and thou wilt always be a
suitably dressed man. By the time I had done my toilette there was a tap
at the door, and in another minute I was in the salle-A -manger.

The Marquis made me a profound salutation, which I endeavoured to return
as well as a stiff Englishman, with a poker up his back, extending right
through the spinal column into his head, could be supposed to do. To the
Lady I was conscious of stooping infinitely lower; and I even flattered
myself that the empressement which I wished to put into my reverence was
not unperceived by her. The little fluttering oscillation of the head
and form, with which a French lady acknowledges a civility, came forth
on her part with exquisite grace. Her husband might be fifty: he was a
tall, harsh-looking man; a gentleman certainly, but still not one of the
right kind; there was a sort of rouA(C) expression about his eyes that
inspired distrust, if not repulsion; his features seemed little
accustomed to a smile; the tone of his voice was dissonant, and he spoke
sharply and quickly. But his wife--his gentle, angelic wife--was the
type of what a woman should be. She surpassed not in height that best
standard of female proportion, which we give, gentle reader, at some
five feet and two inches. She was most delicately formed: her face, of
the broad rather than the long oval shape, tapered down to a most
exquisitely formed chin; while the arch expression of her mouth and
eyes, tempered as it was with an indefinable expression of true feminine
softness, gave animation and vivid intelligence to the whole. Who can
define the tones of a woman's voice? and that woman one of the most
refined and high-bred of her sex? There was a richness and smoothness,
and yet such an exquisite softness in it, as entranced the hearer, and
could keep him listening to its flow of music for hours together. I am
persuaded of it, and the more I think of it the more vividly does it
recur to my mind. 'Twas only a single glance--that first glance as I
moved upwards from bowing towards a hand which I could willingly have
kissed. There was the tale of a whole life conveyed in it; there was the
narration of much inward suffering--of thwarted hopes, of disappointed
desires--of a longing for deliverance from a weight of oppression--of a
praying for a friend and an avenger. And yet there was the timidity of
the woman, the observance of conventional forms, the respect of herself,
the dread of her master, all tending to keep down the indication of
those feelings. And again there came the still-enduring hope of
amendment or of remedy. All was in that glance. I felt it in a moment;
and the fascination--that mysterious communication of sentiment which
runs through the soul as the electric current of its vitality--was
completed.

How is it that one instant of time should work those effects in the
human mind which are so lasting in their results! Ye unseen powers,
spirits or angels, that preside over our actions, and guide us to or
from harm, is it that ye communicate some portion of your own ethereal
essence to our duller substance at such moments, and give us perceptive
faculties which otherwise we never had enjoyed? Or is it that the soul
has some secret way of imparting its feelings to another without the
intervention of material things, otherwise than to let the immortal
spark flash from one being to the other? And oh, ye sceptics, ye dull
leaden-hearted mortals! doubt not of the language of the eyes--that
common theme of mawkish lovers--but though common, not the less true and
certain. Interrogate the looks of a young child--remember even the
all-expressive yet mute eyes of a faithful dog; and give me the bright
eloquent glance of woman in the pride and bloom of life--'tis sweeter
than all sounds, more universal than all languages.

"I am afraid, Monsieur le Marquis, that I shall be interfering with your
arrangements?"

"Ah, mon Dieu! you give us great pleasure. Madame and myself had just
been regretting that we should have to pass the evening in this
miserable hole of a town. 'Pas de spectacle; c'est embAtant A  ne pas en
finir.'"

"And Monsieur is likely to be with us to-morrow, mon ami; for my
femme-de-chambre tells me that he is going to Mont Dor. Do you know,
Monsieur, that just as we were coming into Moulins, we remarked your
odd-looking cabriolet de poste. My husband detests them; on the
contrary, I like those carriages, for they tell me of happy--I mean to
say, of former times. He wanted to wager with me that it was some
old-fashioned sulky fellow that had got into it; but, as we passed, I
looked out at the window, satisfied myself of the contrary, and told him
so. Will you be pleased to take that chair by my side, and as we go on
with our dinner we can talk about Mont Dor."


CLERMONT.

As it had been arranged that I should take an hour's start with my
cabriolet, and bespeak horses for my companions as I went on, I set off
for Clermont early.

As you advance through the Bourbonnais, towards the south, the country
warms upon you: warms in its sunny climate, and in the glowing colours
of its landscape. Not but that France is smiling enough, even in the
north: Witness Normandy, that chosen land of green meadow, rich glebe,
stately forests, and winding streams: nor that even in Champagne, where
the eye stretches over endless plains, towards the Germanic frontier,
there are not rich valleys, and deep woodlands, and sunny glades. Do not
quarrel with the chalky ground of the Champenois--remember its
wine--think of the imprisoned spirit of the land, that quintessence of
all that is French--give it due vent; 'twill reward you for your pains.
Oh! certes, France is a gay and a pleasing land. My fastidious and
gloomy countrymen may say what they please, and may talk of the beauties
of England till they are hoarse again; but there is not less natural
beauty in Gaul than in Britain. Take all the broad tracts from London to
York, or from Paris to Lyons, France has nothing to dread from the
comparison. But, in the Bourbonnais, flat and open as it is, the scene
begins to change. The sun shines more genially, more constantly; he
shines in good earnest; and your rheumatic pains, if you have any still
creeping about your bones, ooze out at every pore, and bid you a long
adieu. That grey, cold haze of the north, which dims the horizon in the
distant prospect, here becomes warmed into a purpler, pinker tint,
borrowed from the Italian side of the Alps: the perpetual brown of the
northern soil here puts on an orange tinge: above, the sky is more blue;
and around, the passing breeze woos you more lovingly. Come hither,
poor, trembling invalid! throw off those blankets and those swathing
bandages; trust yourself to the sun, to the land, to the _waters_ of the
Bourbonnais; and renovated health, lighter spirits, pleasant days and
happy nights, shall be your reward.

How can it be, that in a country where nature is so genially disposed
towards the vegetable and the mineral kingdoms of her wide empire, she
should have played the niggard so churlishly when she peopled it with
human beings? The men of the Bourbonnais are short and ordinary of
appearance, remarkable more for the absence than for the presence of
physical advantages, and the women are the ugliest in France!--mean and
uninviting in person, and repulsive in dress! They are only to be
surpassed in this unenviable distinction by those of Auvergne. Taking
the two populations together, or rather considering them as one, which
no doubt they originally were, they are at the bottom of the
physiological scale of this country. Some think them to be the
descendants of an ancient tribe that never lost their footing in this
centre of the land, when the Gauls drove out their Iberian predecessors.
They certainly are not Gauls, nor are they Celts; still less are they
Romans or Germans. Are they then autochthonous, like the Athenians? or
are they merely the offscourings, the rejected of other populations?
Decide about it, ye that are learned in the ethnographic distinctions of
our race--but heaven defend us from the Bourbonnaises!

See how those distant peaks rise serenely over the southern horizon!--is
it that we have turned towards Helvetia?--for there is snow on the tops
of some, and many are there towering in solitary majesty. No, they are
the goal of our pilgrimage; they are the ridges of the Monts Dor--the
Puys and the extinct volcanoes of ancient France. Look at the Puy de
DA'me, that grand and towering peak: what is our friend Ben Nevis to this
his Gallic brother, who out-tops him by a thousand feet! And again, look
at Mont Dor behind, that hoary giant, as much loftier than the Puy de
DA'me as this is than the monarch of the Scottish Highlands! We are
coming to the land of _real_ mountains now. Why, that long and
comparatively low table-land of granite, from whence they all protrude,
and on which they sit as a conclave of gods, is itself higher than the
most of the hills of our father-land. These hills, if we have to mount
them, shall sorely try the thews of horse and man.

There is something soothing, and yet cheering, in the southern sky,
which tells upon the spirits, and consoles the weary heart. Just where
the yellow streaks of this low white horizon tell of the intensity of
the god of day, come the blue serrated ridges of those mountains across
the sight. If I could fly, I would away to those realms of light and
warmth--far, far away in the southern clime, where the wants of the body
should be few, and where the vigour of life should be great. The
glorious south is, like the joyous time of youth, full of hope and
promise: all is sunny and bright: there, flowers bloom and birds sing
merrily. Turn we our backs to the cold gloomy north, to the wet windy
west, to the dry parching east--on to the south!

But what a magnificent plain is this we are entering upon: it is of
immense extent. Those distant hills are at least fifty miles from us;
and across it, from Auvergne to Le Forez, cannot be less than twenty;
and, in the midst, what a gorgeous show of harvests, and gardens, and
walnut groves, and all the luxuriance of the continental Flora. This is
the Limagne, the garden of France--the choicest spot of the whole
country for varied fertility and inexhaustible productiveness. Ages
back--let musty geologists tell us how long ago--'twas a lake, larger
than the Lake of Geneva. The volcanic eruptions of the mountains on the
west broke down its barriers, and let its waters flow. Now the Allier
divides it; and the astonished cultivator digs into virgin strata of
fertile loams, the lowest depths of which have never yet been revealed.
Corn fields here are not the wide and open inclosures such as we know
them in the north and west, where every thing is removed that can hinder
a stray sunbeam from shining on the grain: here they are thickly studded
with trees--majestic, wide-spread, fruit-laden, walnut-trees; where the
corn waves luxuriantly beneath its thickest shade, and closes thickly
round its stem. Bread from the grain below, and oil from the kernel
above; wine from the hills all around, and honied fruits from many a
well-stocked garden; such are the abundant and easily reared produce of
this land of promise. A Caledonian farmer, put down suddenly in the
Limagne, would think himself in fairy regions; so kindly do all things
come in it, so pure and excellent of their sort--in such variety, in
such never-failing succession. Purple mountains, red plains, dark green
woods, and a sky of pure azure--such is the combination of colours that
meets the eye on first coming into Auvergne.

And yet man thrives not much in it; he remains a stunted half-civilized
animal--with his black shaggy locks, his brown jacket, red sash, and
enormous round beaver; ox-goad in hand, and knife ready to his grip, his
appearance accords but ill with the luxuriant beauty of the scene in
which he dwells. His diminutive but hardy companion--she who shares his
toils in the fields, and serves as his equal if not his better half--is
well suited to his purpose, and resembles him in her looks. Here, she
can climb the mountain-side as nimbly as her master; here, she can drive
the cattle to their far-distant pastures with courage and skill; here,
she mounts the hot little mountain-steed, not in female fashion, but
with a true masculine stride; laborious and long-enduring, simple,
honest, and easily contented; but withal easily provoked, and hard to be
appeased without blood; such is the Auvergnat, and his wife.

Riom seemed a picturesque town when we drove through it; but our eyes
could not bear to be diverted from the magnificent scenery that kept
rising upon us from the south. We had now approached closely to the foot
of the mountain-ranges, and their lofty summits were high above us in
mid-air. On the right, the Puy de DA'me, cut in half by a line of
motionless clouds, reared itself into the blue sky like some gigantic
balloon, so round was its summit--so isolated. The granite plateau which
constituted its base, was broken into deep and well-wooded ravines;
while at intervals there ran out into the Limagne, for many a league,
some extended promontory of land, capped all along by a flood of
crystallized basalt, which once had flowed in liquid fire from the
crater in the ridge. Here and there rose from the plain a small conical
hill, crowned with a black mass of basaltic columns, and there again
topped with an antique-looking little town or fortress, stationed there,
perhaps, from the days of CA|sar. In front stood Gergovia, where Roman
and Gallic blood once flowed at the bidding of that great master of war,
freely as a mountain torrent; now only a black plain, where the plough
is stopped in each furrow by bricks and broken pots, and rusted
arms,--tokens of the site of the ancient city.

On turning short round a steeply sloping hill, crowned with a goodly
chActeau, and clad on its sides with vines and all kinds of fruit-trees,
we saw a deep vale running up into the mountains towards the west, and
Clermont covering an eminence in the very midst. What a picturesque
outline! How closely the houses stand together--how agreeably do they
mix with the trees of the promenades; and how boldly the cathedral comes
out from amongst them all! It is a lofty and richly-decorated pile of
the fourteenth century; and tells of the labours and the wealth of a
foreign land. Anglo-Norman skill and gold are said to have formed it;
but however this may be, we know that it witnessed the presence of our
gallant Black Prince, and that it once depended on Aquitaine, not on
France. Yet what fancy can have possessed its builder to have
constructed it of black stone? Why not have sought out the pure white
lime-rocks of the flat country, or the grey granite of the hills? This
is the deep lava of the neighbouring volcanic quarry; here basalt, and
pumice, and cinder, and scoriA|, are pressed into the service of the
architect; and there stands a proof of the goodness of the
material--hard, sharp, and sonorous, as when the hammer first clinked
against its edge five centuries ago.

"Entrons, Monsieur," said the fair Marquise, as I stood with her on the
esplanade before the Cathedral--the Marquis had gone to see the
commandant. "Entrez donc, 'tis the work of one of your compatriots; and
here, though a heretic, you may consider yourself on English ground."

Now, positively, I had never thought a bit about Catholic or Protestant
ever since I had quitted my own shores. All I knew was, that I was in a
country that gave the same evidences of being Christian as the one that
I had left; and that, however frivolous and profligate might be the
appearance of its capital, in the rural districts, at least, the people
were honest and devout. I was not come to quarrel, nor to find fault
with millions of men for thinking differently from--but perhaps acting
better than--myself. So we entered.

The old keeper of the _benitier_ bowed his head, and extended his brush;
the Marquise touched its extremity, crossed herself, and fell on her
knees.

Thou fell spirit of pride, prejudice, ignorance, and _mauvaise honte!_
why didst thou beset me at that moment, and keep me, like a stiff-backed
puritan, erect in the house of God? Why, on entering within its sacred
limits, did I not acknowledge my own unworthiness to come in, and
reverence the sanctity of the place? No; there I stood, half-astonished,
half-abashed while the Marquise continued on her knees and made her
silent orisons. 'Tis an admirable and a touching custom: there is poetry
and religion in the very idea. Cross not that threshold with unholy
feet; or if thou dost, confess that unholiness, and beg forgiveness for
the transgression ere thou advancest within the walls. I acknowledge
that I felt ashamed of myself; yet I knew not what to do. One of the
priests passed by: he looked first at the lady and next at me; then
humbly bowing towards the altar, went out of the church. My
embarrassment increased; but the Marquise arose. "It is good to pray
here," she said, in a tone the mildness and sincerity of which made the
reproach more cutting. "Let us go forward now."

"I will amend my manners," thought I; "'tis not well to be unconcerned
in such things, and when so little makes all the difference."

"Is Monsieur fond of pictures? Look at that painting of the Baptist, how
vigorously the figure is drawn! And see what an exquisite Virgin! Or
turn your eyes to that southern window, and remark the flood of gorgeous
light falling from it on the pillar by its side!"

I was thinking of any thing but the Virgin, or the window, or the light;
I was thinking of my companion--so fair, and so devout. Had she not
called me a heretic? Had she not already put me to the blush for my lack
of veneration? Strange linking of ideas! "Thou art worthy to be an angel
hereafter," said I to myself, "as truly thou resemblest what we call
angels here."

We were once more at the western door; Madame crossed herself again; we
went out.

"Pour l'amour de Dieu, mon bon monsieur!" "Que le ciel vous soit
ouvert!" whined out half-a-dozen old crones with extended hands; their
shrivelled fingers seeking to pluck at any thing they could get.

Now I had paid away my last sous to the garASec.on d'A(C)curie at the Poste: so
I told them pettishly that I had not a liard to give. A coin tinkled on
the ground; it had fallen from the hand of the Marquise; and as I
stooped to reach it for her, I saw that it was gold.

"Let them have it, poor things. I thought it was silver; but it has
touched holy ground, and 'tis now their own."

I turned round, thrust my purse into the lap of the nearest, and with a
light heart led the lady back to the hotel.




POEMS BY ELIZABETH BARRETT BARRETT.


    A WOMAN'S SHORTCOMINGS.

    1.
    SHE has laughed as softly as if she sighed;
      She has counted six and over,
    Of a purse well filled, and a heart well tried--
      Oh, each a worthy lover!
    They "give her time;" for her soul must slip
      Where the world has set the grooving:
    She will lie to none with her fair red lip--
      But love seeks truer loving.

    2.
    She trembles her fan in a sweetness dumb,
      As her thoughts were beyond her recalling;
    With a glance for _one_, and a glance for _some_,
      From her eyelids rising and falling!
    --Speaks common words with a blushful air;
      --Hears bold words, unreproving:
    But her silence says--what she never will swear--
      And love seeks better loving.

    3.
    Go, lady! lean to the night-guitar,
      And drop a smile to the bringer;
    Then smile as sweetly, when he is far,
      At the voice of an in-door singer!
    Bask tenderly beneath tender eyes;
      Glance lightly, on their removing;
    And join new vows to old perjuries--
      But dare not call it loving!

    4.
    Unless you can think, when the song is done,
      No other is soft in the rhythm;
    Unless you can feel, when left by One,
      That all men beside go with him;
    Unless you can know, when unpraised by his breath,
      That your beauty itself wants proving;
    Unless you can swear--"For life, for death!"--
      Oh, fear to call it loving!

    5.
    Unless you can muse, in a crowd all day,
      On the absent face that fixed you;
    Unless you can love, as the angels may,
      With the breadth of heaven betwixt you;
    Unless you can dream that his faith is fast,
      Through behoving and unbehoving;
    Unless you can _die_ when the dream is past--
      Oh, never call it loving!


    A MAN'S REQUIREMENTS.

    1.
    Love me, sweet, with all thou art,
      Feeling, thinking, seeing,--
    Love me in the lightest part,
      Love me in full being.

    2.
    Love me with thine open youth
      In its frank surrender;
    With the vowing of thy mouth,
      With its silence tender.

    3.
    Love me with thine azure eyes,
      Made for earnest granting!
    Taking colour from the skies,
      Can heaven's truth be wanting?

    4.
    Love me with their lids, that fall
      Snow-like at first meeting!
    Love me with thine heart, that all
      The neighbours then see beating.

    5.
    Love me with thine hand stretched out
      Freely--open-minded!
    Love me with thy loitering foot,--
      Hearing one behind it.

    6.
    Love me with thy voice, that turns
      Sudden faint above me!
    Love me with thy blush that burns
      When I murmur '_Love me!_'

    7.
    Love me with thy thinking soul--
      Break it to love-sighing;
    Love me with thy thoughts that roll
      On through living--dying.

    8.
    Love me in thy gorgeous airs,
      When the world has crowned thee!
    Love me, kneeling at thy prayers,
      With the angels round thee.

    9.
    Love me pure, as musers do,
      Up the woodlands shady!
    Love me gaily, fast, and true,
      As a winsome lady.

    10.
    Through all hopes that keep us brave,
      Further off or nigher,
    Love me for the house and grave,--
      And for something higher.

    11.
    Thus, if thou wilt prove me, dear,
      Woman's love no fable,
    _I_ will love _thee_--half-a-year--
      As a man is able.


    MAUDE'S SPINNING.

    1.
    He listened at the porch that day
      To hear the wheel go on, and on,
    And then it stopped--ran back away--
      While through the door he brought the sun.
      But now my spinning is all done.

    2.
    He sate beside me, with an oath
      That love ne'er ended, once begun;
    I smiled--believing for us both,
      What was the truth for only one.
      And now my spinning is all done.

    3.
    My mother cursed me that I heard
      A young man's wooing as I spun.
    Thanks, cruel mother, for that word,
      For I have, since, a harder known!
      And now my spinning is all done.

    4.
    I thought--O God!--my first-born's cry
      Both voices to my ear would drown!
    I listened in mine agony----
      It was the _silence_ made me groan!
      And now my spinning is all done.

    5.
    Bury me 'twixt my mother's grave,
      Who cursed me on her death-bed lone,
    And my dead baby's--(God it save!)
      Who, not to bless me, would not moan.
      And now my spinning is all done.

    6.
    A stone upon my heart and head,
      But no name written on the stone!
    Sweet neighbours! whisper low instead,
      "This sinner was a loving one--
      And now her spinning is all done."

    7.
    And let the door ajar remain,
      In case that he should pass anon;
    And leave the wheel out very plain,
      That HE, when passing in the sun,
      May _see_ the spinning is all done.


    A DEAD ROSE.

    1.
        O rose! who dares to name thee?
    No longer roseate now, nor soft, nor sweet;
    But barren, and hard, and dry, as stubble-wheat,
      Kept seven years in a drawer--thy titles shame thee.

    2.
        The breeze that used to blow thee
    Between the hedge-thorns, and take away
    An odour up the lane to last all day,--
      If breathing now,--unsweetened would forego thee.

    3.
        The sun that used to light thee,
    And mix his glory in thy gorgeous urn,
    Till beam appeared to bloom, and flower to burn,--
      If shining now,--with not a hue would dight thee.

    4.
        The dew that used to wet thee,
    And, white first, grow incarnadined, because
    It lay upon thee where the crimson was,--
      If dropping now,--would darken where it met thee.

    5.
        The fly that lit upon thee,
    To stretch the tendrils of its tiny feet,
    Along the leaf's pure edges after heat,--
      If lighting now,--would coldly overrun thee.

    6.
        The bee that once did suck thee,
    And build thy perfumed ambers up his hive,
    And swoon in thee for joy, till scarce alive,--
      If passing now,--would blindly overlook thee.

    7.
        The heart doth recognise thee,
    Alone, alone! The heart doth smell thee sweet,
    Doth view thee fair, doth judge thee most complete--
      Though seeing now those changes that disguise thee.

    8.
        Yes and the heart doth owe thee
    More love, dead rose! than to such roses bold
    As Julia wears at dances, smiling cold!----
      Lie still upon this heart--which breaks below thee!


    CHANGE ON CHANGE.

    1.
    Three months ago, the stream did flow,
      The lilies bloomed along the edge;
    And we were lingering to and fro,--
    Where none will track thee in this snow,
      Along the stream, beside the hedge.
    Ah! sweet, be free to come and go;
      For if I do not hear thy foot,
      The frozen river is as mute,--
      The flowers have dried down to the root;
      And why, since these be changed since May,
        Shouldst _thou_ change less than _they_?

    2.
    And slow, slow as the winter snow,
      The tears have drifted to mine eyes;
    And my two cheeks, three months ago,
    Set blushing at thy praises so,
      Put paleness on for a disguise.
    Ah! sweet, be free to praise and go;
      For if my face is turned to pale,
      It was thine oath that first did fail,--
      It was thy love proved false and frail!
      And why, since these be changed, I trow,
        Should _I_ change less than _thou_?


    A REED.

    I am no trumpet, but a reed!
    No flattering breath shall from me lead
      A silver sound, a hollow sound!
    I will not ring, for priest or king,
    One blast that, in re-echoing,
      Would leave a bondsman faster bound.

    I am no trumpet, but a reed,--
    A broken reed, the wind indeed
      Left flat upon a dismal shore!
    Yet if a little maid, or child,
    Should sigh within it, earnest-mild,
      This reed will answer evermore.

    I am no trumpet, but a reed!
    Go, tell the fishers, as they spread
      Their nets along the river's edge,--
    I will not tear their nets at all,
    Nor pierce their hands--if they should fall:
      Then let them leave me in the sedge.


    HECTOR IN THE GARDEN.

    1.
    Nine years old! First years of any
      Seem the best of all that come!--
      Yet when _I_ was nine, I said
      Unlike things!--I thought, instead,
    That the Greeks used just as many
      In besieging Ilium.

    2.
    Nine green years had scarcely brought me
      To my childhood's haunted spring,--
      I had life, like flowers and bees,
      In betwixt the country trees,
    And the sun, the pleasure, taught me
      Which he teacheth every thing.

    3.
    If the rain fell, there was sorrow;--
      Little head leant on the pane,--
      Little finger tracing down it
      The long trailing drops upon it,--
    And the "Rain, rain, come to-morrow,"
      Said for charm against the rain.

    4.
    And the charm was right Canidian,
      Though you meet it with a jeer!
      If I said it long enough,
      Then the rain hummed dimly off;
    And the thrush, with his pure Lydian,
      Was the loudest sound to hear.

    5.
    And the sun and I together
      Went a-rushing out of doors!
      We, our tender spirits, drew
      Over hill and dale in view,
    Glimmering hither, glimmering thither,
      In the footsteps of the showers.

    6.
    Underneath the chestnuts dripping,
      Through the grasses wet and fair,
      Straight I sought my garden-ground,
      With the laurel on the mound;
    And the pear-tree oversweeping
      A side-shadow of green air.

    7.
    While hard by, there lay supinely
      A huge giant, wrought of spade!
      Arms and legs were stretched at length,
      In a passive giant strength,--
    And the meadow turf, cut finely,
      Round them laid and interlaid.

    8.
    Call him Hector, son of Priam!
      Such his title and degree.
      With my rake I smoothed his brow,
      And his cheeks I weeded through:
    But a rhymer such as I am
      Scarce can sing his dignity.

    9.
    Eyes of gentianella's azure,
      Staring, winking at the skies;
      Nose of gillyflowers and box;
      Scented grasses, put for locks--
    Which a little breeze, at pleasure,
      Set a-waving round his eyes.

    10.
    Brazen helm of daffodillies,
      With a glitter for the light;
      Purple violets, for the mouth,
      Breathing perfumes west and south;
    And a sword of flashing lilies,
      Holden ready for the fight.

    11.
    And a breastplate, made of daisies,
      Closely fitting, leaf by leaf;
      Periwinkles interlaced
      Drawn for belt about the waist;
    While the brown bees, humming praises,
      Shot their arrows round the chief.

    12.
    And who knows, (I sometimes wondered,)
      If the disembodied soul
      Of old Hector, once of Troy,
      Might not take a dreary joy
    Here to enter--if it thundered,
      Rolling up the thunder-roll?

    13.
    Rolling this way, from Troy-ruin,
      To this body rude and rife,
      He might enter and take rest
      'Neath the daisies of the breast--
    They, with tender roots, renewing
     His heroic heart to life.

    14.
    Who could know? I sometimes started
      At a motion or a sound;
      Did his mouth speak--naming Troy,
      With an I?I"I?I"I?I"I?I"I?I?
    Did the pulse of the Strong-hearted
      Make the daisies tremble round?

    15.
    It was hard to answer, often!
      But the birds sang in the tree--
      But the little birds sang bold,
      In the pear-tree green and old;
    And my terror seemed to soften,
     Through the courage of their glee.

    16.
    Oh, the birds, the trees, the ruddy
      And white blossoms, sleek with rain!
      Oh, my garden, rich with pansies!
      Oh, my childhood's bright romances!
    All revive, like Hector's body,
      And I see them stir again!

    17.
    And despite life's changes--chances,
      And despite the deathbell's toll,
      They press on me in full seeming!--
      Help, some angel! stay this dreaming!
    As the birds sang in the branches,
      Sing God's patience through my soul!

    18.
    That no dreamer, no neglecter,
      Of the present's work unsped,
      I may wake up and be doing,
      Life's heroic ends pursuing,
    Though my past is dead as Hector,
      And though Hector is twice dead.




THE CONDE'S DAUGHTER.


"I SHOULD think we cannot be very far from our destination by this
time."

"Why, were one to put faith in my appetite, we must have been at least a
good four or five hours _en route_ already; and if our Rosinantes are
not able to get over a _misA"re_ of thirty or forty miles without making
as many grimaces about it as they do now, they are not the animals I
took them for."

"Come, come--abuse your own as much as you please, but this much I will
say for my Nero, though he has occasionally deposited me on the
roadside, he is not apt to sleep upon the way at least. Nay, so sure am
I of him, that I would wager you ten Napoleons that we are not more than
four or five miles from the _chateau_ at this moment."

"_Pas si bAte, mon cher._ I am not fool enough to put my precious Naps
in jeopardy, just when I am so deucedly in want of them, too. But a
truce to this nonsense. Do you know, Ernest, seriously speaking, I am
beginning to think we are great fools for our pains, running our heads
into a perilous adventure, with the almost certainty of a severe
reprimand from the general, which, I think, even your filial
protestations will scarcely save you from, if ever we return alive; and
merely to see, what, I dare say, after all, will turn out to be only a
pretty face."

"What!--already faint-hearted!--A miracle of beauty such as Darville
described is well worth periling one's neck to gaze upon. Besides, is
not that our vocation?--and as for reprimands, if you got one as often
as I do, you would soon find out that those things are nothing when one
is used to them."

"A miracle!--ah, bah! It was the romance of the scene, and the artful
grace of the costume, which fascinated his eyes."

"No, no! be just. Recollect that it was not Darville alone, but
Delavigne; and even that _connoisseur_ in female beauty, Monbreton
himself, difficult as he is, declared that she was perfect. She must be
a wonder, indeed, when he could find no fault with her."

"Be it so. I warn you beforehand that I am fully prepared to be
disappointed. However, as we are so far embarked in the affair, I
suppose we must accomplish it."

"Most assuredly, unless you wish to be the laughing-stock of the whole
regiment for the next month; for notwithstanding Darville's boasted
powers of discretion, half the subalterns, no doubt, are in possession
of the secret of our _escapade_ by this time."

"Well, then, Ernest, as we are launched on this wise expedition, let me
sermonise a small portion of prudence into that most giddy brain of
yours. Remember that, after all, if those ruthless Spaniards were to
discover the trick we are playing them, they would probably make us pay
rather too dearly for the frolic. In short, Ernest, I am very much
afraid that your _A(C)tourderie_ will let the light rather too soon into
the thick skulls of those magnificent hidalgos."

"Preach away--I listen in all humility."

"Ernest, Ernest, I give you up; you are incorrigible!" rejoined the
other, turning away to hide the laugh which the irresistibly comic
expression his friend threw into his countenance had excited.

And who were the speakers of this short dialogue? Two dashing,
spirited-looking young men, who, at the close of it, reined in their
steeds, in the dilemma of not knowing where to direct them. Theirs was,
indeed, a wild-goose chase. Their _Chateau en Espagne_ seemed invisible,
as such _chateaux_ usually are; and where it might be found, who was
there to tell?--Not one. The scene was a desert--not even a bird
animated it; and just before them branched out three roads from the one
they had hitherto confidently pursued.

After a moment's silence, the cavaliers both burst into a gay laugh.

"Here's a puzzle, Alphonse!" said the one. "Which of the three roads do
you opine?"

"The left, by all means," replied the other; "I generally find it leads
me right."

"But if it shouldn't now?"

"Why, then, it only leads us wrong."

"But I don't choose to go wrong."

"And what have you been doing ever since you set out?"

"True; but as we are far enough now from that point, we must e'en make
the best of the bad."

"Well, why don't you?"

"Why, if one only knew which was the best."

At this moment the tinkling of a mule's bells, mingled with the song of
the muleteer, came on the air.

"Hist! here comes counsel," exclaimed the young man whom the other named
Ernest. "Holla, seA+-or hidalgo! do you know the castle of the Conde di
Miranda?"

"Yes."

"Where is it?"

"Where it was."

"Near?"

"That's as one finds it."

"And how shall we find it?"

"By reaching it."

"Come, come, hidalgo mio."

"I'm no hidalgo," said the man roughly.

"But you ought to be. I've seen many less deserving of it," resumed the
traveller.

"I dare say," retorted the muleteer.

"If you'll conduct us within view of the castle you shall be rewarded."

"As I should well deserve."

"Ah, your deserts may be greater than our purse."

But the man moved on.

"Halte-lA , friend! I like your company so well that I must have it a
little longer." And the officer pulled out a pistol. "Will you, or will
you not, guide us to the castle of the Conde?"

"I will," gruffly replied the man, with a look which showed that he was
sorry to be forced to choose the second alternative.

"Can we trust this fellow?" said the younger officer to the elder.

"No--but we can ourselves; and keep a sharp look-out."

"Besides, I shall give him a hint. Hidalgo mio----" he began.

"SeA+-or _Franzese_," interrupted the muleteer.

"What puts that into your head, hidalgo? _Franzese_,--why, Don Felix y
Cortos, y Sargas, y Nos, y Tierras, y, y,--don't you know an Englishman
when you see him?"

"Yes," muttered the Spaniard--"Yes, and a Frenchman, too."

"No, you don't, for here's the proof. Why, what are we, but English
officers, carrying despatches to your Conde from our General?"

The muleteer looked doubtingly.

"Why, do you suppose Frenchmen would trust themselves amongst such a set
of"--

"Patriots." Exclaimed the other stranger, hastily.

"All I say;" observed the man drily, "is, that if you are friends of the
Conde, he will treat you as you deserve. If enemies, the same. So,
backward."

"Onward, you mean."

"Ay, for me; but not for you, seA+-ores, you have left the castle a mile
to the left."

"I guessed right, you see," said Alphonse, "when I guessed left."

The muleteer passed on, and the horsemen followed.

"I say, hidalgo mio," called out Ernest, "what sort of a don is this
same Conde?"

"As how?" inquired the muleteer.

"Is he rich?"

"Yes."

"Proud?"

"Yes."

"Old?"

"No."

"Has he a wife?"

"No."

"Has he children?"

"No."

"No!" exclaimed the cavalier with surprise. "No child!"

"You said children, seA+-or."

"He has a child, then?"

"Yes."

"A son?"

"No."

"A daughter?"

"Yes."

"Why, yes and no seems all you have got to say."

"It seems to answer all you have got to ask, seA+-or."

"Is the DoA+-a very handsome?" interrupted Alphonse, impatiently.

"Yes and no, according to taste," replied the muleteer.

"He laughs at us," whispered Ernest in French. The conversation with the
muleteer had been, thus far, carried on in Spanish--which Ernest spoke
fairly enough. But the observation he thoughtlessly uttered in French
seemed to excite the peasant's attention.

"Do you speak English?" asked Ernest.

"Yes," was the reply, in English. "Do you?"

"Me English? ab course. Speak well English," replied Ernest, in the true
Gallic-idiom. Then relapsing into the more familiar tongue, he added,
"But in Spain I speak Spanish."

By this time the trio had arrived within view of a large castellated
building, whose ancient towers, glowing in the last rays of the setting
sun, rose majestically from the midst of groves of dark cypress and
myrtle which surrounded it.

The muleteer stopped. "There, seA+-ores," he said, "stands the castle of
the Conde. Half-a-mile further on lies the town of R----, to which,
seA+-ores," he added, with a sarcastic smile, "you can proceed, should you
not find it convenient to remain at the _Castello_. And now, I presume,
as I have guided you so far right, you will suffer me to resume my own
direction."

"Yes, as there seems no possibility of making any more mistakes on our
way, you are free," replied the gravest of the two. "But stop one moment
yet, _amigo_," and he pointed to a cross-road which, a little further
on, diverged from the _camino real_, "where does that lead to?"

"Amigo!" muttered the man between his teeth, "say _enemigo_ rather!"

"An answer to my question, _villano_," said the young Frenchman,
haughtily--while his hand instinctively groped for the hilt of his
sword.

"To R----," replied the man, as he turned silently and sullenly to
retrace his steps.

"Holla, there!" Ernest called out; "you have forgotten your money;" and
he held out a purse, but the man was gone. "_Va donc, et que le diable
t'emporte, brutal!_" added Ernest de Lucenay; taking good care, however,
this time, that the ebullition of his feelings was not loud enough to
reach the ears of the retreating peasant. "Confound it! I would rather
follow the track of a tiger through the pathless depth of an Indian
jungle alone, than be led by such a savage _cicerone_."

"Never mind the fellow; we have more than enough to think of in our own
affairs," exclaimed his friend, impatiently. "Let us stop here a moment
and consult, before we proceed any further. One thing is evident, at all
events, that we must contrive to disguise ourselves better if we wish to
pass for any thing but Frenchmen. With my knowledge of the English
language, and acquaintance with their manners and habits, trifling as it
is, I am perfectly certain of imposing on the Spaniards, without any
difficulty; but you will as certainly cause a blow up, unless you manage
to alter your whole style and appearance. I daresay you have forgotten
all my instructions already."

"Bah! Alphonse. Let me alone for puzzling the dons; I'll be as complete
a _Goddam_ in five minutes as any stick you ever saw, I warrant you."

"Nothing can appear more perfectly un-English than you do at present.
That _A(C)veillA(C)_ look of yours is the very devil;" and Alphonse shook his
head, despondingly.

"Incredulous animal! just hold Nero for five minutes, and you shall have
ocular demonstration of my powers of acting. _Parbleu!_ you shall see
that I can be solemn and awkward enough to frighten half the _petites
maA(R)tresses_ of Paris into the vapours." And, so saying, De Lucenay
sprang from his saddle, and consigning the bridle into his friend's
hands, ran towards a little brook, which trickled through the grass at a
short distance from the roadside; but not before he had made his friend
promise to abstain from casting any profane glances on his toilet till
it was accomplished.

Wisely resolving to avoid temptation, Alphonse turned away, when, to his
surprise, he perceived the muleteer halting on a rising ground at a
little distance. "By Jove! that insolent dog has been watching us.
Scoundrel, will you move on?" he exclaimed in French, raising his voice
angrily, when, suddenly recollecting himself, he terminated the
unfinished phrase by "_Sigue tu camin! Picaro! Bribon!_" while he shook
his pistol menacingly at the man's head--a threat which did not seem to
intimidate him much, for, though he resumed his journey, his rich
sonorous voice burst triumphantly forth into one of the patriotic songs;
and long after he had disappeared from their eyes, the usual
_ritournelle_, "_Viva_ Fernando! _Muera_ Napoleon!" rang upon the air.

This short interval had more than sufficed for De Lucenay's mysterious
operations. And before his friend was tired of fuming and sacreing
against Spain and Spaniards, Ernest tapped him on the shoulder, and for
once both the young officer's anger and habitual gravity vanished in an
uncontrollable fit of laughter. "By Jupiter! it is incredible," he
gasped forth, as soon as returning breath would allow him to speak:
while Ernest stood silently enjoying his surprise.

"Well, what think you? It will do, will it not? Are you still in fear of
a _fiasco_?"

"Nay! My only fear now is, that the pupil will eclipse the master, and
that the more shining light of your talents will cast mine utterly into
the shade. By heavens! the transformation is inimitable. Your own father
would not know you."

"He would not be the only one in such an unhappy case, then."

Nothing certainly could have been more absurd than the complete
metamorphosis which, in those few moments, De Lucenay had contrived to
make in his appearance. With the aid of a little fresh water from the
rivulet, he had managed to reduce the rich curly locks of his chesnut
hair to an almost Quaker flatness; the shirt collar, which had been
turned down, was now drawn up to his cheek-bones, and with his hat
placed perpendicularly on the crown of his head, one arm crossed under
the tails of his coat, and the other balancing his whip, its handle
resting on his lips, the corners of which were drawn puritanically down,
and his half-closed eyes staring vacantly on the points of his boots, he
stood the living picture of an automaton.

"Well, would you not swear that I was a regular _boule-dog Anglais_?"
exclaimed Earnest, stalking up and down for his friend's inspection,
while he rounded his shoulders, and carried his chin in the air, in
order to increase the resemblance.

"Excellent!--only not so much _laisser aller_; a little more stiff--more
drawn up! That will do--oh, it's perfect!" And again Alphonse burst into
a peal of laughter, in which De Lucenay, notwithstanding his
newly-assumed gravity, could not refrain from joining.

"Let me see,--That coat fits a great deal too well, too close. We must
rip out some of the wadding, just to let it make a few wrinkles; it
ought to hang quite loosely, in order to be in character."

"Gently, _mon cher_!" interposed De Lucenay, as his friend drew out a
pen-knife. "To satisfy you, I have injured the sit of my cravat, I have
hidden the classic contour of my neck, I have destroyed the
AntinAus-like effect of my _coiffure_--those curls which were the
despair of all my rivals in conquest--I have consented to look like a
wretch impaled, and thus renounce all the _bonnes fortunes_ that awaited
me during the next four-and-twenty hours; and now you venture to
propose, with the coolest audacity, that I should crown all these
sacrifices by utterly destroying the symmetry of my figure. No, no, _mon
cher_! that is too much; cut yourself up as you please, but spare your
friend."

"_Vive Dieu!_" laughed Alphonse. "It is lucky that you have absorbed
such an unreasonable proportion of vanity that you have left none for
me. To spare the acuteness of your feelings, I will be the victim. Here
goes!" And, so saying, he ripped up the lining of his coat, and
scattered a few handfuls of wadding to the winds. "Will that do?"

"Oh, capitally! I would rather you wore it than me; it has as many
wrinkles as St Marceau's forehead."

"Forward, then, _et vogue la galA"re!_" exclaimed Alphonse, as De
Lucenay vaulted into his saddle, and the cavaliers spurred on their
horses to a rapid canter.

"_Apropos!_" exclaimed De Lucenay, as they approached the castle; "we
ought to lay our plans, and make a proper arrangement beforehand, like
honest, sociable brothers-in-arms; it would never do to stand in each
other's light, and mar our mutual hopes of success by cutting each
others' throats for the sake of the _bella_."

"Oh, as for me, you are welcome to all my interest in the DoA+-a's heart
beforehand; for I never felt less disposed to fall in love than I do at
present."

"You are delightful in theory, _caro mio_; but as your practice might be
somewhat different, suppose we make a little compact, upon fair terms,
viz., that the choice is to depend on the seA+-ora herself; that whoever
she distinguishes, the other is to relinquish his claims at once, and
thenceforth devote all his energies to the assistance of his friend. We
cannot both carry her off, you know; so it is just as well to settle all
these little particulars in good time."

"Oh! as you please. I am quite willing to sign and seal any compact that
will set your mind at rest; though, for my part, I declare off
beforehand."

"Well, then, it is a done thing; give me your hand on it. _Parole
d'honneur!_" said De Lucenay, stretching out his.

"_Parole d'honneur_," returned his friend, with a smile.

"But to return to the elopement"--

"Gad! How you fly on! There will be two words to that part of the story,
I suspect. DoA+-a Inez will probably not be quite so easily charmed as our
dear little _grisettes_; and she must be consulted, I suppose; unless,
indeed, you intend to carry the fort by storm; the current of your love
nay not flow as smoothly as you expect."

"Oh, as for that, leave it to me. Spanish women have too good a taste,
and we Frenchmen are too irresistible to leave me any fears on that
score; besides, she must be devilishly difficult if neither of us suit
her. You are dark, and I fair--you are pensive, and I gay--you poetic,
and I witty. The deuce is in it, if she does not fall in love with
either one or other!

"Add to which, the private reservation, no doubt, that if she has one
atom of discernment, it is a certain _volage_, giddy, young aide-de-camp
that she will select."

"Why, if I had but fair play; but as my tongue will not be allowed to
shine, I must leave the captivation part to my _yeux doux_. Who knows,
though?"----

"Oh, _vanitas vanitatum!_" exclaimed Alphonse, with a laugh.

"I might say the same of a certain rebellious aristocrat, who lays claim
to the euphonious patronymic of La Tour d'Auvergne, with a pedigree that
dates from the Flood, and a string of musty ancestors who might put the
patriarchs to the blush; but I am more generous;" and De Lucenay began
carelessly to hum a few bars of La Carmagnole.

"Softly!" said his more prudent friend. "We are drawing near the
chateau, and you might as well wear a cockade _tricolor_ as let them
hear that."

It was an antique, half-Gothic, half-Saracenic looking edifice, which
they now approached. A range of light arcades, whose delicate columns,
wreathed round with the most graceful foliage, seemed almost too slight
to sustain the massive structure which rose above them, surrounded the
_pian terreno_. Long tiers of pointed windows, mingled with exquisite
fretwork, and one colossal balcony, with a rich crimson awning,
completed the faASec.ade. Beneath the _portico_, numbers of servants and
retainers were lounging about, enjoying the _fresco_. Some, stretched
out at full length on the marble benches that lined the open arcades,
were fast asleep; others, seated _A  la Turque_ upon the ground, were
busily engaged in a noisy game of cards. But the largest group of all
had collected round a handsome Moorish-looking Andalusian, who, leaning
against the wall, was lazily rasping the chords of a guitar that was
slung over his shoulder, while he sang one of those charming little
Tiranas, to which he _improvised_ the usual nonsense words as he
proceeded; anon the deep mellow voices of his auditory would mingle
with the "_Ay de mi chaira mia! Luz de mi alma!_" &c. of the
_ritournelle_, and then again the soft deep tones of the Andalusian rang
alone upon the air.

As no one seemed to heed their approach, the two young men stood for a
few moments in silence, listening delightedly to the music, which now
melted into the softer strain of a Seguidilla, now brightened into the
more brilliant measure of a Bolero. Suddenly, in the midst of it, the
singer broke off, and springing on his feet as if inspired, he dashed
his hands across the strings. Like an electric shock, the well-known
chords of the Tragala aroused his hearers--every one crowded round the
singer. The players threw down their cards, the loungers stood
immovable, even the sleepers started into life; and all chorusing in
enthusiastically, a burst of melody arose of which no one unacquainted
with the rich and thrilling harmony peculiar to Spanish voices, can form
an idea.

"Ernest," said La Tour d'Auvergne in a whisper, "we shall never conquer
such a people: Napoleon himself cannot do it."

"Perhaps," replied his friend in the same tone. "They are desperately
national; it will be tough work, at all events. But, come on; as the
song is finished, we have some chance of making ourselves heard now."
And De Lucenay spurred his horse up to the entrance. At their repeated
calls for attendance, two or three servants hastened out of the
vestibule and held their horses as they dismounted. They became
infinitely more attentive, however, on hearing that the strangers were
English officers, the bearers of dispatches to their master; and a dark
Figaro-looking laquey, in whose lively roguish countenance the Frenchmen
would have had no difficulty in recognising a Biscayan, even without the
aid of his national and picturesque costume, offered to usher them into
the presence of the Conde.

Their guide led the way through the long and lofty vestibule, which
opened on a superb marble colonnade that encircled the patio or court,
in the centre of which two antique and richly-sculptured fountains were
casting up their glittering _jets-d'eau_ in the proscribed form of
_fleurs-de-lis_, to be received again in two wide porphyry basins.
Traversing the _patio_, they ascended a fine marble staircase, from the
first flight of which branched off several suites of apartments. Taking
the one to the right, the young men had full leisure to observe the
splendour that surrounded them, as they slowly followed their conductor
from one long line of magnificent rooms into another. Notwithstanding
many modern alterations, the character of the whole building was too
evidently Eastern to admit a doubt as to its Moorish origin. Every where
the most precious marbles, agates, and lapis-lazuli, oriental jasper,
porphyry of every variety, dazzled the eye. In the centre of many of the
rooms there played a small fountain; in others there were four, one in
each angle. Large divans of the richest crimson and violet brocades
lined the walls, while ample curtains of the same served in lieu of
doors. But what particularly struck the friends was the brilliant beauty
of the arabesques that covered the ceilings, and the exquisite
chiselling of the cornices, and the framework of the windows.

"The palace is beautiful, is it not?" said the Biscayan, as he perceived
the admiring glances they cast around them. "It ought to be, for it was
one of the summer dwellings of _il rey Moro_; and those _ereticos
malditos_ cared but little what treasures they lavished on their
pleasures. It came into my master's possession as a descendant of the
Cid, to whom it was given as a guerdon for his services."

"What a numerous progeny that famous hero must have had! He was a
wonderful man!" exclaimed De Lucenay, with extreme gravity.

"_Si, seA+-or--un hombre maravilloso en verdad_," replied the Spaniard,
whom, notwithstanding his natural acuteness, the seriousness of De
Lucenay's manner and countenance had prevented from discovering the
irony of his words. "But now seA+-ores," he continued, as they reached a
golden tissue-draped door, "we are arrived. The next room is the
_comedor_, where the family are at supper."

"Then, perhaps, we had better wait a while. We would not wish to
disturb them."

"Oh, by no means! The Conde would be furious if you were kept waiting an
instant. The English are great favourites of his. Besides, they must
have finished by this time." And raising the curtain, they entered an
immense frescoed hall, which was divided in the centre by a sort of
transparent partition of white marble, some fourteen or fifteen feet in
height, so delicately pierced and chiseled, that it resembled lace-work
much more than stone. A pointed doorway, supported by twisted columns,
as elaborately carved and ornamented as the rest, opened into the upper
part of the hall, which was elevated a step higher. In the centre of
this, a table was superbly laid out with a service of massive gold;
while the fumes of the viands was entirely overpowered by the heavy
perfume of the colossal _bouquets_ of flowers which stood in sculptured
silver and gold vases on the plateau. Around the table were seated about
twenty persons, amongst whom the usual sprinkling of _sacerdotes_ was
not wanting. A stern, but noble-looking man sat at the upper end of the
table, and seemed to do the honours to the rest of the company.

The Conde--for it was he--rose immediately on receiving the message
which the young officers had sent in; while they waited its answer in
the oriel window, being unwilling to break in so unceremoniously upon a
party which seemed so much larger, and more formal, than any they had
been prepared to meet. Their host received them most courteously as they
presented their credentials--namely, a letter from the English general,
Wilson, who commanded the forces stationed at the city of S----, about
sixty miles distant from the chateau. As the Conde ran his glance over
its contents,--in which the general informed him that within three or
four days he would reach R----, when he intended to avail himself of the
Conde's often proffered hospitality, till when he recommended his two
aides-de-camp to his kindness,--the politeness of their welcome changed
to the most friendly cordiality.

"SeA+-ores," he said, "I am most grateful to his excellency for the favour
he has conferred on me, in choosing my house during his stay here. I
feel proud and happy to shelter beneath my roof any of our valued and
brave allies.--But you must have had a hard day's ride of it, I should
think."

"Why, yes, it was a tolerable morning's work," replied De Lucenay, who
felt none of Alphonse's embarrassment.

"Pablo, place seats for their excellencies," said the Conde to one of
the domestics who stood around; while he motioned to the _soi-disant_
Englishmen to enter the supper-room, in which the clatter of tongues and
plates had sensibly diminished, ever since the commencement of the
mysterious conference which had been taking place beyond its precincts.
"You must be greatly in want of some refreshment, for the wretched
posadas on the road cannot have offered you any thing eatable."

"They were not very tempting, certainly; however, we are pretty well
used to them by this time," replied De Lucenay. "But, SeA+-or Conde,
really we are scarcely presentable in such a company," he added, as he
looked down on his dust-covered boots and dress.

"What matter? You must not be so ceremonious with us; you cannot be
expected to come off a journey as if you had just emerged from a lady's
boudoir," answered the Conde with a smile. "Besides, these are only a
few intimate friends who have assembled to celebrate my daughter's
fAte-day." And, so saying, he led them up to the table, and presented
them to the circle as Lord Beauclerc and Sir Edward Trevor,
aides-de-camp to General Wilson. "And now," he added, "I must introduce
you to the lady of the castle; my daughter, DoA+-a Inez;" and turning to a
slight elegant-looking girl, who might have been about sixteen or
seventeen, he said--"_Mi queridita_, these gentlemen have brought me the
welcome news that our friend the English general will be here in three
or four days at the latest; the corps will be quartered in the
neighbourhood, but the general and his aides-de-camp will reside with
us. Therefore, as they are likely to remain some time, we must all do
our utmost to render their stay amongst us as agreeable to them as
possible."

"I shall be most happy to contribute to it as far as it is in my slight
power," replied DoA+-a Inez in a low sweet voice, while she raised her
large lustrous eyes to those of Alphonse, which for the last five
minutes had been gazing as if transfixed upon her beautiful countenance.

Starting as if from a dream, he stammered out, "SeA+-orita, I----I----,"
when fortunately De Lucenay came to his assistance, with one of those
little well-turned flattering speeches for which French tact is so
unrivalled; and as the company politely made room for them, they seated
themselves beside her.

"Don Fernando," said the Conde to a haughty, grave-looking man, who sat
next to De Lucenay, while he resumed his place at the head of the table,
"you and Inez, I trust, will take care of our new friends. _Pobrecitos_,
they must be half famished by their day's expedition, and this late
hour."

But the recommendation was superfluous; every one vied with his
neighbour in attending to the two strangers, who, on their part, were
much more intent on contemplating the fair mistress of the mansion, than
on doing honour to the profusion of _friandises_ that were piled before
them.

DoA+-a Inez was indeed beautiful, beyond the usual measure of female
loveliness: imagination could not enhance, nor description give an idea
of the charm that fascinated all those who gazed upon her: features cast
in the most classic mould--a complexion that looked as if no southern
sun had ever smiled on it. But the eyes!--the large, dark, liquid orbs,
whose glance would now seem almost dazzling in its excessive brightness,
and now melted into all the softness of Oriental languor, as the long,
gloomy Circassian lashes drooped over them! As Alphonse looked upon her,
he could have almost fancied himself transported to Mohammed's paradise,
and taken the Spanish maiden for a houri; but that there was a soul in
those magnificent eyes--a nobleness in the white and lofty brow--a
dignity in the calm and pensive calmness, which spoke of higher and
better things.

But if her appearance enchanted him, her manners were not less winning;
unembarrassed and unaffected, her graceful and natural ease in a few
moments contrived to make them feel as much at home as another would
have done in as many hours. Much to the young Frenchmen's regret,
however, they were not long allowed to enjoy their _apartA(C)_ in quiet;
for a thin sallow-looking priest, whom DoA+-a Inez had already designated
to them as the _Padre Confessor_, interrupted them in a few minutes, and
the conversation became general.

"It is a great satisfaction to us all to see you here, seA+-ores," he
said. "First, as it procures us the pleasure of becoming personally
acquainted with our good friends and allies the English; and, secondly,
as a guarantee that we are not likely to have our sight polluted by any
of those sacrilegious demons the French, while you are amongst us."

"_Gracias a Dios!_" energetically rejoined the _cappellan_--a fat, rosy,
good-humoured looking old man, the very antipodes of his grim
_confrA"re_. "The saints preserve me from ever setting eyes on them
again! You must know, seA+-ores, that some six weeks ago I had gone to
collect some small sums due to the convent, and was returning quietly
home with a lay brother, when I had the misfortune to fall in with a
troop of those sons of Belial, whom I thought at least a hundred miles
off. Would you believe it, seA+-ores! without any respect for my religious
habit, the impious dogs laid violent hands on me; laughed in my face
when I told them I was almoner to the holy community of Sancta Maria de
los Dolores; and vowing that they were sure that my frock was well
lined, actually forced me to strip to the skin, in order to despoil me
of the treasure of the Church! Luckily, however the Holy Virgin had
inspired me to hide it in the mule's saddle-girths, and so, the zechins
escaped their greedy fangs. But I had enough of the fright; it laid me
up for a week. Misericordia! what a set of cut-throat, hideous-looking
ruffians! I thought I should never come alive out of their hands!"

"_Jesus!_" exclaimed a handsome bronzed-looking Castilian, whom De
Lucenay had heard addressed as DoA+-a Encarnacion de Almoceres; "are they
really so wicked and so frightful?"

"Without doubt; true demons incarnate," replied the veracious priest.

"Come, come, _reverendissimo padre_; you are too hard upon the poor
devils: I have seen a good-looking fellow amongst them, now and then."

"_Bondad sua, seA+-or_, I'll be sworn there is not one fit to tie the
latchet of your shoe in the whole army."

"Yet how strange, then," recommenced DoA+-a Encarnacion, "the infatuation
they excite! I am told that it is inconceivable the numbers of young
girls, from sixteen and upwards, who have abandoned their homes and
families to follow these brigands. Their want of mature years and
understanding," she continued, with a significant glance at DoA+-a
Inez--her indignation having been gradually aroused as she perceived the
admiration lavished on her by the strangers, and the indifference with
which they viewed her riper charms,--"may be one reason; but if the
French are so unattractive, such madness is inexplicable."

"Arts, unholy arts all!" cried the Confessor. "Their damnable practices
are the cause of it. They rob the damsels of their senses, with their
infernal potions and elixirs. The wretches are in league with the
devil."

"Assuredly," replied Don Fernando, gravely, "you must be right. No woman
in her senses would condescend to look at those insignificant triflers,
while a single _caballero_ of the true old type is to be found on
Spanish soil;" and he drew himself still more stiffly up.

"The Holy Virgin defend me from their snares!" fervently ejaculated a
thin wrinkled old woman, who until then might easily have been mistaken
for a mummy, casting her eye up to heaven, and crossing herself with the
utmost devotion.

A suppressed laugh spread its contagious influence all round the table.

"DoA+-a Estefania, have no fear; you possess an infallible preservative,"
exclaimed the cappellan.

"And what may that be?" responded the antiquated fair, somewhat sharply.

"Your piety and virtue, seA+-ora," rejoined the merry _cappellano_, with a
roguish smile, which was not lost on the rest of the company, though it
evidently escaped the obtuser perceptions of DoA+-a Estefania; for drawing
her mantilla gracefully around her, and composing her parched visage
into a look of modesty, she answered in a softened tone, while she waved
her _abanico_ timidly before her face, "Ah, _Padre Anselmo!_ you are too
partial; you flatter me!"

This was too much for the risible faculties of the audience; even the
grim Don Fernando's imperturbable mustache relaxed into a smile; while
to avert the burst of laughter which seemed on the point of exploding on
all sides, DoA+-a Inez interrupted----

"But, seA+-ora, I should hope there is much falsehood and exaggeration in
the reports you allude to. I trust there are few, if any, Spanish
maidens capable of so forgetting what is due to themselves and to their
country."

"Nevertheless, the contrary is the case," replied DoA+-a Encarnacion, with
asperity.

"Oh! no no--it cannot be! I will not believe it; it is calumnious--it is
impossible! What being, with one drop of Spanish blood within their
veins, would be so debased as to follow the invaders of their country,
the destroyers, the despoilers of their own land?" DoA+-a Inez, led away
by her own enthusiasm, coloured deeply, while DoA+-a Encarnacion seemed on
the point of making an angry retort, when the count gave the signal to
rise. The rest followed his example, and the Conde led the young
Frenchmen to a window, where he conversed a little with them, asked many
questions about the forces, about the general who was to be their
inmate, &c.--to all which De Lucenay's ready wit and inimitable _sang
froid_ furnished him with suitable and unhesitating replies. The Conde
then concluded with the information, that as there was to be rather a
larger tertulia than usual that evening, perhaps they would wish to make
some alteration in their dress before the company arrived.

The officers gladly availed themselves of the permission, and followed
the maggior-domo up a massive flight of stairs, into a handsome suite of
three or four rooms, assigned entirely to their use. After having
promenaded them through the whole extent of their new domicile, the
maggior-domo retired, leaving them to the attendance of their former
guide, Pedro, who was deputed to serve them in the capacity of
_valet-de-chambre_.

The young men were astonished at the magnificence of all that met their
eyes: walls covered with the finest tapestry; ewers and goblets of
chased and solid silver; even to the quilts and canopies of the bed,
stiff with gold embroidery. But they were too much absorbed by the
charms of the Conde's daughter, and too anxious to return to the centre
of attraction, to waste much time in admiring the splendour of their
quarters.

"How beautiful DoA+-a Inez is!" said De Lucenay, as, in spite of all
prudential considerations, he tried to force his glossy locks to resume
a less sober fashion. "She must have many admirers, I should think?"

"By the dozen," answered the Spaniard. "She is the pearl of Andalusia;
there is not a noble _caballero_ in the whole province that would not
sell his soul to obtain a smile from her."

"And who are the favoured ones at present?"

"Oh, she favours none; she is too proud to cast a look on any of them:
yet there are four hidalgos on the ranks at present, not one of whom the
haughtiest lady in Spain need disdain. Don Alvar de Mendoce, especially,
is a cavalier whose birth and wealth would entitle him to any thing
short of royalty; not to speak of the handsomest face, the finest
figure, and the sweetest voice for a serenade, of any within his most
Catholic Majesty's dominions."

"And is it possible that the DoA+-a can be obdurate to such irresistible
attractions?"

Pedro shrugged his shoulders. "Why, she has not absolutely refused him,
for the Conde favours his suit; but she vows she will not grant him a
thought till he has won his spurs, and proved his patriotism, by sending
at least a dozen of those French dogs to their father Satanasso."

"A capital way to rid one's-self of a bore!" exclaimed De Lucenay, while
he cast a last glance at the glass. "So you are ready, milor," he added,
turning to his friend, who, notwithstanding his indifference, had spent
quite as much time in adonising himself. And, Pedro preceding them, the
young men gaily descended the stairs.

On entering the _salon_, they found several groups already assembled.
DoA+-a Inez was standing speaking to two or three ladies; while several
cavaliers hovered round them, apparently delighted at every word that
fell from her lips. She disengaged herself from her circle, however, on
perceiving them, and gradually approached the window to which they had
retreated.

"What a lovely evening!" she exclaimed, stepping out upon the balcony,
on which the moon shone full, casting a flood of soft mellow light on
the sculptured faASec.ade of the old castle, tipping its forest of tapering
pinnacles and the towering summits of the dark cypresses with silver.
"You do not see such starlit skies in England, I believe?"

"I have enjoyed many a delightful night in my own country, seA+-ora, and
in others, but such a night as this, never--not even in Spain!" answered
Alphonse, fixing his expressive eyes on her with a meaning not to be
mistaken.

"What a pity it is that we cannot import a few of these soft moonlights
to our own chilly clime, for the benefit of all lovers, past, present,
and future!" said De Lucenay gaily. "It is so much pleasanter to make
love in a serenade, with the shadow of some kind projecting buttress to
hide one's blushes, a pathetic sonnet to express one's feelings
infinitely more eloquently than one can in prose, moonlight and a guitar
to cast a shade of romance over the whole, and a moat or river in view
to terrify the lady into reason, if necessary--instead of making a
formal declaration in the broad daylight, looking rather more _bAte_
than one has ever looked before, with the uncharitable sun giving a
deeper glow to one's already crimson countenance. Or, worse still, if
one is compelled to torture one's-self for an hour or two over unlucky
_billet-doux_, destined to divert the lady and all her confidants for
the next six months. Oh! _evviva_, the Spanish mode--nothing like it, to
my taste, in the world!"

"_Misericordia!_" exclaimed DoA+-a Inez with a laugh, "you are quite
eloquent on the subject, seA+-or. But I should hope, for their sakes, that
your delineation of lovers in England is not a very faithful one."

"To the life, on my honour."

"Probably they do not devote quite as much time to it as our
_caballeros_, who are quite adepts in the science."

"Don Alvar de Mendoce, for example," muttered Alphonse, between his
teeth.

"What! where?" cried the young girl, in an agitated tone; "who mentioned
Don Alvar? Did you? But no--impossible!" she added hurriedly.

"I?" exclaimed Alphonse, with an air of surprise--"I did not speak. But,
_pardon_, seA+-ora! is not the cavalier you have just named, your
brother?"

"No, seA+-or--I have no brother: that _caballero_, he is only a----a
friend of my father's," she answered confusedly.

"Oh! excuse me," said Alphonse, with the most innocent air imaginable;
"I thought you had."

There was a moment's pause, and DoA+-a Inez returned into the saloon,
which was now beginning rapidly to fill.

"I am afraid I must leave you, seA+-ores; the dancing is about to
commence," she said, "and I must go and speak to some young friends of
mine who have just come in. But first let me induce you to select some
partners."

"I did not know it was customary to dance at tertulias," observed
Ernest.

"Not in general, but to-night it is augmented into a little ball, in
honour of its being my _dia de cumpleaA+-os_. But come, look round the
room, and choose for yourselves. Whom shall I take you up to?"

"May I not have the pleasure of dancing with DoA+-a Inez herself?" said De
Lucenay.

"Ah no! I would not inflict so _triste_ a partner on you: I must find
you a more lively companion." And as if to prevent the compliment that
was hovering on Ernest's lips, she hurried on, while she pointed out a
group that was seated near the door. "There! what do you think of DoA+-a
Juana de Zayas? the liveliest, prettiest, and most remorseless coquette
of all Andalusia; for whose bright eyes more hearts and heads have been
broken than I could enumerate, or you would have patience to listen to."

"What! that sparkling-looking brunette, who flutters her _abanico_ with
such inimitable grace?"

"The same."

"Oh! present me by all means."

"And you, seA+-or," said DoA+-a Inez, returning with more interest to
Alphonse, who had stood silently leaning against a column, while she
walked his friend across the room, and seated him beside DoA+-a Juana,
"will you be satisfied with DoA+-a Mercedes, who is almost as much admired
as her sister; or shall we look further?"

"But you, so formed to shine--to eclipse all others--do you never dance,
seA+-orita?"

"Seldom or ever," she replied sadly. "I have no spirit for enjoyment
now!"

"But wherefore? Can there be a cloud to dim the happiness of one so
bright--so beautiful?" he answered, lowering his voice almost to a
whisper.

"Alas!" she said, touched by the tone of interest with which he had
spoken,--"is there not cause enough for sadness in the misfortunes of my
beloved country; each day, each hour producing some fresh calamity? Who
can be gay when we see our native land ravaged, our friends driven from
their homes; when we know not how soon we may be banished from our own?"

"Deeply--sincerely do I sympathise with, and honour your feelings; but
yet, for once, banish care, and let us enjoy the present hour like the
rest."

"Indeed, I should prove a bad _danseuse_; it is so long since I have
danced, that I am afraid I have almost forgotten how."

"But as I fear nothing except ill success, let me entreat."

"No, no--I will provide you with a better partner."

"Nay, if DoA+-a Inez will not favour me, I renounce dancing, not only for
to-night, but for ever."

"Oh! well then, to save you from such a melancholy sacrifice, I suppose
I must consent," replied DoA+-a Inez with a laugh: and as the music now
gave the signal to commence, she accepted his proffered arm; and in a
few moments she was whirling round the circle as swiftly as the gayest
of the throng. The first turn of the waltz sufficed to convince Alphonse
that his fears on one score, at least, were groundless; for he had never
met with a lighter or more admirable _valseuse_--a pleasure that none
but a good waltzer can appreciate, and which, notwithstanding all her
other attractions, was not lost upon the young Frenchman; and before the
termination of the waltz, he had decided that DoA+-a Inez was assuredly
the most fascinating, as she was undoubtedly the most beautiful, being
he had ever beheld.

"_Santa Virgen!_" exclaimed De Lucenay's lively partner, after a
moment's silence, which both had very profitably employed; he, in
admiring her pretty countenance, and she in watching the somewhat
earnest conversation that was kept up between the French officer and
DoA+-a Inez, as they reposed themselves on a divan after the fatigues of
the waltz. "It seems to me that our proud Inesilla and your friend are
very well satisfied with each other. I wonder if Don Alvar would be as
well pleased, if he saw them. _Grandios!_ there he is, I declare!"

Instinctively De Lucenay's eyes followed the direction of hers, and
lighted on a tall striking-looking cavalier, whose handsome features
were contracted into a dark frown, while he stood silently observing the
couple, the pre-occupation of whom had evidently hitherto prevented
their perceiving him. "Do, _per caridad!_ go and tell your friend to be
a little more on his guard, or we shall certainly have a duel: Don Alvar
is the first swordsman in Spain, jealous as a tiger, and he makes it a
rule to cripple, or kill, every rival who attempts to approach DoA+-a
Inez. Your friend is such a good waltzer, that I should really be sorry
to see him disabled, at least till I am tired of dancing with him."

"Your frankness is adorable."

"Why, to be sure,--of what use are you men except as partners? unless,
indeed, you are making love to us; and then, I admit, you are of a
little more value for the time being."

"The portrait is flattering."

"Assuredly; you are only too fortunate in being permitted to worship
us."

"In the present instance, believe me, I fully appreciate the happiness."

"_Bravo, bravissimo!_ I see you were made for me; I hate people who take
as much time to fall in love as if they were blind."

"I always reflect with my eyes."

"Ah! that is the true way; but come," rattled on the merry Juanita, "go
and give your friend a hint, and I will employ the interim in smoothing
the ruffled plumes of an admirer of mine, who has been scowling at me
this last half hour, and whose flame is rather too fresh to put an
extinguisher on just yet."

"A rival!" exclaimed Ernest in a tragic tone; "he or I must cease to
exist."

"Oh! don't be so valiant," cried DoA+-a Juana, leaning back in a violent
fit of laughter. "You would have to extinguish twenty of them at that
rate."

"Twenty is a large number," said Ernest reflectingly.

"Yes, yes--be wise in time," said the pretty coquette, still laughing.
"If you are patient and submissive, you have always the chance of rising
to the first rank, you know. I am not very exacting, and provided a
caballero devotes himself wholly to my service, enlivens me when I am
dull, sympathises with me when I am sad, obeys my commands as
religiously as he would his confessor's, anticipates my every wish, and
bears with every caprice, is never gloomy or jealous, and is, moreover,
unconscious of the existence of any other woman in the world beside, I
am satisfied."

"Is that all? Upon my word your demands are moderate."

"Yes, but as our pious friend DoA+-a Estefania says, perfection is not of
this world, and so I content myself with a little," replied the animated
girl, imitating the look of mock humility, shrouding herself in her
mantilla, and wielding her _abanico_ with the identical air and grace
which had so completely upset the gravity of the supper-table an hour
before. "And then, consider," she continued, as suddenly resuming her
own vivacity, "how much more glorious it will be to out-strip a host of
competitors, than quietly to take possession of a heart which no one
takes the trouble of disputing with you."

"Your logic is positively unanswerable," laughed De Lucenay.

"_Ah, per piedad!_ Spare my ignorance the infliction of such hard words,
and be off."

"But----" murmured the reluctant Ernest.

"Obedience, you know!" and Juanita held up her finger authoritatively.

Never had Ernest executed a lady's behests with a worse grace, nor was
his alacrity increased by perceiving that, ere he had even had time to
cross the room, his place was already occupied, as much apparently to
the satisfaction of his substitute, as to that of the faithless fair one
herself. But Alphonse and his partner had disappeared, and De Lucenay
went towards the balcony, to which he suspected they had retreated; but
there was no one there, and De Lucenay stood for a few moments in the
embrasure of the window, irresolute whether he should seek out his
friend or not, while he amused himself contemplating the animated
_coup-d'A"il_ of the saloon. The dark-eyed Spanish belles, with their
basquinas and lace mantillas, their flexible figures, and their
miniature feet so exquisitely _chaussA(C)es_; the handsome caballeros, with
their dark profiles and black mustaches, their sombre costume,
brilliantly relieved by the gold tissue divans, and varied arabesques of
the glittering saloon, they looked like the noble pictures of Velasquez
or Murillo just stepped out of their frames. As Ernest was re-entering
the saloon, the voices of a group of ladies, from whom he was concealed
by the crimson drapery of the curtains, caught his attention.

"_Ah! Mariguita mia_," said one, "how glad I am to meet you here! _Que
gusto!_ It is a century since I saw you last."

"_Queridita mia_," responded a masculine tone, very little in harmony
with the soft words it uttered; "in these terrible times one dare not
venture a mile beyond the town: As for me, the mere barking of a dog
puts me all in a flutter, and sends me flying to the window. You know
the news, I suppose; DoA+-a Isabel de PeA+-aflor has quarrelled with her
_cortejo_, and he has flown off in a rage to her cousin Blanca."

"_Misericordia que lastima_, they were such a handsome couple! But it
cannot last; they will make it up again, certainly."

"Oh no!" interposed another; "her husband Don Antonio has done all he
could to reconcile them, but in vain--he told me so himself."

"Well, I am sure I don't wonder at it; she is such a shrew there is no
bearing her."

"No matter," resumed the first speaker, "the example is scandalous, and
should not be suffered. Ah! it is all the fault of that artificious
Blanca: I knew she would contrive to get him at last."

"_Aproposito_, what do you think of the two new stars?"

"Oh, charming! delightful!" exclaimed a voice, whose light silvery tone
doubly enhanced the value of its praise to the attentive listener in the
back-ground. "Only I fear they will not profit us much; for if my eyes
deceive me not, both are already captured."

"No doubt, child," said a voice which had not yet spoken; "good looks
and good dancing are quite enough to constitute your standard of
perfection."

"At all events," interrupted another, "they are very unlike Englishmen.
Do you know," she continued, lowering her voice to a whisper, "that Don
Alvar swears they are nothing else than a pair of French spies; and as
he speaks English very well, he means to try them by and by."

The intelligence was pleasant! and Ernest seized the first instant when
he could slip out unobserved, to go in search of his friend. After
looking for him in vain amidst the dancing and chattering crowd, he
wandered into an adjoining gallery, whose dark length was left to the
light of the moon, in whose rays the gloomy portraits that covered the
walls looked almost spectrally solemn. The gallery terminated in a
terrace, which was decorated with colossal marble vases and stunted
orange-trees, whose blossoms embalmed the air with their fragrance. As
Ernest approached, the sound of whispered words caught his ear. He stood
still an instant, hidden by the porphyry columns of the portico.

"Indeed, indeed, I must return; do not detain me; it is not right; I
shall be missed; I cannot listen to you," murmured the low voice of DoA+-a
Inez.

"One moment more. Inez, I love, I adore you! Oh, do not turn from me
thus--the present instant alone is ours; to-morrow, to-night, this hour
perhaps, I may be forced to leave you; give me but hope, one smile, one
word, and I will live upon that hope--live for the future--live for you
alone, beloved one! till we compel fate to reunite us, or die. But you
will not say that word; you care not for me--you love another!" said
Alphonse bitterly. "Would that I had never seen you! you are cold,
heartless! or you could not reject thus a love so ardent, so devoted, as
that I fling at your feet."

"But why this impetuosity--this unreasonable haste? If you love me,
there is time to-morrow, hereafter; but this is madness. I love no
one--I hate Don Alvar; but your love is folly, insanity. Three hours ago
you had never seen me, and now you swear my indifference will kill you.
Oh! seA+-or, seA+-or! I am but a simple girl--I am but just seventeen; yet I
know that were it even true that you love me, a love so sudden in its
birth must perish as rapidly."

"It is not true! you know--you feel that it is not true--you do not
think what you say! There is a love which, like the lightning, scorches
the tree which it strikes, and blasts it for ever; but you reason--you
do not love--fool that I am!"

"Oh! let me go--do not clasp my hand so--you are cruel!" and Inez burst
into tears.

"Forgive me--oh, forgive me, best beloved! _luz de mi alma!_"

A sound of approaching footsteps on the marble below startled them, and
Inez darted away like a frightened fawn, and flew down the gallery.

"Well, stoical philosopher!" exclaimed Ernest, as his friend emerged
from behind the orange-trees; "for so indifferent and frozen a
personage, I think you get on pretty fast. _Ca ira!_ I begin to have
hopes of you. So you have lost that frozen heart of yours at last, and
after such boasting, too! But that is always the way with you
braggadocios. I thought it would end so, you were so wondrously
valiant."

"But who ever dreamed of seeing any thing so superhumanly beautiful as
that young girl? Nothing terrestrial could have conquered me; but my
stoicism was defenceless against an angel."

"Bravo! your pride has extricated itself from the dilemma admirably. I
must admit that there is some excuse for you; the pearl of Andalusia is
undoubtedly _ravissante_. But your pieces of still life never suit me. I
have the bad taste to prefer the laughing black-eyed Juanita de Zayas to
all the Oriental languor, drooping lashes, and sentimental monosyllables
of your divinity."

"Oh, sacrilege! the very comparison is profanation!" exclaimed Alphonse,
raising his hands and eyes to heaven.

"Hold hard, _mon cher_. I cannot stand that!" responded Ernest
energetically.

"Then, in heaven's name, do not put such a noble creature as DoA+-a Inez
on a level with a mere little trifling coquette."

"Oh! she is every inch as bad. I watched her narrowly, and would stake
my life on it she is only the more dangerous for being the less open.
Smooth water, you know----however, you have made a tolerable day's work
of it."

"Either the best or the worst of my life, Ernest!" said his friend
passionately.

"What! is it come to that?--so hot upon it! But while we are standing
trifling here, we ought to be discussing something much more important."
And here De Lucenay repeated the conversation he had overheard. "In
short, I fear we are fairly done for," he added, in conclusion. "I hope
you are able to bear the brunt of the battle, for my vocabulary will
scarcely carry me through ten words."

"Oh, as for me, I shall do very well; it must be the devil's own luck if
he speaks English better than I do," said Alphonse; "and as for you, you
must shelter yourself under English _morgue_ and reserve."

"Confound him!" muttered De Lucenay: "jealousy is the very deuce for
sharpening the wits. But no matter, courage!"--And so saying, the
friends sauntered back into the circle.

They had not been long there when the Conde came up and introduced his
friend Don Alvar, who, as they had expected, addressed them in very good
English; to which Alphonse replied with a fluency which would have
delighted his friend less, had he been able to appreciate the mistakes
which embellished almost every sentence. To him Don Alvar often turned;
but as every attempt to engage him in the conversation was met by a
resolute monosyllable, he at last confined himself to Alphonse, much to
De Lucenay's relief. His manners, however, were cautious and agreeable;
and as, after a quarter of an hour, he concluded by hoping that erelong
they should be better acquainted, and left them apparently quite
unsuspicious, the young men persuaded themselves that they had outwitted
their malicious inquisitor. Their gay spirits thus relieved from the
cloud that had momentarily over-shadowed them, the remainder of the
evening was to them one of unmingled enjoyment. In the society of the
beautiful DoA+-a Inez, and her sparkling friend, hours flew by like
minutes; and when the last lingering groups dispersed, and the reluctant
Juanita rose to depart, the friends could not be convinced of the
lateness of the hour.

"Well, Alphonse! so you are fairly caught at last!" said De Lucenay, as,
after dismissing Pedro half-an-hour later, he stretched himself full
length on the luxurious divan of the immense bedroom, which, for the
sake of companionship, they had determined on sharing between them.
"After all, it is too absurd that you, who have withstood all the
artillery of Paris, and escaped all the cross-fire of the two Castiles,
should come and be hooked at last in this remote corner of the earth, by
the inexperienced black eyes of an innocent of sixteen."

"Good heavens! do cease that stupid style of _persiflage_. I am in no
humour for jesting."

"Well, defend me from the love that makes people cross! My _bonnes
fortunes_ always put me in a good humour."

"Will you never learn to be serious? That absurd manner of talking is
very ill-timed."

Ernest was on the point of retorting very angrily, when the sound of a
guitar struck upon their ears; and, with one accord, the friends stole
silently and noiselessly to the balcony--but not before Ernest, with the
tact of experience, had hidden the light behind the marble pillars of
the alcove. By this manA"uvre, themselves in shade, they could,
unperceived, observe all that passed in the apartment opposite to them,
from which the sound proceeded; for the windows were thrown wide open,
and an antique bronze lamp, suspended from the ceiling, diffused
sufficient light over the whole extent of the room to enable them to
distinguish almost every thing within its precincts. The profusion of
flowers, trifles, and musical instruments, that were dispersed around in
graceful confusion, would alone have betrayed a woman's sanctum
sanctorum, even had not the presiding genius of the shrine been the
first and most prominent object that met their eyes. DoA+-a Inez--for it
was she--had drawn her seat to the verge of the balcony; and, her guitar
resting on her knee, she hurried over a brilliant prelude with a
masterly hand; and in a pure, rich voice, but evidently tremulous with
emotion, sang a little plaintive seguidilla with exquisite taste and
feeling. The two young men listened in hushed and breathless attention;
but the song was short as it was sweet--in a moment it had ceased; and
the young girl, stepping out upon the balcony, leaned over the
balustrade, and looked anxiously around, as if her brilliant eyes sought
to penetrate the very depths of night.

"Well, Alphonse," said De Lucenay, "let me congratulate you. This
serenade is for you; but I presume you will no longer deny the
coquettery of your _innamorata_?"

"Hush, hush!" exclaimed his friend hastily, as DoA+-a Inez resumed her
seat: "be sure there is some better motive for it."

The music now recommenced, but it was the same air again.

"This is strange!" muttered Ernest: "her _repertoire_ seems limited.
Does she know nothing else, I wonder?"

"Silence!" replied the other. "Did you mark the words?" exclaimed
Alphonse hurriedly, as the music concluded. "_Descuidado caballero,
este lecho es vuestra tumba_, &c."

"No, indeed; I was much better employed in watching the fair syren
herself. _Foi de dragon!_ she is charming. I have half a mind to dispute
her with you."

"She has something to communicate!" exclaimed Alphonse, in an agitated
voice; "we are in danger." And, running rapidly into the room, he
replaced the light on the table, so that they were full in view.

His conjecture was right; for no sooner did the light discover to her
those whom she was looking for, than, uttering a fervent "_gracias a
Dios!_" she clasped her hands together, and rushed into the apartment,
from which she almost instantaneously returned with a small envelope,
which she flung with such precision that it fell almost in the centre of
the room, with a sharp metallic sound. It was the work of an instant to
tear open the packet, take out the key which it contained, and decypher
the following words:--

"SeA+-ores,--Strange, and I trust unjust suspicions have arisen concerning
you. It is whispered that you are not what you appear: that secret and
traitorous designs have led you amongst us. To-morrow's dawn will bring
the proof to light. But, should you have any thing to fear, fly
instantly--not a moment must be lost. Descend by the small staircase;
the inclosed is a _passe-partout_ to open the gate, outside which Pedro
will wait you with your horses, and guide you on your way, till you no
longer require him. Alas! I betray my beloved parent's confidence, to
save you from a certain and ignominious death. Be generous, then, and
bury all that you have seen and heard within these walls in oblivion, or
eternal remorse and misery must be mine.--INEZ."

"Generous, noble-minded girl!" enthusiastically exclaimed Alphonse, as
he paced the room with agitated steps. "Scarcely do I regret this hour
of peril, since it has taught me to know thee!"

"For heaven's sake, Alphonse, no heroics now!" cried De Lucenay, who,
not being in love, estimated the value of time much more rationally than
his friend. "Scribble off an answer--explain that we are not
spies--while I prepare for our departure. Be quick!--five minutes are
enough for me."

Alphonse followed his friend's advice, and, in an incredibly short space
of time, penned off a tolerably long epistle, explaining the boyish
frolic into which they had been led by getting possession of the
dispatches of an imprisoned English aide-de-camp, and the reports of her
beauty; filled up with protestations of eternal gratitude and
remembrance, and renewing all the vows and declarations of the
evening--the precipitancy of which he excused by the unfortunate
circumstances under which he was placed, and the impossibility of
bidding her adieu, without convincing her of the sentiments which filled
his heart then and for ever. The letter concluded by intreating her
carefully to preserve the signet-ring which it contained; and that
should she at any future time be in any danger or distress, she had only
to present or send it, and there was nothing, within their power,
himself or his friends would not do for her. Having signed their real
names and titles, and dispatched the _billet-doux_ in the same manner
as its predecessor, the young men waited till they had the satisfaction
of seeing DoA+-a Inez open it; and then, waving their handkerchiefs in
sign of adieu, Alphonse, with a swelling heart, followed his friend down
stairs. All happened as the young girl had promised, and in a few
moments they were in the open air and in freedom.

"SeA+-ores," said Pedro, as they mounted their horses, "the SeA+-orita
thinks you had better not return to your quarters, for Don Alvar is such
a devil when his jealous blood is up, that he might pursue you with a
troop of assassins, and murder you on the road. She desired me to
conduct you to S----, whence you may easily take the cross-roads in any
direction you please."

"The SeA+-orita is a pearl of prudence and discretion: do whatever she
desired you," said Alphonse.

Pedro made no answer; but seemingly as much impressed with the necessity
of speed as the young men themselves, put the spurs to his horse; and in
a moment they were crossing the country at a speed which bid fair to
distance any pursuers who were not gifted with wings as well as feet;
nor did they slacken rein till the dawn of day showed them, to their
great joy, that they were beyond the reach of pursuit, and in a part of
the country with which they were sufficiently well acquainted to enable
them to dispense with the services of Pedro--a discovery which they lost
no time in taking advantage of, by dismissing the thenceforth
inconvenient guide, with such substantial marks of their gratitude as
more than compensated him for the loss of his night's rest. A few more
hours saw them safely returned to the French camp, without having
suffered any greater penalty for the indulgence of their curiosity, than
a night's hard riding, to the no small discomfiture of the friendly
circle of _frA"res d'armes_, whose prophecies of evil on the subject had
been, if not loud, deep and numerous.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was on a somewhat chilly evening, towards the beginning of winter,
that Alphonse was writing a letter in his tent; while De Lucenay, who,
when there were no ladies in question, could never be very long absent
from his Pylades, was pacing up and down, savouring the ineffable
delights of a long _chibouque_, when the orderly suddenly entered, and
laid a letter on the table, saying that the bearer waited the answer.
Desiring him to attend his orders outside, Alphonse broke open the
envelope.

"What the devil have you got there, Alphonse?" exclaimed De Lucenay,
stopping in the midst of his perambulations, as he perceived the
agitated countenance and tremulous eagerness with which his friend
perused the contents of the letter. "It must be a powerful stimulant
indeed, which can make you look so much more like yourself than you have
done for these last five months. You have not been so much excited since
that mysterious blank letter you received, with its twin sprigs of
forget-me-not and myrtle. I began to fear I should have that unlucky
expedition of ours on my conscience for the rest of my days. You have
never been the same being since."

"There--judge for yourself!" exclaimed Alphonse, flinging him the note
after he had hurriedly pressed it to his lips, and rushed out of the
tent.

It was with scarcely less surprise and emotion that De Lucenay glanced
over the following lines:--

"If honour and gratitude have any claims upon your hearts, now is the
moment to redeem the pledge they gave. Danger and misfortune have fallen
upon us, and I claim the promise that, unasked, you made; the holy
Virgin grant that it may be as fresh in your memory as it is in mine. I
await your answer.--INEZ." The signet was inclosed. Scarcely had De
Lucenay read its contents when his friend re-entered, leading in a
trembling sister of charity, beneath whose projecting hood Ernest had no
difficulty in recognising the beautiful features of DoA+-a Inez di
Miranda.

"This is indeed an unlooked-for happiness!" passionately exclaimed
Alphonse, while he placed the agitated and almost fainting girl on a
seat. "Since that memorable night of mingled joy and despair, I thought
not that such rapture awaited me again on earth."

"Oh, talk not of joy, of happiness!" imploringly exclaimed the young
girl. "I have come to you on a mission of life or death. My father--my
dear, my beloved father--is a prisoner, and condemned to be shot. Oh,
save him! save him!" she cried wildly, falling on her knees.--"If you
have hearts, if you are human--save him! and God will reward you for it;
and I shall live but to bless your names every hour of my existence."
Exhausted by her emotion, she would have fallen on the ground, had not
Alphonse caught her and raised her in his arms.

"Calm yourself, calm yourself, sweet child!" he whispered soothingly:
"our lives, our blood is at your service; there is nothing on earth
which my friend and I would not do for you."

A declaration which De Lucenay confirmed with an energetic oath.

Somewhat tranquillized by this assurance, she at last recovered
sufficiently to explain that her father was at the head of a guerilla
band which had been captured, having fallen into an ambuscade, where
they left more than half their number dead on the field. Some peasants
had brought the news to the chateau, with the additional information
that they were all to be shot within two days.

"In my despair," continued the young girl, "I thought of you; and
ordering the fleetest horses in the stables to be saddled, set off with
two servants, determined to throw myself on your pity; and if that
should fail me, to fling myself on the mercy of heaven, and lastly to
die with him, if I could not rescue him. But you will save him! will you
not?" she sobbed with clasped hands--and a look so beseeching, so
sorrowful, that the tears rushed involuntarily into their eyes.

"Save him! oh yes, at all costs, at all hazards! were it at the risk of
our heads! But where is he? where was he taken? where conveyed to?"

"They were taken to the quarters of the general-in-chief in command, and
it was he himself who signed their condemnation."

"My father!" said De Lucenay, in a tone of surprise.

"Ernest!" exclaimed his friend, "they must be those prisoners who were
brought in this morning while we were out foraging."

"No doubt, no doubt, you are right," replied De Lucenay, his countenance
lighting up with pleasure. "Oh, then, all is well! I will go instantly
to my father; tell him we owe our lives to you--and that will be quite
sufficient. Have no fear--he is saved!"

"He is saved! He is saved!" shrieked DoA+-a Inez. "Oh, may heaven bless
you for those words!" and with a sigh--a gasp--she fell senseless on the
ground.

"Poor girl!" said De Lucenay, pityingly, "she has suffered indeed.
Alphonse, I leave you to resuscitate her, while I hurry off to the
General. There is not a moment to be lost. As soon as the grand affair
is settled, I will make my father send for her. She will be better taken
care of there; and besides, you know, it would not be _convenable_ for
her to remain here; and we must be generous as well as honourable."

"Oh, certainly--certainly! It is well you think for me; for I am so
confused that I remember nothing," exclaimed Alphonse, as De Lucenay
hurried away.

It was not quite so easy a task, however, as he had imagined, to bring
the young girl to life again. The terror and distress she had undergone
had done their worst; and the necessity for exertion past, the
overstrung nerves gave way beneath the unwonted tension. One
fainting-fit succeeded to another; till at last Alphonse began to be
seriously alarmed. Fortunately, however, joy does not kill; and after a
short while, DoA+-a Inez was sufficiently recovered to listen with a
little more attention to the protestations, vows, and oaths, which, for
the last half hour, the young Frenchman had been very uselessly wasting
on her insensible ears.

"And so, then, you did remember me, it seems!" said DoA+-a Inez, after a
moment's silence--while she rested her head on one hand, and abandoned
the other to the passionate kisses of her lover.

"Remember you! What a word! When I can cease to remember that the sun
shines, that I exist--then, perhaps, I may forget you; but not till
then. Not an hour of my life, but I thought of you; at night I dreamed
of you, in the day I dreamed of you; amidst the confusion of the
bivouac, in the excitement of battle, in the thunder of the artillery,
amidst the dead and the dying, your image rose before me. I had but one
thought;--should I fall--how to convey to you the knowledge that I had
died loving you,--that that sprig of forget-me-not, that lock of dark
hair, so often bedewed by my kisses, had rested on my heart to the last
moment that it beat!" And Alphonse drew out a medallion.

DoA+-a Inez snatched it out of his hand, and covered it with kisses.
"Blessed be the holy Virgin! I have not prayed to her in vain. I, too,
have thought of you, Alphonse; I, too, have dreamed of you by day, and
lain awake by night to dream of you again. How have I supplicated all
the saints in heaven to preserve you, to watch over you! For I, too,
love you, Alphonse; deeply--passionately--devotedly--as a Spaniard
loves--once, and for ever!"

"_Mes amis_, I regret to part you," said De Lucenay, who re-entered the
tent a few moments after; "but the Conde is pardoned--all is right, and
you will meet to-morrow; so let that console you!"

"Oh, you were destined to be my good angels!" cried DoA+-a Inez
enthusiastically, as she drew the white hood over her head, and left the
tent with the two friends.

       *       *       *       *       *

Less enviable were the Conde's feelings, when at noon, on the following
morning, an order from the General summoned him to his tent, to receive,
as he supposed, sentence of death. Great, therefore, was his surprise,
when he was ushered into the presence of three officers, in two of whom
he instantly recognised his former suspicious guests; while the third, a
tall dignified-looking man, advanced towards him, and in the most
courteous manner announced to him his free pardon.

As the Conde poured forth his thanks, the General interrupted him by
saying, that however happy he was at having in his power to remit his
sentence, it was not to him that the merit was due.

"To whom, then?" exclaimed the Conde in a tone of surprise.

"To one most near and dear to you," replied the General.

"Who? who?"

"You shall see." And the General made a sign to Ernest, who slipped out
of the room, and in a few moments returned leading in DoA+-a Inez.

"And it is to thee, then, my own Inesilla, my darling, my beloved
child," passionately cried the Conde as she rushed into his arms, and
hid her face upon his breast, "that I owe my life!" To describe the joy,
the intense and tumultuous delight of that moment, were beyond the power
of words. Even the stern, inflexible commander turned to hide an emotion
he would have blushed to betray.

After waiting till the first ebullition of their joy had subsided,
General de Lucenay walked up to the Conde, and shaking him cordially by
the hand, congratulated him on possessing a daughter whose courage and
filial devotion were even more worthy of admiration, more rare, than her
far-famed beauty; "and which," he added, "even I, who have been in all
countries, have never seen surpassed."

"Though not my own child, she has indeed been a blessing and a treasure
to me," said the Conde; "every year of her life has she repaid to me, a
thousand-fold, the love and affection which I have lavished on her; and
now"----

"Not your child!" exclaimed De Lucenay and Alphonse in a breath.

"No, not my child," replied the Conde. "The story is a long one, but
with my generous preservers I can have no secrets. Just seventeen years
ago, I was returning from a visit, by the banks of the Guadiana, with
only two attendants, when I heard a faint cry from amongst the rushes on
the water's edge; dismounting from our horses, we forced our way through
the briars to the spot whence the sound proceeded. To our great
surprise, we discovered there a little infant, which had evidently been
carried down the stream, and its dress having got entangled amongst the
thorns had prevented its being swept further on. Our providential
arrival saved its life; for it was drawing towards the close of evening,
and the little creature, already half dead with cold and exposure, must
inevitably have perished in the course of the night. In one word, we
carried it to my chateau, where it grew up to be the beautiful girl you
see--the sole comfort and happiness of my life."

"But her parents, did you never discover any thing about them--who or
what they were--the motive of so strange an abandonment?" exclaimed
General de Lucenay in an agitated voice. "Was there no clue by which to
trace them?"

"No, I made all inquiries, but in vain. Besides, it was many miles from
any habitation that we found her. I sent the following day, and made
many inquiries in the neighbourhood; but no one could give us any
information on the subject; so, after an interval of months, I gave the
point up as hopeless. One thing only is certain, that they were not
inferiors; the fineness of her dress, and a little relic encased in gold
and precious stones, that she wore round her neck, were sufficient
proofs of that."

"This is, indeed, most singular!" cried the General. "And do you
recollect the precise date of this occurrence?"

"Recollect a day which for many years I have been in the habit of
celebrating as the brightest of my life! Assuredly--it was the
fourteenth of May--and well do I remember it."

"The fourteenth of May! it must be, it is, my long-lost, my long-mourned
daughter!" cried the General.

"Your daughter!" exclaimed all around in the greatest astonishment.

"Yes, my daughter," repeated the General. "You shall hear all: but
first--the relic, the relic! where is it? let me see it. That would be
the convincing proof indeed."

"It is easy to satisfy you," replied Inez, "for it never leaves me;"
and, taking a small chain, she handed him a little filigree gold case
that she wore in her bosom.

"The same! the same! these are my wife's initials on it. This is indeed
a wonderful dispensation of Providence, to find a daughter after having
so long mourned her as lost; and to find her all my heart could have
wished, more than my most ambitious prayers could have asked! Oh, this
is too much happiness! Alas!" he continued in a tone of deep feeling,
while he drew the astonished and stupefied girl towards him, and,
parting the dark locks on her brow, imprinted a paternal kiss upon her
forehead, "Would that my poor Dolores had lived to see this hour! how
would it have repaid the years of sorrow and mourning your loss
occasioned her?"

"But how! what is this; it is most extraordinary?" exclaimed the Conde,
who had waited in speechless surprise the _dA(C)noA"ment_ of this unexpected
scene.

The General explained. His wife had been a Spanish lady of high birth.
Returning to France from a visit to her relations, they had stopped to
change horses at a little _posada_ on the banks of the Guadiana; their
little daughter, a child of eight months old, had sprung out of its
nurse's arms into the river. Every effort to recover the child was
fruitless; it sank and disappeared. They returned to France, and, after
a few years, his wife died. "You may judge, then, of my feelings on
hearing your story, SeA+-or Conde," concluded the General; "the name of
the river and the date first roused my suspicions, which the result has
so fully confirmed."

"My child, my child! and must I then lose thee!" cried the Count,
clasping the young girl in his arms in an agony of grief.

"Never!" passionately exclaimed Inez. "_Tuya A  la vida a la muerta!_"

"Not so, SeA+-or Conde; the man who has treated her so nobly has the best
right to her," said the General. "I will never take her from you; an
occasional visit is all I shall ask."

"But if you will not take her, I know who would, most willingly," said
Ernest, stepping forward. "But first, my little sister, let me
congratulate you upon dropping from the clouds upon such a
good-natured, good-for-nothing, excellent fellow of a brother, as
myself. And now, gentlemen, I have a boon to ask--where there is so much
joy, why not make all happy at once? There is an unfortunate friend of
mine who, to my certain knowledge, has been all but expiring for that
fair damsel these last five months; and if for once our sweet Inez would
dismiss all feminine disguise, and confess the truth, I suspect she
would plead guilty to the same sin. Come, come, I will spare you," he
added, as the rich blood mantled over DoA+-a Inez's cheek--"that tell-tale
blush is a sufficient answer. Then, why not make them happy?" he added,
more seriously; "the Marquis de La Tour d'Auvergne, the heir of an
ancient line, and a noble fortune, is in every respect a suitable
alliance for either the Conde de Miranda, or General De Lucenay. Besides
which, he is a very presentable young fellow, as you see, not to speak
of the trifle of their being overhead and ears in love with each other
already."

"What say you, my child?--Bah! is it indeed so?" exclaimed the Conde, as
Inez stood motionless, her dark eyes fixed on the ground, and the flush
growing deeper and deeper on her cheek every minute--while Alphonse,
springing forward, declared that he would not think such happiness too
dearly purchased with his life.

"No, no--no dying, if you please. A ghostly mate would be no very
pleasant bridegroom for a young lady. What say you, General? shall we
consent?"

"With all my heart."

"Hurrah! _Vive la joie!_" cried Ernest, tossing his cap into the air.

"Oh, this is too much bliss!" murmured Inez almost inaudibly.

"No, dearest! may you be as happy through life as you have rendered me,"
said the Count, folding her in his arms.




_Edinburgh: Printed by Ballantyne and Hughes, Paul's Work._





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine, Volume
60, No. 372, October 1846, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BLACKWOOD'S EDINBURGH ***

***** This file should be named 36530.txt or 36530.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/5/3/36530/

Produced by Brendan OConnor, JoAnn Greenwood, Jonathan
Ingram and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Library of Early
Journals.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
