The Project Gutenberg EBook of American Antiquities, by Wm. B. Norman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: American Antiquities
       Auction Catalogue, January 8, 1898

Author: Wm. B. Norman

Release Date: July 3, 2011 [EBook #36598]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AMERICAN ANTIQUITIES ***




Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





                        AMERICAN ANTIQUITIES.

                 Pre-historic Stone Implements, Mound
                   BuildersaEuro(TM) Relics, Revolutionary
                          and Foreign Arms,
                              Etc., Etc.

                           SALE BY AUCTION,

                                AT THE

                     Fifth Avenue Auction Rooms,

                   No. 238 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK,

                           JANUARY 8, 1898.

                     _WM. B. NORMAN, Auctioneer._




_This entire Collection will be on exhibit at the Fifth Avenue Auction
House, No. 238 Fifth Avenue, New York, on Thursday and Friday, January
6 and 7, 1898, from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; and on the day of the Sale,
during the morning hours._

_Orders will be carefully executed by the Auctioneers and Dealers in
ArchA|ology._




                              COLLECTION
                                  OF
                        AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY,
                          STONE IMPLEMENTS,
                   REVOLUTIONARY AND FOREIGN ARMS,
                          ETC., ETC., ETC.,

            INCLUDING MANY SPECIMENS OF RARITY AND VALUE.

        Mound BuildersaEuro(TM) Relics, Celts, Grooved Axes, Arrow and
         Spear Heads, Knives, Wampum Treaty Belts and Money,
       Necklaces, Beads, Shell Ornaments, Effigy and Ceremonial
                Pipes, Tomahawks, Objects in Hematite
            and Obsidian, Terra Cotta Figures, Ornaments,
            Temple Chalices of the Incas, Aztec Ornaments,
                  Revolutionary Arms, Blunderbusses,
                      Pistols, Swords, Rapiers,
                        Claymores, War Clubs,
                          Dirks, Etc., Etc.

                THE PROPERTY OF A RETIRING COLLECTOR.

                   Sale by Auction without Reserve,
       AT THE 5th AVENUE AUCTION ROOMS, 238 5th AVE., NEW YORK,
                     SATURDAY, JANUARY 8th, 1898,
                    BEGINNING AT 2 OaEuro(TM)CLOCK, P. M.
                     _WM. B. NORMAN, Auctioneer._

         _CATALOGUE BY ED. FROSSARD.    151st AUCTION SALE._

                108 East Fourteenth Street, New York.

                               BOSTON:
               T. R. MARVIN & SON, NUMISMATIC PRINTERS.
                                1897.




_The Archaeological Collection described in the following pages was
formed by a well-known Collector, who now, for private reasons,
relinquishes the pleasurable pursuit which for so many years engrossed
his moments of leisure. Every specimen in the Collection was selected
with deliberate discrimination, with the view of exemplifying the best
forms of arms and implements conceived and fashioned by the
pre-historic man of that part of the North American Continent embraced
within the present United States. Such objects are of great interest
and value to all those interested in this branch of Archaeology, and
the opportunity offered of adding perfect specimens, at their own
price, to their cabinets, is one seldom occurring.

Among the objects of marked interest will be found a Wampum Treaty
Belt; a large number of Ceremonial Pipes, including some very rare
forms; various objects in hematite, obsidian, copper, etc.; the rare
Idols from Arizona; Incas Temple Vases in beaten silver from the
necropolis of Ancona, etc., etc. The arms, foreign and Revolutionary,
at the end of Catalogue, will be recognized by all interested in the
subject as valuable specimens, worthy to figure in the best
Collections.

Every object in this Collection will be sold, with the guarantee, by
the Cataloguer, of its absolute authenticity and genuineness, both as
regards material and attribution.

Orders faithfully executed by the Auctioneers and Art Dealers
generally._




CATALOGUE.




PRE-HISTORIC STONE IMPLEMENTS.


CELTS.

1 SMALL CELT, reddish stone. Washington Co., Ohio. 2A1/2 in.

2 Another. Gray stone. Knox Co., O. 2A1/4 in.

3 Another. Blue stone. Athens Co., O. 3A1/4 in.

4 Another. Diorite. Very fine. Athens Co., O. 3A1/4 in.

5 Another. Granite. Very fine. Vinton Co., O. 3A1/2 in.

6 Another. Blue stone. Moss Co., O. 3A3/4 in.

7 Large Celt. Granite, polished edge. Very fine. Mercer Co., Ky.
5A1/4 in.

8 Another. Granite, polished edge. Very fine. Mercer Co., Ky. 5A3/4 in.

9 Another. Blue slate, edge slightly chipped. Delaware Co., O. 6A1/2 in.

10 Another. Blue slate, edge slightly chipped, but fine. Delaware Co.,
O. 7A3/4 in.

11 Small Celt. Blue slate, polished edge, perfect. Syria. 3 in.

12 Small hand pick. Blue slate. Harrisburg, Pa. 4A1/4 in.

13 Another. Granite, round top, polished edge. Lincoln Co., Tenn.
4A1/4 in.


GROOVED AXES, ETC.

14 GROOVED AXE of diorite, deeply grooved, fine edge (a head cracker).
Beaver Co., Pa. 4 in.

15 Another. Greenish stone, deeply grooved, fine edge. Rhea Co., Tenn.
4 in.

16 Another. Granite, grooved and perfect. Seneca Co., O. 4A1/2 in.

17 Another. Diorite, deeply grooved and perfect. Athens Co., O. 5 in.

18 Another. Mottled granite, deeply grooved. Very fine. Calhoun Co.,
Ill. 5 in.

19 Another. Dark stone, flat head, entire surface polished and
perfect. Breckenridge Co., Ky. 5 in.

20 Another. Shows marks of ancient pecking. Warren Co., O. 6 in.

21 Another. Palaeolithic sandstone. Greene Co., Va. 5 in.

22 Another. Same. Greene Co., Va. 4 in.

23 Another. Granite, fine and perfect blade, deep groove, polished
from long use; fine and desirable. Breckenridge Co., Ky. 6 in.

24 Another. Granite, fine perfect blade, good shape, deep groove, also
very desirable. Lincoln Co., Tenn. 5 A-- 6A1/2 in.

25 Another. Fine grained granite, extra long and perfect blade, finely
grooved; rare. Athens Co., O. 4A1/2 A-- 8A1/2 in.

26 Another. Rough pebbly granite; of great size and weight, perfect
edge. S. W. North Carolina. 6A1/2 A-- 8A1/2 in.

27 ANVIL or Nut stone. Circular, with pitted cavity on each side;
smooth, nice specimen. Ohio. 4A1/2 A-- 5 in.

28 HAMMER STONE. Granite. Central Ohio. 3 A-- 3A1/2 in.

29 Another. White quartz. Central Ohio. 2A1/2 A-- 3 in.

30 Another. Granite, light groove. Washington Co., R. I. 2 A-- 2A1/4 in.

31 Another. Sand stone, deep groove. New London, Conn. 2A1/4 A-- 2A3/4 in.

32 LARGE HOE. Gray chert, fine large flaking, point polished from long
use. From Elliptical mound, East St. Louis. 8A1/4 in.

33 PESTLE. Pebbly stone, perfect, cylindrical. Eastern Penn. 11 in.

34 Another. Sandstone; similar. Cincinnati, O. 14 in.

35 Another. Hard gray stone, with carving of animalaEuro(TM)s head at one end.
Cylindrical, broken in centre but substantially mended. The largest
and most remarkable example I have seen. Border of Saratoga Lake, N.
Y. 22A1/2 in.

36 Another. Round, pecked sandstone, with handle of mushroom shape.
Meade Co., Ky. 4 A-- 6 in.

37 Another. Base has a slight concavity for cracking nuts, smooth from
long use. Very fine. Ohio. 3A1/2 A-- 5 in.

38 Another. As last, base chipped. Ohio. 3 A-- 5 in.

39 AMULET. Heart-shaped concretion, (see interesting description
attached). Fine and rare. Texas. 4A1/2 A-- 4A1/2 in.

40 QUOIT. Flint, beautifully flaked, extra fine. Tenn. 4 A-- 4A3/4 in.

41 Quoit or large knife; extra fine. Tenn. 3A1/2 A-- 5A1/4 in.

42 BOLAS STONE. Egg-shaped, white quartz, one end slightly flattened.
Hall Co., Ga. 1A3/4 A-- 2A1/4 in.

43 Another. Dark stone, curious and rare. Hall Co., Ga. 1A3/4 A-- 2A1/4 in.

44 Saddle-shaped stone, base and ends flat, sides and top rounded to a
half-circle, with half-inch perforation through its length. Hard dark
stone. Randolph Co., Tenn. 1A1/2 A-- 2A1/4 A-- 3A1/4 in.

45 Boat-shaped object, top hollowed out, two perforations, steatite or
soapstone, a perfect and rare specimen. Hancock Co., Tenn. 1a...oe A-- 6A1/4 in.

46 Similar. Micaceous stone. Gwinnett Co., Ga. 1a...z A-- 3A1/4 in.

47 Another. No perforations, ends grooved. Gwinnett Co., Ga.
1A1/4 A-- 2a...oe in.

48 Another. Different shape, no cavity but perforated with two holes,
also a rare object. Gwinnett Co., Ga. 1 A-- 3A3/4 in.

49 CEREMONIAL AXE (so called). Yellowish material, perforated with a
half-inch hole, fine and rare. Saratoga Lake, N. Y. 3a...z in.

50 Another. Slate. Williams Co., O. 4A1/2 in.

51 BANNER STONE. Butterfly shape, light-colored granite, the usual
perforation begun and half finished; uncommon form, and rare on
account of its size. James Co., Tenn. 6A3/4 in.

52 Neat perforated fragment, at the bottom of which is a nipple
showing process employed in drilling, viz., with sand and hollow reed.
1A1/2 A-- 2A1/2 in.

53 GORGET. Two perforations, slate. Shelby Co., O. 3A3/4 in.

54 Another. One perforation, slate. Marion Co., O. 1A3/4 A-- 3A1/2.

55 Another. Banded slate, very fine. Hardin Co., O. 3A1/4 in.

56 Gorget ornament. Banded slate, diamond shape. Hardin Co., O. 2a...ù in.

57 Object in steatite, two large holes, edge with notches. Columbia
Co., O. 2A1/2 in.

58 PENDANT. Steatite, oval shape, perforated, with carving of a human
face; a curious object. Georgia. 2A1/2 in.

59 POTTERY BUST. Face, front view. Mound, S. E. Missouri. 2A1/2 in.

60 PLUMMET or Slung Shot of quartz, egg-shaped. Massac Co., Ill.
2 A-- 3A1/2 in.

61 DISCOIDAL or Game Stone, with concavity on each side. Very
symmetrical, fine and rare. Ohio. 1A1/2 A-- 2A1/2 in.

62 Two, similar, one with centre perforation, both of soft stone.
Ohio. 3A1/4 A-- 1a...z in. 2 pcs

63 STONE BALL. Incised lines quartering, etc. Very curious. Shelby
Co., O. 1a...z in.

64 PEARL SHELL. From grave, small perforation, one side covered with
incised dots in fanciful design. Santa Barbara, Cal. 2A1/2 A-- 4A1/2 in.

65 Mussel Shell from mound, one side encrusted with limestone
concretion. Pike Co., Ill. 4 in.

66 Mussel Shell. A circular hole through centre. Pike Co., Ill. 3A1/2 in.


ARROW AND SPEAR HEADS, ETC.

67 ARROW HEADS. A small collection, some fine. Ohio. 20 pcs

68 Arrow Heads. White quartz. Suffolk Co., N. Y. 3 pcs

69 Arrow Heads. Larger size, all perfect. Ohio. 5 pcs

70 Arrow Heads. Of mottled stone. Cole Co., Mo. 8 pcs

71 SPEAR POINTS. Black flint and chert, all fine, average 4 in. long.
Ohio. 7 pcs

72 Spear Points. White flint and chert, all fine, average 4A1/2 in. long.
Ohio. 4 pcs

73 KNIFE. Black flint, finely finished. Clay Co., Ky. 3A1/2 in.

74 Another. Light colored flint, an elegant specimen. St. Clair Co.,
Ill. 3A1/4 in.

75 Another. White colored flint, very symmetrical. St. Clair Co., Ill.
3A1/4 in.

76 Another. Dark chert, finely flaked and chipped. Marion Co., Ill.
5 in.

77 Another. Dark chert, ruder shape than preceding. Ohio. 3A1/2 in.

78 ARROW POINT. Pure white quartz, hollow base, the war point type; a
beauty. Georgia. 1a...z in.

79 Another. White chert, square base, deeply notched. Cooper Co., Mo.
1a...z in.

80 Another. Similar to last. Ohio. 2A1/4 in.

81 Another. Pink chalcedony, with dark vein of color, perfect.
Missouri. 2A1/4 in.

82 Another. ROTARY, rounded base, both edges bevelled and notched.
Illinois. 2A3/4 in.

83 Another. Square base, deeply notched and serrated, bevelled edges.
Kentucky. 3 in.

84 Another. Rounded base, very fine. Illinois. 3A1/2 in.

85 Another. Similar to last, very fine. 3A1/2 in.

86 Another. Very remarkable specimen, black flint. Kentucky. 3a...> in.

87 Another. Very large base, serrated and bevelled edges, one barb
broken. Mercer Co., O. 2 A-- 3 in.

88 SPEAR POINT. Square base, white chert, finely made, perfect. Ohio.
3A1/2 in.

89 Another. White flint, spade shape, beautifully flaked, very
symmetrical. Gallien Co., O. 3A1/2 in.

90 Another. Gray flint, round base, deeply notched, serrated edges,
perfect point. Bowling Green, Ky. 3A1/2 in.

91 Another. Similar, dark flint, extra fine. Bowling Green, Ky. 3A1/4 in.

    Special attention is requested to the following 16 lots, every
    one of which has something special to recommend it, either for
    beauty of material, or excellence in design and workmanship.

92 SPEAR HEAD. White chert, in perfect condition. Pike Co., Ill.
1a...oe A-- 6A3/4 in.

93 Another. Yellow chert, small point from tip. Illinois. 1a...z A-- 6 in.

94 Another. Brown chert, perfect. Illinois. 1A1/4 A-- 6 in.

95 Another. Dark colored stone, fine flaking, two curious lines or
markings running longitudinally, perfect. Illinois. 1a...ù A-- 5A1/2 in.

96 Another. White chert, perfect. Illinois. 1A1/2 A-- 5a...> in.

97 Another. Hollowed base, deep notches, serrated edges, tip has been
broken, but has been _repaired_ by the ancient workman. Very fine.
Kentucky. 4A3/4 in.

98 Another. Yellow chert, long, square base, point slightly damaged,
but very finely made. Kentucky. 5A3/4 in.

99 Another. Black flint, sharp, square base, beautifully flaked,
perfect. Kentucky. 5A1/2 in.

100 Another. Yellow flint; when held to the light, shows fine cross
marking of dark color; hollow base, very small notches, very beautiful
and desirable. Illinois. 4A3/4 in.

101 Another. White chert, long, square base, as No. 96, beautifully
made. Illinois. 4a...z in.

102 Another. Bluish flint, fine transverse markings, very wide, flat
base, slightly notched, a perfect and fine specimen. Huron Co., O.
5 in.

103 Another. Grey flint, square base, deep, heavy notches, beautifully
flaked, choice and rare. Miami Co., O. 3a...z in.

104 Another. Reddish or salmon colored, finely flaked and chipped,
very desirable. Jefferson Co., Ark. 8 A-- 4 in.

105 Another. Grey flint, square base, deeply notched, of elegant and
symmetrical shape, perfect in every respect, a _chef daEuro(TM)A"uvre_ of
primitive workmanship, very choice and desirable. Breckenridge Co.,
Ky.

106 Another. Yellowish chert, small, square base, very heavily
notched, perfect edges, finely flaked, desirable. Missouri. 4A1/4 in.

107 KNIFE. White chert, with haft for a handle, flaked and chipped,
extremely rare form. So. Illinois. 7 in.

    Choice specimens neatly mounted on card-board:aEuro"

108 SPEAR POINTS. White chert, localities marked, av. 3A3/4, all very
fine. 4 pcs

109 Arrow Points. White quartz. Suffolk Co., N. Y. 5 pcs

110 Arrow Points. Bluish flint, all perfect, and rare. Mound, Osage
River, Mo. 9 pcs

111 Arrow Points. White quartz, all fine. Suffolk Co., N. Y. 9 pcs

112 Spear Points, etc. Grey chert, of different forms, all perfect and
very fine. WadesboroaEuro(TM), N. C. 7 pcs

113 Arrow Points. As above, all very fine and perfect. WadesboroaEuro(TM),
N. C. 11 pcs

114 Arrow Points. Very desirable specimens; fine color and material,
all perfect. From mound at Osage River, Mo. 9 pcs

115 Arrow Points. Chosen for singular serrated and notched edges, all
fine and rare. Ohio. 4 pcs

116 DRILLS. All perfect, 5 from Missouri, 2 from Ohio, 1 from Georgia.
1 (Ohio) is unique as far as known, in length being 4A1/2 in. A very
desirable selection. 8 pcs

117 Drills. Very pretty and attractive selection. Clay County, Tenn.
6 pcs

118 ARROW POINTS. Small, all perfect. Ohio. 6 pcs

119 Arrow Points. Choice lot, all perfect; small points, from Miss.,
California and Block Island, as marked on card (2 obsidian). 6 pcs

120 Arrow Points. Specimens from Willamette River, Oregon, of these
beautiful productions; jasper, moss agate, obsidian, etc., rare.
12 pcs

121 FISH HOOKS. Black flint; desirable and rare. 2 pcs

122 Arrow Point. Black flint, rotary, hollow base, finely notched,
bevelled and serrated edge, a perfect and choice specimen of this
prototype of the modern revolving rifle ball. Bowling Green, Ky.

123 Arrow Point. Rotary, light-colored flint, as last, except base is
square; perfect and rare. Bowling Green, Ky.

124 Arrow Points. Rotary, gray chert. Perfect, as last, but smaller.
2 pcs

125 Arrow Points. Clouded chalcedony; fine and perfect specimens from
Clear Water Harbor, west coast of Florida, rare. 3 pcs

126 Arrow Point. Crystal, narrow, serrated edges, said to be poisoned.
California.

127 Arrow Point. Thin copper, triangular in shape, Iroquois; small
fish-line stone Sinker. Fleming, Cayuga Co., N. Y. 3 pcs

128 FISH SPEAR. Copper, rounded base, two perforations at base.
1A1/4 A-- 3a...oe in. Highest rarity. Ontonagon River, Mich.

129 Another. Copper, rounded base with three perforations. 1A1/2 A-- 2A1/2 in.
Ontonagon River, Mich.

130 Fish Hooks of copper; small copper arrow head, Phoenicia, Syria.
3 pcs

131 COPPER CHISEL. Ancient copper tool found at Prairie-du-Chien,
Wis.; sharp cutting edge, sides turned up, gouge form, excessively
rare, 1a...ù in. wide, 2A1/2 long, 1A1/4 thick.


OBJECTS IN HEMATITE, ETC.

    On account of its density and the fine polish it takes,
    hematite was a favorite material with the ancient artificer.
    Next to copper, hematite is the scarcest material employed by
    the pre-historic workman.

132 AXE. Hematite, deeply grooved, edge polished and of great weight.
Very rare. 2A1/4 in. thick, 3 wide, 3A1/4 long. Pulaski Co., Mo.

133 CELT. Brown hematite, polished, edge slightly broken, very rare.
Pike Co., Ill.

134 Celt. Edge perfect and sharp, very rare. Pike Co., Ill.

135 Mammal or Cone. Brown hematite, fine and perfect, base 2a...oe in.,
2 in. high. Very rare. Pike Co., Ill.

136 Plummets, (so called). Brown hematite, oblong, with small groove
around the top, beautiful polish, exceedingly rare. St. Clair and Pike
Co., Ill. 2 pcs

137 Plummets. Same as last, but made from white limestone; also a rare
relic. 1a...> A-- 4 in. Illinois. 2 pcs

138 Bone awl, made from deeraEuro(TM)s horn, pointed end, 1A1/2 A-- 6 in.; another,
resembles a needle. A3/4 A-- 2A1/2 in. Mound in Arkansas. 2 pcs

139 Animal (Fox?) carved in bone, a..." A-- 2A1/2 in.; also carved duck 1A1/2 in.
long; each with perforation, curious. Alaska. 2 pcs

140 Relics from mound, Clay Co., N. C. Two bearaEuro(TM)s teeth, four human
teeth, shells, etc. Lot.

141 Pearl Shells. Perforated in process of making into fish-hooks,
fine iridescent color on one side. San Miguel Island, Cal. 3 pcs

142 Pearl Shell Ornaments. San Miguel Island, Cal. 5 pcs

143 Whetstones. Very hard stone, narrow and with pointed ends. Scarce
and desirable. S. W. California. 4 pcs

144 BIRD CALL. Terra cotta, black, turtle-shaped with head and
flippers, round hole in back, two smaller ones at the side. Curious
and rare object from Indian grave near Los Angeles, Cal.

145 TERRA COTTA FIGURES. Male and female Idols in red terra cotta.
Decorated in various pigments; old fractures newly mended. Height 15
and 14 in. Found in ancient water conduit near Mojave, Hackberry,
Ariz. V. rare and curious. 2 pcs

146 BONE WHISTLE. Made from human thigh bone, the large hole at one
end plugged with a black, pitchy substance. Rare and curious. Santa
Barbara, Cal.

The four following lots, domestic utensils of the ancient Cherokees,
are from a mound at Edgefield, S. C, dug up by Mr. William I. Scott,
of Augusta, Ga., in 1895.

147 PIPE, so called, but may be a lamp. Wide bowl surrounded by nine
projecting stems, each perforated and reaching into the bowl. Total
width 4A1/4 A-- 1A3/4 in. Steatite or soapstone, rare and curious.

148 CUP. Steatite, with handle and spout; rare. 3 A-- 4 in.

149 CUP. Steatite, with handle. 4 A-- 2A1/4 in. Rare.

150 DIPPER or SPOON. Short handle. Steatite, perfect and rare. 3A1/2 in.




MISCELLANEOUS.

151 Small Collection of Aztec relics, brought from Mexico many years
ago, by SeA+-or Da Costa Gomez. Terra cotta figure, 4A1/2 in.; ancient
Mirrors, polished surface, convex backs, 1A1/2 in. (2); copper Idol,
3 in.; jade Amulet, 1A1/4 in.; obsidian Lip ornament; green jade
Ornament, perforated, 1A1/4 in.; polished Pendant, 1A1/2 in.; string of
polished perforated stone Beads, fine colors (7). 15 pcs

152 AMULET. Heart-shaped, small perf.; fine green stone, jade or
serpentine. 4A1/4 in. Rare and curious. Mexico.

153 AZTEC BEADS. A necklace of perforated stone pebbles varying in
size from A1/2 to 1A1/4 in., green and mottled colors, fine polish. Rare to
excess. 38 pcs. Lot

154 ARROW POINTS. Five fine arrow points and four flakings, obsidian.
Mexico. Fine and rare. 9 pcs

155 NECK ORNAMENT. Aztec, of obsidian, semi-lunar, small perf. at each
end for suspension, a...ù wide, 3A1/2 in. across. V. fine and rare.

156 SILVER CHALICE or Temple Cup from Ancona, near Lima, Peru, time of
the Incas. Height 8A1/2 in., width across mouth 2A3/4 in. Very thin silver,
hammered from one piece of metal; centre of cup bears impress of a
human face with ears and prominent nose; fanciful zig-zag
ornamentation or crown above. In absolutely perfect condition and of
the highest rarity, color black from oxidation.

157 Silver Chalice. Without decorative ornamentation above the face;
equally fine and perfect, both marvels of workmanship of a by-gone
age, black color. 6a...z in.

158 Pottery Jar. Traces of brown-colored pigment, from Chiriqui
graves, Colombia, S. A. 3 A-- 4 in.

159 KNIFE. Obsidian, oval shaped, finely flaked; when held to the
light, shows dark, cloudy lines across its surface; very showy and
rare. 5 in. Lassen Co., Cal.

160 BEADS. Stone Beads from grave, La Salle, Ill. Bead made from the
oliva shell, which is not found nearer than the Florida coast; this
specimen from Indian grave at Peoria, Ill. 2 pcs

161 Perforated stone Beads, from Lodi, Miss. 1a...oe in. 2 pcs

162 Plummet or Sinker. Blue stone. Meredith, N. H.

163 Arrow Point of remarkable shape, notched on each side; the base
runs to a sharp point, perfect. 1A1/4 A-- 2A3/4 in.

164 COPPER BEADS. Necklace of 24A1/2 in. beads from Indian grave.
Memaloose Is., Oregon. Rare.

165 Copper Beads. From 1 to 6 in. in length, A1/4 in. thick (20).
Flathead Indian graves. Rare lot.

166 Copper Pendant. Perforated for suspension, four notches at base.
Same locality as No. 164, rare.

167 Copper Ornaments from graves as above; one small Bracelet, two
Pendants, one long Bead with original string still in the bead. Rare.
4 pcs

168 Glass Beads. Fine necklace of the HudsonaEuro(TM)s Bay Trading Co. beads,
from Flathead Indian grave, Memaloose Is., Oregon. Lot.

169 EARRINGS. Long earrings, each made from about 120 dentalium
shells. Brass rings for suspension, length, 14 ins., width, 1A3/4 in.
Very curious and rare. Oregon. 2 pcs

170 Shell Pendant or Ornament of perforated shell, small copper ball
at bottom. Indian grave, Cayuga, Co., N. Y. Very rare.

171 NECKLACE of 37 objects: glass beads, bits of copper and catlinite
or red pipe stone cut in fanciful form; of great interest and rarity.
Springport, Cayuga Co., N. Y.

173 WAMPUM TREATY BELT. This rare relic was found with three others,
by Mr. Wm. W. Adams, at the old Fleming farm, East Cayuga, Cayuga Co.,
N. Y., in 1888. One of the four is now in the British Museum; the
present ownership of the other two is unknown to me. This belt, the
fourth of the find, is 2 ft. 3 in. in length and 2A1/2 in. wide; it
contains 1,600 beads; the outer or border row is made from red glass
beads (wampum size); inside the border are seven rows of the _genuine_
shell wampum or _Wampumpeague_ of the Colonial period; 12 fanciful
designs of dark and yellow beads at intervals in its length. Very rare
and desirable.

174 SHELL BEADS, etc. A card, 8A1/2 A-- 9 in., containing an outer string
of 110 perforated shell beads, a...oe A-- A1/2 in. in size; an inner string of
150, more or less, perforated sea-shells; another string of 15 large
and small shell beads from Spang Mound, East Tennessee; and two
splendid examples of the rotary arrow points in black flint and
yellowish chert, both perfect. Rare. Lot.

175 String of Shell Beads, from burial mound, Ga.; another string of
very small perforated shell-money from the South Sea Islands. Mounted,
rare. 2 pcs

176 Mounted colored Shells, shell discs. Georgia. 2 pcs

177 String of small thin perforated Beads, too numerous to count, with
one large flat bead 1a...oe in. diameter. Total length of string about
28 in. Rare. San Miguel Island, Cal. Lot.

178 String of six enormous perforated shell beads, two are 1A1/2 in. long
and broad, from Lake Creek Mound, Tenn. String of 23 flat perforated
shell discs, Tennessee River, near Nashville. 2 pcs

179 Shell Hair Pins. Two very fine examples of these rare relics made
from the columella of the Conch Shell or strombus, one 7, the other
6A1/2 in. long; small string of 31 Shell Beads; string of 11 Beads; also
on the card a fine Spear Head of dark stone, 4A3/4 in. long. Choice and
rare lot, all from Georgia. All mounted. 5 pcs

180 Shell Beads. String of large perforated Beads; string of 40 beads,
from mound near Cartersville, Ga. Rare. 2 pcs

181 BONE or porcelain Beads from Indian grave, Rocky Mountains. String
of 42 oblong polished beads; another, smaller size, all very fine and
rare. 2 pcs

182 Bone and Shell Necklace, one of each, very handsome. Georgia. 2
lots

183 Shell Necklace of 21 perf. beads, 22 in. in length. Very choice.
Mound near Hardin, Calhoun Co., Ill.

184 Curious Necklace of 56 perf. shells, each ground flat, about
20 in. in length; fine example from burial site, mouth Illinois River,
Lincoln Co., Ill.

185 Shell Ornaments. One large perf. shell; two fine semi-lunar neck
ornaments, a...oe A-- 4 in. long. Fine iridescence. California. 3 pcs

186 Stone Beads. Sixteen polished, perforated stone beads, greenish
color, two very large. Rare. Santa Barbara, Cal.

187 Shell Beads. Three strings of Shell Beads. Fine and perfect
specimens. New Madrid Co., Mo.; Calhoun Co., Ill. and mound, Calhoun
Co., Ill. 3 pcs

188 Crinoid Beads, etc. Strings Crinoid and shell beads from grave,
Calhoun Co., Ill., burial mound, Pike Co., Mo. and San Miguel, Cal.
5 pcs

189 Bone Beads. Five bone beads, a...oe to 1A1/4 in. (human?). Stanley, Ark.
5 pcs

190 Shell and Glass. One small string fresh water shells, two strings
of red and blue, long glass beads. Surface finds, Cayuga Co., N. Y.
Rare. 3 pcs

191 Wampum and Baldrick beads. String of 112 pcs _genuine_ wampum, in
blue and white variety, exceedingly rare; another string of 16 pcs,
shell baldrick beads, one 4A1/2 in. in length. All perforated, exceeding
fine and rare lot, from graves, Cayuga Co., N. Y. 2 pcs

192 OBSIDIAN. Core from which knives have been chipped, 2A1/2 A-- 3A1/2 in.
Fine and scarce specimen. Mexico.

193 TOMAHAWK. Iron, time of French and Indian wars; Seneca Falls,
N. Y. 6 in. length, width of blade 3A1/2 in. Fine and rare.


EFFIGY PIPES, ETC.

194 Large Calumet or Peace Pipe of steatite. Head of an animal, sharp
pointed nose, very large stem aperture. Size, 3A1/2 A-- 4A1/2 in., a little
rubbed on one side, otherwise perfect. From Silver Creek, near
Morgantown, N. C.

195 BIRD PIPE. Dark stone, head of a hawk carved on bowl, perforation
for suspension. A remarkable specimen of these now rare types.
Randolph Co., Tenn. 2A1/2 A-- 3A1/2 in.

196 FROG PIPE. Grayish stone, body and head of a frog with open mouth
to receive pipe-stem. Size, 3 A-- 5 in. Perfect, fine and very rare
type. Scott Co., Ky.

197 CALUMET or Council Pipe. DuckaEuro(TM)s head and general outline of that
bird, incised lines for wings, etc. Large bowl and stem for aperture.
Size, 3A3/4 A-- 8 in. Greenish micaceous stone. Rare and valuable. For
illustration, see C. C. JonesaEuro(TM)s aEurooeHistory of the Southern Indians.aEuroù
Bastow Co., Ga.

198 MASSIVE CALUMET or Council Pipe. Steatite, stem square 2 in. each
way, the bowl rises at a slight outward angle, top broken at one
corner. 5 A-- 5 in. Very heavy and remarkable example (see C. C. JonesaEuro(TM)s
History, etc.). Rare. Cherokee Co., Ga.

199 CALUMET. Similar to last in form and material, but smaller, being
2A1/4 A-- 4 in., top of bowl damaged at two corners. Rare. Hightower River,
Ga.

200 PLATFORM or PEACE PIPE. Very large and curious form, the pipe
proper lies on a base with rounded edges, large bowl and stem
apertures. Yellowish sandstone. 4 A-- 4A3/4 in. Perfect in every respect,
unusual and rare type. Union Co., N. C.

201 Mound BuilderaEuro(TM)s Pipe of pottery, long stem, bowl on centre of
stem. 2A3/4 A-- 5A1/2 in. A very primitive affair. Rare. From mound, Faulkner
Co., Ark.

202 LODGE PIPE. A curiosity, in having _two_ stems at right angles
from the bowl, 1a...oe in. deep, 3 in. to end of each stem. Dark soft
stone, very rare. Hancock Co., Tenn.

203 Round Pipe, bowl and stem, both circular and damaged. Steatite.
2 A-- 3 in. Walton Co., Ga.

204 MOUND BUILDERaEuro(TM)S PIPE. Long and graceful shape of pottery; stem has
been broken but mended. 7 in. Very rare. Oneida Co., N. Y.

    All pipes from New York State are of great rarity.

205 PLATFORM PIPE. Dark greenish stone, finely polished, of graceful
outline and excellent workmanship; the platform or stem proper has
been cracked, but neatly repaired. 3A1/2 in. Very fine and rare specimen.
Delaware Co., N. Y.

206 POLISHED PIPE. Greenish mottled stone with 14 tally marks or
notches on each side of the stem. 3A1/2 in. Very fine and rare. From Fish
Creek, Saratoga Co., N. Y.

207 PIPE. Conical, with perforated handle at one side, greenish
colored stone; the pipe is always a rarity and another of this variety
is perhaps unknown. 1A3/4 A-- 2A1/4 in. Saratoga, N. Y.

208 Pipe. Fine polish and shape, dark green color. 1A1/2 A-- 1A1/2 in.
Another, smaller, bowl broken. Eta River, Ga. 2 pcs

209 Esquimaux Stone Pipe, of greenish color, fancifully carved
decoration, fine polish. 2a...oe in., no stem. Perfect and interesting.
Labrador.

210 Mound BuilderaEuro(TM)s Stone Platform Pipe. Very thick, square base and
low bowl, incised line around bowl and two small circular projections
at end of stem; a rarity. 2A3/4 in. Lake Wabesha, Wisconsin.

211 Pottery Pipe. High bowl, short stem. 3A1/4 in., perfect. Another pipe
or tube also of pottery. 3 in. Asheville, N. C. 2 pcs

212 Pipe. Pottery, with human face and projecting ears. 1A3/4 A-- 3 in.,
perfect. Pensacola, Fla.

213 Pipe. Rude attempt at carving a human face, steatite. 2 A-- 2 in.
S. C.

214 TUBE. Unfinished; excessively hard iron stone. 2 A-- 5A1/2 in. Lewis
Co., N. Y.

215 Iron pipe. A curiosity, probably of the Colonial period, when aEurooea
pipe was a pipeaEuroù and not easily to be replaced. Bowl, a...ù in., stem,
5A1/4 in.; very thin, slightly rusted in centre of stem. Rare. Oneida,
N. Y.

216 Stone Pipe. Red catlinite, heavy silver band at junction of bowl
and stem. Very fine deep red color and polish; length of stem, 8A1/2 in.,
height of bowl, 4 in. Modern Sioux, a very choice specimen, duplicate
from the Smithsonian Institute, Wash.

217 Oregon Bird Points. Fine gem arrow points, from the Willamette
River. Obsidian, jasper, etc., mounted and framed, under glass.
116 pcs

218 OHIO. Arrow and Spear points of fine form, color and material,
neatly arranged and framed, under glass. 105 pcs


REVOLUTIONARY ARMS AND RELICS, ETC.

219 CAPT. JOHN PAUL JONES. Marine Glass. Brass mounted, 22 in.
Engraved JOHN PAUL 1773. Cardboard attached, with pen and ink portrait
of Capt. Jones, and fol. certificate: _John Paul Jones Mariene Glass
before and after the Revolutionary War. I got it from Wm. Miller, Esq.
a friend of Gen. Jones who got it from Him. It was greatly admired by
all the Generals and my friends. J. T._ (Col. John Trumbull,
aide-de-camp to Washington.) In curious old ornate case, inscribed
COM. JOHN PAUL JONES SPY GLASS.

220 John Paul Jones. Miniature Portrait painted in India ink on
deer-skin, by John Trumbull, 1776. Colonial frame.

221 ROBERT MORRIS. Flint Lock Musket, ramrod missing. ROBERT MORRIS
engraved at side. Cardboard certificate inscribed: _Gun carried by
Robert Morris Chief Justice of N. Jersey. J. T._

222 Robert Morris. Revolutionary Fire Pan. Iron, flintlock, in good
condition, curious and rare. 8 in. With certificate: _Fire Pan used by
Robert Morris of New Jersey. J. T._

223 Robert Morris. Pair brass Spurs. Certificate: _Brass Spurs used by
Robert Morris of N. Jersey. J. T._

224 GEN. ALEXANDER HAMILTON. Flintlock Carbine, DEMPSEY maker. A
HAMILTON N. Y. engraved on stock. Certificate on cardboard: _Gen.
Alexander HamiltonaEuro(TM)s Gun, a present from the Executors. Clippings
inside. J. T._ (Several clippings published after his death,
inserted). Of great interest.

225 GEN. FRANCIS RAWDON. Flint Lock Pistol, 22 in. Brass mountings, FR
in crowned monogram engraved, also name ROGER SHERMAN engraved on
side. Cardboard certificate: _Gen. Francis RawdonaEuro(TM)s Pistol. An Eng.
Gen. that fought all through the Rev. War. Pistol found at the Battle
of Bunkers Hill and presented to R. S. by Gen. Putnam. I got it in
exchange for a Painting. J. T._ A unique Revolutionary trophy.

226 SAMUEL FRAUNCIS. Flint Lock Pistol, stock handsomely engraved,
S. F. cut at side. 18 in. Given by Frauncis of Frauncis Tavern, N. Y.,
to Col. John Trumbull, who placed it in his Collection of
Revolutionary Relics. Certificate lost, but attribution of this, as of
every object in this catalogue, guaranteed by Cataloguer.

227 Colonial Pike. Used by N. E. home guards in Colonial days. Modern
shaft.

228 DRAGOON SABRE. Heavy scabbard, brass mountings. Used in Colonial
days. Massachusetts.

229 SWORD. Ivory handle, etc., eagleaEuro(TM)s head. Major John Merrill,
Duxbury, Mass., war 1812.

230 REVOLUTIONARY CANNON BALLS. From the battle field of Long Island.
3 sizes. Lot of 3 pcs

       *       *       *       *       *

231 HUNTING KNIFE. Ivory handle, bronze lion-head pommel; 12 in. blade
engraved with U. S. arms, etc. Once the property of the famous Western
Pioneer, David Crockett. From PealeaEuro(TM)s Museum, Phila.

232 Sioux War Club. Pony tail as handle. 20 in. Modern.


FIRE ARMS, SWORDS, ETC.

233 BLUNDERBUSS. Flint lock, brass barrel and mountings; English make,
in perfect order; an extra fine and heavy specimen. 2 ft. 9A1/2 in.

234 Blunderbuss. Flint lock, English make, in perfect condition, extra
fine. 2 ft. 4 in.

235 Blunderbuss. Percussion lock, very fine, carved black stock,
French make. 2 ft. 8 in.

236 Blunderbuss. Circassia, flint lock, muzzle, 4A1/2 in. diam., barrel
etched, stock inlaid with arabesque patterns, very fine and rare. 1
ft. 8 in.

237 PISTOL. Long Algerine flint lock, woodwork overlaid with
ornamental metal covering, repoussA(C) work, no ramrod. 1 ft. 7 in.

238 Pistol. Turkish, flint lock, carved stock, no ramrod. 1 ft. 7 in.

239 Pistols. Pair German duelling pistols, percussion locks, sweet
briar handles; locks and barrels finely etched, with gold inlaying,
barrels rifle grooved. _Lindenschmidt Mainz_ on barrel; marked 1 and 2
respectively; of the finest mechanism. 2 pcs

240 Pistol. English, flint lock, brass barrel. D. GOFF. Very fine;
small piece from stock. 1 ft. 2 in.

241 Pistol. French, flint lock, brass barrel. Du Bois & Fils. Very
fine; stock slightly defective at end. 1 ft. A1/2 in.

242 REVOLVER. English, 5 barrels, extra fine and very heavy, perfect.
11A1/2 in.

243 Revolver. French, 6 barrels rifled, finely etched, perfect and
curiously made. 7A1/2 in.

244 Revolver. French, 8 barrels, also 1 long barrel (9 in all),
_double action_ hammer, in perfect order, once the property of the
notorious Captain Wirz, commandant of the Andersonville, S. C, prison
pen. From General CameronaEuro(TM)s Collection. Wirz was finally executed for
his crimes. 13 in.

245 Revolver. ColtaEuro(TM)s pattern (pepper-box), 5 barrels, a beautiful
unused specimen. 9A1/2 in.

246 Revolver. ORTMANN LIEGE. 6 barrels, etched, perfect, a curious
little bit. 4A1/2 in.

247 Revolver. Remington. 4 barrels. Also very curious, perfect. 5 in.

248 Revolver. Allens. 5 barrels, curious side hammer. Early type.
9 in.

249 Revolver. American Arms Co. 2 barrels. Perfect. 6 in.

250 Pistol. Flintlock. English, curious. 8 in.

251 Pistol. Flintlock, hammer on top of barrel, etched. Very early
type. 6 in.

252 Pistol. VARLEY & CO. LONDON. 2 barrels. Perfect, very fine. 10 in.

253 Pistol. Small Derringer, early type, rifle barrel, nipple gone.
6 in.

254 Pistol. Flintlock. R. JOHNSON. CONN. 1842. Polished, unused
specimen. 14A1/2 in.

255 Pistol. Percussion, U. S. Navy pattern, 1821. Perfect. 16 in.


SWORDS, ETC.

256 CLAYMORE, Scottish, used at Waterloo, open work basket guard. Very
fine. 3 ft. 9 in.

257 Another. Said to have been used at Culloden, fine open work basket
guard, blade slightly curved. 3 ft. A1/2 in.

258 SWORD. Highland, rusty, and has received hard knocks. See
particulars attached. 2 ft. 9 in.

259 Rapier, blade only, stamped on each side, X TOLEDO MADRIET X and
mark of the _running Fox_. Fine and rare specimen of the famous Toledo
blades. 3 ft.

260 Rapier. With quillons and pas daEuro(TM)Ane. Good specimen. 3 ft. 3 in.

261 Scimitar and scabbard, Algerine. Finely decorated and curved
blade. 3 ft.

262 Rapier. French, open guard, used in Mexico, 1864. 3 ft. 2 in.

263 Sword. American. Curved blade, open guard. _Circa_ 1800. 2 ft.
11 in.

264 Sword. Heavy cavalry sword, German; steel scabbard, straight
blade. _Circa_ 1776. 3 ft. 6 in.

265 Sword. Steel scabbard, curved blade, made by Tiffany & Co., N. Y.
1861-65. 3 ft. 6A1/2 in.

266 Sword. Two-handed, fac-simile of that used by Sir Wm. Wallace. 5
ft. 1 in.

267 Dirk. Highland; old time make, blade, 1A1/2 A-- 12A1/2 in. 1 ft. 6 in.

268 PilgrimaEuro(TM)s Staff. Hollow iron handle, with claw and small hatchet,
_sliding_ lance, 2 ft. 7 in. long; that, when not in use, is returned
inside the handle. _Circa_ 1600; very curious. Total length, 6 ft.

269 Cross-bow shaft, black oak; parts of the leather feathering still
remain; triangular, steel head. 15th century. 1 ft. 4A1/2 in.

270 TILTING VISOR. Iron, very heavy bars. Rare. 7A1/2 A-- 8A1/2 in.

271 WAR CLUB. aEurooeMaquahuiltaEuroù Aztec, studded with genuine obsidian teeth.
A fac-simile of the original in museum, City of Mexico. 3 ft.

272 PISTOLS. 4 old _pepper boxes_, ColtaEuro(TM)s pattern, one of 3 barrels,
not in good order. 4 pcs

273 SPURS. Mexican. Enormous rowels. 3 and 4 in. diameter. Very fine.
2 pcs

274 KEYS. Iron, very old patterns. 4 to 5 in. long, on plaque. 9 pcs

275 HARPOON. From New London, Conn. 3 pcs

276 SCALP LOCKS. Mounted, handsomely decorated with colored bead work.
Assiniboin and Sioux. Very rare. 3 pcs

277 WAR CLUB. Modern Sioux, double pointed stone head, rawhide handle,
feather decoration. 2 ft. 2 in.

278 WALNUT RELIC CASE. With locks and two glass doors to each section.
Lower portion, 2 ft. 7 in. high, 4 ft. wide, 8 in. deep. Upper
section, 3 ft. 4 in. high, 3 ft. 10 in. wide, 5 in. deep.

279 CHERRY PISTOL CASE. 4 ft. 11 in. high, 1 ft. 10 in. wide, 5 in.
deep; with lock and glass door.




CONDITIONS OF SALE.


I. The highest bidder is to be the buyer; and if any dispute arise
between two or more bidders, the lot so in dispute shall be
immediately put up again and re-sold.

II. The purchaser to give in his or her name and residence, and to
make a deposit of 25 per cent., or more, in part of payment, or the
whole of the purchase money, _if required_; in default of which, the
lot or lots so purchased to be immediately put up again and re-sold.

III. The lots to be taken away and paid for, whether genuine and
authentic or not, with all faults or errors of description, at the
buyeraEuro(TM)s expense and risk, within two days from the sale; the Fifth
Avenue Auction Rooms not being responsible for the correct
description, genuineness, or authenticity of, or any fault or defect
in, any lot; and making no warranty whatever, the goods having been on
exhibition for two days before sale.

IV. To prevent inaccuracy in delivery, and inconvenience in the
settlement of the purchase, no lot can, on any account, be removed
during the time of sale; and the remainder of the purchase money must
absolutely be paid on delivery.

V. Upon failure of complying with the above conditions, the money
deposited in part of payment shall be forfeited; all lots uncleared
within the time aforesaid shall be re-sold by public or private sale,
and the deficiency (if any) attending such re-sale shall be made good
by the defaulter at this sale.

                                                    WM. B. NORMAN,
                                                     _Auctioneer._




TranscriberaEuro(TM)s Note: Item 172 did not exist in the catalogue.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of American Antiquities, by Wm. B. Norman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AMERICAN ANTIQUITIES ***

***** This file should be named 36598.txt or 36598.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/5/9/36598/

Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
