The Project Gutenberg EBook of The White Squaw, by Mayne Reid

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The White Squaw

Author: Mayne Reid

Illustrator: Anonymous

Release Date: July 3, 2011 [EBook #36604]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WHITE SQUAW ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




The White Squaw
By Captain Mayne Reid
Illustrations by Anon
Published by George Routledge and Sons.
This edition dated 1875.
The White Squaw, by Captain Mayne Reid.

________________________________________________________________________

________________________________________________________________________
THE WHITE SQUAW, BY CAPTAIN MAYNE REID.



CHAPTER ONE.

A DEADLY INTRODUCTION.

The last golden gleams of the setting sun sparkled across the
translucent waters of Tampa Bay.  This fading light fell upon shores
fringed with groves of oak and magnolia, whose evergreen leaves became
gradually darkened by the purple twilight.

A profound silence, broken by the occasional notes of a tree-frog, or
the flapping of the night-hawk's wings, was but the prelude to that
wonderful concert of animated nature heard only in the tropical forest.

A few moments, and the golden lines of trembling light had disappeared,
while darkness almost palpable overshadowed the scene.

Then broke forth in full chorus the nocturnal voices of the forest.

The mocking-bird, the whip-poor-will, the bittern, the bell-frog,
grasshoppers, wolves, and alligators, all joined in the harmony incident
to the hour of night, causing a din startling to the ear of a stranger.

Now and then would occur an interval of silence, which rendered the
renewal of the voices all the more observable.

During one of these pauses a cry might have been heard differing from
all the other sounds.

It was the voice of a human being, and there was one who heard it.

Making his way through the woods was a young man, dressed in half-hunter
costume, and carrying a rifle in his hand.  The cry had caused him to
stop suddenly in his tracks.

After glancing cautiously around, as if endeavouring to pierce the thick
darkness, he again advanced, again came to a stop, and remained
listening.  Once more came that cry, in which accents of anger were
strangely commingled with tones appealing for help.

This time the sound indicated the direction, and the listener's
resolution was at once taken.

Thrusting aside the undergrowth, and trampling under foot the tall
grass, he struck into a narrow path running parallel to the shore, and
which led in the direction whence the cry appeared to have come.

Though it was now quite dark, he seemed easily to avoid impediments,
which even in broad daylight would have been difficult to pass.

The darkness appeared no barrier to his speed, and neither the
overhanging branches, nor the wood-bine roots stayed his progress.

About a hundred paces further on, the path widened into a rift that led
to an opening, sloping gradually down to the beach.

On reaching its edge, he paused once more to listen for a renewal of the
sound.

Nothing save the familiar noises of the night greeted his ear.

After a short pause, he kept on for the water's edge, with head well
forward, and eyes strained to penetrate the gloom.

At that moment the moon shot out from behind a heavy bank of clouds,
and, with a brilliant beam, disclosed to his eager gaze a tableau of
terrible interest.

Down by the water's edge lay the body of an Indian youth, motionless,
and to all appearance dead; while stooping over it was another youth,
also an Indian.  He appeared to be examining the body.

For some seconds there was no change in his attitude.  Then, all at once
he raised himself erect, and with a tomahawk that flashed in the
moonlight above his head, appeared in the act of dealing a blow.

The hatchet descended; but not upon the body that lay prostrate.

A sharp report ringing on the air for an instant silenced all other
sounds.  The would-be assassin sprang up almost simultaneously, and two
corpses instead of one lay along the earth.

So thought he who fired the shot, and who was the young man already
described.  He stayed not to speculate, but rushed forward to the spot
where the two Indians lay.  He had recognised them both.  The one upon
the ground was Nelatu, the son of Oluski, a distinguished Seminole
chief.  The other was Red Wolf, a well-grown youth belonging to the same
tribe.

Only glancing at the would-be assassin to see that he was dead, he bent
over the body of Nelatu, placed his hand upon the region of his heart,
at the same time anxiously scanning his features.

Suddenly he uttered an exclamation of surprise.  Beneath his fingers a
weak pulsation gave signs of life.  Nelatu might yet be saved.

Pulling off his hat, he ran down to the beach, filled it with water,
and, returning, sprinkled the forehead of the young Indian.

Then taking a flask containing brandy from his pouch, he poured a
portion of its contents down the throat of the unconscious youth.

These kindly offices he repeated several times, and was finally rewarded
for his pains.  The blood slowly mantled Nelatu's cheek; a shivering ran
through his frame; and with a deep sigh he gazed dreamily upon his
preserver, and at the same time faintly murmured "Warren."

"Yes, Warren!  Speak, Nelatu.  What is the meaning of this?"

The Indian had only the strength to mutter the words "Red Wolf," at the
same time raising his hand to his side with apparent difficulty.

The gesture made his meaning clear.  Warren's gaze rested upon a deep
wound from which the blood was still welling.

By the tremulous movement of his lips, Warren saw that he was
endeavouring to speak again.  But no sound came from them.  His eyes
gradually became closed.  He had once more fainted.

Warren instantly flung off his coat, tore one of the sleeves from his
shirt, and commenced staunching the blood.

After a time it ceased to flow, and then tearing off the second sleeve,
with his braces knotted together, he bound up the wound.

The wounded youth slowly recovered consciousness, and, looking
gratefully up into his face, pressed the hand of his deliverer.

"Nelatu owes Warren life.  He will some day show his gratitude."

"Don't think of that now.  Tell me what has happened?  I heard your cry,
and hastened to your assistance."

"Not Nelatu's cry," responded the Indian, with a faint blush of pride
suffusing his face.  "Nelatu is the son of a chief.  He knows how to die
without showing himself a woman.  It was Red Wolf who cried out."

"Red Wolf!"

"Yes; Red Wolf is a coward--a squaw; 'twas he who cried out."

"He will never cry out again.  Look there!" said Warren, pointing to the
lifeless corpse that lay near.

Nelatu had not yet seen it.  Unconscious of what had transpired, he
believed that Red Wolf, supposing him dead, had gone away from the spot.

Warren explained.

Still more gratefully did the Indian youth gaze upon the face of his
preserver.

"You had an encounter with Red Wolf?  I can see that, of course; it was
he who gave you this wound?"

"Yes, but I had first defeated him.  I had him on the ground in my
power.  I could have taken his life.  It was then that, like a coward,
he called for help."

"And after?"

"I pitied and let him rise.  I expected him to leave me, and go back to
the village.  He feared that I might speak of his defeat to our tribe,
and for this he determined that my tongue should be for ever silent.  I
was not thinking of it when he thrust me from behind.  You know the
rest."

"And why the quarrel?"

"He spoke wicked words of my sister, Sansuta."

"Sansuta!" exclaimed Warren, a strange smile overshadowing his features.

"Yes; and of you."

"The dog; then he doubly deserved death.  And from _me_!" he added, in a
tone not loud enough for Nelatu to hear, "what a lucky chance."

As he said this he spurned the body with his foot.

Then turning to the Indian, he asked--

"Do you think you could walk a little, Nelatu?"

The brandy had by this time produced an effect.  Its potent spirit
supplied the loss of blood, and Nelatu felt his strength returning to
him.

"I will try," said the wounded youth.  "Nelatu's hour has not yet come.
He must not die till he has paid his debt to Warren."

"Then lean on me.  My canoe is close by.  Once in it you can rest at
your ease."

Nelatu nodded consent.

Warren assisted him to rise, and, half carrying, half supporting,
conducted him to the canoe.

Carefully helping him aboard, he shoved the craft from the shore, and
turned its prow in the direction of the white settlement.

The moon, that had become again obscured, once more burst through the
black clouds, lighting up the fronds of the feathery palms that flung
their shadows far over the pellucid waves.

The concert of the nocturnal forest, for a time stayed by the report of
the rifle, burst out anew as the boat glided silently out of sight.



CHAPTER TWO.

THE SETTLEMENT.

The site of the settlement to which the canoe was being directed merits
description.

It was upon the northern shore of Tampa Bay.

The soil that had been cleared was rich in crops of cotton, indigo,
sugar, with oranges, and the ordinary staples of food.

Through the cultivated lands, mapped out like a painter's palette, ran a
crystal stream, from which the rice fields were watered by intersecting
rivulets, looking like silver threads in a tissue.

Orange groves margined its course, running sinuously through the
settlement.

In places it was lost to sight, only to re-appear with some new feature
of beauty.

Here and there it exhibited cascades and slight waterfalls that danced
in the sunlight, sending up showers of prismatic spray.

There were islets upon which grew reeds, sedges, and canes, surmounted
by groups of caricas, and laurel-magnolias, the exogenous trees
overtopped by the tall, feathery palm.

In its waters wild fowl disported themselves, scattering showers of
luminous spray as they flapped their wings in delight.

Birds of rare plumage darted hither and thither along its banks,
enlivening the groves with their jocund notes.

Far beyond, the swamp forest formed a dark, dreary back-ground, which,
by contrast, enhanced the cheerfulness of the scene.

Looking seaward, the prospect was no less resplendent of beauty.

The water, dashing and fretting against the rocky quays, glanced back in
mist and foam.

Snow-white gulls hurried along the horizon, their wings cutting sharply
against an azure sky, while along the silvery beach, tall, blue herons,
brown cranes, and scarlet flamingoes, stood in rows, their forms
reflected in the pellucid element.

Such were the surroundings of the settlement on Tampa Bay.

The village itself nestled beneath the hills already mentioned, and
comprised a church, some half-dozen stores, with a number of substantial
dwellings, whilst a rude wharf, and several schooners moored near by,
gave tokens of intercourse with other places.

It was a morning in May, in Florida, as elsewhere, the sweetest month in
the year.

Borne upon the balmy atmosphere was the hum of bees and the melody of
birds, mingled with the voices of young girls and men engaged in the
labour of their farms and fields.

The lowing of cattle could be heard in the distant grazing grounds,
while the tillers of the soil were seen at work upon their respective
plantations.

There was one who looked upon this cheerful scene without seeming to
partake of its cheerfulness.

Standing upon the top of the hill was a man of tall, gaunt figure, with
a face somewhat austere in its expression.

His strongly lined features, with a firm expression about the mouth,
marked him for a man of no common mould.

He appeared to be about sixty.

As his keen grey eyes wandered over the fields below, there was a cold,
determined light in them which betrayed no pleasant train of thought.

It spoke of covetous ambition.

Behind him, upon the hill top, of table shape, were poles standing up
out of the earth.  Around them the sward was trampled, and the scorched
grass, worn in many directions into paths, signified that at no distant
period the place had been inhabited.

The sign could not be mistaken; it was the site of an Indian encampment.

Elias Rody, as he turned from gazing on the panoramic view beneath, cast
a glance of strange significance at these vestiges of the red-man's
habitation.

His features assumed a sharper cast, while a cloud came over his face.

"But for them," he muttered, "my wishes would be accomplished, my
desires fulfilled."

What were his wishes?  What his desires?

Ask the covetous man such a question, and, if he answered truly, his
answer would tell a tale of selfish aspirations.  He would envy youth
its brightness, old age its wisdom, virtue its content, love its joys,
ay, even Heaven itself its rewards, and yet, in the narrow bigotry of
egotism, think he only claimed his own.

Elias Rody was a covetous man, and such were the thoughts at that moment
in his mind.

They were too bitter for silence, and vented themselves in words, which
the winds alone listened to.

"Why should these red-skins possess what I so deeply long for; and only
for their short temporary enjoyment?  I would be fair with them; but
they wrap themselves up in their selfish obstinacy, and scorn my
offers."

How selfish others appear to a selfish man!

"Why should they continue to restrain me?  If gold is worth anything,
surely it should repay them for what can be only a mere fancy.  I shall
try Oluski once again, and if he refuse--"

Here the speaker paused.

For some time he stood in contemplation, his eye roving over the distant
view.

As it again lighted upon the settlement a smile, not a pleasant one,
curled his lip.

"Well, there is time yet," said he, as if concluding an argument with
himself.  "I will once more try the golden bribe.  I will use caution;
but here will I build my house, come what may."

This natural conclusion, to an egotistic mind, appeared satisfactory.

It seemed to soothe him, for he strode down the hill with a springy,
elastic step, more like that of a young man than one over whose head had
passed sixty eventful years.



CHAPTER THREE.

ELIAS RODY.

Whilst Elias Rody is pondering upon his scheme, let us tell the reader
who he is.

A Georgian, who began life without any fixed idea.

His father, a wealthy merchant of Savannah, had brought him up to do
nothing; and, until he had attained man's estate, he faithfully carried
out his father's teaching.

Like many Southern lads borne to competence, he could not appreciate the
dignity of labour, and accordingly loitered through his youthful life,
wasting both time and patrimony before discovering that idleness is a
curse.

At his father's death, which happened upon Elias reaching his twentieth
year, all the worthy merchant's property descended to the son, and the
idler suddenly found himself the possessor of a large sum of money with
a sort of feeling that something was to be done with it.

He accordingly spent it.

Spent it recklessly, freely and rapidly, and then discovered that what
he _had_ done was not the thing he _should_ have done.

He then became reformed.

Which meant, that from a liberal, open-handed, careless fellow, he
changed to a cynical, cautious man.

With a small remnant of his fortune, and an inheritance from a distant
relative, Elias became a man of the world, or rather, a worldly man.

In other words, he began life for a second time, and on an equally wrong
basis.

Before his eyes were two classes of his equals.  Reckless men with large
hearts, and careful men with no hearts at all, for such was the
organisation of the society surrounding him.

Of the first class he had full experience; of the second he had none
whatever.

To the latter he resolved to attach himself.

It is useless wondering why this should have been.  Perhaps he had never
been fitted for the community of large-hearted men, and had only mixed
with them through novelty, or ignorance of his own station.

Be this as it may, one thing is certain, he became before long a most
exemplary member of the society he had selected for imitation.  No one
drove a closer bargain, saw an advantage (to himself), or could lay
surer plans for securing it, than Elias Rody.

He learned, also, to control, and in every way wield influence over
those around him.  Power became his dream.  He was ambitious of
governing men.

Strange to say, this feeling was almost fatal to his prospects.  We say
strange, because ambition generally carves its own road, and moulds its
own fortune.

Rody, however, had commenced an active career too late to arrive at much
importance in the political world--that grand arena for attaining
distinction.

He therefore cast about him for another field of ambitious strife, and
speedily found it.

At this time throughout the state of Georgia were many planters, who,
without capital to purchase additional property, found themselves daily
growing poorer as their land became worn out with exhausting crops.

These men were naturally enough the grumblers and discontented spirits
of the community.

Another class were those with little save a restless disposition, ever
ready for any venture that may arise.

Rody, shrewd and plausible, saw in these men the very instruments for a
purpose he had long thought of, and had well matured.

"If I cannot attain the object of my wishes here," said he, to himself,
"perhaps I may be successful elsewhere, if I can only persuade others to
join me.  These are men ready to my hand; I will take them with me, they
shall be my followers; and whilst contributing their means to my end,
they will look upon me as a benefactor."

Rody, it will be seen, was a thorough egotist.

This idea becoming fixed in his mind, the rest was easy.  He spoke to
them of their present condition; drew a brilliant picture of what might
be achieved in a new land; painted with masterly eloquence the increase
of wealth and happiness his plan presented, and finely gathered around
him a large number of families, with whom he started from Georgia, and
settled in that section of Florida we have described.

The reason for Rody's selection of this spot was another proof of his
profound selfishness.

In his reckless, generous days, he had, on the occasion of a visit to
Columbus, been the means of saving from insult and outrage a Seminole
chief, who had visited the capital upon some business connected with the
State Government.

This act of generosity had been impulsive; but, to the Indian, it
assumed the proportion of a life-long debt.

In the fulness of his gratitude, the chief caused papers and titles to
be drawn up in Rody's favour, giving a grant of a portion of his own
property lying on the shores of Tampa Bay.

The Indian chief was named Oluski.

The grant of land was the settlement we have spoken of.

Rody, at the time, made light of Oluski's gratitude, and thrust the
title into his desk without bestowing a second thought on the matter.

Now, in his days of worldly wisdom, these papers with the Seminole's
emblematic signature, were brought to light with a very different
appreciation.

He saw that they represented value.

Elias Rody accordingly determined to make use of them.

It ended in his carrying a colony southward, and settling upon Tampa
Bay.

The scheme originated in selfishness turned out a success.

The lands were valuable, the climate salubrious, and the colony thrived.

A bad man may sometimes do a good thing without intending it.

Rody received even more credit and renown than he had expected; and,
being a shrewd man, he achieved a part of his ambition.

He was looked up to as the most important personage in the community.

Although some of the settlers did not approve of all his measures,
still, their opposition was rather negative than positive, and had, as
yet, found vent only in remonstrances or grumbling.

None had dared to question his prerogative, although he often rode a
high horse, and uttered his diction in a tone offensively arrogant.

What more, then, did Elias Rody want?

A covetous man always wants more.  Oluski's gift was a noble one.  It
covered a large area of fertile land, with water privileges, and a
harbour for trade.  It was the choicest portion of his possessions.  The
chief, in bestowing it, gave as a generous man gives to a friend.  He
gave the best he had.

Unfortunately the best he had did not embrace the hill; and, therefore,
Rody was unsatisfied.

More than once during the progress of the settlement, he had cast a
wishful eye upon the spot, as the choicest site in the whole district
for a dwelling.

As his means expanded so had his tastes, and a grand dwelling became the
great desire of his life.

It must, perforce, be built upon the hill.

To every offer made to Oluski for a cession of this spot, the chief had
firmly and steadfastly given a refusal.  He, too, had his ambition;
which, although not so selfish as the white man's, was not a whit less
cherished.

For nine months in the year Oluski and his tribe dwelt in a distant
Indian town, and only visited the waters of Tampa Bay for the remaining
three, and then only for the purposes of pleasure.  The wigwams of
himself and people were but temporarily erected upon the hill.  For all
this they had an attachment for the spot; in short, they loved it.

This was what Elias Rody stigmatised as a mere fancy.

There was another reason held in similar estimation by Elias.  In the
rear of their annual encampment was an Indian cemetery.  The bones of
Oluski's ancestors reposed therein.  Was it strange the spot should be
dear to him?

So dear was it, in fact, that to every proposal made by Rody for the
purchase of the hill, Oluski only shook his head, and answered "No."



CHAPTER FOUR.

CRIS CARROL.

Nelatu recovered from his wounds.

Warren had conducted him to a hut, the temporary residence of a man of
the name of Cris Carrol.

This individual was a thorough specimen of a backwood's hunter.

He was rough in manner, but in disposition gentle as a child.

He detested the formalities and restrictions of civilisation.

Even a new settlement had an oppressive air to him, which he could not
endure.

It was only the necessity of disposing of his peltries and laying in a
stock of ammunition that brought him into any spot where his fellow
creatures were to be found.

To Cris Carrol the sombre forest, the lonely savannah, or the trackless
swamp, were the congenial homes, and bitterly he adjured the compulsory
sojourn of a few days every year amongst those to whom society is a
pleasure.

It was always a joyful day to him when he could shoulder his rifle,
sling his game bag over his shoulder, and start anew upon his lonely
explorations.

When Warren brought the wounded Indian to Carrol's rude hut, the old
backwoodsman accepted the responsibility, and set himself to the task of
healing his wounds with alacrity.

Nelatu was known to him, and he was always disposed to be a friend to
the red man.

"No, of course not," said he to Warren, in answer to his explanation; "I
don't see as how you could take the red-skin up to the governor's house.
Old dad wouldn't say no, but he'd look mighty like wishin' to.  No,
Warren, lad, you've done the right thing this time, and no mistake, and
that there's sayin' more nor I would always say.  Leave the boy to me.
Bless you, he'll be all right in a day or two, thanks to a good
constitution, along of living like a nat'ral being, and not like one of
them city fellows as must try and make 'emselves unhealthy by sleepin'
in beds, and keeping warm by sittin' aside of stoves, as if dried leaves
and dried sticks warn't enough for 'em."

Carrol's skill as a physician was little short of marvellous.

He compounded and prepared medicines according to unwritten
prescriptions, and used the oddest materials; not alone herbs and roots,
but earths and clays were laid under contribution.

A few days of this forest doctoring worked wonders in Nelatu, and before
a week was over he was able to sit at the back door of the hunter's
dwelling, basking himself in the sun.

Carrol, who had been in a fever of anxiety greater even than his
patient, was in high glee at this.

After giving the Indian youth a preparation to allay his thirst, he was
on the point of packing up his traps to start upon one of his
expeditions, when he saw an individual approaching his cabin from the
front.

Thinking it was Warren Rody, he called out to him that Nelatu was all
right.

He was somewhat surprised to perceive that instead of Warren, it was his
father.

"Good morning, neighbour," said Elias.

"Mornin', governor."

"How is your Indian patient?" asked he whom Carrol called governor.  "I
hope he has entirely recovered."

"Oh, he's ready now, for the matter of that, to stan' another tussle,
and take another thrust.  It wasn't much of a wound arter all."

"Oh, indeed," said Elias; "I heard from my son Warren that it was a bad
one."

"Perhaps your son ain't used to sich sights; there's a good deal in
that.  Would you like to see the Injun?  He's outside, at the back."

"No, thank you, Carrol; I didn't come to see him, but you.  Are you
busy?"

"Well, not so busy but I kin talk a spell to you, governor, if you
wishes it.  I war only packin' up a few things ready for a start
to-morrow."

Saying this, Carrol handed the governor a stool--the furniture of his
hut not boasting of a chair.

"And so you're off to-morrow, are you?"

"Yes, I can't stand this here idle life any longer than I'm obleeged;
'taint my sort.  Give me the woods and the savanners."

At the very thought of returning to them the backwoodsman smacked his
lips.

"When did you see Oluski last?" abruptly asked Elias.

"It war a fortnight ago, governor, near as my memory sarves me; just
arter I'd shot the fattest buck killed this season.  Oluski's people war
all in a state o' excitement at the time."

"Indeed; about what?"

"Wal, Oluski's brother, who war chief o' another tribe, died not long
'fore, and his son, Wacora, had succeeded to the chiefship.  Oluski was
mighty perlite to his nephy, who war on a visit to Oluski's town when I
war thar.  I expect they'll all be hyar soon.  It's about thar time o'
comin' to Tampa."

"Did you see this Wacora, as you call him?"

"I did so, governor," answered Carrol, "and a likely Injun he is."

Elias sat for some moments silent, during which time Cris busied himself
over his gun.

After a time he put the question--

"Is that all you ha' to say, governor?"

The governor, as Carrol styled him, started at this abrupt
interrogatory.

"No, Carrol, that is not all.  What I have to say is this.  You are a
friend to the red-skins?"

"Yes, siree, so long as they behaves themselves, I am," promptly replied
Cris.

"I also am their friend," said Rody, "and want to deal fairly by them.
They have, however, a foolish sort of pride that makes it difficult,
especially in some matters.  You know what I mean, do you not?"

"Yes, I see," rejoined the hunter, in a careless drawl.

"Well, in a bit of business I have with Oluski, I thought a friend might
manage with him better than I could myself."

The governor paused to give Carrol an opportunity of replying.

The backwoodsman, however, did not avail himself of it.

"So you see, Carrol," continued Elias, "I thought that you might act the
part of that friend in the negotiation I allude to."

"No, I don't quite see _that_," said Cris, looking up with an odd smile
upon his face, and a twinkle in his eye.  "But come, governor, tell me
what you want done, and I'll tell you whether I kin do it."

"Well, then, Carrol, I will."

The governor drew his stool nearer to Cris, as if about to impart some
confidential secret.



CHAPTER FIVE.

PLAIN SPEECH.

The backwoodsman preserved a wary look, as if suspicious of an attempt
to corrupt him.

He was not alarmed.  Cris Carrol knew himself to be incorruptible.

"Well, Mr Carrol," proceeded the governor, after a pause; "you know
that my settlement has prospered, and, as you may imagine, I have made
money along with the rest?"

"Yes, I know that," was the curt answer.

"And, having now got a little ahead of the world, I feel that I have a
right to indulge some of my fancies.  I want a better house, for
instance."

"Do you, now?" said Cris.

"And so I've made up my mind to build; and I want a good site.  Now you
see what I am driving at."

"Well, no; I can't say that I do exactly."

"Why, Cris, you are dull to-day.  I say I want a good site for my new
house."

"Well, ain't you got hundreds of acres--enough and to spare for the most
tremenjous big house as was ever built?"

"That's true; but on all my land there's not a spot I really like.  Does
that seem strange to you?"

"Mighty strange to me, but, perhaps, not so strange to you, governor."

"But there _is_ a bit of ground, Cris," continued Elias, "that I do like
exceedingly.  The worst of it is it's not mine."

"Why don't you buy it?"

"Just what I wish to do; but the owner won't sell."

"Perhaps you don't offer enough."

"No; that's not the reason."

"What is it, then?"

"Do you know the top of the hill?" abruptly asked Rody.

"What, where the Injuns make their camp?"

"Yes; that's the place where I want to build.  Oluski won't sell that
piece of property to me.  Why, I don't know."

The governor did not stick very closely to the truth while talking on
matters of business.

"Wal, what I have I to do with that?" asked the backwoodsman.

"Why, I thought if you were to see Oluski, perhaps you might talk him
into letting me have the ground.  I've set my mind on it; and I wouldn't
care if it cost me a good round sum.  I'll pay you well for any trouble
you may take in helping me."

Elias Rody had but one estimation of his fellow man, and that was, that
every one has his price.

In the present instance he was mistaken.

"It won't do, governor; it won't do," said Carrol, shaking his head.  "I
see now, plain as can be, what you're after; but I won't help you in it.
If you wants the property, and Oluski won't let you have it, then the
Injun's got his own reasons, and it ain't for me to try and change 'em.
Besides," added he, "I don't like the job; so no offence meant, but I
must say now--and I says it once and for all.  Is that all you've got to
say to me?"

The governor bit his lips with vexation; but, possessing a wonderful
command over his temper, he merely inquired what his son had said about
Nelatu.

"Well, sir, he didn't say much about anything special, except to ask me
to look after the Injun lad, and see to his wounds.  I did that in
first-class style, and, as I told you before, _he's_ all right.  Your
son has been down every day to see my patient, as the doctor chaps calls
them they physics.  He 'peared mighty anxious to know how it was that he
had come over to this part of the country alone, and where was the young
girl, his sister."

"Ah! so he was inquiring about her, was he?" exclaimed Rody, rising, and
pacing the hut with restless steps.  He was glad of a pretext for his
rage.

The backwoodsman uttered a prolonged whistle.

Suddenly pausing in his impatient strides, the governor faced towards
him.

"So he was anxious about her, was he?"

Elias Rody was evidently out of temper, and not now afraid to show it.
But Carrol was not exactly the person to care much about this.

"He was," was his cool answer; "but I don't know how I've got anything
to do with it, except to tell him, and you, too, for the matter of that,
that the red man has his rights and feelings.  Yes, and they're both
worth considerin' as much as if they war pale-faces like ourselves."

"And why to me, sir?" asked the governor.

"Well, just because I ain't afraid to say to your face what I'd say
behind your back, and that is, that your son had better stop thinking
about that gurl, Sansuta, as soon as may be, and that you'd best see to
it afore worse happens."

A very outspoken man was the backwoodsman, and Elias Rody was sorry now
for having visited him.

Before he could recover from his surprise, Carrol returned speech.

"There ain't no good, governor, in mincing matters.  Last year, when
Oluski war here, your son war always prowlin' 'bout the Injun
encampment, and down in the grove war thar gurl used to be.  He war
always a talkin' to the chief's darter, and making presents to her.  I
know what I seed, and it warn't jest the thing."

"Perfectly natural, man," said the governor, mastering his chagrin, and
speaking calmly; "perfectly natural, all that, seeing that Nelatu,
Sansuta, and my son grew up as children together."

"All that may be; but it ain't no use applyin' it now that they're most
growed up to be man and woman, and you knows it, governor, as well as I
do.  As for Nelatu, he don't amount to shucks; and I sometimes wonder
whether he is Oluski's son after all."

The home truth in the first part of Carrol's speech pleased the
"governor" as little as any of his previous remarks; and, surprised at
the freedom of the backwoodsman's language, he was silent.

Not so Cris, who had evidently determined to say more.  His garrulity
was unusual; and, once started, he was too honest to hold his peace.

"Governor, there's many things I've had in me to say to you at a
convenient time.  That time's come, I reckon, and I may as well clur it
off my mind.  I don't belong to yur colony.  I'm only a 'casional
visitor, but I sees and hears things as others don't seem to dare to
tell you o', though why I can't fancy; for you're only a man arter all,
although you air the head man o' the settlement.  As near as I can fix
it in my mind, all yur people hev settled hyar on land that once
belonged to the Injun.  This bein' the case, it seems to me that the
same laws as is made for the white man is made for the red-skins too.
Now, governor, it ain't so; or, if they are made, they ain't carried
out; and, when there's an advantage to be got for the white man at the
expense of the Injun, why, you see, the law's strained just a leetle to
give it.  It's only a leetle now, but by and bye it'll be a good deal.
I know you'll say that's only natural, too, because that's the way you
think; but I tell you, Mr Rody," here Carrol became excited, "that it
_ain't_ natural no how; and it ain't right; and, therefore, mischief's
sure to come o' it.  Now, I tell _you_, because you've more brains and
more money than any o' the rest, of course you've got more to answer
for.  So them's my sentiments, and you're welcome to them whether you
like 'em or no."

"Well, Mr Carrol," replied Rody, with a withering emphasis on the
"Mister," "I'm glad you've given me your opinion--it's a valuable one,
no doubt."

"I don't know whether it's a valyable one, but I know it's a honest
one," answered Cris, with a quiet dignity, that, despite his rough
dress, bespoke him a gentleman.  "I have no object in giving advice to
you, governor.  I only feel it a duty, and I like to discharge my
duties.  The same way I thinks about your son Warren running after this
Injun girl.  No good'll come o' that neyther."

Whatever reply the "governor" would have made to this last observation
was cut short by the entrance of Warren Rody himself.

Seen now in the light of open day, the young man presented a strange
contrast to his father.  Of small stature, effeminate countenance,
restless, shifting eyes, and a vacillating expression of mouth, he did
not look like the son of the hard, rugged man who stood beside him.

He was neatly, almost foppishly dressed, and had a self-sufficient air
not altogether pleasant.  He seemed like one who would rather pass
through the world with oily smoothness than assert himself with
confidence of power and honesty of purpose.

By one of those strange mental impressions impossible to account for,
both Cris and the "governor" felt that Warren had been a listener.

If so, he did not betray any sign of annoyance at what he had heard, but
stood smilingly tapping his boot with a handsome riding-whip.

"Ah, father, you here?  Have you come to see the invalid, or to say
`good bye' to the hunter, who tells me he is off to the wilderness
to-morrow?"

His father did not answer him, but, turning to Carrol, said--

"The matter I intended to have spoken to you about will do at another
time; but I'm still much obliged to you for your _good_ advice."

This was spoken with as much cutting politeness as could be well pressed
into the speech.

As he turned to leave, he said aside to his son, "Be home early, Warren.
I have something particular to say to you."

Warren nodded, and his father passed out of the house, not at all
pleased with the interview between himself and the backwoodsman.

Nothing disconcerts scheming men more than blunt honesty.

As soon as the governor was gone, Carrol commenced humming a song.  His
new visitor waited for several moments before speaking to him.

"How is Nelatu?" he at length asked.  "Will he be strong enough to
travel to-morrow?"

"Not quite," said Carrol, pausing in the chorus part of his ditty; "he'd
best remain here till his people come.  They won't be long now, and the
stay will give him time to get right smart."

"What was it that vexed my father, Cris?"

"Well, I don't know 'cept he's took somethin' that's disagreed with him.
He _do_ seem riled considerable."

"But, Cris, are you really off to-morrow?"

"By sunrise," answered Carrol.

"Which way are you going?"

Cris looked slily at his questioner before answering.

"I don't know for sure whether it'll be along the bay, or across the big
swamp.  The deer are gettin' scarce near the settlement, and I have to
go further to find 'em.  That's all along of civilisation."

"If you go by the swamp you might do me a service," said Warren.

"Might I?"  Then, after a thoughtful pause, the back woodsman
continued--"Well, you see, Warren, it won't be by the swamp.  I've made
my mind up now, and I'm goin' along the bay."

Warren said, "All right; no matter."

Then, with a word of explanation, parted from Cris, and proceeded to
find Nelatu.

As soon as he was out of sight, Carrol's behaviour would have furnished
a comic artist a capital subject for a sketch.  He chuckled, winked his
eyes, wagged his head, rubbed his hands, and seemed to shake all over
with suppressed merriment.

"A pair of the artfullest cusses I ever comed across.  Darn my pictur if
the young 'un ain't most too good.  War I goin' by the swamp, 'cos then
I might do him a service?  No, no, Mister Warren, this coon ain't to be
made a cat's paw of by you nor your father neyther.  I ain't a goin' to
mix myself up in either of your scrapes, leastways, not if I knows it;
nor Nelatu shan't if I can help it.  I don't let him stir till his
fellow Injuns come, and, may-be, that'll keep him out o' trouble.  No,
Master Warren, you must do yur own dirty work, and so must your father.
Cris Carrol shan't help either o' you in that.  If the young 'un don't
mind what he's heard, altho' he made b'lieve he didn't, and his father
don't mind what I told him, there'll be worse come of it."



CHAPTER SIX.

CROOKLEG.

When young Rody took his departure from Carrol's hut, he went off in no
very enviable mood.

His interview with Nelatu, although of the briefest, had been as
unproductive of results as that with the blunt old backwoodsman.

The plain speaking indulged in by Carrol, and which he had overheard
before entering the cabin, had annoyed him, while the oracular manner
adopted by Cris in no way assuaged the feeling.

The fact of the matter is that the old hunter had made a clear guess at
the truth.

Warren had a passion for Sansuta, the daughter of Oluski.

Not a manly, loving passion, though.

Her beauty had cast a spell upon him.  Had his soul been pure, the spell
would have worked its own cure.  Out of the magic of her very simplicity
would have arisen chaste love.

But his heart was wicked, and its growth weeds.

Hitherto the difference of race had shielded from harm the object of his
admiration.  He would have been ashamed to avow it in an honest way.

Secretly, therefore, he had forged a false friendship for her brother,
as a mask to conceal his base treachery.

In the incident with which our tale opens, he had found a ready means of
advancing his own interests by more closely cementing Nelatu's simple
friendship, and moulding it to his will.

We have said that Red Wolf, the would-be assassin, fell by the bullet of
his rifle.

With his hand upon the trigger, and in the very act of sending this
wretch to his account, a thought had flashed across young Rody's mind,
which made his aim more certain.

Let us explain.

Nelatu said that Red Wolf had spoken wicked words of Sansuta and of
Warren.

The very conjunction of their names supplied the calumny.

Nelatu spoke truly; but what he did not know was, that the wretch who
paid the forfeit of his life for his foul speech was only the dupe of
Nelatu's own friend, Warren Rody.

Red Wolf, an idle, drunken scamp, had been a fit instrument in Rody's
hands to be employed as a messenger between him and the Indian girl.

For these services Red Wolf received repeated compensation in gold.

But the old story of the bad master becoming discontented with a bad
servant was true in this case.

Warren was afraid that Red Wolf would, in one of his drunken orgies,
talk too much, and betray the secret with which he had entrusted him.

So far, he was right; for it was whilst endeavouring to warn Nelatu of
his sister's danger that Red Wolf made use of language about the girl.

He had reviled Nelatu's sister while traducing his friend.

The issue is already known.

Wicked were Warren's thoughts as he stood, rifle in hand, watching the
two.

If Red Wolf--and he recognised him at once--were removed in the very act
of killing Nelatu, a dangerous tongue would be for ever silenced, while
Nelatu's friendship would be further secured, and Sansuta eventually
become his.

The decision was taken, the bullet sent through Red Wolf's brain, and
Warren Rody accomplished a part of his design.

Having succeeded so far, it was terribly mortifying to find that one
clear-sighted individual had penetrated his schemes, and, without
appearing to do so, had placed a restraint upon the otherwise warm sense
of gratitude with which Nelatu regarded him.

All this Cris Carrol had done, and therefore Warren Rody was angry with
him.

He left the cabin vowing vengeance upon Carrol, and casting about for
the means to accomplish it.

He had not long to wait, or far to seek.

At the end of the bye-road upon which the backwoodsman's dwelling stood,
he encountered the very tool suitable for his purpose.

It was in the person of a negro, with a skin black as Erebus, who was
seen perched upon the top of a tall fence.

He was odd enough looking to attract the attention of the most careless
traveller.

His head, denuded of the old ragged piece of felt he called hat, was
unusually large, and covered with an enormous shock of tightly-curling
wool.

This did not, however, conceal the apeish form of the skull, that bore a
strong resemblance to that of a chimpanzee.

Rolling and sparkling in a field of white, were eyes preternaturally
large, and wickedly expressive, above a nose and mouth of the strongest
African type.

His arms were ludicrously long, and seemed by their unusual proportions
to make up for the shortness, and impish form of the body.

He was whistling in a discordant strain some wild melody, and kicking
his heels about like one possessed.

As Warren Rody approached, he paused in his ear-splitting music, and
leaped nimbly from his perch, whilst flourishing his tattered felt in a
sort of salutation.

It might have been observed that he was lame, and the few halting steps
he took imparted a droll, hobbling motion to his diminutive body.

His dress was a curious warp of rags--woven, as it were--upon a still
more ragged woof.

They were held together more by sympathy than cohesion.

In his right hand was a stout gnarled stick, with which he assisted
himself in his frog-like progress.

At sight of young Rody, the huge mouth of this uncouth creature seemed
to open from ear to ear.

"Ha, ha!  Who, whoo!  Gor bress me, if it ain't Massa Warren hisself dat
I see!  My stars, massa, but dis ole man am glad to see ye, dat he is!"

Such was his salutation.

The young man came to a stop, and surveyed the negro with a smile.

"Well, Crookleg, what do you want with me, you old fiend?"

"Ha, ha!  Ho, ho!  Bress him, what a brave young gen'lman it is!  How
han'som'--jess like a pictur'.  What do the ole fien' want?  Why he want
a good deal, massa, good deal."

"Are you out of work again?"

"Ha, ha, ain't done a bressed stroke of work, massa, for more nor two
week!  Ain't, 'pon dis old nigger's solemn word!  Ain't had it, massa,
to do.  Poor Crookleg am most used up, sa, most used up."

As if to prove his last assertion the hideous wretch cut a high caper
into the air, and settled down again in a grotesque attitude.

Young Rody laughed heartily at this feat, slapped his riding-whip
roughfully across the negro's back, pitched a piece of silver to him,
and passed on.

Whilst Crookleg stopped to pick up the coin he glanced after him under
his arm, and saw, with some surprise, that the youth had paused at a few
paces distance as if in thought.

After a time the latter faced round and came back along the road.

"By the way, Crookleg," said he, "come up to the house, my sister may
have something to give you."

"Ha, ha! he, he!  Miss Alice, bress her, so she may, massa!  I'll come,
sartin; dis old nigger's always glad to get what he can from Miss
Alice."

"And," continued Rody, "ask for me when you come.  I may find something
for you to do that'll help you along a little."

Not staying to hear the voluble expressions of gratitude with which
Crookleg overwhelmed him, Warren strode on, and was soon lost to sight.

The moment of his disappearance the darkey perpetrated another aerial
leap, and then hobbled off in a direction opposite to that pursued by
the governor's son.

He could be heard muttering as he went--

"Wants to see dis chile, does he?  Why, dat looks good for de old
nigger; and, who knows, but what de long time am a coming to an end, and
all dis old nigger's work is gwine to be done for him by odder folk.
He, he! dat would make dis chile bust a laffin!  He, he, he!"



CHAPTER SEVEN.

THE TWO CHIEFS.

Our story now takes us fifty miles inland from Tampa Bay.

The spot on the edge of an everglade.

The hour noon.

The dramatis personae two Indians.

One an old man, the other in the prime of life.

The first white-headed, wrinkled, and with traces of a life spent in
action.

He presented an appearance at once striking and picturesque as he stood
beneath the shade of a tall palm tree.

His dress was half Indian, half hunter.

A buckskin shirt, leggings, and moccasins richly worked with beads; a
wampum belt crossed his shoulder; a scarlet blanket hung at his back,
its folds displaying a figure which, in its youth, must have been
superb.

It still showed, in the broad chest and powerful limbs, almost its
pristine strength.

Upon his head he wore a band of bead-work, in which were stuck three
wing feathers of the war-eagle.

His face was full of dignity and calm repose.

It was Oluski, the Seminole chief.

His companion was no less remarkable.

As he lay stretched upon the ground, leaning on one elbow, his face
upturned towards that of the old man, a striking contrast was presented.

Like Oluski, his dress was also half Indian, half hunter, but more
richly ornamented with bead-work, whilst a certain careful disposition
of the attire, seemed not inappropriate to his youth and bearing.

It was, however, in his features that the difference was chiefly
apparent.

In the attitude he had assumed, a ray of sunshine piercing a break
between the trees, illumined his countenance.

Instead of the coppery colour of the Indian, his skin was of a rich
olive, an unmistakeable sign that white blood flowed in his veins.

He was remarkably handsome.  His features were regular, well defined,
and admirably chiselled.  His eyes were large and lustrous, overarched
by a forehead that denoted the possession of intellect.

Like the old man, he wore a plume of eagle's feathers on his head, as
also a wampum belt; but in lieu of a blanket, a robe made of skin of the
spotted lynx was thrown over his shoulders.

Oluski was the first to speak.

"Must Wacora depart to-day?" he asked.

"At sunset I must leave you, uncle," replied the youth, who was his
nephew, already spoken of as Wacora.

"And when do you return?"

"Not till you come back from Tampa Bay.  I have still much to do.  My
father's death has still placed me in a position of trust, and I must
not neglect its duties."

"I and my tribe depart from this place in seven days."

"And Nelatu, where is he?" asked Wacora.

"I expected him ere this.  He and Red Wolf went away together."

Oluski was ignorant of what had happened.

"They went upon a hunting excursion, and if not able to return in time,
were to go on to the bay, and there await our coming."

"You still make your summer encampment upon the hill.  I have not seen
it since I was a boy.  It is a shame, too, since out people are buried
there."

"Yes; and, therefore, it is dear to you as to me."

"And yet the whites have a settlement near it.  It was your gift to
them, uncle, I remember that."

Wacora said this with an accent that sounded almost sneering.

The old chief answered warmly.

"Well, I owed their chief a debt of gratitude, I paid it.  He is my
friend."

"_Friend_!" said Wacora, with a bitter smile; "since when has the
pale-face been a friend to the red man?"

"Still unjust, Wacora.  I thought you had changed.  The foolish
sentiments of youth should give place to the wisdom of age."

Oluski's eye brightened as he spoke.  His heart swelled with noble
feelings.

"I do not, will not, trust in the white man!" answered the young chief.
"What has he done to our race that we should believe in him?  Look at
his acts and then trust him if you can.  Where are the Mohawks, the
Shawnees, the Delawares, and the Narragansets?  How has the white man
kept faith with them?"

"All white men are not alike," responded Oluski.  "A pale-face
befriended me when I required aid.  The deed always weighs against the
word.  I could not be ungrateful."

"Well, Oluski's gratitude has been proved," returned Wacora.  "But let
him beware of those on whom it has been bestowed."

The old chief did not answer, but stood in an attitude of thought.

Ideas, slumbering till now, were awakened by Wacora's words.  An unknown
feeling appeared to gain possession of him.

So contagious is mistrust.

The nephew, too, seemed lost in thought.  Still lying upon the ground he
idly plucked the petals of a flower growing by his side.

The conversation was at length resumed by his uncle.

"I have nothing to charge the white chief with or his people.  Our tribe
yearly visits the place.  We are welcomed on arrival, respected during
our stay, and unmolested at leaving.  No, Wacora, these white men are
not like others."

"Uncle, all white men are the same.  They make their homes in our land.
When space is needed, the Indian must yield to them.  What faith or
friendship can exist where there is no equality?  Do not the Seminoles
suffer at this very moment from the white man's ambition?  Are not their
hunting grounds profaned by his presence--their towns pillaged for his
fancied wrongs?  Your _friend_ is a white man, and, therefore the enemy
of your race."

Wacora spoke passionately.

The Indian is not always a savage.  The reverse is often the case.  In
every tribe there are men of education, of quick intelligence, and with
a high sense of right.

Both Oluski and Wacora were superior men, in the sense that education
and natural intelligence gave the stamp of superiority over ignorance
and superstition.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

SANSUTA.

As we have said, Wacora had white blood in his veins.

His mother was a Spaniard, the daughter of a planter, who had lived near
the town of Saint Augustine.

Almost a child at the time of her capture, she eventually forgot her own
kindred, and became devoted to the chief who had been her captor.

It ended in her becoming his wife, and the mother of Wacora.

Albeit that in Wacora's veins white blood flowed, his soul was Indian,
and he loved his father's people as if he had been of their purest
blood.

He was a patriot of the most enthusiastic stamp.

His judgment, clear in most things, was clouded in estimating the
qualities of the white race, simply because he had seen the worst phases
of their character, its cupidity and selfishness.

Oluski would have answered his companion's address, but the same train
of disagreeable thought that had entered his mind at the first part of
Wacora's speech held him silent.

Wacora proceeded.

"Enough, uncle.  I did not intend to trouble you with my feelings; I
meant only to warn you against danger, for danger exists in all dealings
with the pale-faces.  They, as ourselves, are true to their instincts,
and those instincts blind them to justice.  Your friend, the White
Chief, may be all you think of him.  If so, he will rather admire your
caution than blame you for mistrust; natural, because not causeless."

Whatever reply Oluski intended, was postponed by the arrival of a third
person, at whose coming Wacora sprang from the ground with a gesture of
surprise and admiration.

The new comer was an Indian maiden.  A perfect wood nymph.

She was a girl of slight stature, beautifully rounded limbs, with hands
and feet unusually small.

Her dress was simplicity itself; yet so gracefully worn that it seemed
the result of laboured art.

A tunic of bright-coloured cloth, clasped round her neck by a silver
brooch, descended to her ankles, while around her waist was twisted a
scarf of many colours; over her shoulders fell a bright cloth mantle,
bordered with shells worked into delicate patterns; upon her head was a
bead-work cap, trimmed with the plumes of the white eagle, like a fringe
of newly-fallen snow; her wrists were encircled with bead bracelets,
whilst embroidered mocassins covered her small feet.

She smilingly approached Oluski, and nestled close to the old chief.

Wacora seemed puzzled by the fair presence.

"I had forgotten," said Oluski, "that you are strangers to each other.
Sansuta, your cousin Wacora stands before you."

Sansuta--for she it was--smiled upon the young Indian.

He did not approach the spot where father and daughter stood.

His impassioned eloquence had vanished.

He could scarce find words for the simplest salutation.

Oluski, perceiving his bashfulness, hastened to his relief.

"Sansuta has been upon a visit, and has only now returned.  It is many
years since you have seen her, Wacora.  You did not expect her to have
grown so tall?"

Wacora finished the sentence.

"Nor so beautiful!" he said.

Sansuta cast down her eyes.

"No praise like that should reach an Indian maiden's ear," said Oluski,
with a smile; "nevertheless, Sansuta is as the Great Spirit has made
her, that is sufficient."

The girl did not seem to share her father's sentiments; a slight pout of
her beautiful lips implied that the compliment was by no means
unpleasant.

Wacora was again dumb, as if half regretting what he had said.

Such is the power that beauty exercises over bravery.

The young Indian warrior actually blushed at his boldness.

"But what brings you here, Sansuta?" asked her father.  "Did you not
know that your cousin and myself were in council?"

The pretty Sansuta had recovered her composure.

The pout had disappeared from her lips, which, opening to answer her
father's question, revealed two rows of teeth of a dazzling whiteness.

"I am here to bid you both to the evening meal," she said.

Her voice, melodious and soft, struck upon Wacora's ear like the music
of the mocking-bird.

The charm was complete.

Forgetful of his late conversation, forgetful for a time of his thoughts
and aspirations, oblivious of his enthusiasm, he stood a very child,
eagerly watching her and listening for those tones again.

It was Oluski, however, who spoke.

"Come, Wacora, let us go with her."

The old chief strode away from the spot, Sansuta by his side.

Wacora followed, with a new feeling in his heart.

It was love!



CHAPTER NINE.

THE INDIAN VILLAGE.

A week later the table top of the hill over-looking the settlement
presented a changed picture.

It was one of active life.

The naked poles, formerly standing there, had disappeared, and
comfortable Indian dwellings--wigwams--were in their place.

At the doors of several were planted lances and spears, with plumes and
pennons depending from them.

These were the residences of the chiefs.

In the centre of the group was a large building, which was carefully,
almost elaborately constructed, and which far o'ertopped over the
others.

It was the council house of the tribe.

Around the doors of their respective dwellings, the owners might be seen
engaged in every variety of employment or peaceful idleness.  Children
frolicked in the presence of their parents, and dusky maidens, in twos
and threes, loitered up and down the main street or avenue.

At one of the doors an interesting group seemed rapt in attention at the
recital of a story that was being told by an aged chief.

The chief was Oluski, and among the individuals around was his daughter,
Sansuta.

The others were his kindred.

They had assembled, as was their usual evening custom, in front of his
wigwam, to listen to tales of virtue or valour; of deeds done by their
ancestors in the days of the early Spanish settlers.

The Indians are admirable listeners, and, in the easy natural attitudes
into which they fell as they lent forward to catch Oluski's words, they
formed a charming tableau.

The venerable chief, with dignified action, measured speech, and great
skill in modulating his voice, held their attention as much by the
manner as the matter of his narrative.

As the incident he was relating developed pathos, chivalry, horror or
revenge, so did his audience yield themselves to its influences.  By
turns they lowered their eyes, shuddered, stared wildly around with knit
brows and clenched hands.

Like all people constantly communing with nature, they were easily moved
to joy or sorrow; and not civilised enough to make any attempt at
concealing it.

As Oluski sat in their midst, the observed of all observers, he looked
the picture of a patriarch.

The time and piece were both in harmony with the subject.

Oluski's story drew to a close.  His hero had achieved his triumph.  The
distressed Seminole maiden was rescued, and joy and union wound up the
tale, which had for more than an hour held his listeners enthralled.

"So now, children, away!  The sun is sinking in the west; the hour of
council is at hand, and I must leave you.  Return to-morrow, and I will
relate to you some other episode in the history of our tribe."

The young people rose at the chief's bidding, and with "thanks" and
"good nights," prepared to depart; Sansuta among the rest.

"Where are you going child?" asked her father.

"Only to the spring, father.  I shall be back soon."

As the girl said this, she turned, as if wishing to avoid her father's
gaze.  The other people had all departed.

"Well," said the old man, after a pause, "do not forget to return soon.
I would not have you abroad after nightfall."

She murmured a few words, and sauntered away from the spot.

Oluski did not immediately depart, but stood leaning against the spear
that stood up in front of his dwelling.

The old man's eyes were filled with tears, while a hand was laid upon
his heart.

"Poor girl," he reflected, as he watched her form disappearing in the
fast darkening twilight; "she never knew her mother.  I sometimes think
I have been but a poor guardian of Sansuta's steps.  But the Great
Spirit knows I have tried to do my duty."

Sighing heavily, he brushed the tears from his eyes, and strode off to
the council house.



CHAPTER TEN.

AN APPOINTMENT KEPT BY DEPUTY.

Let us follow the steps of Sansuta.

Once out of sight, and conscious that she had eluded her father's
observation, she quickened her steps, not in the direction of the
spring, but towards a thick clump of live oaks which grew at the foot of
the hill.

As she approached the spot, her pace gradually became slower, until she
at length came to a stop.

As she paused, a shiver ran through her frame.

She was evidently in doubt as to the propriety of what she was doing.

The sun had sunk below the horizon, and darkness was rapidly falling
over the landscape.

A distant murmuring alone gave token of the proximity of the Indian
village upon the hill.

After a few moments, and while Sansuta still stood beside the grove,
these sounds ceased, and perfect silence reigned around the spot.

Presently a cuckoo's note was heard--followed by another nearer and
louder--that in its turn succeeded by three others.

Whilst the echo of the last still vibrated on the evening air, the
maiden was startled by a sudden apparition.

It sprang into view at her very feet, as if the ground had opened
suddenly to give it passage.

When the girl regained courage sufficient to look upon it, her fears
were in no way lessened.

Standing in a grotesque attitude, she beheld a negro, with arms
enveloped in a ragged garment, moving about like the sails of a
windmill, whilst a low chuckle proceeded from his huge mouth.

"He! ho! ho! brest if de ole nigga didn't skear de galumpious Injun.
He! he! he! 'gorry if de Injun beauty ain't turn white at de show of dis
chile!"

It was Crookleg who spoke.

He seemed to enjoy the fright he had given the maiden; for, after having
ceased to speak, his gurgling cachinnation was continued.

It was some time before Sansuta recovered presence of mind sufficient to
speak to the black deformity before her.

"What do you want?" was all she could gasp.

"Ha! ha! ha!  It warn't dis ugly ole nigga what the big chief's chile
'pected to meet--war it?  No, I know it warn't.  But don't be skeared,
ole Crookleg won't hurt ye.  He's as innercent as a angel.  He! he! he!
as a angel."

Here another caper, similar to the one with which he had introduced
himself, placed him in a still more impish attitude.

The Indian girl had by this recovered from her first surprise, seeing
that some attributes of humanity appertained to her strange
interlocutor.

"Again, what do you want?  Let me pass.  I must return to the village."

"Gorry, an it arn't Crookleg dat will hinder you," the negro answered,
standing directly in her path.  "He only want say a word to you--dat is
if you is de beautiful Sansuta, de darter of de chief?"

"I am the chief's daughter; that is my name.  I am Sansuta!"

"Den de young gen'l'm'n tole dis old darkey true wen he say I find you
down by de live-oak grove at sunset--he told de old nigga true."

A blush overspread the girl's face as Crookleg spoke.  She did not
answer him.

"He said to me," continued the negro, "dat I were to tell de _lady_"
(here he chuckled), "dat he de gen'l'm' couldn' come to meet her
to-night, on accoun' o' de ole man his bossy wot hab gib him somethin'
'tickler to do.  He send ole Crookleg to tell her dat, and gib her
sometin' what I've got hyar in my pocket, he! he! he!"

Saying these words, the monster made a series of movements, having in
view the discovery of his pocket.

After a most elaborate and vigorous search for its aperture among the
multitudinous rags, he succeeded in finding it.  Then, plunging his long
right arm therein up to the elbow, he drew forth a small parcel wrapped
in white paper, and tied with a string of dazzling beads.

With another acrobatic bound, he handed it to the trembling girl.

"Dere it am, safe and soun'.  Dis ole nigga nebba lose nuffin and offen
find a good deal.  Dat, says de gen'l'm', is for de most lubbly of her
seek, de Missy Sansuta."

The tender look accompanying this speech was something hideous to
behold.

Sansuta hesitated before taking the parcel from him, as if in doubt
whether she should not decline it.

"Da! take it," urged he; "'tain't nuffin as'll go off and hurt ye; dis
nigga kin swar to dat!"

Not so much this friendly assurance as a resolution the girl had come
to, decided her.

She stretched forth her hand and took the package.

This done, she essayed once more to move past the negro in order to
return to the hill.

Crookleg, however, still blocking up the path, made no movement to give
way to her.

He had evidently something more to say.

"Lookee hyar," he continued, "I war bid to tell the lubbly Injun lady
that the gen'l'm'n wud be at dis berry spot to-morrow mornin' early to
meet her, and I war 'tickler told say dat it war private, and not to be
told no 'quisitive folks wat might want to know.  Now I think," here
Crookleg took off his tattered hat and scratched his wool.  "Yes! dats
all dis nigga war tole to say--yes, dats all."

Without waiting for a reply, the monstrosity made a pirouette, then a
bound, and disappeared so suddenly, that he was gone before Sansuta
could recover from her surprise.

Once assured that she was alone, the maiden hastened to untie the
bead-string around the package, and lay bare its contents.

Her glance fell upon a pair of showy ear-rings, and affixed to them a
small slip of paper.

Though but an Indian maiden, the chief's daughter had learnt to read.

By the last glimpse of departing twilight she read what was written on
the paper.

There were but two words--

"From Warren."



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

THE COUNCIL.

Oluski's entrance into the council-house was the signal for all eyes to
turn towards him.

Slowly and with dignity he traversed the space between the door and the
seat reserved for him, at the upper end of the hall.

Once there he turned around, bowed gravely to the assembled warriors,
and then took his seat.

Pipes were now lighted, and gourds filled with honey and water handed
around.

Oluski declined the latter, but lighted one of the pipes, and for some
time watched, as if in reverie, the circling of the smoke.

The silence that ensued upon the old chief's entrance continued for
several minutes.  At length a young warrior, opposite to him, rose and
spoke--

"Will our chief tell his brothers why they are called together, and what
is it that makes him thoughtful and silent?  We will hear and advise--
let Oluski speak!"

After this brief address, the young man resumed his seat, while those
around the circle murmured their assent to what he had said.

Thus solicited, Oluski arose, and spoke as follows:--

"It is not unknown to many of our warriors now present that I was
deputed by the elder brothers and themselves many years since to go to
the pale-faces in Georgia to settle some old disputes about lands sold
by our people to them, and about which wicked men of both races had
caused quarrels and bloodshed.  I departed on my errand, went to the
great town where their council-house stands, spoke truth, and made new
treaties with them.  All this I did, and our people were pleased!"

A chorus of voices ratified the chief's statement.

"It may be remembered that I made new friends with some of the
pale-faces, and concluded treaties, founded on justice, which gave to
our people property they needed in exchange for lands which we did not
require."

Renewed signals of assent.

"To one pale-face more than to others I was under bonds of gratitude.
He did me great service when I required it, and I promised to repay him.
An Indian chief never breaks his word.  I gave to that man some of the
lands left to me by my fathers.  These are the lands upon which the
white settlement now stands.  The pale-face I speak of was Elias Rody!"

The voices of the assembled warriors were silent.  An eager look of
expectancy was all the answer Oluski received at mention of Rody's name.

The old chief continued.

"To-day Elias Rody came here and talked with me.  He told me that the
hour had arrived when I could do him a great service, and again prove
myself grateful for the aid he had afforded me.  I told him to speak
out.  He did so.  I listened.  He said the colony he had founded was
prosperous, but there was one thing he still desired; and that was the
favour he came to ask.  Twice before he had spoken of it.  This time he
required a final answer.  His demand was more than I could of myself
grant.  I told him so.  For this reason have I called you into council.
I will lay his wish before you.  It is for you to decide."

Oluski paused to give opportunity for any one who chose to make a
remark.

None was made, but the listeners looked around them, as if trying to
read each other's thoughts.

The chief proceeded.

"What the white man wants is to buy from us this hill upon which our
habitations are built."

A chorus of angry, dissentient voices greeted the proposal.

"Hear me out," continued Oluski, "and then decide."

Silence ensued as sudden as the noisy interruption.

"The white chief offered me one hundred rifles, two hundred square
Mackinaw blankets, five kegs of gunpowder, fifteen bales of cloth and
one hundred shot belts, besides beads, knives, and small articles.  For
this he desires to have possession of the hill as far as the borders of
the settlement, and the strip of land lying along the shore of the bay.

"I have told you this with no remark of my own to influence your
decision.  To you, brothers, I leave it, whatever it may be Oluski will
abide by it."

Saying this, he sat down.

The young warrior who had already spoken, once more rose to his feet and
addressed himself to his chief.

"Why does Oluski ask us to decide?  The land is his, not ours."

Without rising the chief replied to the question.  His voice was sad and
subdued, as though he were speaking under compulsion.

"I have asked you, my sons," said he, "for good reason.  Although the
land is my own, the graveyard of our ancestors, which adjoins the
property, belongs not only to the whole tribe, but to the children of
the tribe for ever!"

A silence, such as precedes a storm fell upon the assembly.

Then every voice within the council chamber was simultaneously raised in
loud protestations, and had Elias Rody seen the flashing eyes and angry
gestures, or heard the fierce invective hurled back to his proposal, he
would have hesitated to renew it.

Amidst the wild tumult Oluski sate, with head bowed upon his breast, a
feeling of sorrow in his heart.

The angry debate that succeeded did not last long; it was but the
ebullition of a common sentiment, to which the expression by one voice
was alone wanting.

It found it in the same youthful warrior who had spoken before.

The feelings of the warriors being known, he, as well as any other, good
give them voice.

"The chosen of the tribe have decided," said he, amidst perfect silence;
"I will proclaim their answer."

"Do so," Oluski said, simply raising his head.

"They despise the white chief's bribe, offered for the bones of our
ancestors.  They bid me ask Oluski what answer he intends making to the
pale-face."

The old chief rose hastily to his feet, his form and eyes dilated.

Glancing proudly around the assembly, he cried out, in a clear ringing
voice.

"Oluski's answer is written here."

As he said this, he struck his spread palm upon his breast.

"When the white chief would have it, it shall be No!"

A cry of approbation from every warrior present greeted this patriotic
speech.

Hastening forward, they pressed around their chief with ejaculations of
joy.

The aged patriarch felt his blood freshly warmed within his veins--he
was young again!

In a few moments the excitement subsided, and the warriors, returning
from the council-house, moved off towards their respective dwellings.

Oluski was the last to emerge from the council chamber.

As he stepped across the threshold, the fire that animated him seemed to
have become suddenly extinguished.

His form was bent, his steps tottering and listless.

As he looked down the hill, he caught a glimpse of the white settlement,
with its window-lights twinkling through the darkness.

One, more brilliant than the rest, attracted his attention.

It was the house of Elias Rody.

"I fear," said the old chief, in a dreary voice, "my gift will prove
fatal alike to him and me.  When ambition enters the heart, honour and
justice find no home therein.  Our people cannot know that man in the
past; they must judge him by his present.  I would be generous--the
Great Spirit knows that--but I must also be just.  If I have raised
angry feelings at this council, I have nothing to charge myself with; I
did but my duty.  May the white chief's heart be turned from the
covetous thoughts which fill it!  Great Spirit, hear my prayer!"

With a natural and beautiful action, the aged Indian raised his hands in
supplication to that Power alike cognisant of the thoughts of white and
red.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

THE SITUATION.

Several days had elapsed since the meeting in the council-house.

The answer of the Seminole warriors had been conveyed to the white
governor by Oluski himself.

The old chief couched the decision in kindly words mingled with regrets.

Elias Rody was wonderfully self-possessed.

He smiled, shrugged his shoulders, grasped the Seminole's hand, and with
a wave of his own seemed to dismiss the subject from his thoughts.

Nay, more, he presented the old warrior with a beautifully inlaid rifle,
a bale of broad-cloth, and a keg of powder.

"Come, come," said he speaking in the friendliest tone, "don't let a
mere whim of mine affect such a friendship as ours.  You _must_ accept
these things--mere trifles.  Your taking them will prove that you
harbour no unkindness towards me or mine."

Thus pressed, Oluski accepted the presents.

The governor smiled covertly as the old chief departed.

Nelatu had recovered from his wound; he daily spent hours in company
with Warren, and there was no lack of diversion for the white youth or
his red-skinned companion.

Their canoe darted through the blue waters of the bay, or stole dreamily
along the river's current.

Their rifles brought down the wild fowl upon the sea, or the quail and
partridge upon the land.

Their fishing-rods and spears furnished many a dainty dish.

Sometimes, going farther afield, they would bring home a deer, or a
brace or two of wild turkeys--or, bent on destruction, would penetrate
some dark lagoon and slay the hideous alligator.

The opportunities which these pursuits presented were constantly
improved by Warren.

He moulded his conduct and expressions to suit the simple faith and
understanding of his companion.

He concealed beneath a considerate kindness the dark thoughts that were
brooding in his bosom, and was the very semblance of what he professed
to be--a friend.

Nelatu, generous and confiding, was flattered and charmed by his
condescension; with the simple faith of a child he trusted his white
associate.

"Ah, Nelatu," would the latter say, "if I had only the power to do what
I wish, I would prove myself a true friend to the Indians.  Our race are
afraid to show real sympathy with them on account of old and stupid
prejudices.  Wait until I am in a position to prove my words, and you
will see what I will do.  Why, even now, I'd rather sit near you
fishing, or tramp with you across the country on a hunting excursion,
than spend my time amongst my own people, who cannot understand either
me or my ways."

In a thousand designing ways he impressed himself on Nelatu's mind as a
chivalrous, self-sacrificing fellow, worthy the love of any maiden.
Then, adroitly singing soft praises of Sansuta to the brother's pleased
ear, he insured in him a faithful ally and warm panegyrist.

Sansuta, pleased with an admiration which she never paused to question,
blushed at her brother's report of Warren's good qualities.

Many articles of adornment had come into her hands, and were kept from
her father's sight.

She dared not wear them, but in secret gloated over their possession as
over the feeling which had prompted the gift.

Sansuta, it will be seen, was a coquette, though one through vanity, not
vice.

She was innocent as a child, but inordinately vain.

She had grown up without a mother's care; had been so much thrown upon
her own resources; that all her faults were those of an untrained
nature.

Her heart was warm, her affection for her father and brother deep and
true; but she was too prone to turn from the bright side of life, and
tremble at anything with the appearance of dulness.

Differently placed, this Indian maid might have become a heroine.  As it
was she was nothing but a frivolous child.

With a generous man, her defenceless position would have ensured her
safety.

Not thus with Warren Rody.

The son did not belie his father's nature.

Crookleg had become useful to him in his scheme.  This hideous creature
proved far more subservient and trustworthy than the defunct Red Wolf,
for he was all obsequious obedience.

True, he sometimes glanced askance with an ugly look bent upon his young
master, but the look vanished in a hideous grin whenever the latter
turned towards him.

What dark mystery lay hidden in the negro's mind, no one white knew, but
all, by a common impulse, gave way to him as he passed.  Children ran
shrieking, and hid their faces in their mother's aprons; the boys paused
suddenly in their play as he hobbled by, while the old gossips of both
sexes shook their heads and thought of the devil as he approached them!

He seemed only flattered by these signs of detestation, and chuckled
with glee at the aversion he inspired.

The Indians, meanwhile, pursued their usual avocations.

The waters of Tampa Bay were dotted with their canoes.  Troops of their
children frolicked on the plateau, or clucked the wild flowers that grew
along the sloping sides of the hill.

The women of the tribe followed their domestic duties, and the whole
scene around the wigwams was one of tranquil contentment.

The white settlers were not idle neither.  The fields were swelling with
crops, which the planters had commenced to gather in.  A goodly store of
merchandise was collected upon the wharf, and several schooners had come
to an anchor in the bay.

Peace and plenty abounded in the settlement.

But, as before the storm a small, dark cloud specks the bright sky,
gathering as it grows, so was there a cloud, too small for human view,
drifting over this peaceful scene which should carry death and
destruction in its wake.

Slowly and surely it was coming!



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

A SUBTERRANEAN SNARE.

A morning in the forest.

What beauty!  What delight!

The wild flowers gemmed with dew--the quivering foliage vieing in colour
with the emerald sward--the vistas dreamily grey and endless--the air
balmy--the light soft and grateful.

What a melody the birds make--a very paradise of sound!

What flashes of splendid blues, reds, and yellows, as they dart from
branch to branch!

What a succession of novelties, and charms for eye and ear!

Thoughts like these filled the mind of an individual seen near the
settlement on a lovely morning, a few days after the council held by
Oluski with his warriors.

The individual in question was a woman.  She was on horseback, and as
she checked her steed to gaze upon the scene before her, she presented
to view a face and form signally beautiful.

A frank, fearless, young face withal, of true maiden modesty.  Her hair,
in a rich golden shower of curls, fell over a forehead of snowy
whiteness, and a neck and shoulders admirably rounded.

Her figure was graceful and striking; its contour shown off by the dark
riding-dress she wore.

A hat, with a heron's plume, stuck saucily on one side, covered her
head.

The horse she rode was a Seminole steed--of the Andalusian race--small,
but well proportioned, as evidenced by the arching of its neck, proud of
its fair burden.

She remained for some time silently feasting her senses with the lovely
prospect, herself a charming addition to its interest.

After a while, she gave the reign to her horse, and allowed it, with a
dainty, mincing step to pick its way along the path, occasionally making
a pretence of alarm, pricking up its ears, drawing its head one side,
and doubly arching its pretty neck as some idle butterfly, or
quick-winged humming bird, darted across the road, or rose suddenly from
a bed of wild flowers.

Por a considerable distance the young lady proceeded without adventure
or mischance, whilst her horse, having little affected airs, stepped.

The fair equestrian's thoughts had not, it seemed, undergone any change,
for the same pleasant smile illumined her countenance.

Her thoughts were gay and happy, in unison with the surroundings.

In this mood was she proceeding on her journey.

Suddenly--indeed so suddenly as to cause her alarm--her steed came to a
stop, showing signs of being scared.

His eyeballs were distended, his fore-feet planted stiffly in advance,
his mane standing almost straight, while he trembled in every limb.

Another step, and horse and rider would have suddenly disappeared
beneath the surface of the earth, and for ever.

They were on the brink of one of those subterranean wells, or "rinks,"
common in that part of the country, whose dangerous concavity is
concealed by a light crust of earth; and only by the sudden sinking of
the support beneath him is the unwary traveller apprised of the peril.

Over the covering of the abyss the grass grew as greenly, the flowers
bloomed as brightly as elsewhere.

And yet under that fair seeming was a trap that conducted to death.

In an instant the fair rider comprehended her peril.

To advance would be certain death; to attempt to back her steed upon its
own tracks almost as certain destruction.

She knew but one thing to do, and she did it.

Gently patting the creature's neck she addressed it in soothing words,
whilst with a wary hand she held the bridle, her touch upon the horse's
mouth so delicate that the very breeze might have swayed it.

Her hand did not tremble, nor her eye quail, although the ruddy tinge
upon her cheek had altogether disappeared.

After a time the horse seemed to gain confidence; his tremor became
subdued, and, instead of the wild frenzy in his eye, there was a dull
look, while the foam rose to his nostrils, and sweat bathed his limbs.

She continued to caress his neck, and soothe him with soft words.

Moving neither up nor down, to right or to left, with her delicate hand
she still held the bridle.

But the danger still threatened.

She saw it as she cast her eyes below.

The ground was crumbling slowly but surely beneath the horse's feet, and
a fissure had already opened wide enough to show the deep, black chasm
underneath.

She shuddered, closed her eyes for a second, and then opened them, only
to see the fissure widening--the blackness growing more intense.

A prayer rose up from her lips.

She waited for the catastrophe!

The tension on the horse's nerves became too great.

Again the animal trembled!

Its knees began to yield!

The ground seemed all at once to give from beneath its feet!

His rider felt that she was lost!

No--saved!

Just as her closing eyes saw the courageous animal slide into the black
chasm, and heard its last snort of her terror, she felt herself lifted
from the saddle, borne from the spot, and then--

She knew no more.

She had fainted!



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

A TRUE GENTLEMAN.

It was Cris Carrol who had rescued the fair equestrian.

The old hunter had perceived her danger, and, with the quickness of
thought, mastered the whole situation.

Without uttering a word, he stealthily approached the spot, until
reaching a tree, one of whose branches extended over the horse's head.

To clutch it, spring out on the projecting limb, and lift the young lady
out of the saddle, were acts performed almost instantaneously.

What followed was not so easy.

He had not counted on the feminine weakness of fainting, and, with the
dead weight of the swooning girl upon his arm, there was still a
difficulty as to his future movements.  How was he to get back along the
limb?

He saw that nothing but sheer strength could accomplish it, and
accordingly exerted all he had.

With one hand grasping the branch, and the other around the unconscious
form, he made a superhuman effort, and succeeded in reaching the trunk
of the tree.  Against this he supported himself until he recovered
breath and strength.

While thus resting, he was witness to the engulfing of the gallant
steed, as the snorting animal sank into the chasm below.

The old hunter heaved a sigh.  He was sorry for the creature, and would
have saved it had the thing been possible.

"Wal, if it ain't too bad for a good, plucky crittur like that to die
sich a death!  Confound them tarnal sink holes!  They've been the
misfortun' o' many a one.  Thank goodness I've saved the feminine."

The "feminine's" condition now demanded his attention, as the temporary
faintness was passing away, and she showed signs of returning animation.

With rare tact and delicacy, the old hunter, regardless of his own
fatigue, softly lowered himself and his fair burden to the ground.
Then, gently withdrawing his arm from her waist, he drew back a step or
two.

Taking of his seal-skin cap, he wiped the perspiration from his brow,
and, with the gallantry of a true gentleman, waited until she should
address him.

The young lady he had rescued was no ordinary person.

The faintness which had come upon her endured only for a short while.

Recovering consciousness, she understood at a glance, not only the
nature of the service rendered her, but also the character of the man
who had rendered it.

"Oh, sir!  I'm afraid that you have run a fearful risk.  I can hardly
tell you how grateful I am."

"Wal, miss, it war rayther a toughish struggle while it lasted.  But,
bless ye, that's nothin' so long as it's turned out all right.  If you'd
not been the plucky one you air, nothin' I could ha' done would have
helped ye.  It war your own grit as much as my muscle saved ye from
fallin' into that trap."

"My horse.  Where is he?"

"Yur right there, he's gone, poor crittur.  I'd ha' liked to saved him,
too, for the way he behaved.  That dumb crittur had more sense in him
than many a human; and it 'ud ha' done me a sight o' good to have pulled
him thro'; but it wasn't possible, nohow."

"Tell me, sir, where did you come from?  I did not see you."

"Wal, I war clost by, and seed you ride right on to the danger.  It war
too late to holler, for that would only ha' made things worse, an'
skeared you both; so I said nothin', but jist dropped my rifle, and made
track toarst ye.  I spied the branch above you, an' speeled up to it.
The next war nothin'--only a spell o' twisting an' wrigglin'."

He did not tell her that the muscles of his arms were fearfully swollen,
and that it demanded all his power of endurance to prevent him groaning
at the intense agony he suffered.

But the young lady, with a quickness of apprehension, seemed to
understand this, too.

"Nothing, do you say?  Oh! sir, it's another proof of your noble
courage.  I can never show you enough gratitude.  For all that, I feel
deeply grateful."

Her voice trembled with emotion--tears welled into her eyes.

Her brave heart had well endured danger, but could not contemplate,
without betraying its emotion, the self-generosity of her preserver.

"Wal," said he, in order to change the conversation, which he thought
too flattering towards himself, "what do you intend doing, now that your
horse is gone?"

She wiped the tears from her eyes, and in a firm voice answered him--

"I'm not more than four or five miles from my home.  I merely rode out
for pleasure.  I little thought that my excursion would end thus.  Where
do you live, sir?  I don't remember to have seen you before."

"At the settlement?" he asked.

She nodded.

"No; I ain't a resident of no place.  I'm as you see me--a hunter.  I've
been at the settlement tho' many a time; in fact, I used to live on that
thar spot afore thar war any settlement.  It war enough for me to know
they war a-comin', so I pulled up stakes and quit.  You see, miss, it
don't do for a hunter to live among the clearins; besides, I'm a deal
happier by myself."

"No doubt.  To a contented mind, such a life as yours must be a happy
one."

"That's it, miss; to them as is contented.  Do you know I've often and
often puzzled over the expressin' o' that idear, and never could hit it;
and yet you've gin it in the snapping of a jack-knife."

"Perhaps you were going to the settlement when you saw me?"

"No; exactly t'other way.  I war goin' from it.  I've been down beyont
hyar to meet a friend o' mine.  It ain't long ago tho' since I war in
the colony, and staid a spell there.  Now I'm bound for the big Savanna,
that is, arter I've seen you home, and out of danger."

"Oh, no thank you, that's not at all necessary.  I'm used to wander
about alone, although this part of the country is a little new to me."

"If you'll allow me, miss, I'll go with pleasure."

"That I cannot do.  All I want to know now is your name?"

"Cris Carrol," was the hunter's reply.

"Then," said she holding out her pretty white hand, "Cris Carrol, I
thank you with my whole heart for what you have done for me.  I will
remember it to my dying day."

Like a knight of ancient chivalry, the backwoodsman stooped and kissed
the proffered hand.

When he stood erect again, a flush of pleasurable pride made his rugged
face look as handsome as an Apollo's.  It was the beauty of honesty.

"Bless you, miss, bless you!  Cris Carrol will allers be too glad to do
a sarvice for one that's real grit, as you air.  That I'll swar to.
Bless you!"

As she turned to take her departure, a sudden idea struck the
backwoodsman--

"Why, what a durn'd old fool I am; I never axed her for her name."

"You'll pardon me, miss," said he, "I'm sure you will--but--"

"But, what?" she asked, smilingly.

"But, might I ask you--I'd like to know--" here he stammered and
stuttered.

"You want to know my name; that's it, isn't it?"

"The very thing!"

"Alice Rody."

The old backwoodsman started on hearing it.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

BROTHER AND SISTER.

As Alice Rody left the spot, which had so nearly proved her tomb, she
thought of the old hunter with admiration.  His courage and honest
courtesy had won her, but she had also noticed his surprise on hearing
her name.

Of the feeling entertained by him for her father and brother she knew
nothing.

The female mind loves riddles, and Alice, like a true woman, racked her
brain for a solution of that one Carrol's conduct seemed to embody.

Thus occupied, she emerged from the forest, and had proceeded some
distance upon her road, when she perceived two individuals in close
conversation.

Their backs were turned towards her, and, as her light footfall did not
disturb them, she got close to the spot on which they stood without
their perceiving her.

Near enough, in fact, to hear the following:--

"Hark you, you black rascal!  If you betray me, it will be the worse for
you.  I have a means of silencing those who prove false to me."

Whatever reply the "black rascal" would have made was prevented by an
impetuous gesture of the speaker, who had caught sight of Alice.

"Ah, Alice, you here?" said he, facing towards her.  "I did not know you
were abroad--"

It was her brother Warren.

Alice recognised in the "black rascal" no less a personage than
Crookleg.

Warren thrust a piece of silver into the negro's hands.

"There, there, that'll do.  I'll forgive you this time, but remember!
Now be off with you--be off, I say."

Crookleg, cut short in his attempt to address Alice, hobbled away,
muttering some words to himself.

"Why, Warren," asked his sister, "what makes you speak so harshly to
poor Crookleg?"

"Because he's a pestilent fellow.  I want him to know his place."

"But a kind word doesn't cost much."

"There, sister! no scolding, if you please.  I'm not in the best of
humours now.  Where is your horse?"

Alice told her brother of the incident, and spoke warmly of Carrol.

"So the old hunter did you a good service, did he?  I didn't think he
had it in him, the old bear."

"How unjust you are, Warren.  Bear, indeed!  I tell you that Cris Carrol
is as good a gentleman as ever lived!"

As she said this she showed signs of indignation.

"Is he, indeed!" was the brother's mocking retort.

"Yes--a thorough gentleman!  One who wouldn't wound another's feelings
if he could help it--and that's my idea of a gentleman!"

"Well, we won't argue the point.  He has done good this time, and
that'll go to his credit; for all that, I don't like him!"

Alice bit her lip with vexation, but made no reply.

"He's too officious," continued Warren; "too free with his advice--and I
hate advice!"

"Most people do, especially when it is good," quickly answered his
sister.

"Who said it was good?"

"I know it is, or you would have liked it, and have followed it."

"You are sarcastic."

"No--truthful."

"Well, as I am in no mode for quarrelling, we'll drop the subject, and
Cris Carrol too."

"_You_ may, but I shall never drop him.  He is my friend from this time
forward!"

"You are welcome to choose your friends--I'll select my own."

"You have done so already."

"What do you mean?"

"That Nelatu, the Indian, seems to be one of them."

"Have you anything against him?"

"Oh, no.  I am only afraid he'll be the loser by the intimacy."

"Am I so dangerous?" asked her brother.

"Yes, Warren, you are dangerous, for, with all your pretended goodness,
you lack principle.  You cannot conceal your real character from me.
Remember, I am your sister."

"I am glad you remind me.  I should forget it."

"That's because you avoid me so much.  If you believed in my wishes for
your welfare, you would not do that."

Her voice trembled as she spoke.

"Indeed, then I beg you won't waste your sympathy on me.  I'm perfectly
able to take care of myself."

"You think you are."

"Well, have it that way if it pleases you better.  But what has this to
do with my friendship for the Indian?"

"A great deal.  I don't like your intimacy with him.  Not because he's
an Indian--although that is one reason--but because you have some
purpose to serve by it that'll do him no good."

"Why, one would think you were in love with the young copper-skin!"

"No, but they might think he's in love with me."

"What! has he dared--"

"No, he has dared nothing; only a woman's eye can see more than a man's.
Nelatu has never spoken a familiar word to me, but, for all that, I can
see that he admires me."

"And you--do you admire him?"

The young girl stopped in her walk.

Her eyes sparkled strangely as she answered--

"Shame, brother, to put such a question!  I am a white woman--he is an
Indian.  How dare you speak of such a thing?"

Warren laughed lightly at his sister, as he answered.

"Why, you don't think that _I_ care for the fellow, do you?"

The young girl saw her opportunity, and seized it.

"And yet you pretend to be his friend.  Ah! have I caught you by your
own confession?"

"Again, what do you mean?"

"That my doubts are now certainties--that some wicked scheme _is_
concealed under this false friendship for Nelatu."

"You are mad, Alice."

"No, perfectly sane.  You have some design, and I advise you, whatever
it be, to abandon it.  You don't like my tears, so I'll try to suppress
them if I can; but I implore you, Warren, brother, to give it up now and
for ever."

She dashed a few bitter drops from her eyes ere she spoke again.

"I have only you and my father to look to for support and comfort; my
heart has yearned towards you both, but has met with nothing but
coldness.  Oh, Warren, be a brave man--brave enough to despise
wickedness, and you will not only make me happy, but, perhaps, avert
that terrible retribution which overtakes transgression.  There is time
yet; hear my prayer before it is too late."

Her pleading voice fell upon an ear that heard not.

The appeal did not reach her brother's stony heart.

With a few commonplaces he endeavoured to exculpate himself from any
evil intentions towards the young Indian.

All in vain.

Her woman's instinct saw through his hypocrisy, and showed him to her as
he was--wicked!

That night Alice Rody prayed long and earnestly for support in an
affliction which she felt was but too surely coming; and she wept till
her pillow was bedewed with tears!



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

A CHANGED CHARACTER.

A wonderful change had taken place in the conduct of Elias Rody.

He was most gracious--most condescending.

He kissed all the children, chatted with the mothers, and listened to
their narratives of infant ailments, husbands' delinquencies, or
household troubles.

To the surprise of many of the poorer settlers the hitherto aristocratic
governor took, or appeared to take, great interest in their affairs,
and, more wonderful still, in some instances, put his hand into his
pocket to relieve their pressing necessities.

Petty matters seemed to become deeply interesting to him, and he devoted
time and attention to their adjustment.

Through all this his temper was conciliating and amiable.

Many personal quarrels, amongst settlers, were forgotten and forgiven
through his means, whilst coolness were warmed into new friendships by
his mediation.

This was the work of some time, and the astonishment of his amiability
gave way to self censure on the part of the observers, who charged
themselves with having done him great injustice.

No churlish man would have sent down provisions for the poor, have
rebuilt Widow Jones's barn, or bought Seth Cheshire a new horse; and
what mean man would have lent money to that drunken but popular Jake
Stebbins, whose fiery nose, should Jake be abroad, was as a lighthouse
on a dark night to any belated traveller?

This was the impression that gradually got abroad about Elias Rody.

He only smiled, rubbed his hands softly together, and muttered, "Humph!"

The monosyllable was full of meaning.

It meant that he thought his labour well bestowed, and that the design
he had in view prospered even beyond his expectations.

What this design was must be already apparent.

He had courted this popularity to enable him to accomplish the dearest
wish of his heart.

After his bland dismissal of Oluski, laden with gifts, he had acquired a
control over his own naturally impetuous temper which astonished
himself.

The refusal of the Seminole chief to give him quiet possession of the
hill was the more annoying because it seemed to close for ever any
further attempt at negotiation.

He understood the Indian character sufficiently to know that they were
unchangeable in their opinions, and seldom, if ever, to be moved from a
resolution once taken.

This tenacity of purpose had, time out of mind, brought ruin and
devastation upon themselves as on those who sought to coerce them, and
Rody ground his teeth with impotent rage when Oluski had announced the
decision of the Indian council.

The Judas smile that succeeded had root in another thought, which the
governor had left out of his mind until the supreme moment of his
defeat.

Hence his changed conduct towards his fellow-settlers.

They became almost to a man believers in him, and ready to do his
bidding.

He did not neglect, in his Machiavelian policy, to insinuate in every
artful way his pet project of possessing the property on which the
Indians were encamped.  So artfully, indeed, that in most instances the
idea seemed to have originated in his listener's mind, and by them to
have been suggested to Elias, thus skilfully reversing the true facts of
the case.

This once accomplished the rest was simple.

A general feeling got abroad that the red men were interlopers, and had
no right to usurp a spot so necessary and so useful to the colonists.
This feeling, although not loudly expressed, was very deep, and, in
nearly every instance, sincere.

The few clear-headed and impartial planters who, proof against Rody's
sophistical speeches, were assailed by him in a different manner--by
specious promises of enlarged possessions, or by matter-of-fact appeals
for the advancement of civilisation.  If he did not gain their approval,
he, at any rate, made their objections seem narrow-minded and selfish.

Only a few sturdy, honest men held out.  These Elias could do nothing
with.  They rejected his proposals, laid bare his false arguments, and
laughed at his facts--but as they were a very small minority, they had
little influence.

Ere Rody had accomplished this pacific revolution of opinion, the autumn
had waned, and the winter months--if such a word can be used where there
is no winter--approached, and with it the limit of the term of the
Indians' stay upon the hill.

With the first appearance of cool weather, Oluski and his tribe repacked
their household gods, took their dwellings to pieces, and with their
wives, children, horses, and cattle, quitted their late encampment.

The bare poles again appeared cutting against the clear sky.

The hill was once more uninhabited.

A new sort of activity had sprung into existence upon its table top.

In the place of Indians, with their painted plumes and primitive finery,
the ground was occupied by white men--carpenters and other artisans,
along with their negro attendants.

Piles of prepared lumber, stones, and other building materials strewed
the ground, whilst the busy workmen, black and white, made the air
resonant with their jocund voices.

A finished frame-house soon made its appearance on the spot where the
Indians had but recently dwelt--a large structure, substantially built,
and ornamental in finish.

It belonged to Elias Rody.

He had secured the sanction of the settlers, and they had determined to
support him in his piratical design.  Only a very few of them had stood
out against it.

Thus strengthened, he had resolved upon, and had now completed his act
of usurpation.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

OVER CONFIDENCE.

Oluski's dwelling, in his place of permanent abode, was a more
pretentious affair than the wigwam temporarily inhabited by him at Tampa
Bay.

This eastern residence was an old Indian town that had been built long
before the Spaniards had landed in Florida, and in it his people, for
many generations, had dwelt.

The chief having returned from an extended hunting excursion, was
pleased to find himself once more beneath his paternal roof.

Doubly pleased; for he had brought back with him his nephew, Wacora,
who, thinking of his pretty cousin, had accepted his uncle's invitation
with alacrity.

Behold them, then, with pipes lighted, seated inside the house, Sansuta
in attendance.

Wacora watched the lithe-limbed maiden; as she flitted to and fro,
engaged in household duties, he thought her as attractive as ever.  A
certain consciousness on her part of the fact, in no way detracted from
her beauty.

"I am pleased, nephew," said Oluski, "pleased to see you here again.  I
feel that I am no longer young, the support of your arm in a wearying
day's march has been very welcome."

"It is always at your service, uncle."

"I am sure of it.  If Oluski thought otherwise he would be unhappy.
Your cousin, Sansuta," addressing his daughter, "came to see you as much
as to bear me company.  You should thank him for it."

"I do."

"Wacora is thanked already in the smile of welcome that met him in
Sansuta's eyes."

The young girl blushed at the delicate compliment, and, going out, left
the two chiefs together.

"You tell me, Wacora, that the affairs of your tribe are prosperous, and
that there is peace and harmony in your council chamber?"

"Yes, uncle, the same as in my father's lifetime."

"That is well, for without that there is no real strength.  So it is
with us."

"You have told me nothing of the pale-faces at Tampa Bay."

"They are our firm friends still.  In spite of your fears, Wacora, to
the contrary, Rody and the colonists are true to their promises."

"I am pleased to hear Oluski say so," was the nephew's reply.

"I did not tell you that he had made an offer to buy the hill."

"To buy the hill!  What hill?"

"That on which we make our annual encampment.  We call it Tampa after
the bay."

"Indeed!  He wants that, too?" rejoined the young chief, in a tone
savouring of indignation.

"Yes; I called our council together, and told them of the offer."

"And their answer?"

"The same as my own; they refused."

Wacora gave a sigh of relief.

"When I carried that answer to the white he was not angry, but met me
like a friend."

"Indeed!"

"Yes; he pressed upon my acceptance rich presents, and told me that
Oluski's friendship was worth more than land."

"But you refused the presents," said the young Indian, eagerly.

"I could not; my old friend would take no denial.  Fearing to offend
him, I yielded."

The conversation was interrupted by the entrance of an Indian, one of
the warriors of the tribe.

"What does Maracota want?" asked Oluski.

"To speak to Wacora, the chief."

Wacora desired him to express his wishes in the presence of his uncle.

"Marcota must speak to Wacora alone, if Oluski will allow it."

Oluski made a sign to his nephew, who rising, followed the man outside
the door.

"Wacora must follow me further," signified the Indian.

"Go on, I will do so."

Maracota led the way, and only paused in his walk when he had got some
distance from the dwelling.

"Has Wacora faith in Maracota?"

The young chief started at the question which his guide had put to him
in a tone of strange earnestness.

"Yes.  I have faith in you."

"And he would serve Oluski, our chief?"

"With my life!"

"Sansuta is dear to Oluski."

Again Wacora started.  Maracota's words were enigmatical.

His guide continued--

"Sansuta is beautiful."

"We all know that.  Was it to tell me this that you brought me here?"

"The pale-faces admire the beauty of our Indian maidens."

"What of that?"

"One pale-face has marked Sansuta's beauty."

"Ha!"

"His eyes gladden at sight of her.  Her cheeks grow red at sight of
him."

"His name?"

"Warren Rody."

"How do you know all this?"

"Maracota is Oluski's friend and watches over his chief's happiness.
To-night Warren's messenger was in town--the negro, Crookleg."

The young chief was silent.  Maracota watched him without breaking in
upon his thoughts.

Recovering himself, Wacora asked--

"Where did you see the negro?"

"In the old fort."

"The old fort!  What was he doing there?"

"Maracota followed his trail--a lame foot and a stick--and saw him as he
entered the ruin; some one was waiting for him inside."

"Who was with the negro," demanded Wacora.

"His master," repeated Maracota.

"Warren Rody?"

Maracota nodded.

"I heard their talk," he said.

"What did they say?" asked the young chief.

"At first, I could not hear--they spoke in whispers.  After a time they
grew angry.  Warren abused Crookleg and struck him.  The black man
uttered a fierce oath and leaped over the wall of the fort at the side
opposite to where I lay hid."

"Did you hear their conversation before they quarrelled?"

"I heard the pale-face say Crookleg had only half done his errand and
must return to complete it.  The black refused.  It was then the other
got angry and struck him."

"This is very strange, Maracota.  It is some treachery I cannot
understand.  The negro must be found and questioned!"

"Well, Massa Injun, dat ain't hard to do.  He, he, he!"

Had the fiend of darkness himself risen between the two Indians, they
could not have been more startled than when these words were uttered in
their ears, for it was Crookleg who spoke.

The darkey appeared delighted at the effect his sudden appearance had
created, and continued for some time to chuckle in great glee.

"Yas! here be de 'dentical nigger wot you was a-wishin' for.  You hab
found him 'ithout gwin far.  He, he, he!"

Wacora turned sternly towards him.

"And having found you, wretch, I mean to keep you till I've made you
speak the truth."

"De trufe, Massa Injun, am what dis ole nigga always 'peak.  He can't
help it, kase it comes so na'tral to him.  Trufe an' innocence is dis
chile's on'y riches, tank heaven!"

The look which accompanied this impious speech was almost diabolical.

Wacora cut him short in an attempt to continue his speech, by a command
instantly to make known what Warren Rody wanted, with what message he
had been charged, and to whom.

Crookleg, however was not easily taken at a disadvantage.

"Well, Massa Injun, I don't mind tellin' you somet'ing, but I don't like
talkin' afore other folk.  You send dis indiwiddle away," pointing to
Maracota, "an' ole Crook'll tell you all about it.  He meant to do so,
when he comed here so sudden."

With a sign the chief dismissed Maracota, and telling the black to
follow, led him a little distance further from the town.

A long, and apparently interesting conversation ensued, in which
Crookleg's gesticulations were, as usual, violent, while the young
chief, with arms folded, and brows knit, listened to his narration.

It was late ere they separated, the negro hobbling back in the direction
of the ruin, while Wacora returned to his uncle's dwelling.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

A LOVE MEETING.

The old fort, as already said, was in a ruinous condition.

It had at one time been a stronghold of the Spaniards, but on their
quitting that part of the country, it had been suffered to fall into
decay.

Early in the morning succeeding Wacora's interview with Crookleg, two
persons stood conversing near the inner wall of the ruin.

They were Sansuta and Warren Rody.

The Indian girl had stolen from her father's house unnoticed by the few
early risers, and with cautious steps had gained the fort.

Warren's presence at such a distance from Tampa Bay, as well as
Crookleg's attendance upon him, were thus explained:--

"I am very grateful to you, Sansuta, for coming here to meet me."

"I am afraid I have done wrong."

"Wrong!  What can you mean?"

"That I am deceiving my father, my kind father; but it is for the last
time."

"The last time?"

"Yes, I have determined that this shall be our last meeting.  I could
not endure my father's reproaches, if he knew that I betrayed his
confidence."

"Do you doubt my love for you, Sansuta?  Will it not make up for
Oluski's anger?"

"Warren!"

The reproachful tone in which Sansuta uttered his name, recalled young
Rody to himself.

He immediately changed his tactics.

"But why talk of Oluski's anger?  Rather speak of my love.  Surely you
do not doubt it?"

The Indian maiden heaved a sigh.

"Sansuta does not doubt you, but she is unhappy."

"Unhappy!  Why?"

"Because an Indian girl would make but a poor wife to a white
gentleman."

A strange smile crossed the young man's face.  He did not, however,
interrupt her.

"If Sansuta cared for you less, she would not have been here this
morning; she would not have seen you again."

"Come, come, dearest, you alarm yourself without reason.  Need I tell
you how much I love you--how I have always loved you?  Have we not grown
up together?  What more natural than love like mine?"

"But your father--"

"He will not object.  Why should he?  Is he not Oluski's best friend?"

"Yes, they are friends, but still--"

Warren saw that the girl was nervous and alarmed.  He lost no time in
reassuring her.

"And, after all, dearest, we need not tell them of our love until we are
sure of their consent.  In the meantime, let us think only of ourselves.
You have not yet told me what I longed to hear."

"What is that?"

"The whispering assurance that your heart is mine?"

A painful struggle was evidently taking place in the maiden's breast.
Filial duty and self-reproach contended with that feeling, nurtured by
the soft blandishments of the scoundrel by her side.

In such a contest love is always the victim.

This case was not exceptional.  Softly murmuring the young man's name,
Sansuta hid her head upon his shoulder.

His arm enclasped her waist.

The confession had been made.  The die was cast!

They were both startled by a sound heard near.  It was like some one
sighing.

Warren, with the eye of a lynx, searched among the weeds and wild vines,
and pierced through the foliage on all sides, but saw nothing.

Reassuring her with honeyed words, he then led the girl away from the
spot.

As soon as they had disappeared a man's form was seen standing upon the
place they had last occupied; while another was visible at no great
distance from it.

He who first made appearance seemed utterly bowed down with grief,
whilst a cloud black as night was visible on his brow.  It was the
chief, Wacora!

With an angry and contemptuous action he flung some pieces of money to
the other who had followed him, and was the negro Crookleg.

"Begone!  Wacora may use you for his revenge--you shall not witness his
grief.  Begone!"

The black picked up the coins, grinned hideously and hobbled away.

Wacora stood for some time rapt in his own sad thoughts.  Then, turning
his back upon the old fort, he retraced his steps to Oluski's dwelling.

The old chief found but a dull guest in his nephew during that and many
succeeding days.

He would sit for hours seemingly lost to all that was passing around
him.

Then starting up suddenly he would stride out of the dwelling with rapid
steps, pass out of the town, and on to the adjoining woods, plunging
into their depths, to emerge from them hours after, sullen and
abstracted as ever!

His anxiety to return to his own tribe seemed to have passed away; and
day by day he deferred his departure on the plea of some trivial excuse
of remaining.

He watched Sansuta's movements, however, with the jealous care a mother
might exercise over her infant child.  Every look, word, and action
seemed to command the closest scrutiny.

The girl often trembled as she caught the young chief's eye gazing upon
her.  His stern demeanour agitated her.  She suspected that he knew her
secret; although neither by word or action did he betray the knowledge.

Oluski was amazed at his conduct.  In their conversation there was a
renewed bitterness when they talked of the pale-faces and their actions.
It astonished the old Seminole chief.  He could not understand the
sudden growth of such an unjust antipathy; therefore became more
reticent, and would sit for hours without exchanging a word with his
nephew.

Time passed in this manner until the period for the annual migration of
the tribe to Tampa Bay.  To Oluski's surprise, Wacora signified his
intention to accompany them, and along with them he went.



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

A CHANGED SCENE.

A still greater surprise was in store for the Seminole chief and his
tribe.

The Indians stood as if petrified, when they came within eight of the
well-known hill.

Upon its table top, and visible for miles around, stood a frame mansion,
in all the glitter of fresh paint.

When Oluski first saw it, he uttered an exclamation of agonised anger,
at the same time clutching hold of Wacora's arm; but for its friendly
support he had fallen to the ground.

"Look, Wacora; look yonder!  What is it we see?"

As he spoke, he passed his hands across his eyes to shade off the sun.

No; they had not deceived him; there was no glamour over them.  The
sun's beams were shining brightly upon a house.

His nephew looked sadly into the old man's face, fervently pressing his
hand.  He dared not trust himself to speak.

"And this is the act of a friend.  So much for my blind faith in the
traitor's deceitful words.  May the curse of the Great Spirit fall on
him and his!"

Wacora added--"Yes; may both be accursed!"

Then drawing his uncle away from the contemplation of the painful sight,
he conducted him to a neighbouring grove of oaks; the tribe halting near
the spot.

A council of the chief men was instantly called, and a plan of action
resolved on.

Oluski and Wacora were commissioned to visit the white settlement, and
demand the reason of this scandalous usurpation.

The Indians proceeded no farther.

That night they encamped upon the spot where they had halted, and early
the next morning the two chiefs departed on their mission.

As they approached the hill another surprise awaited them.

Surrounding it was a strong wooden stockade, with substantially built
block-houses at regular distances from each other.  Behind the
palisading men were seen, as if watching the approach, and ready to
receive them in a hostile manner.

"See!" cried Wacora, "they are prepared for our reception.  The robbers
have determined to maintain themselves in their stolen possession."

"Yes, yes!  I see.  But let us not act rashly.  We will first make an
appeal in the name of justice.  If they refuse that, then we must prove
ourselves worthy the blood in our veins! worthy of our ancestors!  Oh, I
would rather be lying among them in yonder graveyard than that this
should have arisen!  The fault has been mine, and upon me let fall the
punishment.  Come on!"

They reached the central block-house, and were summoned to a halt by one
of the settlers, who, gun in hand, stood by the entrance.

"Who are you?  What do you want?"

Oluski answered--

"White man, go tell your governor that Oluski, the Seminole chief, would
speak with him."

The sentinel answered sharply--

"The governor is not here.  He is at his house, and cannot be
disturbed."

Wacora's hand clutched his tomahawk.  Oluski perceiving the act, laid
hold of his nephew's arm.

"Patience, Wacora, patience!  The time for bloodshed will come soon
enough.  For my sake be patient."

Then, turning to the sentry, he continued, his eyes flashing in their
sockets.  "Fool!" said he, "go with my message; the lives of hundreds
may depend upon it.  Tell your chief that I am here!  Bring him
instantly before me!"

The dignity of the old Indian's manner struck the man with respect.
Perhaps the nervous twitching of Wacora's fingers about the handle of
his tomahawk had also its effect.

Calling out to a comrade who was near, and placing him at the post, he
hastened off towards the house.

The two Indians, without exchanging speech, patiently awaited his
return.

There was evidently some commotion within the frame dwelling at the
reception of the news, as several men, well armed, were observed
hurrying off in different directions, and taking station along the line
of the stockade.

Shortly after, the man who had been sent was seen coming back.

Throwing open the strong slab door, he beckoned the two chiefs to enter.

They did so; and then, leading them inside the block-house, the man told
them there to await the governor's arrival.  It was not long delayed.

Elias Rody was seen coming forth from his new mansion, followed by five
or six stalwart settlers.

All save himself carried rifles.

The Indians stood still as statues.

They made no movement to lessen the distance between themselves and the
white men.

At length Elias Rody and Oluski stood face to face.

A close observer might have detected signs of fear in the governor's
countenance.

Despite his assumed boldness of bearing, he found it hard to look into
the face of the man he had so cruelly wronged.

It was he, however, who first broke the silence so painful to himself.

"What does Oluski wish to say to me?"

"What is the meaning of this?" asked the chief, pointing to the mansion
as he spoke.

"That is my new residence."

"By what right have you built it on this ground?"

"By the right of possession--bought and paid for?"

Oluski started as if a shot had struck him.

"Bought and paid for?  Dog of a liar!  What do you mean?"

"Only that I have built my house upon land purchased from you.  Your
memory appears bad, my old Indian friend."

"Purchased from me?  When--how?"

"Do you already forget the guns, powder, and valuables I gave you?  Fie,
fie! you are trying to cheat me!  Surely you must remember your bargain!
But if your memory fail you, these gentlemen," here Rody pointed to the
settlers, "these gentlemen are prepared to certify to the truth of what
I say."

Oluski only groaned.

The audacious treachery of the white man was beyond his simple belief.

Wacora, burning with indignation, spoke for him.

"False wretch, the lie these men are ready to swear to is too monstrous
to be believed, even were they upon their oaths!  Those gifts were
thrust upon my uncle, falsely bestowed as the lands he gave you were
falsely claimed for services done to him!  Your black heart never
conceived a generous thought or a just deed!  All was for a treacherous
end--the betrayal of this noble-minded chief, as much your superior as
the Deity you profess to worship is above the white man himself!  Wacora
despises you!  Wacora has said it!"

He drew Oluski towards him, and stood erect and proud in the
consciousness of right before the trembling usurper and his adherents.

The aged chief had recovered himself while his nephew was speaking.

"What Wacora has said is good, and he only utters my own thoughts.  I
came here ready to receive atonement for the wrong done me and my
people.  I now see that there is a darker depth of treachery in you,
even than this which has robbed a confiding man of his best-loved
possession.  I, Oluski, the Seminole, spit at and despise you!  I have
spoken!"

With a kingly dignity the old chief folded his blanket around him, and
leaning on his nephew's arm, slowly departed from the spot.

Rody and his followers, as if transfixed by the withering contempt with
which the Indians had treated, them, suffered the two to depart without
molestation.

They now redoubled their watchfulness, stationed additional sentinels
around the stockade, and looked after the arms and ammunition, with
which they would, no doubt, have to defend the usurped possession.

The small cloud that had been slowly gathering over the settlement was
growing dark and portentous.  The soft breeze was rapidly rising to a
storm.

The people of the settlement, alarmed by the news of the interview
between Rody and the Indian chief's, which spread rapidly among them,
hastened to take measures for the safety of their families.  The women
and children were hurriedly brought in from the outlying plantations,
and lodged in temporary abodes within the stockade, whilst provisions in
plenty were carried to the same place.

The war signal had sounded, and before long the work of carnage would
commence!



CHAPTER TWENTY.

STILL ANOTHER SORROW.

Disappointed and chafed, the two chiefs returned in all haste to the
Indian encampment.

But few words had been spoken between them on their way from the hill.
A firm pressure of his uncle's hand was proof that Wacora, once embarked
in the impending contest, would remain faithful to its end.

It needs no speech among true men to establish confidence.  Between the
two chiefs it was mutual.

As they neared the spot where the tribe had pitched their tents, an
unusual excitement was observable.  Men and women were conversing in
little groups, animated apparently by the receipt of some startling
news.

The two chiefs at first imagined that the result of their interview was
already known; but on reflection, the impossibility of the thing became
apparent to them, and their surprise was extreme.

All at once they saw Nelatu hastening towards them.

The young man seemed ready to drop as if from fatigue.  His looks told
that he was a prey to the keenest anxiety.

On arriving before the two chiefs, he was for some moments unable to
speak.

Words rose to his tongue, but they found no articulate utterance.  His
lips seemed glued together.  Drops of sweat glistened upon his brow.

The father, with a dreadful prescience of new sorrows, trembled at the
sight of his son.

"Nelatu," he said, "what anguish awaits me?  Of what fresh disaster do
you bring the tidings?  Speak! speak!"

The young Indian again essayed, but only succeeded in muttering
"Sansuta!"

"Sansuta!  What of her?  Is she dead?  Answer me!"

"No; she is not dead.  Oh! father be calm--have courage--she is--"

"Speak, boy, or I shall go mad!  What of her?"

"She is gone!"

"Gone!  Whither?"

"I have sought her everywhere.  I only heard of her departure after you
left the encampment.  Bury your tomahawk in my brain if you will, for I
have been the cause."

"What does the boy rave about?  What does it all mean?  Has the Great
Spirit cursed me in all my hopes?  Speak, Nelatu.  Where is your sister?
You say she is gone.  Gone!  Gone!  With whom?"

"With Warren Rody!"

Oluski uttered a shriek of mingled rage and grief, pressed his hand upon
his heart, and reeling, would have fallen to the earth but for Wacora's
arm, at that instant thrown around him.

The two young men bent over his prostrate form, which his nephew had
gently laid upon the sward.

A few faint, murmuring words escaped from his lips; so faint, indeed,
that they were not comprehended by either son or nephew.

The frown which had gathered on his brow in his interview with Elias
Rody gradually gave place to a gentle smile.  His eyes, for an instant,
rested sorrowfully on the face of Nelatu, then on Wacora, and were
closed for ever!

With that look had his life ended.  The spirit of the Seminole Chief had
departed to a better land.

Wounded in his friendship, doubly wounded in his pride, cruelly stabbed
by the desertion of his own daughter and the weakness of his own son,
outraged as friend and father, the old man's heart had burst within his
bosom!

Tenderly covering the body with his blanket, Wacora stooped and kissed
the cold brow in silence, registering a vow of vengeance upon his
murderers!

Nelatu, stunned by the suddenness of the event, hid his face in his
hands, and gave way to lamentation and tears.

That evening the remains of their chief were interred in a temporary
grave, around which the warriors of the tribe, by their own consent now
commanded by Wacora, joined in an oath of sure and ample vengeance.
Coupled with their oath was the declaration that war and rapine should
not cease until the hill was again their own, and the body of their
beloved chief laid peacefully beside the bones of his ancestors.

That night the red pole was erected in their encampment, and under the
glare of pine torches was performed around it the fearful scalp-dances
of the tribe.

The white sentinels upon the hill saw afar off the fiendlike
performance, and, as around echoed in their ears their wild shriek, they
turned trembling from the hill, and cursed Elias Rody!



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

WACORA CHOSEN CHIEF.

Wacora was unanimously elected war chief of the tribe over which his
uncle had long ruled.  Nelatu's claims were so slight, his ability so
deficient, that not one of the warriors wished to nominate him for the
important position.

To Wacora the honour was of inestimable value.  By its means there was
now a hope for the realisation of his long-cherished dream--the
redemption of the red-man by the union of all the tribes into one
powerful nation.

He instantly dispatched messengers to the braves of his own sub-tribe,
summoning them to Tampa Bay, to take part in the conflict.

He was answered by the speedy arrival of a large and well-armed force,
who, mingling with Oluski's people, now became one community.

Obedient to his mandate, they continued to preserve an ominously
peaceful attitude towards the settlers, who, but for a knowledge to the
contrary, might have comforted themselves with a belief that the red men
had left the bay.

But although unseen, their presence was not unfelt.  The news of
Oluski's death had spread a feeling of alarm among the white colonists,
which the heartless and assumed indifference of Elias Rody and his
adherents could not dismiss from their minds.

The "governor" seemed to have returned to the courses of his early life.
He had for many years been a man of sober habits; but since the
building of his new house a change had come over him.  He had begun to
drink freely, and in the excitement of preparation for the defence of
his usurped property, he found a thousand excuses for the indulgence of
that appetite so long kept under control.

Still another matter gave discomfort to the governor.  His son had been
for some time missing from the settlement, and in a mysterious manner.
His disappearance had a marked effect on his father's temper, and when
not cursing himself for the general discomfort he had caused, he cursed
the son for adding to it!

It will thus be seen that although Elias Rody had prepared his own bed,
and was obliged to lie upon it, it was proving anything but a bed of
roses.

Had it not been for the presence of his daughter Alice, the new mansion
in which he now lived, and for which he might yet have to pay dearly,
would have been a perfect pandemonium to him.

That amiable girl, by her gentle behaviour, did much to soften the rude,
inharmonious elements around her; and the roughest of her father's
roystering companions were silent and respectful in her presence.

She was like a ministering angel among those who had taken refuge within
the stockade.  She never seemed to tire of attending upon them or their
wants.  Her kind sympathetic voice and assiduous care were of
inestimable service to the sick, who blessed her in their hearts.

Nothing in the meantime had been heard of her brother Warren.

Crookleg had also disappeared, although no one particularly missed him.

Cris Carrol, the hunter, had not returned to the settlement.  In some
distant savanna he was no doubt tranquilly passing his time, at peace
with all the world.  Such was the condition of affairs.

The first preparations for strife between the Whites and Indians had
been made; and to several other outrages, similar to that committed by
Elias Rody, may be traced the causes of that Seminole war which cost the
government of the United States some thousands of lives, along with
several millions of dollars, to say nought of the reputation of six
hitherto distinguished generals.



CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

A CONVERSATION BETWEEN COUSINS.

The tranquil state of affairs did not last for long.

The Indians, eager to revenge Oluski's death, wore impatient of the
restraint Wacora would have imposed upon them, and at a council convened
for that purpose, they determined to attack the stockade upon the hill.

This determination was hastened by several rencontres which had taken
place in the outlying districts.

A small party of the red men, led by Maracota, had pillaged and
destroyed a plantation.

Near the bay they had been met by some of the white settlers as they
were returning from their work of destruction.

In the _melee_ which ensued a number of Indians were killed, while their
white adversaries met with little loss.

These and some individual cases of contest had worked the red men up to
a pitch of savage earnestness that took all Wacora's temporising power
to restrain.

He knew the character of the people he had to deal with too well to
hazard opposition to their will, the more so as his own desire for
vengeance was as deep and earnest, but more deadly than theirs.

One thought occupied his mind nobler than that of revenge--the
regeneration of the Indian race.

A chimera it may have been, but still his great ambition.

He thus spoke to the assembled chiefs--

"I do not urge upon you to withhold vengeance for injuries done to our
race by the white enemy.  I only desire to make it more full and
terrible.  This is but the beginning of a long list of retributions, the
overflowing of accumulated wrongs, the first step towards freedom and
redemption!  To take that step we must be patient until certain of
success.  Then begins a warfare that will only end with the annihilation
of our hated enemies and in a new existence for the red men!  Have I
spoken well?"

Loud approbation greeted him from the assembled warriors; but such is
the inconsistency of human character that individually they devised
means for immediate retaliation on the settlers.

Hence the several encounters which had already taken place.

Nelatu, mortified at his own weakness, was among the warriors addressed
by Wacora.

On returning from the council, the young chief approached his cousin.

"Nelatu, you would do something to make up for your blind infatuation,
that has led to such misfortunes?"

"I would, Wacora, I would.  My father's face seems always before me,
reproaching me as my sister's destroyer."

"Then action is the only way by which to shake off the remorseful
feeling.  Our efforts have till now been fruitless in tracing the spot
to which your sister has been carried.  She must be found, and the
punishment of the guilty made sure."

"Not Sansuta.  You would not injure her?"

Wacora smiled sadly, as he pressed his hand upon his heart.

"No, Nelatu, I would not injure your sister.  Alas!  I had already
learned to love her.  I would not hurt her for worlds.  It is the wretch
who has carried her away.  I would have him suffer a thousand deaths,
and every death more terrible than the other!"

"Tell me, what can I do?  If I remain idle, I shall die!"

"Take three or four of my own people, follow every trail that promises
to lead to where they are concealed, and having found the monster, bring
him to me alive."

Wacora's eyes, as he uttered these words, blazed with passion.

"I would rather go alone," said Nelatu.

"As you please; but remember, that there is one man you dare not trust,
and yet he may be the means of finding Sansuta."

"His name?"

"Crookleg, the negro."

"But he, too, is missing."

"I know it, and therefore he can lead you to their hiding-place, if he
can be found.  With Crookleg to assist you, you may succeed; without him
your search will be fruitless."

"How am I to find him?"

"By diligent search.  He is not near the spot, but yet not so distant as
to be ignorant of what is passing.  He has the cunning of the wild cat;
remember that."

"I'll be a match for him, never fear, cousin."

Wacora glanced pityingly at the simple youth.

He thought of his confiding nature, and felt that if the only chance of
finding Sansuta lay in cunning, they would never be discovered.

"Well, Nelatu, I have given you the best advice I can.  Will you
undertake the search?"

"I will!"

"When?"

"At once, Wacora."

With these words the cousins separated.



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

THE STRAYED CANOE.

That night Nelatu left the Indian camp.

Wacora had given him a few hints by which he thought his search for
Crookleg might be facilitated.

He had suggested that the negro lay hid within the neighbouring swamp.

This wilderness, difficult to traverse, was of great extent.  It was
only by a knowledge of its intricate paths that it could be successfully
explored.

Nelatu, fully appreciating the difficulty of his undertaking, was more
than usually depressed.

This journey through the track of dry timber was easy enough.

On emerging from it he found himself on a broad savanna.

On the other side of which lay the swamp to which Wacora had directed
him.

Its gloomy appearance struck a chill to the young chief's heart.

Could it by any possibility be the place selected by Warren for
Sansuta's concealment?

He almost hoped his search for her in its sombre fastnesses might prove
futile.

Its aspect was especially forbidding at the time Nelatu reached it,
which was in the early morning.

A heavy fog rose from its dark waters, clinging around the rank
vegetation, and veiling the mosses and spectral limbs of the decayed
trees.

A foetid breath exhaled from the thick undergrowth, and the air seemed
charged with poison.

No note of bird was heard; no bloom of flower seen.  Death in life was
everywhere apparent!

Carefully, and with the quick natural instinct of his race, Sansuta's
brother struck upon a well-defined trail leading inwardly from the
borders of the morass.

Following this with care, he had soon made considerable progress.

The sun rising higher as he advanced, only revealed more clearly the
gloomy character of the scene.

The thick mist became dispelled; the verdure, dark but rich, glistened
with drops of moisture, and the ghostly moss waved to and fro, stirred
by a gentle breeze that had helped to dissipate the fog.

With the bright sky, however, there came a corresponding lightness over
the young man's spirit, and a doubt arose in his mind as to the guilt of
his former friend.

"I cannot believe all that he has been accused of.  Perhaps he is not
guilty of carrying off Sansuta.  I always trusted him.  Why should he be
so evil without a suspicion having crossed my mind that he was so?  He
has not been seen since she disappeared; but yet Crookleg might be the
guilty one.  If all I have been told be true, and Warren be the man, he
shall bitterly pay for his crime.  But I will not believe it until I am
convinced 'tis so."

It will be seen that Nelatu was still a firm friend, ready to doubt even
villainy.

Suddenly the trail he was following came to an end.

A deep black lagoon was before his feet.

How to cross it?

Its unrippled bosom showed it to be deep.

Here and there jagged cypress stumps, to which clung drooping parasites,
stood out of it.

Nelatu felt that the trail he had followed was purposely terminated at
the edge of the lake, doubtless to be discovered on its opposite shore.

How to cross it?  That was the question.

Stooping, he scanned the shore, but failed to trace any further evidence
of the footsteps of man.

He was on the point of retracing his path in order to look for a trail,
when he was arrested by a faint sound, as from a movement in the water.

It was very faint, but unmistakeable in its character.

It was the stroke of an oar!

He strained his eyes to catch a view of the boat which he felt sure was
traversing the lake.

After some time spent in the endeavour, his scrutiny was rewarded.

A strange tableau was revealed to him.

At a distance appeared the shadowy form of a canoe, in which two figures
were seated.

The fog, like a dull silver veil, was still spread over the lagoon, and
his efforts to recognise the phantom-like forms were unavailing.

The intervening curtain of vapour baffled even the keen eye-sight of an
Indian.

He hallooed to the spectral figures until the swamp re-echoed his
shouts.

In vain!

No response came from the silent voyagers.

He fancied that the measured pulling of the oars for an instant ceased,
but so dim and unreal did it all appear, that he began to doubt the
evidence of his senses.

As he gazed the canoe glided silently out of sight.

Muttering an angry adjuration at the ghostly oarsman, he threw himself
upon the ground.

Overcome with the fatiguing journey, and dispirited by his fruitless
search, he soon fell into a deep slumber.

The last film of the fog was now dispelled by the powerful rays of the
sun.

Birds sang in the trees above him, and from the black waters of the
lagoon a huge caiman crawled up the banks to bask in the noontide glare.

Still Nelatu slumbered.

He slept until the meridian heat had passed, and the evening approached,
seeming to lull all nature into silence.

The young man's sleep was placid.  With his head pillowed on his arm, he
lay like one dead.

From this sweet unconsciousness he awoke with a start.

A rippling sound as of some craft cleaving the water, once more fell
upon his ear.

Had the phantom canoe returned?

A glance answered the question.

Drifting near the shore was an empty dug-out.

The broken manilla rope, dragging at the stern, told him why it was
adrift.

Without hesitation he plunged into the water, and in a few strokes
reached the straying craft.

Scrambling into it, he seized an oar found lying in its bottom, and
paddled back to the place whence he had started.  Placing his gun ready
beside him, he again paddled off, and rowed into the centre of the lake,
steering his course, as nearly as he could remember, in the direction
which, in the morning, he had observed the canoe to take.

The spot, as he had marked it, was near a huge cypress tree.

It proved to be at a greater distance than he thought, and the sun had
well sunk in the western sky before he arrived at it.

Once there he came to a stop.  Those he sought had evidently either gone
further out into the open water of the lagoon or had made for one or
other of the numerous narrow canals which debouched into it.

Selecting that which appeared of the greatest width, he plied his oar
and advanced towards it.



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

A SMOKE INTERRUPTED.

Although Cris Carrol was absent from the immediate neighbourhood of the
settlement, he was none the less informed of what had happened since his
departure.

Several of the colonists, alarmed at the prospect of affairs, had
quietly left Tampa Bay, and, meeting with the hunter, had told him of
the events that had transpired within the past month.

The backwoodsman's foresight had not deceived him.

The whites, by which he meant Elias and his followers, had not heeded
his advice, and worse had come of it.

The hunter was nothing, if not oracular.

"Wal," said he, "Governor Rody thought himself smart when he set to work
buildin' that thar frame-house of his'n on the red-man's ground, but I
reckon he'll pay for it yet in bloody scalps and broken bones.  Confound
the old cormorant; his house will cause all of them poor white settlers
no end of trouble.  It don't bear thinkin' on, that it don't.  As for
his black-hearted whelp of a son, darn me if I wouldn't like to put an
ounce o' lead into his carcass, if it war only to larn him some human
feelin'."

"But won't you go back to the settlement now, and see if your presence
can do any good?"

To this question, propounded by one of the fugitive settlers, Cris
answered--

"Good!  What good can I do now?  No, lad, the fat's in the fire this
time, and, may be, I may better help some poor critter away from the
place than anigh it.  I'll tell ye what it is, and it aint no use
denyin' it.  Them there red devils means mischief, and the old cuss Rody
knows it by this time.  The chief, Oluski, what you tell me air dead,
war worth a whole settlement of Rody's--barrin' one--that is, barrin'
one."

"And who may that be?"

"Who but his darter.  The most beautifullest gal that this coon ever set
eyes on.  Bless her, I hope no hurt won't come to her, and there shan't
either, if Cris Carrol can prevent it."

In this manner did the honest hunter comment on the alarming news
brought by the fugitives from Tampa Bay.

Not that he approached the spot closely.  No; he had formed an idea of
the manner in which he might be most useful; and, to do so, he must
carefully avoid any appearance of interference between the contending
parties.

He, therefore, pursued his occupation of hunting; but contrived
materially to narrow the circle of his excursions.

Often as the image of Alice Rody presented itself to his mind, he would
heave a painful sigh.

"How such a gal came to be a child of that old trait'rous heathen is
more nor I can reckon up.  It's one of them thar things as philosophers
call startlers!"

In one of these moralising, wandering moods the old hunter was seated on
a tree stump on the afternoon of a day that had been more than usually
fatiguing to him.

He knocked the ashes from his pipe, took a plug of tobacco from his
pouch, and began to cut up a supply for another smoke.

"Ah!" muttered he, shaking his head, "I remember the time when there was
happiness in the savannahs, and when them red-skins were ready to help
the white man rather than fight agin them.  Them times is gone from hyar
for ever!"

He struck a light with his flint, and applied it to his pipe.

Just as he had puffed two or three small clouds of smoke, and was
preparing to enjoy himself to the fullest extent, a flash suddenly
appeared, the pipe was knocked from his mouth, and the whizz of a bullet
sounded in his ears!

To grasp his rifle and shelter himself behind a tree, on the side
opposite to that from which the shot proceeded, was but the work of an
instant.

"Red-skins, by the eternal!  I know it by the twang of that rough-cast
bullet."

Whether red-skins or white men, he did not find it easy to be certain,
although he was up to every move in such an emergency.

He knew that to look in the direction of the shot was to expose himself
to almost certain death.

He listened with breathless anxiety for the slightest sound, which might
give evidence of the movements of the enemy.

All remained perfectly still.

Adopting a very old _ruse_, he stuck his skin cap upon the barrel of his
rifle, and held it out a few inches beyond the trunk of the tree, by the
side of which he had ensconced himself.

A flash, a report, and it was pierced by a bullet!

He was now fully satisfied that there was but one enemy with whom he had
to cope.

Had there been more, the first bullet, which struck the pipe from his
mouth, would have been followed by another as quickly, but perhaps more
surely aimed.

With a rapid glance he surveyed the ground behind him.

It was covered with undergrowth and fallen timber.

His resolution was at once taken.

He fell flat upon the earth, and noiselessly gliding away reached a
tree, distant some paces, and in an oblique direction from the one he
had left.

From that spot he made his way to another, at a greater angle, and about
equally distant from the second.

The movements were affected with such agile stealthiness, as to be
entirely unperceived by his unseen enemy.

By the change of position he now commanded a side view of his unknown
antagonist, who, unsuspicious of it, was keeping a close watch upon
Carrol's supposed shelter.

To raise his rifle to his shoulder was a natural action of the old
hunter.

Instead of pulling the trigger, however, some idea seemed to cross his
mind, and pausing, he scanned his adversary.

He saw it was Maracota who had fired at him!

Carrol knew Maracota as a faithful and devoted follower of the late
chief, and he felt loth to take his life, although he might easily have
done so.

The better thought prevailed.

He felt convinced that the bullet fired by the Indian had been aimed in
reality at one for whom Maracota had mistaken him.

Advancing cautiously towards the unconscious warrior, the old
backwoodsman crept from tree to tree until he was close upon him.

Not anticipating an attack from the rear, and still fancying he
commanded the hiding-place of the white man, Maracota, in spite of his
Indian cunning, was completely in the white man's power.

A loud shout, a quick bound, and Carrol had him in his grasp.

With one hand upon his throat, the hunter had pinned him to the earth.

"Not a word, you darned catamount, or I'll run my knife into your ribs!
So you thought to circumwent me, did yer, with your Injun treachery?
What would you say now if I war to raise your har, 'stead of letting you
take mine?"

Maracota could make no reply to the question, as the pressure on his
throat stopped his breath as well as speech.

The backwoodsman saw by the expression upon the Indian's face, that his
own surmise had been correct.

He was not the victim Maracota would have doomed to death.

It was a mistake, but rather a serious one.

Loosening his hold, he suffered the astonished Maracota to rise to his
feet.

"Yes; I can tell you've made a random shot at me.  Next time, try and
see a man's face 'fore you pulls trigger on him, or it might be awkward.
There's no harm done, only a worse shot nor yours I never saw.  I'd eat
my rifle, stock, lock and barrel, afore I'd own to sich shooting.  Who
war it you were arter?"

Having at length recovered breath, the Indian was able to answer.

"I took you for Warren Rody."

"Much obleeged for the compliment.  Do I look such a skunk as that
fellow?  If I do, put a brace of bullets into me, and we won't quarrel."

The warrior grimly smiled.

"Maracota has sworn to avenge Oluski's death.  Warren Rody must die!"

"Wal, let him die.  I shan't stop you from riddin' the world of such as
he.  What made you follow my trail?"

"It was no trail I followed.  I have been seeking one from the north;
yours came from the east."

"Right you air; that's whar I hail from last."

"Have you seen anything of him, or Sansuta?"

"Hark hyar, Injun.  Altho' I might draw blood in the scoundrel if I saw
him, I ain't a _man-hunter_, and that's why I haint been a follerin' any
trail of his'n."

Maracota's eager look gave place to one of despondency, as he
muttered,--

"Not found yet!  Where can they be?"

"Ah, whar?  It ain't Warren as has hid whar he can't be found.  Some
knowin' hand has put him up to it."

"Yes, Maracota thinks so.  It must be the negro Crookleg."

"Crookleg!  Is that all-fired nigger varmint mixed up with him?  That
makes a brace of the durndest hounds that ever run together.  Who told
you that Crookleg helped young Rody?"

"The chief thinks so."

"Wal, then, I'll bet a 'possum skin agin a musk rat's that he's right.
Your chief, Wacora, is as likely an Injun at reck'nin up the merits o' a
case as this coon knows on.  Now you've missed liftin' my scalp, what do
you intend doin'?"

"Go on looking for the chief who stole Oluski's heart, find him, and
kill him."

The glance that accompanied these words was full of deadly
determination.

"Wal, go, and good luck attend you.  Don't ask me to jine you, I tell
you I ain't no man-hunter nor never will be; only, if either of them
thar scamps should be out walkin' whar I chance to be, they had better
have met with a mad bar than this Cris Carrol.  Never mind sayin' a word
about that bad shot o' yourn.  The moment I seed you I knowed you didn't
mean it for me, only next time be more partiklar, that's all."

Without making reply, Maracota turned away, and was soon lost under the
shadows of the forest.

As soon as he was out of sight, the old hunter renewed his preparations
for a smoke.

Drawing from his pouch (which seemed to contain everything that the
heart of a hunter could desire) another pipe, he was soon once more
sending clouds of blue smoke up into the air.

"If that Maracota meets Warren Rody or Crookleg he'll be an awkward
customer to either or both on 'em; and that he may meet 'em he has Cris
Carrol's best prayers and wishes."

With this homely but sincere expression of his desires, the backwoodsman
ceased to think of the deadly danger lately threatening himself.



CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

PREPARING FOR THE ATTACK.

The Indians had, at length, determined upon making an attack upon Elias
Rody's stronghold.

The governor had got wind of their intention through a spy, a slave
belonging to the tribe, who had turned informer through his seductive
offers.

A meeting of the settlers within the stockade was at once called.

"Fellow citizens," said Rody, addressing them, "I have received some
information that our enemies have resolved upon attacking us.  It is my
duty to tell you this in order that every man may be prepared to defend
himself and his family.  One thing I would have you remember; this war
will be one of extermination; therefore be careful not to waste a
bullet.  Let every pull upon your trigger send an Indian to his long
account.  Let the cry be `no quarter!'"

"Perhaps that'll be their motto too," remarked a voice in the crowd.

"I perceive, sir," replied Rody, a little nettled at the running
commentary on his speech, "I perceive that there are still one or two
dissatisfied people amongst us.  Let them step forward, and declare
themselves.  _We_ want neither renegades or traitors in our midst."

"That's so," the voice replied.

"Again I say, let those displeased with my views step boldly out, and
allow me to answer any objections they may raise.  I've done nothing I
am ashamed of.  I blush for nothing that I do."

"No, you're past blushing!" was the ironical rejoinder.

A suppressed titter ran round the assemblage at these pertinent remarks
of the unknown; and the governor's temper was not improved by observing
the effect the words had produced on his hearers.

"I scorn to answer the fellow who is afraid to show himself; but I warn
you all to be prepared for a desperate contest.  We have only ourselves
to look to for our defence.  We are in the hands of Providence."

"We are!"

This sudden change from jeering comment to deep solemnity of utterance
on the part of the unknown speaker struck awe into the crowd, and caused
Rody to turn pale.

In the hands of Providence!

Yes, for good or evil.  For punishment or reward.

The thought expressed in this manner was too much for the governor.

He dismissed the meeting with a hurried admonition to be prepared for
the worst.

As he re-entered his house, he encountered his daughter face to face.

"Father, I was about to seek you," said she.  "They tell me that you
have heard bad news."

"Bad enough, girl!  The red-skins are going to attack us."

"Is there no hope?"

"Hope, for what?"

"That this bloodshed may be avoided.  Will they not listen to an offer
of reconciliation?"

"And who would dare to make it?"

"Dare, father!  I do not understand you.  It is the duty of those who
have done wrong to contrive by concession to atone for it, and, if
possible, to make peace."

"But who has done wrong?"

Alice did not answer in words, but the look she bestowed upon her father
was eloquence itself.

"I see what you're thinking about, my girl.  It's very hard that inside
of my own home I should meet with reproaches.  Isn't it enough for me to
have to bear the sneers and taunts of others, without being forced to
listen to them from you?"

"Father!"

"Oh, yes; now you'll try to say you didn't mean to reproach me; but it
won't do.  I see it in your face; and, there, your eyes are full of
tears.  That's the way with you girls, when you can't use your tongues,
you have always a stock of tears ready.  But blubbering won't mend this
matter; it's got to be settled with blows."

"Oh, father! can nothing be done?"

"Nothing, but prepare for the worst.  Now, girl, stop your crying, or
you'll drive me stark mad.  I'll tell you what it is, I'm just in that
sort of state that if I don't do something, I shall go clean out of my
mind.  What with the worrying work here, and the grumbling discontent of
a few paltry hounds about the settlement, I don't know how I keep my
senses about me."

The angry mood into which he had worked himself was, however, no novelty
to his daughter.  She had of late seen it too often, and sorrowfully
noted the change.

Still, she was a brave girl, and knowing she had a duty to perform, she
did it fearlessly.

"Oh, father!" she exclaimed, apologisingly, "I did not mean to reproach
you.  If my looks betrayed my thoughts, I cannot help them, much as I
may regret giving you pain.  What I wanted to say was, that if there is
any honourable way to avoid this bloodshed, it should be tried.  There
is no disgrace in acknowledging a fault."

"Who has committed one?"

"You know wrongs have been done by white people against the Indians, not
alone now, but ever since the two races have been brought together.  We
are no better than others; but we can avoid their errors by trying to
remedy the grievances they complain of."

Old Rody stamped the floor with rage; his daughter's remarks made him
wince.  Conscience, which he deemed asleep, was at work, and upon the
tongue of his own child had found utterance.

"Begone, girl!" he cried, "before I forget that you are my own flesh and
blood.  You insult me beyond endurance.  I will manage my affairs my own
way, without impediment from you.  Ay, not only my own affairs, but the
affairs of all here.  I will have blind obedience; I demand it, and will
exact it.  Begone!"

His daughter looked him boldly in the face.

"Be it so, father," she answered; "I have done my duty--will always do
it.  Think, however, before it is too late, that to your conduct in this
matter, the groans of widows and the sighs of orphans may be laid.  The
happiness or misery of many rests upon your single word.  It is an awful
risk--reflect upon it, dear father, reflect!"

Her proud bearing gave place to tears.  Her womanly heart was full to
overflowing.  It conquered her spirit for a time; and as she parted from
her father's presence, she felt that the last hope of peace had
vanished.

"By the eternal powers!" cried he, "this will prove too much for me.  It
must come to an end!"

As Rody uttered these words, he drew from his pocket a flask and applied
it to his lips.

It was a bottle of brandy.  It seemed the last friend left him.



CHAPTER TWENTY SIX.

FORCED INTO SERVICE.

After entering the narrow stretch of water, Nelatu, for some time, plied
his paddle with vigour.

He then paused to examine the place.

Sedges and cane-brakes grew thickly down to the water's edge.

There appeared no passage through them.

Resuming his course, he attentively watched for any sign of habitation,
but for a long time without success.

Just as he was turning the head of the canoe again in the direction of
the lagoon, an object, floating on the surface, attracted his attention.

It was an oar.

A glance convinced him that it was the fellow of the one he held in his
hand.

Re-animated by this assuring proof that he was going in the right
direction, he fished it up, and abandoning the more laborious mode of
paddling, he adjusted the oars in the rowlocks, and bending to them,
made more rapid way.

He kept his eyes turning to right and left, on the lookout for a
landing-place, which he now felt assured could not be far distant.

His scrutiny was at length rewarded.

A few hundred yards from where he had picked up the floating oar, a post
was seen sticking up out of the bank.

To this was attached a Manilla rope, the broken strands of which showed
it to be the other portion of that fastened to the stern of the canoe.

The clue was found.

Those he had dimly seen in the morning, were doubtless close at hand.

He ran the craft in shore, fastened it securely to the post, and landed.

With cautious steps he followed the footprints now seen in the soft mud
of the bank.

They led to a sheltered spot, upon which a rude hut had been erected.

The sound of a man's voice arrested his steps.

"He, he!  I 'clare it makes dis chile larf, to t'ink about de trubble
dat's brewing for dem.  De long time am comin' round at last.  I'se bin
a waitin' for it, but it am comin' now."

It was Crookleg who spoke; but for the time he said no more.

A stunning blow from Nelatu's clubbed rifle--which would have crushed
any skull but that of a negro--felled him senseless to the ground.

On recovering consciousness, he found himself bound in a most artistic
manner by a thong of deer-skin, which Nelatu had found near the hut.

"Hush!" said the Indian, in a half-whisper; "not a word, except to
answer my questions.  Don't move, dog, or I'll dash out your brains!"

The negro trembled in every limb.

"Is Warren Rody inside that hut?"

Crookleg shook his head.

"Where is he?"

"Don't know, Massa Injun; don't know nuffin 'bout him."

"Liar!"

"By him tressed life, massa, dis chile don't know."

"Answer me--where is Warren Rody?  I give you one chance for your
wretched life.  Tell me, where is Warren Rody?"

The raising of a tomahawk above the negro's head convinced him that
death would be the sure reward of untruth.

"Don't, massa, don't kill de ole nigger.  He'll tell you all he knows.
Oh, don't kill me!"

"Speak."

"He _war_ here, but he am gone."

"Where?"

"Out ob de swamp into de woods."

"And Sansuta?"

"De gal am gone 'long wid him."

Nelatu groaned.

Warren, then, was guilty.

"Do you know me?" he asked.

"Oh, yes, massa, I knows you well--you am Sansuta's brodder.  I tole
Warren he war a-doin' wrong, but he am so headstrong he would take your
sister.  Dis chile's begged him not to do it."

"False dog! you are deceiving me."

"I swear, Mass 'Latu, I'se speaking the bressed trufe."

Not deigning to reply, the Indian strode on to the hut, and entered it.
It was deserted.

A bead bracelet lying inside attested to the truth of that portion of
Crookleg's story which told him Sansuta had been there.

He returned to the negro.

"Rise," he said, in a commanding tone.

"I can't, massa; you has tied me so tight that I can't move."

"Rise, I tell you," repeated the Indian with a threatening gesture.

Beginning to obey, the negro rolled over the ground in the direction of
the rifle which Nelatu had laid aside in order to tie him.

Could he but reach that, he might defy his raptor.

But the Indian was too quick for him.

With a kick which made Crookleg howl with pain, he forced him aside, and
secured the weapon himself.

Seeing that his only chance was submission, the negro got upon his feet
with some difficulty, and stood awaiting further orders.

Nelatu now unfastened the thongs that bound him.

"Go before me," he said.

Crookleg hobbled forward with a demoniac look upon his face.

They reached the water's edge.

"Is that your canoe?"

"Yes, massa; dat dug-out b'long to me."

"Get in."

The black scrambled into the stern.

"Not there--the other end."

Crookleg obeyed.

Nelatu took the vacated seat.

"Now, lay hold of these oars, bend your back, and row me to the place
where you landed Warren Rody and my sister.  Remember, that if you make
the slightest attempt to deceive me, I will bury my tomahawk deep in
your brain."

Thus admonished, the negro plied the oars, and the canoe darted rapidly
through the water.



CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

THE LOST SISTER.

For more than an hour Crookleg was compelled to use the oars, until they
had reached the other side of the lagoon.

Nelatu, silent and wrapped in his own gloomy thoughts, watched his every
motion.

It was twilight when they made a landing within a sheltered bay upon
that side of the swamp nearest the settlement.

Beyond this lay the woods of which the negro had spoken.

Compelling the black to precede him, Nelatu urged him forward until they
had reached a mound covered with bushes.

"Hush!  Massa Injun, we are near de place."

"I see no signs of habitation!"

"We is near it, for all dat.  It ain't a easy ting to find a place like
dis 'ere whare dere are nuffin to show but de ground and dese ere
bushes!"

"Quick! lead me to the place!"

"By-am-by, massa; for a mercy's sake hab jist a little patience.  'Twont
do no good to be in a hurry, 'twont, indeed."

Suspecting treachery, Nelatu would hear of no delay.

"Remember, slave! what I threatened you with.  Conduct me at once to
their hiding-place!"

"Well, den, Massa Injun, if you must go, step light, or we'll gib Massa
Warren de alarm.  He's as quick eared as a rabbit; dat he am.  And he
may shoot us both afore we know; dat is, if he 'spects you am coming
after de gal."

With this caution, to which his companion silently agreed, they skirted
the mound to its extreme end, where it seemed to terminate abruptly in a
deep chasm.

Once there, Crookleg threw himself upon the ground, motioning the Indian
to do the same.

Nelatu complied, still watching for any movement of betrayal on the part
of his guide.

With a stealthy hand the negro parted the bushes, and signed to the
young man to look through the opening.

He did so.

Before his eyes was the entrance of a cave or grotto.

Inside the entrance a pine-torch, stuck in the ground, illumined a
portion of the interior.

The light was obscured by the bushes, and it was only when these were
parted that it became visible.

Inside the grotto was Sansuta.  She was reposing upon a bed of moss.

Behind her, on a large boulder of rock, sat Warren Rody!

Nelatu was on the point of rushing forward, when he was stayed by the
negro's hand clutching his arm.

"Not yet, massa," he whispered, "you'd be shot afore you get two steps
in dar, and dis poor ole nigga would nebba get away 'gain.  Let me go
speak first, and gib Massa Rody de signal; and den I'll find a way to
bring him out to you.  Don't you see that'll be de best plan to fix
him?"

"I cannot trust you from my sight.  Take your hand off my arm! let me
go!"

"Oh, massa, I shall be ruined, and murdered complete.  Don't you see dat
afore you reach him he'd see you and fire?  De ole nigga's plan am de
best.  Let me bring de fox out ob his hole!"

Crookleg spoke reasonably.

Nelatu might, it is true, have easily killed Warren from where he lay,
but his sister's presence, Wacora's command, and a certain reluctance to
shed blood, stayed his hand.

"Well, then, do it, but on conditions."

"What conditions, Massa Injun?  Name 'em, and I'se obey."

"That you bring him away from my sister's side out here into the open
ground; that every word you speak shall be loud enough for me to hear.
Go!"

"I'll go, massa."

"See!"

As Nelatu uttered this monosyllable he tapped his rifle.

Crookleg took the hint.

"I'se swear, massa, do dis ting right!  Dis ole nigga don't want no
bullet through him karkiss.  I'se swear to do as you say!"

With this asseveration he rose erect and entered boldly among the
bushes, while Nelatu concealed himself behind them.

Warren started to his feet, calling out--

"Who's there?"

"Hush, Massa Warren!  It's only me--ole Crookleg."

"Come in, Crookleg."

"No, Massa Warren, you come out here.  I'se want to show you somethin'."

With a hasty glance at the slumbering maiden Warren Rody emerged from
the cave.

At the entrance he was suddenly confronted by Nelatu.

"Nelatu!"

A yell of fiendish laughter from Crookleg answered the exclamation.

"He, he, he, he! ho, ho, ho!  Oh, dat am de best ting dis ole nigga eber
done!  Ah, de time am comin' now!  Ho, ho!  Massa Warren, who kicked de
ole dog of a nigga wot fetch and carry for de white man to de Injun gal?
Ha, ha, ha!  I 'clare to mercy it am splendid!  Now I'll leave you two
friends togedder; but don't quarrel--don't!  Only remember, Massa
Warren, remember Crookleg to your dyin' day!"

With these words the negro darted off, and was soon lost to sight behind
the bushes.

Warren stood grating his teeth in impotent rage.

He saw that he had fallen into a trap laid for him by Crookleg.

Nelatu stirred not an inch.

Again young Rody pronounced his name.

"Nelatu!"

"Yes, Nelatu--the brother of Sansuta!  Does not the sight of me turn you
into stone?  Is your heart so hardened that you do not tremble?"

Warren gave a short, mocking laugh.

"Go away from here," he said; "I owe no account of my actions to any
one."

"Yes, you owe an account of them to that Great Spirit who is alike your
God and mine."

"Pah! stand aside, I say."

"My arm will brain you if you move or step!  Nelatu is a chief, and
_must_ be heard!"

"Well, then, go on."

"You once said you were my friend.  Nelatu tears your friendship from
his breast and casts it to the wind!  You are an assassin--a thief!
What answer do you make?"

"I make none."

"You are right; nothing can be said to palliate the crime of falsehood,
murder, and robbery!  Come along with me."

"Indeed!  Where to?"

"To our chief--to Wacora."

"A prisoner?"

"Yes."

"And who is to take me?"

"I will."

"You!" retorted Rody, with a sneer.

"Yes; your life was in my hands but a minute ago.  You live only because
I would not kill you in my sister's presence.  Your very slave has
proved false to you.  You are in my power; Wacora shall pass sentence on
you, and that sentence will be death."

With a bound Warren rushed at Nelatu, who, suddenly dropping his rifle,
grappled with him.

A terrible struggle ensued.

The young men were about equally matched in size and strength, while
each knew that it was a contest for life or death.

Warren, by his unexpected onset, had at first some advantage over his
antagonist; but the Indian speedily recovered it by his great power of
endurance.

All feeling of pity had vanished from his breast.  He had intended to
take him a prisoner; he would now kill him.

He made several unsuccessful efforts to draw his tomahawk; whilst
Warren, inspired by the certainty that death would be the result, strove
to his utmost to prevent him from wielding the weapon.

Long did they continue the struggle without either speaking a word.
Their heavy breathing, as they rolled over and over on the grass, was
the only audible sound.

Nelatu at length succeeded in getting his antagonist under him, and with
one arm strove to hold him, whilst with the other he groped for his
tomahawk.

At this moment Warren made a superhuman effort, threw the Indian off,
and, with the speed of lightning, snatched his rifle from the ground.

Nelatu had stumbled as he was thrown off, and lay sprawling upon the
earth.

Another instant and he would have had a bullet through his body.

Was it an echo that answered the cocking of the rifle held in Rody's
hand?

That was the last thought that crossed Warren Rody's mind.

The next moment he was a corpse.

A bullet had pierced his brain!

It came from Maracota's gun, who had arrived upon the ground at the
moment of Nelatu's fall.

Before either of the two Indians could speak a word, a piercing cry
echoed in upon their ears; a girl came gliding through the bushes, and
flung herself prostrate over the body.

It was Sansuta!

The air was filled with her lamentations as she kissed the cold forehead
of Warren Rody, and with a thousand endearing terms endeavoured to
recall him to life.

Nelatu approached and gently raised her from the ground.

He was about to address her, but he started back in horror.

Her wild, starting eyes, with that unmeaning smile upon her lips, told
the sad tale.

Her reason had departed.



CHAPTER TWENTY EIGHT.

THE STRUGGLE IN THE STOCKADE.

On that same night the Indians, led by Wacora, stormed the stockade upon
the hill.

The combat proved long and desperate, but the place was at length taken.

Bravely as the settlers fought, they had a foe to deal with implacable
and determined.

As fast as the red warriors fell in the attack, others took their
places, and from out the darkness legions seemed to rise to avenge the
deaths of their fallen comrades.

The white women loaded the rifles, stood by their brothers and husbands
assisting them in the fearful strife.

But valour availed not; the settlers were doomed.

Never had Elias Rody been seen to greater advantage.

He seemed ubiquitous, cheering and inspiring the men around him.

Many who had condemned him till then gave him credit for his bravery.

He seemed to bear a charmed life, and was seen where-ever bullets
whistled, unharmed and undaunted!

All his hopes on earth were centred in successfully maintaining himself;
and that strong physical courage which he undoubtedly possessed,
stimulated by his frightful responsibility, made him for the moment
heroic.

His daughter, the gentle Alice, showed herself equally brave.

She took under her care the wounded men--she who, at any other time,
would have fainted at the sight of blood--bound up the ghastly wounds,
and stood on that dreadful night by more than one death-bed, calm and
courageous, upheld by the sustaining idea.

But what availed courage and devotion against numbers?

The stockade was at length carried, and, after it, the house, which was
instantly given to the flames.

A horrible carnage ensued amongst those who, unable to fly, were left to
the besiegers' fury.

The worst passions were displayed in their worst forms, and helplessness
pleaded in vain to hearts steeled with revenge.

The moon's rays lighted up a fearful scene.

Corpses of Indians and settlers, with their wives and children strewed
the ground of the enclosure!

The glare of the burning house added to the horror of the sight.

Some few of the colonists fled across the country, pursued by their
relentless foes.

Though a small number escaped with life, many perished in their flight.

With revengeful cries the Indians sought for Elias Rody, but failed to
find him.

Had he, too, escaped?

It seemed so, for nowhere could his body be discovered among the slain.

His daughter had also disappeared.

But half of their revenge seemed accomplished, and Wacora felt that,
with Rody alive, his uncle's death was not yet avenged.

In vain did he send warrior after warrior in search of the missing man.

All returned with the same answer.

The white chief was not to be found!

Enraged at being thus baffled in his revenge, Wacora called his
straggling forces together, and returned with them to the Indian camp.

After their departure there was profound stillness within the stockade,
more awful from contrast with the battle there so late raging.

The dead were left to repose in peace.

For a long time this stillness continued unbroken.

Then from afar sounds began to be heard, gradually drawing nearer and
nearer.

It was the howling of the gaunt Florida wolves as they scented a rich
repast.

Ere long they could be seen skulking through the enclosure, and
quarrelling over the corpses upon the plain.  Above them, with shadowy
wings, the vultures hovered, waiting to come in for their share of the
spoil.

The moon sank in the sky, and drew a pall over the dreadful sight.

At intervals a flickering tongue of flame shooting up from the expiring
embers of the burnt house, imparted a weird aspect to the scene,
lighting it up, only to display its ghastly horrors.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Where was Elias Rody?

He had proved deceitful to the last.

Wacora and his warriors had sought him everywhere, but had failed to
find him.

For all that he was near.

In the last attack made by the red men, he had been wounded--not
severely, but sufficiently to make him feel faint and giddy.  He knew
that he could no longer hope for success, and determined, if possible,
to save his own life while there was a chance.

Amidst the smoke and confusion he found no difficulty in withdrawing
from the combat.  Remembering a species of cellar he had caused to be
dug in the rear of the house, he staggered towards it, and reached it
unobserved.

He paused before entering.  A thought of Alice arrested him--the thought
of the hopelessness of saving her, and tottering forward, half-blinded
by his own blood, he descended the steps of the cellar, at the bottom of
which he fell insensible to the floor.

The yells of the victorious Indians, the glare of the burning mansion,
the shrieks of the wounded, and the agonising wail of defenceless women
and children as they committed their souls to Heaven, Elias Rody, though
the cause of all this, heard nothing.

Beneath his own burning house, miraculously sheltered by some huge
timbers which had fallen over the excavation, he lay for a long time
insensible to thought as to feeling.

When he at length recovered consciousness, and crawled forth from his
concealment, the sun had risen, lighting up the ruined pile.

He shuddered at the sight.

He suffered a thousand deaths in the contemplation of the horrors his
mad selfishness had caused.

Bitter remorse, stronger than his shattered physical frame could endure,
gnawed at his heart.  But it was selfish remorse for all that.

Here was vengeance for Oluski, had the chief only been alive to witness
it.

Too weak to get away from the spot, Rody groaned in the bitterness of
his spirit.

"Ten thousand times may I be accursed for all this!  Fool--blind,
infatuated fool--that I have been.  Every aspiration might have been
gratified, every hope fulfilled, had not my impatience blinded me
against caution.  May the fiend of darkness overtake these red--"

How long this tirade of blasphemous repentance of his villainy might
have lasted it is impossible to say.  It was stopped, however, by a
physical pain, and with a faint voice, he cried--

"Water! water!"

Blood there was in plenty around him, but not one drop of water.

Others had yelled for it through the long, dreadful night, as
agonisingly as he, but had been answered by the same solemn silence.
_They_ had died in their agony.  Why should not he?

"Well, then, let death come!  The full accumulation of mortal torment
has fallen on myself; it cannot be greater?"

Wrong in this, as in everything else.

See!  Skulking along the brow of the hill, stooping over and examining
corpse after corpse, with a look of demoniac joy upon his hideous
features, something in human shape, and yet scarce a man, appears.

Horror of horrors! he is robbing the dead.

Rody saw him not, for he had again fainted.

With a harsh voice, rivalling the vulture's croak, the skulker continued
his hideous task.

"Ha! ha! ha!" chuckled he to himself, "there am nice pickings after all
for dis chile, boaf from de bodies of white man and de red.  Bress de
chances what set 'em agin' each oder!  Oh, but de ole nigger am glad--so
glad!  But where am he?--where am he?  If dis chile don't find him, why
den his work ain't more den half done!"

Diligently did Crookleg, for it was he, continue to search, turning over
dead bodies, snatching some bauble from their breasts, and so passing to
others, as if still unsatisfied.

For whom was he seeking?

As he proceeded in his work, a voice that came from among a heap of
ruins, was heard feebly calling for "water!"

The negro started on hearing it, sending forth a shout of triumph.

He had recognised it as the voice of Elias Rody, the man for whom he had
been searching.

As the latter recovered consciousness, he saw a hideous face close to
his own, that caused him to start up, at the same time uttering a cry of
horror.



CHAPTER TWENTY NINE.

AN EXULTING FIEND.

"I has found you, has I?"

"Crookleg!"

"Yes, it am Crookleg."

"A drop of water, for the love of God; a drop of water!"

"If de whole place war a lake, dis chile wouldn't sprinkle you parched
lips with a drop out ob it."

"What do you mean, Crookleg?"

"Ha! the time I been waitin' for has come at last.  It hab been long,
but it am come!  Do you know war you son Warren am?"

"Thank heaven! away from this, and in safety."

"Ha! ha! ha!  Safe; yes, he am safe enough wid a big bullet through his
brain!"

Elias Rody, with an effort, raised himself into a sitting posture, and
glared upon the speaker.

"Dead!"

"Yes, dead; and it war me dat bro't him to it.  Ha! ha! ha!"

"Who are you?  Has hell let loose its fiends to mock me?"

"Perhaps it have.  Who am I?  Don't you know me yet, Rody--_Massa_
Rody?"

"No, devil!  I know you not.  My son dead--oh, God! what have I done to
deserve all this?"

"What hab you done?  What hab you not done?  You had done ebery ting
that de black heart ob a white man do, and de day of recknin' am come at
last.  So you don't know me, don't you?"

"Away, fiend, and let me die in peace!"

"In peace--no; you shall die as you hab made oders live--in pain!  When
you can't hear dis nigga's voice plainly, he'll hiss it in at your ear,
so it may reach your infernal soul, in de last minutes of you life!"

"Who--who are you?"

"I am Reuben, de son of Esther."

"Esther!"

"Yes, Esther, your father's slave.  You was de cause ob her death.  Do
you know me now?"

Rody groaned.

"Dey call me Crookleg, kase I was lame.  Who made me lame?"

Still no answer.

"It war you dat put de ball in my leg for sport, when you war a boy, and
I war de same.  I have been close to you for years, but you didn't know
me.  I war too mean--too much below de notice of a proud gentleman like
you.  But I hab a good memory, and de oath I'd taken to be even wid ye,
am kept.  My mother war a slave, but she war my mother for all dat, an'
if I war a black man I war still a human bein', although you and de
likes of you didn't think so.  Do you know me now?"

Rody uttered not a word.

"When I war forced to limp away from your father's plantation, I war but
a boy, but de boy had de same hate for de cruel massa dat de lame nigga
hab now for Elias Rody.  Days and years hab passed since den, but de
hate war kept hot as ever; and I'se happy now when I knows dat de dyin'
planter am at de mercy of de mean slave.  Don't be skear'd, I wouldn't
lift dis hand to help you eider die or live.  All I'se a going to do is
to sit hyar an' watch ober you till you am cold and stiff.  Every
flutter you wicked soul makes to get free from you ugly body, will be a
joy to me!"

"Oh, devil!" exclaimed the wounded man, in the depth of his agony.

"Debbil!  Yes, I is a debbil, and you has made me one!"

The negro, as he said this, knelt down by Rody's side and thrust his
face close up to that of the dying man, while a demoniac joy lit up his
horrid features.

And he continued to gaze upon his victim until the grey shadow of
dissolution stole over his countenance, the senses wandered, and the
once bright eyes were becoming dimmed with the film of death.

At last a scream burst from the lips of the dying man, followed by words
of piteous appeal.

"Ha--help--water--water!  My soul's on fire!  Devils--demons!  Away--
away!  Let me go!  Unloose your burning hands from my heart!  Unloose--
ah, horror!"

The cries ceased.

Elias Rody was dead!

Remorselessly did the negro glare upon his expiring enemy as he uttered
these last frantic speeches, and when, at last, the spirit had passed
away, he bounded to his feet and began to exult over his now unconscious
victim.

At this moment another personage appeared upon the scene.

At some little distance from the spot a man, leaning upon his rifle,
stood taking a survey of the smoking ruins.

He had been for some time ignorant that any living being but himself was
upon the hill.

His attention was now called to Crookleg, who, assured of his enemy's
death, could no longer restrain his immense joy, but was giving vent to
it in cries and fantastic caperings.

"Ho, ho--dead!  It am 'plendid sport to de ole nigga!  Only to tink dat
dis poor ole lame darkey hab been de cause ob a war 'tween de whites and
de red-skins!  Ha, ha, ha! it am most too good to be beliebed!  But it
am true--it am true!"

As the monstrous creature concluded the speech he was seen to spring
suddenly into the air and fall flat upon his face--a corpse!

A long hunting-knife had penetrated his back!

"There, ye black hound!  If you have been the cause of one war, you'll
never have a hand in another.  I swore not to fight agin my own blood,
nor to take part agin the red-skins, but black blood don't count in my
bargain!"

Saying this, Cris Carrol drew his blade from the negro's body and coolly
sauntered away from the spot.



CHAPTER THIRTY.

ROBBED OF HIS REVENGE.

Wacora, after reaching the camp, dismissed his warriors, and entered his
tent alone.

The remainder of that night he passed in meditation.

Was it the influence of the white blood flowing in his veins that made
him think of the slaughter he had directed and taken part in?

Strange inconsistency of nature.

The heroic chief, still decked in the war paint of his father's race, as
he reviewed the events of the past few hours, could not restrain himself
from shuddering.

His mother's spirit seemed to hover around him; her eyes sad and
reproachful; her heart heavy.

"They were the people of my race, and so of yours, that you have
immolated on the throne of your vengeance."

So seemed it to say!

His head sank upon his breast.  He sighed heavily.

Long he continued in his gloomy abstraction; his thoughts deeper than
plummet ever sounded.

The weary hours of night crept slowly past, and yet he stirred not.

Fears and forebodings filled his warrior's heart.

"I have done all for the best," muttered he to himself.  "Witness it,
thou Great Spirit; all for the best.  For the future of my father's race
I have closed my heart to pity.  It was not for present vengeance alone
that I urged on the wild people to the slaughter.  It was that they
might then begin the great work of regeneration, assured in their
strength, and conscious of their invincibility."

Like all high-strung natures, Wacora was subject to fits of despondency.

With want of action this had come upon him.  The excitement over, gloomy
doubt had succeeded to bright hope.

The sun was high in the heavens ere he could bestir himself, and shake
off such thoughts.  He at length made the effort, and emerged from his
tent to consult with the warriors of his tribe.

As he stepped forth, he perceived Maracota slowly approaching.

In an instant the slumbering passion of hate was awakened; he saw in the
young Indian's eye that he had news to communicate.

Speak! have you found him?

"Yes, he is found."

"I mean Warren Rody.  Make no error, Maracota--tell me, is it Warren
Rody you have found?"

"He has been found."

"Then all is well.  Quick! bring him to me.  Let me look upon this dog
of a pale-face!"

Maracota made no answer, but stood silent.

"Do you hear me?  Bring the dog before me.  My eyes hunger for a sight
of his craven countenance--I would see his white-livered face of fear--
watch his trembling frame as he stands in my presence!"

Still Maracota did not speak.

"By the Great Spirit, Maracota, why do you not go for him?  Why do you
not answer me?"

"Maracota dreads your anger."

"You an Indian warrior, and afraid.  What do you mean?"

"That I have disobeyed your commands--"

"Ha! wretch!  I understand.  You found him, but he escaped."

"Not that--"

"What is it then?  Speak, did he defy you?  Was he too powerful?  Then
summon our warriors, and if it cost the life of every Indian in Florida
I swear he shall be captured.  Answer me or I shall do you mischief."

"Maracota deserves punishment."

The young chief, now fully aroused to anger, cast a significant look at
his subordinate; he could scarce refrain from striking him to the
ground, and it was with an effort that he resumed speech--

"No more mystery.  Speak! where is he?"

"Dead."

Wacora made a bound towards the speaker, as he cried, "Did _you_ kill
him?"

"I did."

Maracota fearlessly stood to await the stroke of the upraised tomahawk.

It fell, but not on the Indian's skull.

Wacora flung his weapon on the grass.

"Wretch!" he cried, "you have robbed me of my revenge.  May the arm that
took that man's life hang palsied by your side for ever!  May--oh, curse
you--curse you!"

Maracota's head fell upon his breast.  He dared not meet his chief's
angry glance--more dreaded than the blow of his hatchet.

For some moments there was silence; whilst Wacora paced to and fro like
a tiger in its cage.



CHAPTER THIRTY ONE.

A SAD SPECTACLE.

After a time the enraged chief, pausing in his steps, stood by the side
of the silent warrior.

"Tell me how it happened," he said, apparently becoming calmer.  "Tell
me all."

Maracota related the circumstances as they had happened.

"It was to save Nelatu's life that you fired upon the monster?"

"It was."

"And he--where is Nelatu?"

"He is close by.  See, they come this way."

As Wacora looked in the direction indicated, he perceived his two
cousins approaching.

The beautiful maiden, now wan and sad, seemed absorbed in the
contemplation of some wild flowers which she held in her hand.  There
were others wreathed in her hair.

In this manner had she been conducted to the camp.

Nelatu turned to his sister, put his arm in hers, and was about to lead
her off, when a man rushed into the presence of the chief, crying out as
he approached--

"Good news!  The body of the white chief, Rody, has been found, and--"

The warning gesture had been lost upon the impatient speaker.

It was too late now, Sansuta had heard the fated name.

Casting from her the flowers she had been trifling with, she uttered
shriek upon shriek, running wildly and beseechingly, backwards and
forwards, from her brother to her cousin, who both stood spell-bound
with surprise and grief.

"Where have you hid him?  Give him to me.  You shall not kill him; no--
no--no!  I say you shall not hurt him!  Warren!  Warren! 'tis Sansuta
calls.  Murderers!  He never injured you.  Take nay life--not his!
Warren!  Warren!  Oh, do not keep him from me.  See, that is his blood
upon your hands--his eyes are closed in death!  It is you, wretches,
that have murdered him.  No, no--stand back--I would not have you touch
me whilst your hands are red with his blood.  Back! back!  I will find
him!--No, you shall kill me first!--I will find Warren Rody!  Help,
help! save me from his murderers!"

With renewed screams of agony that struck horror into the listeners'
hearts, the girl, eluding their grasp, darted away into the forest.

At a signal from Wacora, Nelatu started in pursuit.

"May the lightnings blast all who have brought about this!  Fool that I
was just now to feel pity for the pale-faces; nothing that revenge can
accomplish will make up for this.  Here I swear to take vengeance far
more terrible--vengeance to which that of last night shall be but a
mockery!"

With these words the young chief hastened away from the spot, followed
by Maracota and the messenger.



CHAPTER THIRTY TWO.

"SPARE HER!  SPARE HER!"

The opportunity of this vengeance was already close at hand.

Within the space enclosed by the Indian tents, under guard of some
warriors, stood a group of pale-face prisoners.

It consisted of several men, and among them a young girl.

Wacora stopped on perceiving the group.

His features were illumined with a savage joy.

One of the chiefs, advancing, reported their having been captured while
attempting to escape through the adjoining forest.

"What's to be done with them?" he asked.

"They shall die by torture!"

"The girl?"

"She, too, shall die.  Who is she?"

"I don't know."

Turning to Maracota, he propounded a similar question.

Maracota was equally ignorant of the person of the captive.

The chief ordered her to be brought before him.

With an undaunted step, although evidently suffering from debility and
sorrow, the girl allowed herself to be led along.

Once in Wacora's presence, with a modest courage, she gazed into his
face.

"Who are you?" he asked.

"Your prisoner."

"When where you captured?"

"About two hours ago."

"You were trying to escape?"

"I was."

"Your companions--who are they?"

"I know nothing of them, except that they are people belonging to the
settlement.  They were kind to me, and endeavoured to help me in my
escape."

"You know your doom?"

She answered, sadly--

"I expect no mercy."

Wacora, struck with this reply, felt an interest in the courageous girl,
which he could not account for.

"You have been taught to think of the red man as a remorseless savage?"

"Not as remorseless, only as revengeful."

"Then you acknowledge that we have just cause for revengeful feelings?"

"I did not say so."

"But you implied it."

"All men have enemies.  The truly great are the only ones who can forego
revenge."

"But savages must act according to their instincts."

"Savages--yes.  But men who know right from wrong should act by their
judgment."

"If I spared your life, you would still consider me a savage."

"My life is nothing to me.  All those I loved are now dead."

"Your mother?"

"She died when I was a child."

"Your father?"

"Was killed last night."

Wacora seemed lost in thought as he said, half aside--

"So young, and yet with no fear of death!"

The young girl overheard the muttered soliloquy, and made answer to it--

"To the unhappy death is welcome."

"Unhappy?"

"I have told you that all I love are dead?"

"Yet death is terrible."

"Your name?"

"Alice Rody."

With a cry of fiendish delight, Wacora grasped the maiden's arm.

"You, the daughter of that accursed man--the daughter of that demon in
human form!  Then, by the Great Spirit above us! by the ashes of my
ancestors, you shall die!  My own hand shall inflict the blow."

As he uttered these words, he drew a knife from his belt, and was on the
point of sheathing it in her heart, when his arm was seized, and a voice
full of agony vibrated in his ear--

"Spare her!--oh! spare her.  Take my life instead."

"Nelatu!"

"Yes, Nelatu; your cousin, your slave, if you will--only spare her
life!"

"You forget her name."

"No, no; I know it but too well."

"You forget that her father has been the accursed cause of all this
misery?"

"No; I remember that too."

"Then you are insane thus to beg for her life.  She must die!"

"I am not insane.  Oh!  Wacora, on my knees I implore you to spare her!"

"Rise, Nelatu; the son of Oluski should not bend his knee to man.  At
your intercession, her life shall be spared!"

Nelatu rose from the ground.

"You are indeed our chief, Wacora.  Your heart is open and generous."

"Stay, yet, before you mistake me.  I give you her life, but `an eye for
an eye!'  She shall suffer what Sansuta has suffered; spare her life,
but not her honour."

"Wacora!"

"I have said it.  Here"--turning to the assembled warriors who had been
amazed witnesses of the scene--"this is the child of our enemy, Elias
Rody.  I have, at Nelatu's entreaty, spared her life; I bestow her upon
the tribe; do with her what you will."

Nelatu leaped before the advancing braves.

"Back!" he cried.  "The first who lays hands upon her, dies!"

Wacora gazed upon his cousin.

In his breast rage contended with wonder.

"Heed him not; he is insane."

"No; not insane."

"Speak; what then?"

"I love her!  I love her!"

The young girl, who had stood like a statue throughout all the previous
scene, gave a start, and, cowering to the ground, buried her face in her
hands.

To Wacora the words of Nelatu were no less surprising.

Turning to the shrinking maiden, he said--

"You hear what Nelatu says?  He loves you."

She murmured faintly--"I hear."

"He loves you.  Wacora, too, has loved.  That love has been trampled
upon, and by your wretch of a brother!  Yet still it shall plead for
Nelatu.  His request is granted.  You are spared both life and honour,
but must remain a prisoner.  Conduct her hence!"

"And these?" asked a warrior, pointing to the other prisoners.

Wacora's heart, touched for an instant by his cousin's pleading, as well
as by Alice Rody's heroic bearing, became again hardened.

He replied--

"They must die!  Not by the torture, but at once.  Let them be shot!"

The brave fellows, disdaining to sue for mercy, were led away from the
spot.

Soon after he heard several shots that came echoing from the woods.

His captives had been released from all earthly care.



CHAPTER THIRTY THREE.

RUIN AMONG THE RUINS.

The Indians' encampment near Tampa Bay was broken up.

The women and children, attended by a few warriors had departed for the
town.

Alice Rody, a prisoner, went along with them.

Wacora, Nelatu, and the rest of the tribe, joined others of their race
in the war which was now rapidly spreading over the whole peninsula.

For a time the Seminole tribe led a wandering life.

The varying successes or defeats of the protracted contest entailed upon
them both vigilance and activity.

It was, therefore, only occasionally that the cousins were enabled to
visit the town in which their people permanently resided.

Sansuta had now seldom any relapses of her fits of violent madness.

She was silent and melancholy, and wandered about wrapped in her own
bewildered thoughts.

Alice, although a prisoner, was suffered to come and go as it pleased
her.

Nelatu's love for the pale-faced maiden made no progress.

A wan smile was all the reward the Indian youth received for his patient
devotion.

He felt that his passion was hopeless, but still he nursed it.

To Sansuta, Alice indeed proved a guardian angel.

At first the Indian girl repelled the tender solicitude expressed by the
white maiden, and with an alarmed look seemed to dread even her voice.

In time, however, won by the magic of kindness, she sought the company
of the captive, and in her presence seemed happy.

Often they would stroll away from the town, and in some quiet spot pass
hours together--Alice in silent thought, Sansuta in such childish
employment as stringing beads, or making baskets with the flowers and
tendrils of the wild vine.

A favourite haunt with them both was the old fort.

Amongst its ruins they would seat themselves in silence, each busy with
her own thoughts.

And thus was their time tranquilly passed, while war was raging around
them.

But the first storm of conflict had been passed, and was succeeded by a
temporary calm.

The pale-faces had abandoned the smaller settlements and detached
plantations, and in the neighbouring towns awaited the arrival of the
Government troops on their way to prosecute the campaign throughout the
whole peninsula.

The Indians had sought their respective rendezvous, there to mature
plans for a more perfect organisation.

Nelatu and Wacora had returned home, for such was the title Wacora now
gave to the place where Oluski's tribe had their permanent residence.

The exigencies of the contest had compelled the withdrawal of his own
warriors from his father's town, and the two tribes, Oluski and his own,
had become fused into one powerful community.

The chief's views towards his captive had undergone a marked change.

He no longer wished to harm her, and had she demanded from him her
liberty, he would have granted it freely.

Of what use is liberty to the homeless?

Alice Rody had become careless of her freedom--nay, in a manner,
preferred her captivity to the uncertainty of an unknown future, where
no kindred awaited her return, no friend stood expectant to receive her.

A sense of security--almost contentment--had stolen into her heart.

Time had done much to assuage the terrible sorrow from which she had
suffered.

It was a wonderful transformation to the once high-spirited girl who had
shown such energy and fortitude in the midst of danger.

So thought the young chief, Wacora.

To Nelatu it was a negative happiness.  She had not energy to chide his
ardent devotion, but submitted to it passively, without bestowing the
slightest encouragement.

One lovely afternoon Sansuta, conducted by Alice, strolled to the ruined
fort.

Arrived there, Sansuta proceeded to embroider a pouch she had commenced
to make.

Alice, seated on a fragment of stone, watched her companion's trivial
employment.

As the Indian girl nestled close to the pale-faced maiden, she seemed on
the point of fainting.

She had grown thinner during the last few weeks, and her hollow cheeks
were tinted with a hectic flush.

"Rest your head on my lap, Sansuta."

As Alice spoke, she gently caught the poor girl in her arms.

"I am tired, oh, so tired!" said Sansuta.

"You must not walk so far as this another time.  We must seek some place
nearer to the town."

The Indian girl did not appear to heed her, but commenced singing softly
to herself.

She paused abruptly in her song, and looked up into her companion's
face.

"Last night I dreamed I was in another land, walking along a footpath.
It was strewn with lovely flowers.  On both sides were beautiful
creeping plants, over which bright butterflies sailed.  There were two
birds--such birds--their plumage of silver and gold.  I heard music.
Was it the land of the Great Spirit?  Do you think it was?"

"Who knows? it might have been!"

"There I met my father.  Not stern as our warriors are, but sad and
weeping.  Why did he weep?"

Alice was silent.  Her own tears hindered her from making answer to the
artless question.

"When I saw him weeping, I, too, wept, and kissed him.  He spoke kindly
to me; but why did he weep?"

Still no answer from her listening companion.

"Then I dreamt--no, I cannot remember what else I dreamt--yet there was
some one else there.  I seemed to know his face, too; but a great storm
arose, and all became dark, and I grew frightened.  What was that?"

"Alas!  Sansuta, I cannot read my own dreams, far less yours."

But Sansuta had already forgotten her question, and was again singing
softly to herself.

Presently she stopped once more, and putting both arms around Alice's
neck, murmured that she was tired.

The pale-faced maiden kissed her, and, as she did so, the tears from her
eyes fell on Sansuta's cheek.

"Why do you weep?  Who has injured you?"

Had Alice framed her thoughts into words she would have answered, the
whole world; but, instead, she only replied to her companion with gentle
endearments, and, at length, caressed her into a gentle sleep.

It was a beautiful tableaux for a painter to delineate--beautiful--but
at the same time sadly impressive.

A young Indian chief, who had been a silent witness to it, must have
thought so, by the sigh that escaped him, as he turned his face away.

Wacora was the chief who thus sighed.



CHAPTER THIRTY FOUR.

STRANGE CHANGES.

Wacora's love for Sansuta had long since changed into pity.

A new feeling now possessed his heart.

A new love had arisen from the ashes of the past:

Alice Rody was the object!

He had at first been struck with admiration at her courage; afterwards
he had witnessed her discretion and tenderness, and then noted her
beauty.

His thoughts, thus stirred; soon ripened into a passion far stronger
than respect.

Pity and love had exchanged places within his bosom.

He and his captive had done the same.

The girl was free; her gaoler had become her prisoner.

This new phase of feeling was not accomplished suddenly.

It grew silently and slowly but surely.

One thought troubled Wacora.

It was Nelatu's admiration for Alice Rody.

He saw that she cared not for his cousin, but he forebore to urge his
suit, out of compassion for Sansuta's brother.

His love, therefore, was speechless, and his captive was unconscious of
it.

But what of her?  She, too, had changed.

By one of those marvellous transformations of which the human heart is
capable, Alice Rody not only became reconciled to her residence among
the Indians, but even found much that interested her, even to the
awakening of pleasant thoughts.

Many of the Seminoles were, as has been stated, well educated, and with
education had come the usual chastening influence.

This was especially true of the young chief Wacora, and she had not
failed to observe it.

Her first reflection was what he might have been had he been brought up
amongst her own race, for, although she had not been told of his mother
being a white woman, she did not doubt that he had white blood in his
veins.

What might not a man of his intelligence, chivalric courage, and purity
of thought have become in a society where civilisation would have
developed all these mental qualities?

The question was a natural one when viewing only the advantages which
high culture presented; but its obverse was unfavourable, when
considering that civilisation is often an approach to barbarism through
selfishness and rapacity.

She answered the query herself, and favourably for him.  This mental
questioning once commenced, did not pause, but went on to farther
consideration of the character of the young chief.

His thoughtfulness seemed as much sprung from regret at the compulsory
warfare he was waging against her race, as the noble enthusiasm with
which his soul was filled.

The heart of a woman easily yielded its admiration to an enthusiast!

The motive may be condemned, but the spiritual essence of thought that
prompts to action still remains to be admired.

It will then be seen that the first abhorrence had given place to
interest; and interest had ripened into--

Into what?

There was no answer to that question.  As it came before Alice Rody's
mind she evaded it, and strove calmly to consider Wacora as her captor.

But it soon seemed impossible to look upon him in this light.

No _preux chevalier_ could be more courteous in his bearing--no prince
more calmly conscious of his own birthright.

His was of the oldest patent.  Whether thinking so or not, he was one of
Nature's noblemen.

A few months had wrought these marvellous changes in the personages of
our tale, and upon Wacora's sudden departure to the scene of war, both
he and his captive felt a strange void in their hearts, unaccountable,
because novel.

Nelatu, whose hope of winning the regard of the pale-faced maiden had
sunk into a calm state of despair, departed with his cousin, hoping that
in the field of battle he might find a still calmer rest.

His fate, wrapt in the dark mystery of the future, was veiled from him.



CHAPTER THIRTY FIVE.

A PEACEFUL WARNING.

The summer had waned into autumn.

With the changing season came also a change over the hapless Indian
maiden, Sansuta.

Her weakness, which had been continually increasing, was now so great
that she could no longer stray with Alice to their favourite haunts.

The poor girl's form had wasted away, and her features become shrunken.
Her dark, lustrous eyes alone seemed to retain their vitality.

All her former violence had disappeared, and a change had also made
itself manifest in her mental condition.

Now and then she had lucid moments of thought, during which she would
shed torrents of tears on Alice's shoulder, only with the return of her
malady would she appear happy and at peace.

Towards sunset of a lovely day the two girls sat together at the door of
Sansuta's dwelling.

"See!" said the Indian girl, "the flowers are closing, the birds have
gone into the deep forest.  I have been expecting some one, but he has
not come yet.  Do you know who it is?"

"No, I do not."

"'Tis Warren.  Why do you start and tremble?  He will not hurt you.  Who
was it you thought I meant?"

"I cannot tell, dear Sansuta."

"No one but him--I think of him always, although," she added lowering
her voice to a whisper, "I dare not call his name.  I'm afraid to do
that.  I'm afraid of my brother Nelatu and my cousin Wacora.  Why does
the sun look so fiery?  It is the colour of blood--blood--blood!  That
red colour, is it on _your_ hands, too?  Ah, no!  _You_ are no
murderer!"

"Hush, Sansuta! you are excited."

"Ah, yonder sun!  Do you know that I feel as if it were the last time I
should ever see it set.  See, there are dark lines across the sky--
ribbed with bands of black clouds.  It is the last day--the last day--"

"I see nothing, only the approach of night."

"But you hear something.  Don't you hear the spirits singing their death
march over Oluski's grave?  He was my father--I hear it.  It is a
summons.  It is for me.  I must go."

"Go?  Where?"

"Far away.  No; it is of no use clasping me to your heart.  It is not
Sansuta's body that will leave you--it is her spirit.  In the happy
hunting grounds I shall meet with him--"

A few moments after she became tranquil; but the lucid interval
succeeded, and hot tears coursed down her hollow cheeks.

Again her mind wandered, and for two or three hours, refusing to enter
the house, she sate muttering to herself the same fancies.

Alice could but sit beside her and listen.  Now and then she sought to
soothe her, but in vain.

By and bye Sansuta's voice grew faint.  She seemed to lean heavier on
the arm of her pale-faced friend, and the lustre of her eye gradually
became dimmer.

The change was alarming, and Alice would have risen and called for help,
but an imploring glance from Sansuta prevented her.

"Don't leave me," she murmured gently.

Her voice was changed; she had recovered reason, and her companion
perceived it.

"Do not leave me.  I shall not detain you long.  I know you now--have
known you it seems for years.  I know all, for there is peace in my
heart towards all, even to those who took his life.  Forgiveness has
come back with reason, and my last prayers shall be that they who made
Sansuta unhappy may be forgiven!"

She spoke in so low a voice that it was with difficulty her companion
could hear what she said.

"Kiss me, Alice Rody!  Speak to me!  Let me hear you say that Sansuta
was your friend!"

"Was--_is_ my friend!"

"No--let me say _was_, for I am about to leave you.  The time is come; I
am ready!  My last prayer is `Pity and forgiveness!  Pity and--'"

By the gentle motion of her lips she appeared to be praying.

That motion ceased, and with it her unhappy life!

Alice still continued to hold her in her arms long after her soul had
passed into Eternity!



CHAPTER THIRTY SIX.

THE BURNT SHANTY.

The ghost of Crookleg did not in any way disturb Cris Carrol, either
sleeping or awake.

The worthy backwoodsman believed that he had done a highly meritorious
action in for ever disposing of that malevolent individual.

"The infernal black skunk, to be cuttin' his capers over the bodies of
brave men who had laid down their lives in a war he, and sich as he,
brought about!  It were no more nor an act of justice to send him to
everlastin' perdition, and, if I never done a more valuable thing to
society than stickin' three inches of cold steel atween his two
shoulder-blades, I think I desarves the thanks of the hul community."

This consolation Cris indulged in whenever he thought of that terrible
episode upon Tampa hill.

He had returned a few days after the massacre and had found the dead
decently buried.

Wacora had commanded it to be done.

The charred ruins of Rody's house, however, recalled the memory of that
eventful night.

For some time after his last visit to Tampa Bay, Cris Carrol had not
been seen.

Neither the pale-faces nor the redskins had been able to discover his
whereabouts.

The truth is, that the backwoodsman was glad to get away from scenes
where so much violence had been done to his feelings.

As he had said, he _couldn't_ fight against the Indians, and he
_wouldn't_ take up arms against the whites.

"It ain't in human nature to shoot and stab one's own sort, even when
they're in the wrong, unless they'd done somethin' agin oneself; an'
that they hain't done as regards me.  I'll be eternally dog-goned if I
think the red-skins are to blame for rising agin oppression and tyranny,
which is what old Rody did to them, to say nothin' agin him now he's
dead, but to speak the truth, and that's bad enough for him.  No, they
war not to blame for what they did, arter his conduct to them--the old
cuss; who, bad as he war, had one redeemin' feature in his karactur, and
that war his angeliferous darter.  Where kin she have gone a hidin'?
Thet puzzles this chile, it do."

Cris was unaware of Alice's capture and imprisonment.

As suddenly as he had taken his departure from Tampa, Cris returned to
the same neighbourhood.  He expected the war to be transferred to a more
distant point, and wished still to keep out of the way.

"It's the durned'st fightin' I ever heard on," said he to himself;
"first it's here, then it's there, and then it ain't nowhere, till it
breaks out all over again, where it was before, and they're as far off
the end as I am from Greenland.  Durn it, I never knowed nothin' like
it."

On his return to Tampa, he found the country around altogether deserted.
Most of the buildings and the planter's house had been destroyed, even
his own wretched hut had been burnt to the ground.

"This is what they call the fortun' of war, I 'spose?" he remarked, as
he stood gazing at the ruins.  "Wal, it war a ramshackle, crazy ole
shanty anyhow, and I allers despised four walls an' a roof at the best
o' times--still it war `home.'  Pshaw!" he added, after a moment's
silence, "what have I to grow molloncholly about, over sich a place as
this--calling it `home,' when I still have the Savannas to hunt over an'
sleep upon.  If thar's such a place as home for me that's it, and no
other."

For all his stoicism, the old hunter sighed as he turned from the
blackened spot which marked the site of his former dwelling.

He paused at the bend of the road, where Crookleg had first met Nelatu,
to gaze again at his ruined home.  Not only paused, but sat down upon
the self-same rail that the negro had perched upon, and from gazing upon
it, fell to reflecting.

So absorbed was he in his contemplation, that contrary to his usual
custom, he took no note of the time, nor once removed his eyes from the
subject of his thoughts.

He did not perceive the approach of a danger.

It came in the form of four individuals who had silently and stealthily
crept close to the spot where he was sitting.  Before he knew of their
proximity, he was their prisoner.

"Red-skins!" he exclaimed, struggling to free himself.

His captors smiled grimly at his vain efforts.

"By the eternal!  I'm fixed this time!  Darn my stupid carcase for not
havin' eyes set in the back o' my head.  Wal, you may grin, old
copper-skins, it's your turn now--maybe, it'll be mine next.  What are
you a-doin' now?"

Without deigning a reply the Indians bound his arms securely behind him.

That done they made signs to him to follow them.

"Wal, gentlemen!" said Cris, "yur about as silent a party as a man might
wish to meet, darn me, if you aint.  I'm comin'."

"Much obleeged to you for your escort, which I ked a done without.
Thanks to your red-skin perliteness for nothin'.  Go ahead, I kin walk
without your helpin' me.  Where are ye bound for?"

"To the chief," answered one of the men.

"The chief!  What chief?"

"Wacora."

Cris uttered an emphatic oath.

"Wacora, eh?  If that's the case, I reckon the days o' Cris Carrol air
drawin' to a close.  The fiercest and most 'vengeful cuss of them all,
I've heard say.  Lead on, I'll go along with ye willin, but not
cheerful.  If they kill me like a man I'll not tremble in a jint; but if
it's the torture--there, go ahead.  Don't keep the party waitin'."

Brave heart, as he was, he followed them with as bold and free a step to
what he believed to be his death, as if alone, and at liberty on the
Savanna.

The Indians without exchanging a word, either among themselves or with
him, proceeded in the direction of Oluski's town.



CHAPTER THIRTY SEVEN.

DEATH AT THE STAKE.

At night they encamped in the forest.

Lighting no fires, lest the light might betray them to their enemies,
they produced from their packs some dried meat and meal cake.

Cris did full justice to the humble fare, although he made rather a wry
face at the gourd of spring water with which he was invited by his
captors to wash down the frugal repast.

Mastering his aversion, he, however, managed to swallow a few mouthfuls.

Supper over, two of his captors wrapped themselves up in their blankets,
and immediately fell asleep.  The other two remained awake, watching
him.

Carrol saw that any attempt to escape under the eyes of two Indians
would be idle.

One he might have coped with, even unarmed as he was.  Two would be more
than a match for him, and he knew that on the slightest alarm the
sleeping men would awake, making it four to one.

With the philosophy of a stoic he threw himself upon the ground, and
also fell asleep.

He awoke once in the night to find that his guard had been changed.
There was no better prospect of freedom than before.

"Dura them! they're bound to fix me, I kin see that plain enough.
Besides, with these 'tarnal all-fired thongs cuttin' into my elbows,
what could I do?"

Apparently nothing, for with a muttered curse at his own stupidity, he
again composed himself to slumber.

With the dawn of morning Cris Carrol and his captors continued their
journey.

They made no other halt before reaching the town.

Carrol in vain tried to draw from them the reason of their unexpected
presence at so great a distance from the residence of the tribe.

They gave him no satisfaction.

He discovered, however, that whatever errand they had been sent on, they
had failed in accomplishing it, and his own capture began to be
considered by him as a peace offering with which they intended to
mollify Wacora's wrath at their want of success in the mission with
which they had been charged.

"Wal," reflected he, "I suppose I'm in some poor devil's place; perhaps
I mout take more pleasure in doing him this good turn if I only knowed
who he is.  No doubt he's got some folks as 'ud grieve over him, but
there ain't a many as will fret over Cris Carrol, not as I know on--yes,
all right! go ahead.  Let's go whar glory waits us, ye catawampous
scamps, you.  Ah! four to one; if it had been two to one, or, at a
pinch, three to one, I'd have tried it on, if it had cost me all I've
got, and that's my life--yah! it's almost enough to make one turn
storekeeper to think on't."

Unmoved by the taunts and jeers which Cris liberally bestowed upon them
during the journey, the Indians continued to watch him narrowly.

It was about mid-day when they arrived at their destination.

On entering the Indian town Carrol was thrust into one of the houses,
where he was left to await the order of Wacora as to his final
disposition.  Four guards were kept over him, two inside the house, the
other two without.

He expected immediate death, but he was left undisturbed for the rest of
the day, and at night received some supper, consisting of dried meat,
bread, and water.  He was then permitted to pass the hours till morning
as seemed best to him.

The hunter soon arranged his plans.  He wrapped the blanket that had
been given him around his body, and in a few moments was in a sound
slumber.

His sleep lasted until a hand upon his shoulder, along with a summons to
awake, aroused him.

It was one of his guards of yesterday who addressed him.

"Come!"

"Is that you, old Dummy?" asked he, recognising the Indian.  "I can't
say I'm glad to see yur, since yur've broke in on the pleasantest dream
I've had for a long time.  But never mind, how shed you know that you
whar a doing it, you poor savage critter you, that don't know nothin'
but to handle a tomahawk, and raise the hair off a human head?  What do
you want with me now?"

"The warriors are assembled!"

"Air they?  Wal, that's kind of them, only they needn't have put
themselves out o' the way to get up so early on my account; I could ha'
waited."

"Come."

"Wal, I'm comin'; d'ye think I'm afraid, durn yur?  D'ye think I'm
afraid of you or all the warriors of your tribe, or of your chief,
Wacora, either?"

"Wacora is not here."

"Not here!  Where is he?"

"I cannot answer the pale-face's questions.  I came to bring you before
the council."

"Wal, I'm ready to go afore the council."

As they were about to emerge from the house, a sudden idea seemed to
strike Carrol, and he stopped his conductors.

"Stay, friend, will you tell me one thing?"

"Speak!"

"Whar are we?"

"At Oluski's town."

Carrol's face beamed with a sudden joy.

"And his son Nelatu--is this _his_ home?"

"It is."

"Hurray!  Now, I dare say you wonder at my bein' struck all of a heap
wi' delight.  But I'll tell you one thing, red-skin--no offence, not
knowin' your name--you and yur three partners have taken a most uncommon
sight o' trouble all for nothin'."

"What do you mean?"

"Just this--go and tell Nelatu that Cris Carrol is the party as you
sneaked up to and took prisoner, and arter that, streak it for your
precious lives."

"Nelatu?"

"Yes, Nelatu, he's a friend o' this ole coon, and one that'll prove
himself so, too, in givin' you skunks as took me a deal more nor you
bargained for."

"Nelatu is not here."

"Not here?  Why, didn't you tell me just now that this war his father's
town?"

"I did; but Nelatu is not here."

"Not now, perhaps; but I s'pose he'll be here?"

"He will not return for weeks."

Carrol's countenance fell.

"Then, dog-gone yur skin, lead on!  I throw up the pack of cards now
that the trump's out of 'em.  It's my luck, and it's the darndest luck I
ever seed; there's no standin' agin it.  I s'pose I must give in."

Without another word he followed his guards.

They entered the council chamber, where the assembled warriors awaited
them.

With his foot upon the threshold, his manner entirely changed from the
light, jeering hilarity he had exhibited to that of a calm and dignified
bearing.

He saw in an instant that he was foredoomed.

The stern expression of his judges told him as much.

The mock ceremonial of examination was proceeded with, and a vain
attempt made to extract from him intelligence of the movements of the
whites, especially of the numbers and disposition of the Government
troops, some of whom had by this time arrived in the peninsula.

His disdainful refusal to betray his own race did him no service.

True, he was already sentenced to die, but the manner of his death might
inflict horror on him who had no fear of dying.

Though the questions were skilfully put to him, the old hunter saw
through them all.

He did not, indeed, possess much knowledge of the military invasion; but
had he been in the secret of the commanding officer himself, he could
not have been more reticent in his replies.

Utterly foiled in their questions, the warriors played their last card,
and with threats of the most terrible tortures endeavoured to wring from
his fears what his honour would not reveal.

Vain effort on their part.

Cris did, indeed, wince when they first spoke of torture; but,
recovering himself, he became more proudly defiant than before.

"Ye may shake my old body with rackin' pains.  I know you've got devil's
inventions, and I don't deny but they're awful; but there's somethin'
about me that ye can't make tremble, not if all the imps o' hell war yer
slaves--that's my soul.  It'll come out of yer fiery ordeal as calm as
it is now; and with its last thoughts it'll despise and dare ye!  Cris
Carrol arn't bin backwoods hunter for a matter goin' on forty year to be
skeart at burnin' sticks or hot lead; and he'll die as he has lived, an
honest man!"

A mingled murmur of admiration and anger ran through the assembled
crowd, and it was evident that many of the warriors would have given
their consent to his being set free.

There is something about TRUE courage which extorts admiration even from
an enemy.

A hurried consultation took place among the head men in council.

It was speedily over, and the oldest of their number rose and pronounced
sentence against the prisoner.

It was death by burning at the stake!

Cris Carrol was not surprised on hearing it.

The sentence had already lost half of its terror.  He had made up his
mind that this would be his doom.

Only one word of response came from his lips--

"When?"

"To-morrow!" replied he who had pronounced judgment.

Without bestowing a glance upon those who had thus fixed the limit of
his earthly career, the hunter strode from the council chamber with calm
and measured steps.

As he passed out the crowd made way for him, and many of the faces
expressed admiration--some even pity.

The stoic bravery of the Indian is marvellous, and for him death has no
terrors.  With them it is a sort of fatalism.

What they do not dread themselves, they make but light of in others.

Por all that they have the highest admiration for a man who dares meet
death calmly.

In their eyes the white captive had assumed all the importance of a
great warrior.

Yet was he an enemy--one of the race with whom they were at war--
therefore he must die.

Thus strangely do civilisation and barbarism meet on common ground.



CHAPTER THIRTY EIGHT.

THE SLEEPING DRAUGHT.

Cris Carrol's fortitude did not desert him, when he once more found
himself alone in his prison.

He was not wholly unmoved by the reflection that on the morrow he must
die; for it was a death such as even a brave man might not meet bravely,
but a lingering death by torture.

The hunter knew what this meant.

"A bullet ain't nothin'," said he to himself, "it's into yer body afore
ye knows it, and if it's in your vitals there's an end on it; but to
stand up to be prodded with burning sticks, requires philosophy a'most
as much as this hyar chile have got.  Dog-rot it, it won't bear thinkin'
on--that it won't.  But I'll be all-fired eternally if them fellows
shall know how it hurts Cris Carrol!  So let 'em do their worst, dura
'em!"

After this self-consoling soliloquy, he calmly went to work to make
himself comfortable, by laying his blanket on the bare ground and
improvising a pillow out of some logs that lay within reach.

As he handled the billets, a strange desire seized him.  It was to knock
his guard's brains out and make a dash for liberty.  But a moment's
reflection convinced him that the attempt at escape would be futile, the
men outside being doubtless prepared to oppose his exit.

A disinclination to shed blood uselessly decided him, and he lay down
composedly after lighting his pipe.

For some time he ruminated on his condition, puffing curls of smoke into
the air, and watching them as they disappeared.

Once or twice he heard a scratching noise near the corner of the room,
but it ceased almost as soon as he had noticed it.

At length, giving way to weariness, he composed himself to sleep, and
before long, his loud snoring suggested to his guards that they might
relax their vigilance.

They accordingly retired outside the door, after having assured
themselves that his slumber was genuine.

There were still four of them, and they began chattering to each other,
for a time forgetting their prisoner.

He was at length awakened by a gentle tug at his arm, which had to be
repeated several times before it had the effect of arousing him.

In an instant he sat up.

"Eh? what?  By the etarnal--"

An admonition of silence checked him, and he surveyed, with an
astonished countenance, the cause of his disturbance.

In the darkest corner of the hut he perceived an opening, through which
the face of a young girl was visible.  He started on recognising her.

"Hush!" she said in a whisper.  "Remember you are watched.  Lie down
again--listen; but say nothing.  Ha! they are coming back!"

At these words the speaker withdrew, just in time, as two of the guards
next moment re-entered the room.

They did not stay long.  The heavy snoring which Cris improvised for
them disarmed them of suspicion.

The moment they were again gone, he turned his eyes towards the opening,
and listened.

"Do you know me?--answer by a sign."

Cris nodded in the affirmative.

"You believe I am desirous to serve you?"

To this question he almost nodded his head off.

"Listen, then; and be careful to obey my instructions.  This opening
leads into the next house.  The exit from it is through another--
unfortunately it is a public room; therefore you cannot escape that way
without as much risk as you would by going directly out by the door.
Don't go that way, but by the window.  You see that window?"

Cris looked up.  He had seen the window, certainly, and had already
looked at it in every possible light, while considering a means of
escape, but had come to the conclusion that it wouldn't suit.

In reply, he shook his head despairingly.

His visitor seemed to understand him.

"It is too high, perhaps?"

Cris intimated by a sign that the difficulty was not in its height.

"The bars would prevent you getting out?"

The hunter's head nodded like a mandarin's.

"Is that all?  Then I may as well tell you.  Hush! some one is coming."

One of the sentinels had thrust his head inside the door; he luckily
withdrew it, convinced that all was right.

On its disappearance Carrol's mysterious visitor returned, and resumed
the conversation.

"You think those bars would hinder your escape?"

Another nod was the answer.

"You are mistaken."

The backwoodsman, now perfectly _au fait_ with his pantomimic part of
the dialogue, gave a modest but expressive look of dissent.

"I tell you you are mistaken," continued the young girl, "they are all
sawn through.  I see you are curious to know who did that?"

Cris said "yes," without speaking a word.

"It was I!"

"You?" he telegraphed.

"Yes; I was once a close prisoner in this very room--not watched as you
are, but still a prisoner.  I broke a watch to pieces, took out the
mainspring, filed a saw with the nail-cleaning blade of a pen-knife, and
with that I sawed away the bars, leaving barely enough to hold them
together."

Carrol's look expressed astonishment.

"Yes; it _was_ hard work, and it took weeks to accomplish it.  I dare
say you wonder why I didn't make my escape.  That's too long a story to
tell you now."

The backwoodsman's look was very eloquent, and his visitor equally quick
of comprehension.  By that look he asked a question.

"No; I'm not a prisoner now," she answered, "only in name.  You shall
have the benefit of my labours.  But you must do everything cautiously.
And first, to get rid of your guards."

"How was that to be done?"

It was the captive who asked himself this question.

"Here is a bottle," continued she; "it contains a sleeping draught.
When they return, ask them for a drink; they will give it to you in a
gourd; manage to pour the contents of this bottle into the gourd, and
invite them to drink along with you.  They will do so, as they never
refuse a condemned captive.  In a few minutes the draught will take
effect.  Then climb to the window, remove the bars without noise, let
yourself down softly, and make your way straight into the forest.  No
thanks, till I see you again!"

With these words his visitor vanished, the opening in the wall closed
noiselessly, and Cris lay wondering whether he had been sleeping or
waking, listening to a soft, delicate voice, or only dreaming that he
heard it.

The phial in his hand, however, gave token that he had not been
dreaming.  His visitor was no creature of another world, but one of this
mundane sphere.

The hunter scratched his head with bewilderment, and mentally reviewed
the situation.

"Wal, of all the surprisingest things as ever I met, this air the most
tremenjous.  Bite me to death with gallinippers if ever I thought to
have seed sich a thing and not yell right out!  And me a lyin' here when
that splendiferous critter war a botherin' her brain to sarve this old
sinner!  It's the most etarnal 'stonishing thing ever heerd on--that's
what it is.  Yah! so you're come agin, air ye?" he continued, as two of
his guards re-entered.  "Wal, I reckon I've got somethin' as 'ill suit
your complaint.  Come in, ye devils, you!"

The unconscious objects of his apostrophe having entered the room,
seated themselves not far from him, chattering with each other.  The
subject of the conversation was uninteresting to their prisoner, who lay
revolving in his mind what was best to be done.

The time for putting his plan into execution had at length arrived.

His sentinels had ceased conversing, and were with difficulty keeping
themselves awake.

"Look hyar, red-skins," he said, addressing them, "have ye sich a thing
as a drop of water?  I'm most chokin' wi' thirst, and I see its no use
waiting till you axes me, so I'll take the trouble off your hands, and
axe you."

One of the Indians good-naturedly went outside, returning with a gourd,
which he handed to the prisoner.

Cris raised it to his lips, and drank; then paused, as if for breath.

"By the etarnal!" said he, "if I didn't think I seed one of your
comrades put his head in that thar door.  What kin he want?"

The men looked in the direction of the door.

The contents of the phial were poured into the gourd.

When the Indians looked again at their captive, he was apparently
enjoying another long draught of water.

Not a drop, however, passed his lips.

"Ah!" he exclaimed, after his seemingly exhausting imbibation, and with
the greatest difficulty suppressing a grimace, "there's nothing like
water to refresh one.  It a'most gives a dyin' man new lease o' his
life.  I wonder I never tried it afore.  There's a smack o' freedom
about it that's worth its weight in gold.  Try it yourselves, and don't
stand staring, as if you was agoin' to swallow me."

The comical expression of their captive's face, more than the long
speech he made to the two men, induced them to oblige him.

Putting their lips to the gourd, each took a draught of the water.

They did not seem to coincide with him in his opinion of its virtues.

The old hunter laughed in his sleeve on perceiving their wry faces.

"Don't like it, eh?  Wal, you don't know what's good for ye.  Poor
benighted critters! how should ye?"

As he made the remark he fell back upon his log bolster, and again
seemed to compose himself to sleep.

If the Indians had been somnolent before drinking the water, they were
not rendered more wakeful by the indulgence, and it was almost ludicrous
to see what useless efforts they made to battle against the potent
narcotic.

In vain they talked to each other, got up, and paced the room, and
endeavoured to stand up without leaning up against the wall.

This struggle between sleep and watchfulness at length came to a close.

In less than ten minutes after taking the draught, both lay stretched
along the floor in a deep death-like slumber.

The backwoodsman lost no more time.

With an agile motion, he planted his feet in the interstices of the
logs, and reached the window.

A slight wrenching of the bars showed the skill with which they had been
sawn asunder.

One after another gave way, and the whole framework was in his hands.

He was on the point of dropping it gently, when outside, under the
window, a human form appeared.

It was that of an Indian!



CHAPTER THIRTY NINE.

AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE.

On seeing the Indian, Cris Carrol felt himself in a dilemma.

But he did not pause long before taking action.

He saw that the man was not watching him, but seemed to have his eyes
fixed upon the windows of the adjoining habitation.

Quietly pulling in the iron framework which was beginning to feel heavy,
Cris deposited it without noise in the interior of the room and again
clambered up to the window.  Before doing so, however, he stole his
knife from one of the sleeping sentinels.

The Indian outside had still maintained his attitude.

When Cris looked forth again, he saw him with his eyes fixed on the same
spot.

What was to be done?

The only thing that suggested itself to the hunter was precisely what he
did do.

He crept through the window.

So quietly, that ere the individual below was aware of his presence, he
had seized him by the throat and forced him to the ground.

A surprise awaited him when he had accomplished this feat.  The Indian's
face was revealed, and, to Carrol's surprise, no less than his joy, for
not having plunged the knife into his heart, he recognised it.

"Nelatu!"

"Carrol!"

"Hush! or you'll alarm all the red-skins about the place."

"What are you doing here?"

"I've just dropped out o' that thar window," he paid, pointing to the
opening above.

"How came you to go in there?"

"I didn't go in of my own will, you may bet high on that.  I war brung."

"Who brought you?"

"Some o' yur own Injuns."

"A prisoner?"

"That's about the size o' it.  I shouldn't have been one much longer."

"What do you mean?"

"Why, that to-morrow I'd have been as dead as a man could be, with forty
or fifty fellows playing blue-blazes on his carcase."

"Ha! they have decreed on burning you?"

"That's it, lad, and consarn me if I ain't glad to be out hyar in the
open air a tellin' it you, 'stead of in there a thinkin' on it."

"Who condemned you?"

"Wal, names hev a kind o' slipped my memory, but they wur warriors and
braves of yur enlightened community."

"Why did you not send for me?"

"I thought of that, but they told me you war gone, and wouldn't be back
in time for the ceremony."

"How did you get out here?  Who opened the window?"

"That war done by a angel."

"An angel?--what do you mean?"

"Jist this; that at one of the corners of that thar eternal hole, a
angel appeared and showed me the road to liberty."

"Who was it?"

"Wal, it air no use keepin' it from you--"

"Speak! who was it?"

"I'll tell you, but first listen a spell to somethin' else.  Nelatu,
lad, I once did you a sarvice."

"You did!  I shall never forget it!"

"Durn it, it warn't for that I made mention on't.  It war only this--
look me in the face, and tell me on the word of a man you mean square
with me.  Do that an' I'll put my trust in ye, as I'm now puttin' my
life in your hands."

"Upon an Indian warrior's word, I am your friend!"

"You air, Nelatu?  Then dog-gorn me if I doubt you.  Your hand!"

They exchanged a friendly grasp.

"It is more nor my life--it am the good name and actions of the most
splendiferous, angeliferous critter the sun ever set eyes on!  It air--"

"Alice Rody!"

The hunter showed some surprise as Nelatu uttered the name.

"Yes, it war that same gal; but how on airth did you come for to guess
it so straight?"

"Because that one name is never absent from my thoughts."

The hunter uttered a strange exclamation.

"Ho-ho!" he muttered to himself, "the wind sits in that quarter, do it?
Poor lad, I'm fear'd thar ain't no chance for him."

"I fear it," said Nelatu, overhearing the muttered remark; "but, come!--
what she has commenced, I will accomplish.  At all risks I shall assist
you in regaining your liberty."

"Wal, I'll be glad to get it."

"Then, follow me!"

The Indian rapidly crossed the open space at the back of the house, and
led the way to the edge of the forest.

The released captive strode silently after.

They paused under a grove of live oaks, in the shadow of which Carrol
perceived a horse.

"It is yours," said Nelatu, "follow the straight path, and you are
free."

"Nelatu," said the backwoodsman, "you've done me a great sarvice.  I'm
goin' to give you a bit of advice in return for it--"

"Give up the angeliferous critter that's your prisoner; send her back to
her own people, and forget her!"

"If I could forget her, you mean?"

"Wal, I don't know much myself about them thar things; only my advice
is--Give her up!  You'll be a deal happier," he added, suddenly waxing
impassioned.  "That ere gal am as much above either you or me, or the
likes of us, as the genooine angels air above all mortals.  Therefor'
give her up, lad--give her up!"

Again pressing Nelatu's hand in his, the old hunter climbed into the
saddle, gave a kick to the horse, and rode off a free man.

"Kim up, ye Seminole critter!" said he to the animal he bestrode, "an'
take me once more to the open savannas; for, durn me! if this world
arn't gettin' mixed up so, thet it's hard for a poor ignorant feller
like me to know whether them that call 'emselves civilised air more to
be thought on than them air savages, or _wisey wersey_."

The question was one that has puzzled clearer brains than those of Cris
Carrol.



CHAPTER FORTY.

THE TALE OF AN INDIAN CHIEF.

As the old hunter has ridden out of our sight for ever, let us return to
the Indian town, where Alice Rody was so strangely domiciled.

Her people had buried the ill-fated Sansuta near the old fort.

The wild flowers she had loved so well had already blossomed over her
grave.

Wacora and Nelatu had both been present--both much affected.

The events of the contest had called them away immediately afterwards.
Wacora remained absent, but his cousin had made a stolen visit to the
town, as shown by the incidents already related.

The search for the escaped captive was carried on for some time with
vigour, but was at length abandoned.

Meanwhile, the other captive's life passed without incident.  The aid
she had given the backwoodsman had afforded her the greatest pleasure.

She had been informed of his capture immediately after his condemnation,
and was resolved to help him in his escape.

She did not know of Nelatu's presence near the scene, nor of his
well-timed assistance.

The Indian youth had ridden many miles that evening, merely to stand and
gaze at her window.

To feel that he was near her seemed a happiness to him.

He departed without even seeing her.

Weeks had elapsed since the Indian maiden had been laid to rest within
the old fort.

Alice often visited the spot.

And there Wacora, who had once, more returned to the town again, saw
her.

She was resting on the same stone where Sansuta's head had rested on her
bosom.

On perceiving the chief's approach she rose to her feet, as if to quit
the spot.

"Does my coming drive you away?" he asked.

"Not that; but it is growing late, and I must return to my prison."

"Your prison?"

"Is it not my prison?"

"It is no more your prison than you are a prisoner.  You have long been
free."

There was a mournful sadness in Alice Rody's speech which touched the
heart of the Indian chief.

"Freedom is a boon only to those who can enjoy it," she said, after a
pause.

"And are you unhappy?" asked Wacora.

"Can you ask that question?--you who have done so much--" She paused;
her generous nature hesitated to inflict pain.

He concluded her speech for her.

"I have done so much to make you unhappy.  You are right.  I have been
an instrument in the hands of Fate, and you owe your misery to me.  But
I am only an instrument, not the original cause.  My will had no voice
in my actions, and but one motive prompted me.  That was Duty."

"Duty?" she asked, a smile curling her lip.

"Yes, duty!  I could prove it to you had you the desire to hear me."

She resumed her seat, and said, quietly--

"I will hear you."

"There was an Indian chief, the son of a Spanish woman.  His father was
a Seminole.  Both are dead.  He was reared amongst his father's people,
and learned from them all that Indian youths are taught.  Schools then
existed amongst the Seminoles.  The white missionaries had established
them, and were still at their heads.  They had both the ability and the
desire to teach.  From them Wacora learned all that the pale-faced
children are taught.  His mind was of his mother's race; his heart
inclined to that of his father."

"But why this difference?" she asked.

"Because the more he knew the more was he convinced of the cruel
oppression that had been suffered in all ages.  History was a tissue of
it.  Geography marked its progress.  Education only proved that
civilisation was spread at the expense of honour and of right.  This is
what the schools taught him."

"That is but one side of the question."

"You are right, so he resolved to make himself familiar with the other.
The story of the past might be applicable to the events of the present.
Believing this, he left the schools, and sought the savannah and the
forest.  What did he find there?  Nothing but the repetition of the past
he had read of in books, aggravated by the lawlessness and rapacity of
the present.  The red man was ignorant.  But did the pale-faces seek to
educate him?  No!  They sought and still seek to keep him ignorant,
because, in his ignorance, lies their advantage."

"Was that all the fault of our race?"  Alice asked, as she noticed the
enthusiastic flush upon the speaker's face.

"Not all.  That were to argue falsely.  The red man's vices grew greater
as the chances of correcting them were denied him.  His instinct
prompted him to retaliation, for by this he sought to check oppression.
'Twas a vain effort.  He found it so; and was forced to practise
cruelty.  So the quarrel progressed till to-day the Indian warrior sees
in every white man only an enemy."

"But now?  Surely you are not so?"

"I am the Indian chief I have attempted to describe.  Take that for your
answer."

The young girl was silent.

"If my heart bleeds for suffering, it is my mother's nature pleading
within me.  I check it, because it would be unworthy of a warrior, and
the leader of warriors.  The storm has arisen--I am carried along with
it!"

As he uttered the last words his form seemed to dilate, while his
listener stood wondering at it spell-bound.

After a pause, he continued in a tone more subdued, but still full of
feeling.

"If I have caused you unhappiness, think of me as the involuntary
instrument.  My uncle was beloved by all his tribe--by all our race.
His injuries were ours; it was ours to avenge them.  And for her"--his
voice trembled as he pointed to Sansuta's grave--"_she_ was his only
hope and joy upon earth."

Alice Rody's tears fell in torrents over the last resting-place of the
Indian maiden.  Wacora observed them, and, with a delicacy of feeling,
was about to withdraw from her presence, when she stayed him with a
motion of her hand.

For some time neither uttered a word.  Alice at length spoke, through
sobs which she vainly strove to check or conceal.

"Forgive me," said she, "for I have done you a great wrong.  Much that
was dark and terrible appears now just and natural.  I cannot say that I
am happier, but I am less troubled than before."

He would have kissed her hand, but, with a slight shudder, she drew
back.

"No, no; do not touch me!  Leave me to myself.  I shall be more composed
by-and-bye."

He obeyed, without saying a word; leaving her alone.

For a long time she sat in the same place, a prey to thoughts she scarce
understood.

At length she rose, to all appearance more composed, and retracing the
forest path with slow, sad steps, she re-entered the Indian town.



CHAPTER FORTY ONE.

A TREACHEROUS BRIDGE.

There was one among the Indians who viewed their fair captive with no
great favour.

It was Maracota.

His devotion to Oluski had been so blindly true that, in his
narrow-minded memory of the old chief's wrongs, he had become
bloodthirsty and remorseless.  Naturally of a revengeful disposition, he
saw, in the leniency of both Wacora and Nelatu towards the pale-faced
maiden, too much of forgiveness.

This stirred his evil passions to their depth, and he sought for an
opportunity to do her an injury.

With a shrewd guess at the truth, he looked upon Cris Carrol's escape as
another evidence of that toleration which ill consorted with his
sanguinary hatred of the white race.

He dared not take open measures, but insidiously strove to turn the
people of the tribe against their white captive, as well as Wacora.

His success was not commensurate with his wishes.  They admired their
chief too much to believe anything to his prejudice, and Maracota became
himself looked upon as a restless agitator--a subject more zealous than
loyal.

He saw, accordingly, that any injury to the captive must be accomplished
by his own agency; the more so, as he had already endeavoured to excite
a feeling of jealousy in Nelatu's mind, of which she and Wacora were the
objects.  The generous youth not only refused belief, but angrily
reproved the slanderer, for daring to couple his cousin's name with an
act so unworthy!

When a person resolves upon mischief it is astonishing how many
opportunities present themselves.

Alice, although unsuspicious of the enmity of which she was the object,
avoided Maracota.  She did so from a different motive.  She knew that it
was he who had fired the fatal shot at her brother, and could not help
regarding the act with abhorrence.  His sister, how could she?

And, as his sister, how could she look upon his executioner without
repugnance--more than repugnance--with horror?

The exigencies of the war had kept Maracota away from the town, and for
long periods; but the same causes that brought Wacora back, also
controlled his return.

He felt that now, if ever, was the time to carry out his schemes of
malignity.

He accordingly watched her every movement; amongst others, the many
lonely visits she paid to the ruined fort.

There was the opportunity he wanted, if he could only find the means to
avail himself of it.

In a community of red men, where everything is reduced, even in times of
a temporary peace, to dull routine, it was not difficult to devise a
plan of revenge.  But it must be unnoticed, or go unpunished, for he had
a wholesome dread of Wacora's displeasure, and was not disposed to incur
it.

Some days had elapsed since the interview described between the chief
and his captive, during which time they had seen nothing of each other.

Wacora, with great delicacy, had avoided her, and she had kept herself
within the dwelling assigned to her, afraid to meet him, yet pondering
deeply over what he had said.

In spite of a natural prejudice against the Indian race, she was
startled and wonder-stricken at the nobility of thought and rare talent
he had exhibited.  She did not doubt but that a portion, at least, of
his argument was based on false reasoning, but she was not subtle
enough, or perhaps indisposed, to detect the erroneous argument.  We are
very apt to acknowledge the truth of what we admire, whilst admitting
its errors.

Alice Rody was in this predicament.

She had learned to respect the Indian chief, and her respect was tinged
with admiration of his good qualities.

This mental ratiocination had occupied her during the days of her
seclusion.

She endeavoured to divert her mind to other subjects, and to this end
determined to pay another visit to the old fort.  She was prompted to it
by a thought of having too long forgotten the Indian maiden who slept
within the ruins.

It was a glorious morning as she set forth for a walk to the place.

The way was through a belt of timbered land leading to a creek, spanned
by a rude wooden bridge.  On the other side lay the ruin.

The wood was passed in safety, and she reached the water's edge.  To her
amazement she found the creek greatly swollen; this often happened after
heavy rains, though she had never before seen it in that condition.

She proceeded along the causeway leading to the bridge, that seemed to
offer a safe means of crossing.

She paused to contemplate the current, bearing upon its bosom the torn
trunks of trees caught in its rapid course.

In another moment she was upon the bridge, and had got midway over it,
when a tremulous motion of the planks caused her to hesitate.  As she
stood still the motion ceased, and smiling at her fears she again
proceeded.

Not far, however.  Ere she had made three steps forward, to her horror
the motion re-commenced with greater violence.

She saw it was too late to retreat, and sped onward, the planks swaying
fearfully towards the water.

Believing it best to proceed, she took courage for a fresh effort, and
kept on towards the other side.  It was a fatal resolution.

Just as she had prepared for her last spring the planks gave way with a
creaking sound, and she was precipitated into the stream.

Her presence of mind was gone, and in an instant she was submerged
beneath the seething current of the flood.

She rose again, gave utterance to a shriek, and was again swallowed up,
her wail of agony being uttered in the water.

At that moment a face that expressed fiendish delight appeared through
the bushes, on the bank; nor did it vanish until assured that all was
over, and Alice Rody had sunk below the surface, never more to return to
it alive.

Then, and not till then, the form emerged from out the underwood, and
scrambling to the rude pier from which the planks had parted, stood
surveying the scene.

It was Maracota!

"Good!" cried he.  "So perish all who would make the red man forgive the
injuries of his race.  She was the child of a villain--the sister of a
fiend!"

He stooped down and examined the broken fragments of the bridge.

"Maracota's axe has done the deed well," said he, continuing his
soliloquy, "and he has nothing to fear.  Her death will be attributed to
accident.  It was a great thought, and one that Oluski's spirit will
approve.  Maracota was his favourite warrior, and to please his shade
has he done this deed, and will do more.  Death to the pale-faces--death
to their women and children!  Death and extermination to the accursed
race!"

The vengeful warrior rose from his stooping position, cast one hurried
glance upon the turbulent stream, and once more entering the underwood,
disappeared from the spot.



CHAPTER FORTY TWO.

A SOLILOQUY.

Wacora came from the council chamber, where the warriors had assembled,
and passed over to the house where dwelt his white captive.

This was no unusual thing for him when he deemed himself safe from her
observation.  Upon the day in question, however, he had resolved to see
her.

The time had come when active measures were about to be taken by the
United States Government in order to "suppress" (such was the term used)
the Indians in Florida, and although none could know at that moment how
difficult the undertaking would prove, all were alive to the fact that
the work was about to commence in earnest.

Information of this had reached the young Seminole chief; and he saw the
necessity of removing his tribe from their present residence.

Hence the council--hence, also, his visit to Alice Rody.

He had determined to lay the facts fully before her, in order that she
might name the time of return to her own people.

Thus reflecting, he walked on towards the house tenanted by his captive.

On arriving at the place he found she was not there; but some children
playing near told him she had gone into the woods, and pointed in the
direction she had taken.

The young chief hesitated about following her.  He was unwilling to
thrust himself into her presence at a time she had, perhaps, devoted to
self communion and repose.

Turning in another direction, he wandered for some time purposelessly,
taking no note of the locality, until he had reached the belt of the
woods which Alice had herself traversed on her road to the old ruin.
Wacora, however, entered it at some distance farther off from the skirts
of the town.

Once under the shadow of the trees he abated his pace, which, up to this
time, had been rapid.  Now walking with slow step, and abstracted air,
he finally stopped and leant against a huge live oak, his eyes wandering
afar over the sylvan scene.

"Here," he soliloquised in thought, "here, away from men and their
doings, alone is there peace!  How my heart sickens at the thought that
human ambitions and human vanities should so pervert man's highest
mission--peace--turning the world into scenes of strife and bloodshed!
I, an Indian savage, as white men call me, would gladly lay down this
day and for ever the rifle and the knife; would willingly bury the war
hatchet, and abandon this sanguinary contest!

"Could I do so with honour?" he asked, after a pause of reflection.
"No!  To the end I must now proceed.  I see the end with a prophetic
eye; but I must go on as I've begun, even if my tribe with all our
people should be swept from the earth!  Fool that I've been to covet the
leadership of a forlorn hope!"

At the end of this soliloquy he stamped the ground with fury.

Petty dissensions had arisen among the people he deemed worthy of the
highest form of liberty.  By this his temper had been chafed--his hopes
suddenly discouraged.  He was but partaking of the enthusiast's fate,
finding the real so unlike the ideal.  It is the penalty usually paid by
intelligence when it seeks to reform or better the condition of fallen
humanity.

"And she," he continued, in his heart's bitterness, "she can only think
of me as a vain savage; vain of the slight superiority education appears
to give me over others of my race.  I might as well aspire to make my
home among the stars as in her bosom.  She is just as distant, or as
unlikely to be mine."

In the mood in which the Indian was at that moment, the whole universe
seemed leagued against him.

Bitterly he lamented the fate that had given him grand inspirations,
while denying him their enjoyment.

As he stood beneath the spreading branches of the live oak a double
shadow seemed to have fallen upon him--that of his own thoughts, and the
tree thickly festooned with its mosses.  Both were of sombre hue.

He took no heed of the time, and might have stood nursing his bitter
thoughts still longer, but for a sound that suddenly startled him from
his reverie.

It was a shriek that came ringing through the trees as if of one in
great distress.

The voice Wacora heard was a woman's.

Lover-like, he knew it to be that of Alice Rody in peril.

Without hesitating an instant he rushed along the path in the direction
from which it appeared to come.

In that direction lay the stream.

His instinct warned him that the danger was from the water.  He
remembered the rain and storm just past.  It would be followed by a
freshet.  Alice Rody might have been caught by it, and was in danger of
drowning.

He made these reflections while rushing through the underwood, careless
of the thorns that at every step penetrated his skin, covering his
garments with blood.

His demeanour had become suddenly changed.  The sombre shadow on his
brow had given place to an air of the wildest excitement.  His white
captive, she who had made him a captive, was in some strange peril.

He listened as he ran.  The swishing of the branches, as he broke
through them, hindered him from hearing.  No sound reached his ears; but
he saw what caused him a strange surprise.  It was the form of a man,
who, like himself, was making his way through the thicket, only in a
different direction.  Instead of towards the creek the man was going
from it, skulking off as if desirous to shun observation.

For all this Wacora recognised him.  He saw it was Maracota.

The young chief did not stay to inquire what the warrior was doing
there, or why he should be retreating from the stream?  He did not even
summon the latter to stop.  His thoughts were all absorbed by the shriek
he had heard, and the danger it denoted.  He felt certain it had come
from the creek, and if it was the cry of one in the water, there was no
time to be lost.

And none was lost--not a moment--for in less than sixty seconds after
hearing it he stood upon the bank of the stream.

As he had anticipated, it was swollen to a flood, its turbid waters
carrying upon their whirling surface trunks and torn branches of trees,
bunches of reeds and grass uprooted by the rush of the current.

He did not stand to gaze idly upon these.  The bridge was above him.
The cry had come from there.  He saw that it was in ruins.  All was
explained!

But where was she who had given utterance to that fearful shriek?

He hurried along the edge of the stream, scanning its current from bank
to bank, hastily examining every branch and bunch borne upon its bosom.

A disc of whitish colour came before his eyes.  There was something in
the water, carried along rapidly.  It was the drapery of a woman's
dress, and a woman's form was within it!

The young chief stayed not for further scrutiny; but plunging into the
flood, and swimming a few strokes, he threw his arms around it.

And he knew that in his arms he held Alice Rody!  In a few seconds after
her form lay dripping upon the bank, apparently lifeless!



CHAPTER FORTY THREE.

SAVED!  SAVED!

Wacora had saved his white captive.  She still lived!

The struggle between life and death had been long and doubtful, but life
at length triumphed.

Por days had she lingered upon the verge of existence, powerless to move
from her couch; scarce able to speak.  It was some time before she could
shape words to thank her deliverer, though she knew who it was.

She had been told it was Wacora.

The young chief had been unremitting in his attentions, and showed great
solicitude for her recovery.  He found time, amidst the warlike
preparations constantly going on, to make frequent calls at her
dwelling, and make anxious inquiry about her progress.

The nurses who attended upon her did not fail to note his anxiety.

Nelatu had been absent and did not return to the town until she was
convalescent.

He was grieved to the heart on hearing what had happened.

Wacora, suspecting that Maracota was the guilty one, sought him in every
direction, but the vengeful warrior was nowhere to be found.

He had fled from the presence of his indignant chief.

It was not until long after that his fate became known.

He had been captured in his flight by some of the settlers, and shot;
thus dying by the hands of the enemies he so hated.

Several weeks elapsed, and no active movement had, as yet, been made by
the government troops.  Wacora's tribe still continued to reside in
their town undisturbed.

His captive continued to recover, and, along with her restored strength,
came a change over the spirit of her existence.  She seemed transformed
into a different being.

The past had vanished like a dream.  Only dimly did she remember her
residence at Tampa Bay, her father, the conflict on the hill, the
massacre, her brother's sad fate, all seemed to have faded from her
memory, until they appeared as things that had never been, or of which
she had no personal knowledge, but had only heard of them long, long
ago.

It is true they still had a shadowy existence in her mind, but entirely
disassociated with the events of her life, since she had been a captive
among the Indians.  Nor was there much to regret in this impaired
recollection, for both the events and personages had been among the
miseries of her life.

Of her present she had a more pleasurable appreciation.  She was living
a new life, and thinking new thoughts.

Nelatu and Wacora both strove in a thousand kind ways to render her
contented and happy.

They had no great luxuries to offer her, but such as they had were
bestowed with true delicacy.

Strange to say, that in this common solicitude there was not a spark of
jealousy between the two cousins.

Nelatu's nature was generosity itself; and self-sacrifice appeared to
him as if it was his duty or fate!

Still, while he basked in the sunshine of the young girl's beauty, he
had not the courage to imagine to himself that she could ever belong to
another.  Not to him might her love be given, but surely not to another!
He could not think of that.

True that at times he fancied he could perceive a look bestowed on
Wacora such as she never vouchsafed to him--a tremor in her voice when
speaking to his cousin, which had never betrayed itself in her discourse
with himself.

But he might be mistaken.  Might?  He was certain of it.  If she did not
love him, at any rate he could not think that she loved Wacora.

Thus did the Indian youth beguile himself!

Innocent as a child, he knew little of the heart of woman.

That look--that tremor of the voice--should have told him that she loved
Wacora.

Yes; the end had come, and love had conquered.

The white maiden was in love with the young Indian chief!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Wacora and his captive--now more than ever his captive--were seated
within the ruined fort near Sansuta's grave.

"You are pleased once more to be here?" he asked.

"I am.  During my illness I promised myself if ever I recovered that my
first visit should be to this spot."

"And yet it was in paying such a visit that you nearly lost your life."

"The life you saved."

"'Twas a happy chance.  I cannot tell what led me to the forest on that
occasion."

"What were you doing there?" she asked.

"Like the blind mortal that I am, I was blaming myself, and my fate,
too, when I should have been blessing my fortune."

"For what?"

"For conducting me to the spot where I heard you cry."

"What fortune were you blaming?"

"That which made me unworthy."

"Unworthy of what?"

He did not immediately answer her, but the look he gave her caused her
to turn her eyes to the ground.

"Do you really wish to know of what I think myself unworthy?"

She smiled as she replied, "If you betray no confidence in telling me."

"None; none but my own."

"Then, tell me if you like."

Was it the faint tremor in her voice that emboldened him to speak?

"Unworthy of _you_!" was his answer.

"Of me?" she said, her face averted from his.

"Of you, and you only.  But why should I withhold further confidence?
You have given me courage to speak; have I also your leave?"

She made no answer to the last question, but her look was eloquent of
assent.

"I thought on that day," he continued, "that I was accursed by man and
heaven--that I, an Indian savage, was not accounted worthy to indulge in
thoughts of love that had sprung up within my heart, like a pure flower,
only to be blighted by the prejudices of race; that all my adoration for
the fair and excellent, must be kept down by the accident of birth; and
that whilst nurturing a holy passion, I must crush it out and stifle it
for ever."

"But now?"  Her voice was low and tremulous.

"Now--all rests upon one word.  Upon that word depends my happiness or
misery now and for ever."

"And what is it?"

"Do not ask it from me.  It must come from your eyes--from your lips--
from your heart!"

There was an eloquence that spoke the answer without a word being
uttered.

It was the eloquence of love!

In another instant the lips of the white maiden touched those of her
Indian lover.

From their rapturous embrace they were startled by a sound.  It was a
groan!

It came from the other side of Sansuta's grave, behind which there was a
clump of bushes.

Wacora rushed towards the spot, while Alice kept her place, transfixed
to it by a terrible presentiment.

The young chief uttered an exclamation of horror, as he looked in among
the bushes.

His cousin was lying beneath them, stretched out--dead! a dagger, which
his right hand still clutched, sheathed in his heart!

With his last groan, and his heart's blood, the generous youth had
yielded up his love with his life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

L'ENVOI.

The Seminole war continued for eight years.

Eight years of bloodshed and horror, in which the white man and the
Indian struggled for the supremacy.

The whites fought for conquest, the Indians to retain possession of
their own.

On both sides were acts of cruelty--terrible episodes illustrating the
_lex talionis_.

As in all such contests, the pale-faces were the victors, and the red
men were in time subdued.

Such of the Seminoles as survived the war were allotted lands beyond the
Mississippi; and, far distant from their native home, were commanded to
be content and happy.

They had no alternative but to submit to their adverse fate, and in
several detachments they were transported to their new homes.

In one of the migrating bands, who passed through New Orleans, bound
west of the Mississippi river, was a young chief who attracted great
notice by his commanding presence no less than by a companion seen
constantly by his side--a white woman!

She was of great beauty, and those who saw her naturally made enquiry
about her name, parentage, and station, as also the name of the young
chief.

The Indians who were asked simply made answer that the chief was Wacora,
and that she by his side was his wife, known among them as--

------------------------------------------------------------------------

"The White Squaw."






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The White Squaw, by Mayne Reid

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WHITE SQUAW ***

***** This file should be named 36604.txt or 36604.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/6/0/36604/

Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
