The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Ballad of the Quest, by Virna Sheard

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Ballad of the Quest

Author: Virna Sheard

Release Date: July 4, 2011 [EBook #36617]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BALLAD OF THE QUEST ***




Produced by Al Haines









[Illustration: title page]





The

Ballad

of

The Quest


by

Virna Sheard




McClelland & Stewart, Ltd.,

Publishers

Toronto




Copyright 1922 by

THE JAMES A. McCANN COMPANY


All Rights Reserved



PRINTED IN THE U. S. A.




_To the sweet memory_

_of my Mother_




ACKNOWLEDGMENT

_We acknowledge with thanks the kindness of Messrs. J. M. Dent & Sons,
London, England, for permitting us to use the poems published by them
in "The Miracle"; also we thank the Imperial Order of the Daughters of
the Empire for permission to use those poems brought out by them in
"Carry On."_




CONTENTS


  The Ballad of the Quest
  A Song of Poppies
  The Shepherd Wind
  In Solitude
  The Slumber Angel
  At Midnight
  Dreams
  A Southern Lullaby
  When Jonquils Blow
  Lament
  The Sea
  The Cry
  The Bridge of Dreams
  The Shells
  Requiem
  The Crosses
  The Lonely Road
  To One Who Sleeps
  April Again!
  Histories
  Fireflies
  The Vanished
  Pathfinders
  The Call
  Before the Dawn
  The Fairy Clock
  The Temple
  The Whistler
  March
  On Silver Nights
  The Birth-Right
  A Love Song
  A Song
  The Night of all Saints
  In the Last Year
  Ships
  June
  October Goes
  The Lily-Pond




  THE BALLAD OF THE QUEST

  "Some day," I said, "before Life is over,
  I will shut my house door, and will be a rover."

  Under the sky where the great stars roll,
  I will search for my faith, and search for my soul.

  I have fared without them this many a day
  Through the market-place of the world's high-way.

  The truth I gave in exchange for a lie,
  And I bartered my dreams to a passer-by.

  I have met Delilah,--her enchantments I know
  As the man of strength knew them ages ago.

  Fool's gold and fool's joy have been my reaping,
  And my heart has nothing that's worth the keeping.

  But the world is wide and the world is free,
  And the things I have lost may come back to me.

  I will follow the path of the bird that flies,
  And look for a woman with honest eyes.

  If I travel hard, and travel alone,
  I may overtake Peace, and make it my own.

  Only the Sun and the Moon's sweet light
  Shall mark my day, or measure my night.

  Silks and satins and embroidered things,
  I'll exchange for blossoms and butter-flies' wings.

  And under a thorn-hedge I will dine
  On a handful of berries, as red as wine.

  Or I'll earn my bread on the out-bound ships,
  With the sun in my eyes, and salt on my lips.

  And for the softness of beds and pillows,
  I'll take a hammock that swings with the billows.

  It may be the trail will lead me afar
  To mountain paths, where the wild sheep are.

  Or with simple people, and free from guile,
  I will pitch my tent and will rest awhile.

  I am weary of softness and things of ease,
  And weary of Scribes, and of Pharisees.

  On a morning road where the wind is strong,
  I may learn again to whistle a song.

  Down forest paths, or the ways of the sea,
  My soul and my faith may come back to me.

  And always and ever beneath the skies,
  I will look for a woman with honest eyes.

  I will follow no will at all but my own,
  And the road I take I will take alone.

  "Some day," I said, "before Life is over,
  I will shut my house door, and will be a rover."

      *    *    *    *    *

  II

  But the day when it came was a troubled day,
  And the road I took was a troubled way.

  Then never a will I had of my own,
  And never a step did I travel alone.

  We marched by day, and we marched by night,
  Through the Sun's hot gold, or the Moon's cool light.

  We marched with laughter, we marched with song,
  Or in dreadful silence we marched along.

  The man at my right cursed low at his fate,
  The man at my left smiled early and late.

  And the faces I saw at the edge of day,
  Were young, young faces, turned old and grey.

  The field where poppies flashed red in the wheat,
  Was a hell we tramped through on stumbling feet.

  I forgot I had said "before Life is over,
  I will shut my house door, and will be a rover."

  Out on the roads where the guns took toll
  I gave little heed to my faith, or my soul.

  In the trenches where only the dead could rest,
  Life was a candle-flame--Death was a jest.

  The stars swung round in a blood-red sky,
  And the earth was red where the men reeled by.

  I laughed--for I was living and strong,--
  And I tossed them the line of a battle song.

  May-day came in,--but the sweet o' the Spring,--
  Who should know there was any such thing?

  For the lovers were gone, who used to know
  The English lanes where the hawthorns blow--

  And the lovers from lands far over the sea,--
  Ah!  The watching moon only, knew where they might be.

  I shook my impotent hand at the sky,
  And travelled on with a battle cry.

      *    *    *    *    *

  III

  On a desperate night--bitter black with pain,--
  My soul returned to haunt me again.

  We two kept vigil till break of day,
  But the moon bore witness, I did not pray.

  I dreamt I drifted with a name on my lips,
  Where the clouds were sea waves, and the stars little ships.

  I dreamt,--and lay on the shell-bitten sod,
  Like a thing that had been forgotten of God.

  I saw the smoke of the battle roll
  Over many a swift departing soul,--

  But when the dawn was a violet tide,
  A shadow came and knelt at my side.

  No--not a shadow--or mystery--
  But a rose of the darkness, she came to me.

  Mist-grey was her gown, and about her head
  Was a shining band with a cross of red.

  Her eyes were closed, for she dared not see
  What the guns and the dark had made of me.

  So I caught her gown in fear she would pass,
  Like a lovely shadow, across the grass.

  "Who are you?" I cried, "who have found me here
  Where I have lain, this year upon year?"

  "No!  No! but one night, beloved,"--she said,
  "While I searched for you all among the dead.

  "But you were so strong you could not die,
  Though Azrael touched you as he passed by."

  And then by a flame that lit up the skies,
  I looked once again in Delilah's eyes.

  They had out-lived fear, and were sweet, and deep
  As the eyes of an Angel, who bringeth sleep.

  "O brave one!" she said, "You soon shall see
  From your thirst and your pain I can set you free!

  "Here!  The water flask!--I will lift your head,--
  Drink if you will, and spare not," she said.

  "Be patient, and wait!  See here in your arm,
  The poppies of God shall work their charm."

  So she spoke, while her voice seemed faint and far
  As though it drifted down from a star.

  "I have come," she faltered, "beloved at last"--
  "Even so"--I said, "from the long-gone past.

  "I would know," I cried, "how you came to me
  Through this hell where no woman should ever be?"

  "I heard you call," she answered, "and then
  I followed the road of the out-bound men.

  "I followed the bearers, for far--and far,--
  They travel wherever the wounded are.

  "Picket and sentry, and the men who fly,
  Made the holy sign as I hurried by."

  "Here and there where the grass was red,
  I stopped for a moment beside the dead.

  "I pressed my lips to their tunic's hem,--
  And often I folded the hands of them.

  "But I could not stay,--and when dawn was near,
  You called again--and I found you here."

  "O Sweet--no more!" I said.  "Tell me no more!
  For Peace has come in through the morning's door.

  "There is only this at the end of my quest--
  Only you--and Love--and a spirit at rest."

      *    *    *    *    *

  Then came the bearers to lift me away--
  But beside me her shadow moved--tender and grey.




  A SONG OF POPPIES

  I love red poppies!  Imperial red poppies!
    Sun-worshippers are they;
  Gladly as trees live through a hundred summers
    They live one little day.

  I love red poppies!  Impassioned scarlet poppies!
    Even their strange perfume
  Seems like an essence brewed by fairy people,
    From an immortal bloom.

  I love red poppies!  Red, silken, swaying poppies!
    Deep in their hearts they keep
  A magic cure for woe,--a draught of Lethe,--
    A lotus-gift of sleep.

  I love red poppies!  Soft silver-stemmed, red poppies,
    That from the rain and sun,
  Gather a balm to heal some earth-born sorrow,
    When their glad day is done.




  THE SHEPHERD WIND

  When hills and plains are powdered white,
    And bitter cold the north wind blows,
  Upon my window in the night
    A fairy-garden grows.

  Here lilies that no hand hath sown
    Bloom white as foam upon the sea,
  And elfin bells to earth unknown,
    Hold frost-bound melody.

  And here are blossoms like to stars
    Tangled in nets of silver lace,--
  My very breath their beauty mars,
    Or stirs them from their place.

  Perchance the echoes of old songs,
    Found here a resting place at last,
  With drifting perfume, that belongs
    To roses of the past,--

  Or all the moonbeams that were lost
    On summer nights the world forgets,
  May here be prisoned by the frost,
    With souls of violets.

        *      *      *      *      *

  The wind doth shepherd many things,--
    And when the nights are long and cold,
  Who knows how strange a flock he brings
    All safely to the fold.




  IN SOLITUDE

  He is not all alone whose ship is sailing
    Over the mystery of an unknown sea,
  For some great Love with faithfulness unfailing
    Will light the stars to bear him company.

  Out in the silence of the mountain passes,
    The heart makes peace and liberty its own,--
  The wind that blows across the scented grasses
    Bringing the balm of sleep,--comes not alone.

  Beneath the vast illimitable spaces,
    Where God has set His jewels in array,
  A man may pitch his tent in desert places,
    Yet know that heaven is not so far away.

  But in the city--in the lighted city--
    Where gilded spires point toward the sky,
  And fluttering rags and hunger ask for pity,
    Grey Loneliness in cloth-of-gold, goes by.




  THE SLUMBER ANGEL

  When day is ended, and grey twilight flies
    On silent wings across the tired land,
  The Slumber-Angel cometh from the skies,--
  The Slumber-Angel of the peaceful eyes,
    And with the scarlet poppies in his hand.

  His robes are dappled like the moonlit seas,
    His hair in waves of silver floats afar;
  He weareth lotus-bloom, and sweet heartsease,
  With tassels of the rustling, green fir trees,
   As down the dusk he steps from star to star.

  Above the world he swings his curfew bell,
    And sleep falls soft on golden heads and white;
  The daisies curl their leaves beneath his spell,--
  The prisoner who wearies in his cell
    Forgets awhile, and dreams throughout the night.

        *      *      *      *      *

  Even so, in peace, comes that great Lord of rest
    Who crowneth men with amaranthine flowers;
  Who telleth them the truths they have but guessed,
  Who giveth them the things they love the best,
    Beyond this restless, rocking world of ours.




  AT MIDNIGHT

  Turn Thou the key upon our thoughts, dear Lord,
    And let us sleep;
  Give us our portion of forgetfulness,
    Silent and deep.

  Lay Thou Thy quiet hand upon our eyes,
    To close their sight;
  Shut out the shining of the moon, and stars,
    And candle-light.

  Keep back the phantoms and the visions sad,--
    The shades of grey,--
  The fancies that so haunt the little hours
    Before the day.

  Quiet the time-worn questions that are all
    Unanswered yet;
  Take from the spent and troubled souls of us
    Their vain regret;

  And lead us far into Thy silent land,
    That we may go,
  Like children out across the field o' dreams,
    Where poppies blow.

  So all Thy saints--and all Thy sinners, too--
    Wilt Thou not keep,
  Since not alone unto Thy well-beloved
    Thou givest sleep?




  DREAMS

  Keep thou thy dreams--though joy should pass thee by;
    Hold to the rainbow beauty of thy thought;
  It is for dreams that men will oft-times die,--
    And count the passing pain of death as nought.

  Keep thou thy dreams, though faith should faint and fail,
    And time should loose thy fingers from the creeds;
  The vision of the Christ will still avail,
    To lead thee on to truth and tender deeds.

  Keep thou thy dreams, through all the winter's cold;
    When weeds are withered, and the garden grey,
  Dream thou of roses with their hearts of gold;--
    Beckon to summers that are on their way!

  Keep thou thy dreams;--the tissue of all wings
    Is woven first of them; from dreams are made
  The precious and imperishable things,
    Whose loveliness lives on, and does not fade.




  A SOUTHERN LULLABY

  Little honey baby, shet yo' eyes up tight;--
    (Shadow-man is comin' from de moon!)--
  You's as sweet as roses if dey _is_ so pink an white;
    (Shadow-man'll get here mighty soon.)

  Little honey baby, keep yo' 'footses still!--
    (Rocky-bye, oh, rocky, rocky-bye!)
  Hush yo' now, an listen to dat lonesome whip-po'-will;
    Don't yo fix yo' lip an start to cry!

  Little honey baby, stop dat winkin' quick!
    (Hear de hoot-owl in de cotton-wood!)
  Yess--I sees yo' eyes adoin' dat dere triflin' trick,--
    (He gets chillun if dey isn't good.)

  Little honey baby, what yo' think yo' see?--
    (Sister keep on climbin' to de sky--)
  Dat's a June bug--it ain't got no stinger, lak a bee,--
    (Reach de glory city by-an-by.)

  Little honey baby, what yo' skeery at?--
    (Go down, Moses--down to Phar-e-oh!)--
  No--dat isn't nuffin but a furry fly-round bat;--
    (Say, he'd betta let dose people go.)

  Little honey baby, yo' is all ma own,--
    Deed yo' is.--Yes,--dat's a fia-fly;--
  If I didn't hab yo',--reckon I'd be all alone;
    (Rocky-bye--oh, rocky, rocky-bye.)

  Little honey baby, shet yo' eyes up tight;--
    (Shadow man is comin' from de moon,)
  You's as sweet as roses, if dey is so pink and white;
    (Shadow-man'll get here mighty soon.)

----------

The lines in brackets are supposed to be sung or chanted.  The Southern
"Mammy" seldom sang a song through, but interlaced it with
comments.--V.S.




  WHEN JONQUILS BLOW

  When jonquils blow I think of one
    Who sleeps beneath the green;
  And all the light and song of life
    And all the golden sheen,
  Turn cold and still before my eyes,
    While pearl-edged boughs of May
  Seen through a sudden mist of tears
    Are rimmed with ashen-gray.




  LAMENT

  Here in my garden where the tulips grow
    I walk alone;
  Dim are my eyes with tears, my feet are slow,
    My heart is stone;
  Though all the lovely earth again for me
    New sweetness yields
  It matters not,--only the dead I see
    On battlefields.

  Only the dead I see,--and strangely bright
    Their faces shine
  As though the God of Glory in the night
    Had made them fine.
  Place for the victors!  Stoop my soul to touch
    Their tunics' hem,--
  'Tis those they loved who need tears overmuch
    O weep for them!




  THE SEA

  The sea is but a cradle wide and deep,--
    A cradle that the moon rocks to and fro;
  What peace they find who there fall fast asleep,
    What lovely dreams,--'Tis not for us to know.

  But God hath sent the angel of the sea
    To sing to them an endless lullaby;
  And that they may not dread night's mystery,
    He lights for them the candles of the sky.

  They are infolded by the silken waves,
    And wrapped in shining blue, and emerald green;
  They drift through opalescent ocean caves,
    That only God Himself hath ever seen.

  The great salt wind that no man holds in thrall,
    Touches them softly, as it passes by;--
  I think the silver sea gulls know them all,
    And greet them with their lonely tender cry.

  For but a little, little round of years,
    The sweet sun-sprinkled foam will be their bed,
  And they will slumber--hushed from any fears--
    To waken, when the sea gives up her dead.




  THE CRY

  They have laid him away;
  Even he who was always so strong and gay
  Will be locked in the earth till the judgment day;
  "Dust unto dust" I have heard the priest say.

  He will never return;
  Though I weep my eyes blind, though I pray and yearn,--
  Though the star-light goes out and the great suns burn
  Into whitest ash,--he will never return.

  So of weeping--no more;
  It is tears fill the oceans from shore to shore;
  They have made the wind salt--the wind at my door;
  They harm the good ground--so of weeping--no more.

  "Not again!"  "Not again!"
  Do you hear the sea singing that one refrain?
  The pine trees, the wind and the wearysome rain
  All whisper it; "Never again!"--"Not again!"

  Who can tell me--who knows,
  Where his lonely soul travels?
    Whither it goes?--
  Has he gone like the leaves?--Like yesterday's snows?--
  Speak, dear Lord of Death!  You who died--and arose!




  THE BRIDGE OF DREAMS

  The thought of thee is like a swinging tune,
    A little swinging tune I seem to hear;
  The thought of thee is like the breeze of June
    Blowing across the winter of the year!

  The thought of thee is like a golden star
    Set all alone within the midnight blue;--
  A heaven-lit candle shining from afar
    Upon the road that we are passing through.

  The thought of thee is like the woods in spring,
    With silver-grey and silver-green o'erset;
  The thought of thee is what the four winds bring
    Over the banks of wild-blown mignonette.

  And all the music of the twilight sea,
    Echoes thy voice in tender undertone;
  The sea-gulls seem but grey-winged thoughts of thee,
    Caught on the salted wing and homeward blown!

  God keeps the secret of His heaven well,--
    But Azrael finds its gates, where'er they be;
  And from the earth, to fields of Asphodel,
    I build a bridge of dreams, and cross to thee.




  THE SHELLS

  O my brave heart!  O my strong heart!  My sweet heart and gay,
  The soul of me went with you the hour you marched away,
  For surely she is soulless, this woman white, and still,
  Who works with shining metal to make the things that kill.

  I tremble as I touch them,--so strange they are, and bright;
  Each one will be a comet to break the purple night;--
  Grey Fear will ride before it, and Death will ride behind:
  The sound of it will deafen,--the light of it will blind!

  And whom it meets in passing, but God alone will know.
  Each one will blaze a trail in blood--will hew a road of woe;
  O when the fear is on me, my heart grows faint and cold;--
  I dare not think of what I do,--of what my fingers, hold!

  Then sounds a Voice, "Arise, and make the weapons of the Lord!"
  "He rides upon the whirlwind!  He hath need of shell, and sword!
  His army is a mighty host--the lovely and the strong,--
  They follow Him to battle, with trumpet and with song!"

  O my brave heart!  My strong heart!  My sweet heart and dear,--
  'Tis not for me to falter,--'Tis not for me to fear;--
  Across the utmost barrier--wherever you may be,--
  With joy unspent, and deathless, my soul will follow thee!




  REQUIEM

  Weep for the dead; weep for the swift slain dead,
        November skies;
  Too few the tears that day and night are shed
        From women's eyes.

  Blow o'er them lightly with a soft caress,
        Wind of the sea;
  If you are tender they may miss love less--
        Where'er they be.

  Come, gentle moon, swing low your lantern light
        On reddened fields,
  And find the lonely harvest of the night
        That battle yields.

  Banish the darkness filled with quivering dread,
        Lest they should know
  Some last strange horror,--even they--the dead;--
        Sweet moon, swing low!

  Fold them at dawn, dear Earth, within your arms
        So safe and strong;
  Hold them asleep till they forget alarms,
        And woe and wrong.

  Master of Kings!  If peace be bought with pain,
        These paid the price;
  O show Thy tortured world that not in vain,
        Is sacrifice!




  THE CROSSES

  The little lonely crosses, the crosses low and white,
    They haunt me most in the silver hour
  That lies against the night;
    Or when the rose-dusk dawn comes in,
  With a star for candlelight.

  The little lonely crosses in fields so far away,
    They cast a shadow on my path--
  And, take which road I may,
    It follows, follows, follows--
  Throughout the livelong day.

  O little lonely crosses that gentle hands have made,
    You mean to us forevermore
  The price that has been paid
    For a heritage of Freedom,
  And a People unafraid.

  So, as a Pilgrim to his shrine, in dreams I rise and go,
    To find the poppied place of sleep,
  And the crosses row on row;
    The crosses carved with names beloved,
  The crosses white and low.




  THE LONELY ROAD

  We used to fear the lonely road
    That twisted round the hill;
  It dipped down to the river-way,
    And passed the haunted mill,
  And then crept on, until it reached
    The churchyard, green and still.

  No pipers ever took that road,--
    No gipsies, brown and gay;--
  No shepherds with their gentle flocks,--
    No loads of scented hay;--
  No market-wagons jingled by
    On any Saturday.

  The dog-wood there flung wide its stars
    In April, silvery sweet;
  The squirrels crossed that path all day
    On tiny flying feet;
  The wild, brown rabbits knew each turn,
    Each shadowy safe retreat.

  And there the golden-belted bee
    Sang his sweet summer song;
  The crickets chirped there to the moon
    With steady note and strong;
  Till cold and silence wrapped them round
    When autumn nights grew long.

  But, oh! they brought the lonely dead
    Along that quiet way,
  With strange procession, dark and slow,
    On sunny days and grey;
  We used to watch them, wonder-eyed,
    Nor care again to play,--

  And we forgot each merry jest;
    The birds on bush and tree
  Silenced the song within their throats,
    And with us watched to see,
  The soft, slow passing out of sight
    Of that dark mystery.

        *      *      *      *      *

  We fear no more the lonely road
    That winds around the hill;
  Far from the busy world's highway
    And the gods' slow-grinding mill;
  It only seems a peaceful path,
    Pleasant, and green, and still.




  TO ONE WHO SLEEPS

  Fare not too far, my own,
    Down ways all strange and new,
  For I must find alone,
    The road that leads to you.

  Enchantments may arise
    To lure thy little feet,
  And charm thy wondering eyes;--
    Yet,--wait for me, my sweet!

  Already Earth doth seem
    A phantom place to me,
  And thy far home of dream,
    Is my reality.

  So this is just "good-night";--
    Some stars will rise and wane,--
  But sure as comes the light,
    I'll be with thee again!




  APRIL AGAIN!

  April again! the willow wands are yellow
    Rose-red the brambles that the passing wind knows,
  Comes a robin's note like the note of a 'cello,
    And across the valley, the calling of the crows,--
          "April again!"

  April again! and the marsh birds swinging
    Over the rushes that belong to yester-year;
  Silver shines the river, and young lips are singing
    Songs as old as Eden--as old and as dear;
          "April again!"

  April again! with a wet wind blowing,
    And along the western sky a pathway of gold;
  Sounds a call to follow the road we're not knowing,
    A new road--a wild road--o'er fairy lands unrolled,--
          "April again!"

  April again! with its wonder of gladness,
    April with its haunting joy, and swift-stinging tears,--
  Month of mist and music, and the old moon-madness,
    Month of magic fluting, the spirit only hears,--
          "April again!"




  HISTORIES

  I weary of the histories of men--
    The garnered store of books in grim array;
  Life's bitter salvage, leather-bound, and then
    Left to the silence and a bloom of gray.

  I weary of the stories that they hold;
    The clash of arms sounds through them like a knell;
  I weary of the Kings in crowns of gold,
    The Kings victorious, and the Kings who fell.

  There are too many tears on every page;
    Too red a tide sweeps every chapter in;
  There is no word of peace in any age,
    Except the peace that death rode forth to win.

  And old unhappiness, long wrapped in sleep,
    And thrice-armed feud that passed in wrath and woe,
  And white despair from many a dungeon keep,
    Arise to haunt us still, where'er we go.

  Yet through the years the sun was warm and sweet,
    And pipers piped at morn, and night and noon,--
  And there was carnival with dancing feet,
    And love and joyance always came in June,--

  O, to remember when the pages close--
    Linked with the vision of the deathless brave,--
  The nightingale, the moonlight, and the rose,
    And all the beauty that the lost years gave!




  FIREFLIES

  (From an old Italian Legend)

  True lovers' words are deathless things;
    Eros, the little god, and wise,
  Catches them all,--gives to them wings,
    And turns them into fireflies!

  Words that are sweet as a caress,
    And wild, bright words no will can tame;
  Soft words of haunting tenderness,--
    Words that are like a blue-white flame.

  The magic word, the jewelled word,
    The word that hides a thousand fears,--
  These all the perfumed winds have heard,
    Through all the immemorial years!

  Not one is lost;--by old sea walls,
    And over beds of mignonette,
  And through lost lanes,--when darkness falls,
    In loveliness they sparkle yet.

        *      *      *      *      *

  Then down the velvet sea of night,
    Like little lighted ships asail,
  They pass away, and out of sight,--
    Companioned by the nightingale.




  THE VANISHED

  I grieve to think the little gods have vanished,--
    The half-gods with the vine-leaves in their hair;
  I sorrow much the goat-foot Pan is banished,
    And that the Dryads are not anywhere.

  The shrine of Flora has no need of flowers,--
    Diana seeks her arrows in the sky;
  Apollo's beauty was a thing of hours--
    And Artemis, herself, learned how to die.

  I think Endymion released from sleeping,
    Walks through the star-dust at the heaven's rim,
  For he is gone--though still the Moon is keeping
    Her tireless and beloved watch for him.

  On river banks the purple grapes are growing,
    But Bacchus and his merry train have passed.
  Where are the little Fauns--I would be knowing?
    In all the world who heard and saw them last?

  If but the small grey elfs were still astraying,
    Where shadows lace the golden forest ways,
  What joy to meet them, and be long delaying
    The sombre tasks that fill the working days!

        *      *      *      *      *

  I grieve to think the little gods have vanished,--
    The half-gods with the vine-leaves in their hair;--
  I sorrow much the goat-foot Pan is banished,
    And that the Dryads are not anywhere.




  PATHFINDERS

  These were the men of the restless heart;--
    The brothers to wind and tide;--
  They followed the lure of the far away,
  And they saw a vision by night and day,
    Of lands that were free and wide.

  They blazed the long and desolate trail,
    And set their mark on the trees;
  And sometimes only the star of the North,
  Guided their little, lone ships that set forth
    Upon the uncharted seas.

  They marked a road through the shifting sand
    Where never a road had led,--
  And beneath the pavilions of the sky,
  In a deep and abiding peace they lie
    With the world forgotten dead.

  The ice of the Arctic shut them in
    And locked its crystalline doors;--
  Or it may be a tide that was hot, and slow,
  Drifted them in where sea-grasses grow,
    On sun-bleached tropical shores.

  They journeyed beyond the shadow of fear,
    And past the ghost of despair;--
  On the coasts of coral they made their bed,
  Or they fell asleep where the ground was red,
    And grey wings shadowed the air.

  High adventurers!  Gentlemen all!
    Knights of the golden code;--
  That we might ride softly, you rode hard,--
  That we might go safely,--you without guard
    Followed the perilous road!




  THE CALL

  Come to me out of the night,
    In any way that you will,
  As a radiance, unspeakably bright--
    Or a shadow, close-hooded and still;
      Nothing will touch me of fear--
  Harken!  I make thee my vow!--
    Out of the darkness, my dear,
      Come to me now!

  This is the old haunted place,--
    Haunted by ghosts of spent hours:
  Decked by the ivy's green lace,
    Sweet with the dusk-opened flowers;
      This is the garden you know,
  Moon-touched, and tranquil and dear,--
    I, alone, walk to and fro,--
      Come to me here!




  BEFORE THE DAWN

  In that one darkest hour, before the dawn is here,
  Each soul of us goes sailing, close to the coast of Fear.

  There in the windless quiet, from out the folded black,
  The things we have forgotten--or would forget--come back.

  Old sorrows, long abandoned, or kept with lock and key,
  Steal from their prison places to bear us company.

  All softly come our little sins--our scarlet sins--and gray.
  To keep with us a vigil till breaking of the day.

  And there are velvet footsteps; or oft we seem to hear
  Light garments brush against the dark; so near--so very near!

  From out the red confusion where men long watches keep,
  New shadows come--we know they come--and in the dark we weep.

  Then heavily, as weighed by tears, each haunted moment goes,
  For dawn steps down the morning sky, in robes of gray and rose.

  O fairies of the forest-ring, and little men in green,
  And pixies of the moonlight, and elves no eye hath seen,
  Brew us a magic potion, of deep and fairy power,
  A draught of Lethe--for one night--to tide us past that hour.




  THE FAIRY CLOCK

  Silver clock!  O silver clock! tell to me the time o' day!
  Is there yet a little hour left for us to work and play?
  Tell me when the sun will set--tiny globe of silver-grey?

  It has been so glad a world since the coming of the morn;--
  Oft I wondered, when I met any souls who seemed forlorn;
  And I scarce gave heed to those who were old or travel worn.

  Mayhap I have loved too well all the merry fleeting things;
  Run too lightly with the wind,--chased too many shining wings;
  Thought too seldom of the night, and the silence that it brings.

  Well I fear me I have been but an idler in the sun;
  All unfinished are the tasks long and long ago begun;--
  In the dark perchance they weep, who have left their work undone.

  And I know each black-frocked friar preacheth sermons that, alas!
  Fain would halt the dancing feet of those careless ones who pass,
  Down a sweet and primrose path, through the ribbons of the grass.

  Silver-clock!  O Silver-clock!  It was only yesterday
  Dandelions flecked the field, starry-bright and gold and gay;
  You are but the ghost of one--little globe of silver-grey!

  Tell me--tell me of the hour,--for there is so much to do!
  Is it early?  Is it late?  Fairy-clock!  O tell me true,
  As I blow you down the wind, out upon a road of blue!




  THE TEMPLE

  Enter the temple beautiful!  The house not made with hands!
  Rain-washed and green, wind-swept and clean,
    Beneath the blue it stands,
  And no cathedral anywhere
  Seemeth so holy or so fair.

  It hath no heavy gabled roof, no door with lock and key;
  No window-bars shut out the stars,
    The aisles are wide and free;--
  Here through the night each altar-light
  Is but a moon-beam, silver-white.

  Silently as the temple grew at Solomon's command,--
  Still as things seem within a dream,
    This rose from out the land;--
  And all the pillars, grey and high,
  Lifted their arches to the sky.

  Here is the perfume of the leaves, the incense of the pines,--
  The magic scent, that hath been pent,
    Within the tangled vines:
  No censor filled with spices rare
  E'er swung such sweetness on the air!

  And all the golden gloom of it holdeth no haunting fear,
  For it is blessed, and giveth rest
    To those who enter here;--
  Here in the evening--who can know
  But God Himself walks to and fro!

  And music past all mastering within the chancel rings;
  None could desire a sweeter choir,
    Than this--that soars and sings,--
  Till far the scented shadows creep,--
  And quiet darkness bringeth sleep.




  THE WHISTLER

  Throughout the sunny day he whistled on his way;--
    Oh, high and low, and gay and sweet,
    The melody rang down the street,
  Till all the weary, old and grey,
  Smiled at their work, or stopped to say,
    "Now God be thanked that youth is fair,--
    And light of heart, and free from care."

  What time the wind blew high, he whistled and went by;--
    Then clarion clear on every side
    The song was scattered far and wide!
  Like birds above a storm that fly,
  The silver notes soared to the sky;
    "O soul, whose courage does not fail
    But with a song can meet the gale."

  And when the rain fell fast, he whistled as he passed;--
    A little tune the whole world knew,--
    A song of love, of love most true;
  On through the mist it came at last
  To one by sorrow overcast;
    "Dear Christ," she said, "by night and day
    They serve who praise, as well as pray."

  Though the great world was white, he whistled in the night;--
    The sky was spangled all with gold,
    The bitter wind was keen and cold,
  Yet, dear musician, out of sight,
  You still put wintry thoughts to flight,
    For summer follows where you fare,
    O Whistler, so debonair!

  And when the fog hung grey, he whistled on his way;--
    The little children in his train
    With rosy lips caught up the strain.
  Then I, to hear what he might say,
  Followed with them, that sombre day.
    "Is it for joy of life," quoth I,
    "Good sir, you go awhistling by?"
  He smiled, and sighed, and shook his head,
  "I cheer my own sad heart," he said.




  MARCH

  Windy March weather, with a lone crow flying,
    A little ebony airship careening down the blue,
  And high, high above him a wild goose crying,
    The leading cry, the clarion cry, that guides his grey lines through!

  Windy March weather, with the pine trees singing,
    Silver-red the brambles show and silver-green the birch,
  And silver-grey a squirrel on a top branch swinging,--
    A friendly elf who nods to me from his far perilous perch.

  Windy March weather, with the tawny brook that hurries
    Eager for the outward rush of rivers to the sea;
  A tiny brook sun-dappled, that frets and sings and worries,
    A rough adventurous little brook that calls and calls to me!

  Windy March weather, and the old spring madness
    Tempting us to take the trail that wanders free and far,--
  Whispering of magic roads that wind to lands of gladness,
    Where vanished joys and lost delights and garnered treasures are!




  ON SILVER NIGHTS

  On silver nights I cannot sleep;--
    The ancient moon from far above,
  Bids me arise, and run and keep
    A rendezvous with one I love.

  And in my heart a little song
    Swings to and fro its clear refrain,
  While down the stairs I haste along
    As though the past were mine again.

  Then is my spirit so beguiled
    By all the night's white witchery,
  That I am kin to all things wild,
    And part of all things that are free!--

  Then he comes back,--who long ago
    Left these green paths his steps had trod;
  Yes--he comes back,--I know!--I know!--
    Light-footed from the fields of God.

  So through the garden and the lane,
    And where the lovely grass is deep,
  We two go walking once again,--
    On silver nights, that banish sleep.




  THE BIRTH-RIGHT

  Whate'er betides, all beauty still is mine,
    I drink--as did the old gods--of its wine!
  Though Times should dim my eyes, yet I have seen
    The hills and hollows gay with gold and green:
  Roses have charmed me with a dear delight,
    And Iris brought me joy in cups of white:--
  For me the fairies hung on bush and tree
    The marvel of the frost's bright filagree
  And well I know where at the grey of morn
    They threaded dew on cob-web, weed and thorn!
  Lights of the Northern skies--and dancing flames,
    And flowing seas--your colors have no names!
  Day-shine across the uplands how you pass
    Chased by the filmy shadows on the grass!
  Oh, I have watched the little swallows fly
    Down silver reaches of the twilight sky--
  While through the Western gates another day
    In sweeping golden garments passed away,--
  I know how morning hastening from afar
    Catches upon her rose-edged robes a star;
  And often I have seen at Midnight's hour
    The blooming of the Moon's gold wonder-flower.
  O look, look, out upon the lovely earth
    And take the gift she gave thee at thy birth!
  Whate'er betides--all beauty still is thine,--
    Drink deep--as did the old gods--of its wine!




  A LOVE SONG

  Oh haste thee, Sweet!  Impatient now I wait,
  The crescent moon swings low,--it groweth late,--
  A night-bird sings of Life, and Love, and Fate!--

  Oh haste, my Sweet!  Youth and its gladness goes;
  Joy hath one summer time--like to the rose
  Love only, lives through all the winter's snows.

  So haste, my Sweet!  These hours are all our own:
  But see!--A rose-leaf on the night-wind blown,--
  For thee I wait--for thee I wait alone!--
      So haste, my Sweet!




  A SONG

  O heart of mine--if I were but a swallow--
    A thing so fearless, swift of flight, and free--
  On wings unwearied I would find and follow
    Some path that led to thee!

  Were I a rose out in the garden growing
    My sweetness I would give the vagrant breeze--
  For he, perchance, might meet thee all unknowing--
    Yet bring thee memories.




  THE NIGHT OF ALL SAINTS

It is an old belief that on the night of All Saints, "Hallowe'en," the
spirits of the dead return, so each year there is made a beloved feast.

  He will come back across the roads unmeasured--
    Lit by old moons and flaming sun and star;
  There are so many things he loved and treasured
    To call him from afar.

  Joy of the distant heaven, howe'er entrancing,
    Never could charm him from the earth he knew,
  Scent of the rose-leaves--music, mirth and dancing--
    He will come back to you.

  He will come back--no golden bars can hold him--
    He will come back to fire and candle shine;
  He will be near, though you may not behold him,
    And though he gives no sign.




  IN THE LAST YEAR

  1918

  We are forgetting all the old grey saints,--
    A bloom of dust lies on the martyrs' shrines;
  From storied windows that the sunlight paints,
    We rarely read the dear familiar lines;
      They seem a part of things so far away,
      These haloed ones--the saints of yesterday.

  We are forgetting all the ancient lore
    Of time-dimmed battles, with their unnamed dead;
  All, all have vanished,--we will nevermore
    In dreams unfurl their banners stained with red;
      A tidal-wave has drifted them away
      Into the limbo of Life's yesterday.

  We are forgetting all the mighty men,--
    The knights in clanking armor of the past;
  We care not that by forest and by fen,
    Their fighting done, they soundly slept at last;
      They all belong to grief so far away;
      The long and bitter tears of yesterday.

  We are forgetting all the hours of peace,
    The sweet sun-sprinkled hours of gold on green,--
  The careless hours we thought could never cease,--
    The merriest hours the world has ever seen.
      They are so very, very far away,--
      Those white untroubled hours of yesterday.

  For Death goes to and fro upon the earth;--
    It follows in the wake of marching men;
  And we who knew the olden peace and mirth,
    Will never, never know the same again.
      The scented wind across the boughs of May,
      Brings but the memory of some yesterday.




  SHIPS

  The great grey ships!  We saw them in our dreaming,
    The strong grey ships--the ships of our desire,
  Watched by the stars, and by the dawn's white gleaming,
    And followed by the winds that never tire.

  O, but we trusted them through days of weeping,
    Blessed them each one, and bid each one depart
  With all the brave we gave into its keeping,
    The priceless, garnered treasure of the heart!

  Long, long they haunted us when gales were blowing,--
    Dim wraiths of ships, like shadows in the rain;--
  Little we slept on winter nights of snowing,
    Thinking of those who might not sail again.

  Yet--dear grey ships--the spirits of the fearless,
    Lost many a day beneath the deepest blue,--
  The souls of mighty sailors, bright and tearless,
    Arose from out the sea to sail with you.

  And not alone you kept your banners flying,--
    And not alone you met each bitter day,--
  For dauntless ones,--unseen, and death-defying,
    Swept outward with you on your darkened way!




  JUNE

  Now by every meadow-side the buttercups blow--
    (O June, you are spendthrift of your gold!)
  Green are the uplands where the little lambs go,
    Green and glad the forests that are old.

  Once again the summer weaves on her magic loom,
    Cloth of clover,--fairy web of wheat;--
  Only Mary's alabaster box of perfume
    Ever made the passing wind more sweet.

  Even through the city where the dusty roads run,
    Blue runs now the river to the sea.
  Tender is the twilight when the long day is done,--
    Infinite the stars' tranquillity.

  Not forever are the rains or the winter snows,
    All these past--nor shall be overlong,--
  And with every lovely June cometh the rose,
    The sweet blue dusk,--a night-bird's wonder-song!




  OCTOBER GOES

  October goes, and its colors pass:
  At dawn there's a silver film on the grass,
  And the reeds are shining as pipes of glass,

  But yesterweek where the cloud waves rolled
  Down a wind-swept sky that was grey, and cold,
  Sailed the hunter's moon,--a galleon of gold!

  And now in the very depth of the night
  It is just a little flame, blown and white,
  Or a broken-winged moth on a weary flight.

  But the steadfast trees at the forest rim,
  And the pines in places scented and dim,
  Still wait for one hunter, and watch for him.

  And the wind in the branches whispers, "Why?"
  And the yellow leaves that go rustling by,
  Say only, "Remember," and sigh,--and sigh.




  THE LILY-POND

  On this little pool where the sun-beams lie,
  This tawny gold ring where the shadows die
  God doth enamel the blue of His sky.

  Through the scented dark when the night wind sighs
  He mirrors His stars where the ripples rise
  Till they glitter like prisoned fireflies.

  'Tis here that the beryl-green leaves uncurl,
  And here the lilies uplift and unfurl
  Their golden-lined goblets of carven pearl.

  When the grey of the eastern sky turns pink,
  Through the silver sedge at the pool's low brink
  The little lone field-mouse creeps down to drink.

  And creatures to whom only God is kind,
  The loveless small things, the slow, and the blind,
  Soft steal through the rushes, and comfort find.

  Oh, restless the river, restless the sea,
  Where the great ships go and the dead men be;
  The Lily-pond giveth but peace to me.











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Ballad of the Quest, by Virna Sheard

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BALLAD OF THE QUEST ***

***** This file should be named 36617.txt or 36617.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/6/1/36617/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
