The Project Gutenberg EBook of Hope Hathaway, by Frances Parker

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Hope Hathaway
       A Story of Western Ranch Life

Author: Frances Parker

Release Date: July 5, 2011 [EBook #36629]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOPE HATHAWAY ***




Produced by Peter Vachuska, Pat McCoy, Stephen Hope and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









    HOPE HATHAWAY


    [Illustration]




    _HOPE HATHAWAY_


    A Story of
    Western Ranch Life

    _BY
    FRANCES PARKER_


    [Illustration]


    BOSTON, MASS.
    C. M. CLARK PUBLISHING CO. (Inc.)
    1904



    _COPYRIGHT, 1904_

    _by_

    _C. M. CLARK PUBLISHING CO. (Inc.)
    BOSTON, MASS., U. S. A._


    _Entered at Stationers Hall, London_


    _Rights of Translation, Public Reading and
    Dramatization Reserved_




HOPE HATHAWAY




CHAPTER I


Hathaway's home-ranch spread itself miles over an open valley on the
upper Missouri. As far as the eye reached not a fence could be seen, yet
four barbed-wires, stretched upon good cotton-wood posts, separated the
ranch from the open country about.

Jim Hathaway was an old-time cattle-man. He still continued each summer
to turn out upon the range great droves of Texas steers driven north by
his cowboys, though at this time it was more profitable to ship in
Western grown stock. He must have known that this was so, for every year
his profits became less, yet it was the nature of the man to keep in the
old ruts, to cling to old habits.

The old-time cowboy was fast disappearing, customs of the once wild West
were giving way before an advancing civilization. He had seen its slow,
steady approach year after year, dreading--abhorring it. Civilization
was coming surely. What though his lands extended beyond his good
eyesight, were not these interlopers squatting on every mile of creek in
the surrounding country? The open range would some time be a thing of
the past. That green ridge of mountains to the west,--_his_ mountains,
his and the Indians, where he had enjoyed unmolested reign for many
years,--were they not filling them as bees fill a hive, so filling them
with their offensive bands of sheep and small cow-ranches that his
cattle had all they could do to obtain a footing?

On one of his daily rides he had come home tired and out of humor. The
discovery of a new fence near his boundary line had opened up an
unpleasant train of thought, and not even the whisky, placed beside him
by a placid-faced Chinese servant, could bring him into his usual jovial
spirits. After glancing through a week-old newspaper and finding in it
no solace for his ugly mood, he threw himself down upon his office
lounge, spreading the paper carefully over him. The Chinaman, by rare
intuition, divined his state of mind and stole cautiously into the room
to remove the empty glasses, at the same time keeping his eyes fixed
upon the large man under the newspaper.

Hathaway generally took a nap in the forenoon after returning from his
ride, for he was an early riser, and late hours at night made this habit
imperative. This day his mood brought him into a condition where he felt
no desire to sleep, so he concluded, but he must have fallen into a
doze, for the sharp tones of a girl's voice directly outside his window
brought him to his feet with a start.

"If that's what you're driving at you may as well roll up your bedding
and move on!" It was spoken vehemently, with all the distinctness of a
clear-toned voice. A man replied, but in more guarded tone, so that
Hathaway went to the window to catch his words.

"You don't know what you're talking about," he was saying. "This is my
home as well as yours, and I'd have small chance to carry out my word if
I went away, so I intend to stay right here. Do you know, Hope, when you
get mad like that you're so devilish pretty that I almost hate you! Look
at those eyes! You'd kill me if you could, wouldn't you? But you'll love
me yet, and marry me, too, don't forget that!"

"How can you talk to me so," demanded the girl, stepping back from him,
"after all my father has done,--made you his son,--given you everything
he would have given a son? Oh!" she cried passionately, "I can't _bear_
you in this new role! It is terrible, and I've looked upon you as a
_brother_! Now what are you? You've got no right to talk to me so--to
insist!"

"But your mother----" he interrupted.

"My _mother_!" weariedly. "Yes, of course! It would be all right there.
You have money--enough. A good enough match, no doubt; and she would be
freer to go,--would feel better to know that she had no more
responsibility here. You know your ground well enough _there_." Then
with growing anger: "Don't you ring in my mother on me! I tell you I
wouldn't marry you if I _never_ got married! I'm strong enough to fight
my own battles, and I will, and you'd better forget what you've said to
me and change the subject forever!" She walked away, her strong, lithe
body erect.

"But you're handsome, you brown devil!" he cried, taking one step and
clasping her roughly to him. She tore herself loose, her eyes blazing
with sudden fire, as Hathaway, white with anger, came suddenly around
the corner of his office and grasped the offender by the coat collar.
Then the slim young man was lifted, kicked, and tossed alternately from
off the earth, while the girl stood calmly to one side and watched the
performance, which did not cease until the infuriated man became
exhausted. Then the boy picked himself up and walked unsteadily toward
the building, against which he leaned to regain his breath while
Hathaway stood panting.

"Here, hold on a minute," roared the angry father as the young man moved
away. "I ain't done with you yet! Get your horse and get off this ranch
or I'll break every bone in your damn body! You will treat my girl like
that, will you? You young puppy!" The young fellow was whipped
undoubtedly, but gracefully, for he turned toward Hathaway and said
between swollen lips:

"You don't want to blame me too much, Uncle Jim. Just look at the girl!
Any man would find it worth risking his neck for her!" Then he moved
slowly away, while the girl's eyes changed from stern to merry. Her
father choked with rage.

"You--you--you----Get away from here, and don't talk back to me!" he
roared at the retreating figure.

The girl moved forward a few steps, calling: "That's right, Sydney, keep
your nerve! When you're ready to call it off we'll try to be friends
again." Without waiting for her cousin's reply she ran into the house,
while he lost no time in leaving the ranch, riding at a rapid gait
toward the nearest town. Hathaway watched him out of sight, then with a
nervous, bewildered shake of the head joined his wife and daughter at
luncheon.

"At last your father has come," sighed Mrs. Hathaway, as he appeared.
"Hope, ring for the chocolate; I'm almost famished. It seems to me,
James," turning to her husband with some impatience, "that you might
_try_ to be a little more prompt in getting to your meals--here we've
been waiting ages! You know I can't bear to wait for anyone!" She sighed
properly and unfolded her napkin.

"My dear," said Hathaway blandly, "I'm sorry to have kept you waiting,
but I've been somewhat occupied--somewhat."

"But you should always consider that your meals come first, even if your
wife and family do not," continued the lady. "Where is Sydney? The dear
boy is generally so very prompt."

The effect of her words was not apparent. Her husband appeared
absent-minded and the meal began.

The daughter, Hope, with quiet dignity befitting a matron, occupied the
head of the table, as she had done ever since her mother shifted the
responsibilities of the household to her young shoulders. When this
question was asked she gave her father a quick glance. Would he
acknowledge the truth? Evidently not, for he began immediately to talk
about the new fence near his boundary line. It was a shame, he said,
that these people were settling in around him.

"The land's no good," he declared. "Nearly all the water around here
that's any account is on my place. All on earth these hobos are taking
it up for is in expectation that I'll buy them out. Well, maybe I will,
and again maybe I won't. I'd do most anything to get rid of them, but I
can't buy the earth." At this Hope smiled, showing a flash of strong,
white teeth.

"And if you could buy the earth, what would you do with these people?"
she asked, her face settling into its natural quiet. Her mother gave her
the usual look of amazement.

"Hope, I must ask you not to say impertinent things to your father. You
no doubt meant to be witty, but you were none the less rude. Why do you
allow her to say such things to you, James? You have succeeded in
spoiling her completely. Now if _I_ had been allowed to send her away to
school she would have grown up with better manners."

Hathaway passed his cup to be refilled, making no answer to his wife's
outburst. Perhaps he had learned in his years of experience that the
less said the better. At any rate he made no effort to defend his
daughter--his only child, and dear to him, too. If she had expected that
he would defend her it was only for a passing instant, then she returned
to her natural gravity. Her face had few expressions. Its chief charm
lay in its unchanging immobility, its utter quiet, behind which gleamed
something of the girl's soul. When her rare smile came, lighting it up
wonderfully, she was irresistible--in her anger, magnificent.

Ordinarily she would not have been noticed at first glance, except,
perhaps, for the exceptionally fine poise of her strong, slim body. She
was a true daughter of the West, tanned almost as brown as an Indian
maid, and easily might have passed for a half-breed, with her blue-black
eyes and hair of the darkest brown. But if she had Indian blood she did
not know it. Her mother, during the season, a flitting butterfly of New
York society, a Daughter of the Revolution by half a dozen lines of
descent, would have been horrified at the mere thought.

The girl herself would not have cared had she been born and raised in an
Indian camp. She had what Mrs. Hathaway termed queer ideas, due, as she
always took occasion to explain to her friends who visited the ranch, to
the uncivilized life that she had insisted upon living.

Hope had been obstinate in refusing to leave the ranch. Threats and
punishments were unavailing. When a young child she had resolved never
to go away to school, and had set her small foot down so firmly that her
mother was obliged to yield. Hathaway was secretly glad of this, for
the ranch was home to him, and he would not leave it for any length of
time.

The little girl was great company to him, for his wife was away months
at a time, preferring the gayety of her New York home to the quiet,
isolated ranch on the prairie. Some people were unkind enough to say
that it was a relief to Hathaway to have the place to himself, and
certain it is that he never made any objections to the arrangement.
Their only child, Hope, was educated on the ranch by the best
instructors procurable, and readily acquired all the education that was
necessary to her happiness.

At Mrs. Hathaway's outburst the girl made no effort to defend herself,
and was well aware from former experiences that her father would not
come to her aid. That he was afraid of her mother she would not admit.
It seemed so weak and foolish. She had exalted ideas of what a man
should be. That her father fell below her standard she would not
acknowledge. She loved him so, was proud of his good points, and in
many ways he was a remarkable man, his greatest weakness, if it could be
called that, being his apparent fear of his wife. Her dominion over him,
during her occasional visits at the ranch, was absolute. Hope shut her
eyes to this, telling herself that it was caused by his desire to make
her happy during these rare opportunities.

Hathaway did not respond to his wife's somewhat uncalled-for remarks,
but after a moment of silence adroitly changed the subject by inquiring
of Hope who it was that had ridden up to the ranch just as he left that
morning.

"It must have been Joe Harris, from the mountains," she replied, "for he
was here shortly after you rode away. I thought he was out hunting those
cattle of his that I saw over on Ten Mile the other day, but he informed
me that it was not cattle he was hunting this time, but a
_school-teacher_. They have some sort of a country school up there in
his neighborhood, and I think, from what he said, and what some of the
boys told me, that he must be the whole school board--clerk, trustees,
and everything. He was on his way over to the Cross Bar ranch to see if
he could secure that young fellow who came out from the East last fall.
One of the boys told him that this young man had given up his calling
indefinitely and was going on the round-up instead, but Harris rode on
to try what persuasion would do."

"That _dreadful_ man," sighed Mrs. Hathaway. "He is that _squaw-man_
with those _terrible_ children! Hope, I wish you wouldn't talk so
intimately with such people; it's below your dignity. If Sydney were
here he would agree with me. Where _is_ Sydney? Do you know where he
went? He will miss his luncheon entirely, the poor boy!"

Hope looked searchingly at her father, but he ignored her glance. Surely
he would say something now! The question trembled upon the air, but she
waited involuntarily for him to speak.

"I've asked you a question, Hope. Why don't you answer; are you dumb?"
said her mother, with a show of impatience. "Where _is_ Sydney?"

"I don't know _just_ where he is," replied the girl at length, "but I
think it would be safe to say that he is riding toward town; at least he
was heading that way the last I saw of him."

"Toward town!" gasped her mother. "Why, he was going to drive in for the
Cresmonds to-morrow! You must be mistaken. Please do not include me in
your jokes!" Then, turning to Hathaway, continued: "James, where _did_
he go?"

Hathaway moved uneasily under the direct gaze of his daughter. "I
haven't the least idea," he finally answered. "I can't keep track of
everyone on the ranch." The girl's face turned pale under her tan. She
rose from the table and stood tall and straight behind her chair, her
clear eyes direct upon her father.

"Why don't you tell her," she cried with passion. Then the usual calm
settled over her face. She turned to her mother. "I may as well tell
you that we had a little scene this morning, Sydney and I. He proposed
to me." She hesitated an instant, turned and caught her father's
nervous, anxious look direct. He was watching her uneasily. She
continued deliberately: "I refused him--and sent him away from the
ranch. You may as well know all about it."

"_You_ sent him away from the ranch," gasped Mrs. Hathaway.

"Yes," answered the girl quietly. It was her first lie.

"You _dared_ send him away--away from his own home!" almost screamed
Mrs. Hathaway, her rage increasing with every word. "_You dared!_ _You_,
my own daughter--ungrateful, inconsiderate----You _know_ how I love that
boy, my poor Jennie's son! What business had you sending him away, or
even refusing him, I'd like to know! What if he is your cousin--your
second cousin? Oh, you have no consideration for me, _none_--you never
had! How can I ever endure it here on this ranch three whole months
without Sydney! It was bad enough before!" She wrung her hands and rose
sobbing from the table. "James, do go after that poor boy. Say that I am
willing he should marry Hope if he is so foolish as to want her. Tell
him not to mind anything she says, but that he _must_ come home. You
will go at once, won't you?"

She placed both hands imploringly on his arm.

"Yes, I'll go after him to-morrow, so stop your worrying," he answered
soothingly. "Hope, fetch your mother a glass of wine, don't you see
she's all upset?"

The girl brought the wine and handed it to her father, but his eyes
shifted uneasily from her clear, steady ones. He led his unhappy wife
from the room, leaving Hope alone with the empty wine glass in her hand.
She stood so for a moment, then walked to the table and set the tiny
glass down, but, oddly, raised it up again and looked at it closely.

"As empty as my life is now," she thought. "As empty as this home is for
me. I have no one--father, mother--no one." A queer look crossed her
face; determination settled over her, as with a sudden, vehement motion
she shattered the frail glass upon the floor. A single thought, and a
new life had opened before her.




CHAPTER II


Upon the slope of a great grass-covered hill, among other hills, larger
and grass-covered also, stood a small log school-house. A hundred yards
away, between this isolated building and the dingy road stretched
through the mountain valley, grew a scrubby clump of choke-cherry brush.
Some boys crouched low upon the ground behind these bushes, screened
from sight of possible passers-by, and three pairs of eyes looked
through the budding branches, intently scanning the road at the crest of
hill to the left. Finally a dark speck appeared upon its gray surface.
The youngest boy shivered, a tightening of expression came over the
leader's face. He drew his shotgun closer to him, resting it upon his
knees. Suddenly he laughed unpleasantly and kicked the child who had
shivered.

"You ninny, quit your shakin'! Can't you tell a steer from a man? You'll
make a nice feller when you grow up, 'fraid of your own shadow! You'd
better git into the school-house an' hide under a bench, if you're goin'
to be scared out of your skin. Baby! Umph, a _steer_, too! That blame
black one that won't stay with the bunch!" The big boy brought his
awkward length down upon the ground, continuing in a lower tone: "I'd a
darn sight ruther be on my horse drivin' him back on the range than
waitin' here for any fool school-teacher! But we've got this job on
hand. No schoolin' for me--I'm too old. It'll do for babies that shiver
at a steer, but I've got other business, an' so's Dan. I'm thinkin' if
the old man wants school up here he'll have to teach it himself! What
does he think we'd go to the trouble of running away from the Mission
for if we wanted to go to school? Umph, he must think we're plumb
locoed!"

"If father catches us in this he'll lick us to death," interposed the
youngest boy.

"Not much, he won't. He'll have to ride a faster horse than mine or
Dan's if he catches us! We'll ride over to the Indian camp, an' you can
stay here an' take the lickin'! He'll be glad enough to see us come back
in a month or two, I'll bet! And he's goin' to find out right now that
it ain't no use to bring any doggoned teacher up here to teach this
outfit. Ain't that so, Dan? We know enough of learnin'. I bet this new
fellow won't stay long enough to catch his breath!"

A boy, who in looks and size was the exact counterpart of the speaker,
asked in a sweet, soft-toned voice: "What if the old man takes a notion
to come along to the school-house with him--what'll we do then, Dave?"

"Do! why, what do you suppose we'll do?" answered his twin, settling
down closer to the ground. "Why, we'll hide these here guns an' walk up
to the school-house like little sheep, and _then_ lay low and watch our
chance when the old man _ain't_ around. I ain't figurin' on any lickin'
to-day, you can bet your boots on that, but I'll take a darn good one
before any more schoolin'! We've got the medicine to fix
school-teachers for him this year, I reckon!" And patting his gun, the
breed boy gave a satisfied grunt and settled down nearer to the ground.

"You bet we have," softly assented his twin. "But what if the fellow
don't scare at them blank cartridges?"

"Then we'll try duck-shot on him," answered the first readily. "What'd
you think--we're a lot of babies? I reckon we've got fight in us! You've
got to stick to us, Ned, even if you ain't as old as Dan and me. Ain't
that so, Dan?"

"Yes, unless he wants to get whaled half to death," sweetly answered the
soft-voiced twin.

"I'm no coward," exclaimed the sturdy little fellow. "If you boys _dare_
lick me I'll shoot the two of you!" His small black eyes flashed
ominously. For an instant he glared at the older boys, all the savagery
in his young soul expressed in his countenance. The soft-voiced twin
gave a short laugh. Something like admiration shone in his eyes for the
young lad, but he retorted sweetly: "You shivered! Don't you go an' do
it again!" At that instant his sharp eyes sighted an object just
appearing at the top of the hill. He punched the leader vigorously: "Now
down on your knees, he's comin' sure this time!"

"And he's alone," said the bold leader joyfully. "We won't have no
trouble with him. He rides like a tenderfoot, all right. Wait till he
gets down by that rock there, then let him have it, one after the
other--first me, then Dan, then you, Ned. I'll bet my horse an' saddle
that he'll go back quicker'n he's comin'!"

"What if that ain't the feller we want?" gently asked Dan.

"We'll wait till he turns in here, an' then we'll know. They ain't
nobody else goin' to come along this way just now. Lord, don't he ride
slow, though! Now I'll shoot first, don't forget."

"His saddle blanket's flying on this side, and he's got a red shirt on,"
said the other twin. "He's lookin' over this way. Yes, he's comin' here
all right. Let him have it, Dave, before he gits any closer!"

As he spoke, the approaching rider left the main road and turned up the
dimly marked trail toward the school-house. The forward twin waited an
instant, then, aiming his shotgun carelessly toward the stranger, fired.
At the signal a volley rang out from behind the bushes. As quickly the
horse took fright, stopped stock still, then wheeled, and bolted with
utmost speed directly toward the patch of brush, passing so near that
the boys drew in their legs and crawled snake-like under the protection
of the branches.

"Good Lord," gasped the leader, as the horse raced past, on up the
grassy slope of a hill, "it's a girl!"

Two minutes later the bushes were quickly parted over three very
uncomfortable boys, and a red shirt-waisted girl looked sternly in at
them.

"You boys come out of there this minute! Who did you take me for that
you were trying to frighten me to death? Or is that the way you treat
ladies up here in the mountains? Come out immediately and explain
yourselves!"

The soft-voiced twin crept out first, and before scrambling to his feet
began apologizing: "We didn't know it was _you_. We thought it was a
man. Don't hurt us! We wouldn't a done it for nothin' if we'd thought it
was you. We were layin' for a school-teacher that father got to teach
this school, an' we took you for him." Then more hopefully as he
regained his feet: "But our guns wasn't loaded with nothing but blank
cartridges. We was just goin' to frighten him away so that we wouldn't
have no school this summer. It's too fine weather to be in school,
anyway." He looked up into the girl's uncompromising face. "But now I
reckon our hides are cooked, for you'll tell your father." This last
questioningly.

"And you wouldn't like my father to know about this--or _your_ father
either, I suppose?"

"We'd do most anything if you wouldn't tell on us, Miss Hathaway!"

"Do I look like a girl that would tell things?" she flashed back. "I
usually fight my own battles; if necessary, I can use _this_." A quick
movement and she placed before their faces a reliable looking
six-shooter.

"We know all about that! You ain't a-goin' to hurt us, are you?"
exclaimed Dave.

"You know all about _that_, do you? Well, that's good. Now tell me your
names."

"We're the Harris kids," answered Dave quickly.

"I know you're the Harris kids, but I want your first names. _Yours_,"
she commanded, looking at the soft-voiced twin and absently fingering
the weapon.

"Mine's Dan. _He's_ Dave, an' that one's Ned," answered the boy in one
soft, quick breath; then added: "We know all about how you can shoot.
You're a dead one!" His face took on a certain shrewd look and he
continued divertingly: "I'll throw up my cap an' you shoot at it. I'd
like to have the hole in it."

Miss Hathaway seemed suddenly amused.

"You are a very bright boy! And your name is Dan--Daniel. You want a
souvenir? Well, all right, but not just now. I've got other business. I
came to teach your school." She hesitated, looking keenly at their
astonished faces. "Yes, your father has engaged me--hired me, so I think
we'd better go inside and begin work, don't you? We'll overlook this
shooting affair. I don't know as I blame you very much for not wanting a
man teacher, but of course the shooting was very wrong, and you
shouldn't have tried to frighten anyone; but we'll forget all about it.
But you are not going to have a man teacher, and I am different. I am
going to live at your house, too, so of course we'll be good
friends--ride together, hunt, and have great times, _after school_.
During school we _work_, remember that! Now one of you boys please stake
out my horse for me and then we will go inside and start school. You
boys must help me get things to working."

Before she had finished speaking the soft-voiced twin caught her horse,
which was grazing near. Dave, more clumsily built, followed him, while
the girl took the small boy by the hand and started toward the
school-house. At the door she turned in time to see the twins struggling
at her horse's head. They were about ready to come to blows.

"I'll take care of that horse myself," said Dave gruffly, attempting to
force the other boy's hand from the bridle.

"Don't fight, boys, or _I_ will take care of the horse," called the new
school-teacher severely; thereupon the soft-voiced twin released his
hold and walked demurely up to the school-house.

"Anyway," he explained as he went inside, "Dave's the youngest, and so I
let him have the horse."

"I never was so frightened in my life," thought the girl, as she
arranged the small school for the day. "But the only way to manage these
little devils is to bluff them."




CHAPTER III


A group composed principally of cowboys, squaw-men, and breeds squatted
and lounged outside of Joe Harris' house. Numerous tousley-headed boys,
with worn overalls and bare feet, played noisily on the outskirts, dogs
and pigs scurried about everywhere, while in the doorway of the dingy,
dirt-covered kitchen in the rear hovered a couple of Indian women and
several small dark-skinned children. Somewhere out of sight, probably
over the cook-stove, were two or three nearly grown girls. Such, at
supper time, was the usual aspect of Joe Harris' cabins, varied
occasionally by more or less Indians, whose tepees stood at one side, or
more or less dogs, but always the same extraordinary amount of squealing
pigs and children.

The huge figure of Joe Harris, squaw-man, cattle-man, and general
progressive-man, was prominent in the center of the group. He was by all
odds the greatest and most feared man in that portion of the country.
His judgment as well as his friendship was sought after by all the small
ranchers about, and also, it was rumored, by a certain class of cattle
owners commonly called rustlers. To be Joe Harris' friend meant safety,
if nothing more; to be his enemy meant, sooner or later, a search for a
new country, or utter ruination. He brought with him, years before from
the north, a weird record, no tangible tale of which got about, but the
mysterious rumor, combined with the man's striking personality, his huge
form, bearded face, piercing blue eyes, and great voice, all combined to
make people afraid of him. He was considered a dangerous man. At this
date he possessed one thousand head of good cattle, a squaw, and fifteen
strong, husky children, and, being a drinking man, possessed also an
erratic disposition. He was very deferential to his Indian wife, a good
woman, but he ruled his offspring with a rod of iron. His children
feared him. Some of them possessed his nature to such a marked degree
that they hated him more than they feared him, which is saying
considerable. Even as they played about the group of men they watched
him closely, as they had learned by instinct at their mother's breast.

In the midst of loud talk from the assorted group, a tiny girl, the
great man's favorite child, was sent out from the kitchen to tell them
that supper was ready. The little thing pulled timidly at the large
man's coat. He stooped and picked her up in his arms, leading the hungry
throng into the house, where a rude supper was eaten in almost absolute
silence. Occasionally a pig would venture into the room, to be
immediately kicked out by the man who sat nearest the door. Then the
children that played about the house would chase the offending animal
with sticks and shrill cries.

In a room adjoining this one a girl sat alone in dejected attitude, her
face buried between two very brown hands. As the men tramped into the
house she rose from the trunk upon which she had been sitting and
crossed to the farther side of the room. There, with difficulty, she
forced up a small dingy window looking out upon the mountains at the
back of the ranch--a clear view, unobstructed by scurrying dogs, pigs,
or children. She leaned far out, drawing in deep, sweet breaths, and
wondering if she would follow the impulse to climb out and run to the
top of the nearest hill. She thought not, then fell again to wondering
how she should ever accustom herself to this place, these new
surroundings. She heard the men tramp out of the house, followed soon by
a timid rap upon her door, then moved quickly across the room, an odd
contrast to her rude surroundings.

"You can have supper now," said a tall girl in a timid voice. "The men
are through. We ain't got much, Miss Hathaway."

"A little is enough for me," said the girl, smiling. "Don't call me
_Miss_, please. It doesn't seem just right--_here_. Call me Hope. It
will make me feel more at home, you know. You're _Mary_, aren't you?
_You_ haven't been to supper, have you?"

"Mother said you were to eat alone," answered the breed girl.

"Oh, no, surely I may eat with you girls! I'd much prefer it. You know
it would be lonely all by myself, don't you think so?"

"We ain't going to eat just yet, not till after the boys get theirs,"
said the Harris girl a trifle less timidly.

"Then I will wait, too," Hope decided. "Come in, Mary, and stay till I
unpack some of these things. Just a few waists and extra riding skirts.
I suppose I am to hang them up here on these nails, am I not?" When she
had finished unpacking she turned to the breed girl, who had become
quite friendly and was watching her interestedly, and explained: "Just a
few things that I thought would be suitable to wear up here, for
teaching; but, do you know, I'd feel lots better if I had a dress like
yours--a calico one. But I have this--this old buck-skin one. See, it
has bead-work on it. Isn't it pretty?"

"Oh!" exclaimed the girl, as Hope held it up for inspection. "_Isn't_ it
lovely!"

"Very old and dingy-looking, but I'll put it on and wear it," she
decided.

A few minutes later, when they had arranged the small, barren room
somewhat more comfortably, Hope Hathaway, attired in her dress of Indian
make, joined the Harris girls at their frugal meal. Her dark hair was
parted in the center and hung in two long braids down her back. That,
combined with the beaded dress, fringed properly, her black eyes, and
quiet expressionless face, made a very picturesque representation of an
Indian girl. Truly she was one of them. The breed girls must have
thought something of the same, for they became at their ease, talking
very much as girls talk the world over. There were three of them between
the ages of fourteen and eighteen, and Hope soon found herself well
entertained and almost contented. The loneliness soon wore away, and
before realizing it she began to feel at home--almost one of them, true
to her spirit of adaptability. But yet for her supper she ate only two
hard boiled eggs.

After the meal the breed girls walked with her down to the spring-house
where the milk and butter was kept. From underneath the small log
building a large spring crept lazily out, spreading itself as it went
into a miniature lake which lay between the house buildings and the
stables. It was the only thing on the ranch worthy of notice, and, in a
country barren of water excepting in the form of narrow winding creeks,
it was pleasing to the eye.

The men and boys had disappeared, the younger children were with their
mother, and even the pigs had drowsily gone to their sleeping quarters.
The place seemed strangely quiet after its recent noise and commotion.

Finally the girls returned to the house to help with the small children,
while in the deepening twilight Hope remained alone beside the lake. The
water into which she looked and dreamed was shallow, but the deepening
shadows concealed that fact. To her fancy it might have been bottomless.
Someone rode up on horseback, but she paid no attention until a
pleasant voice close beside her startled her from her reverie.

"Can I trouble you for a drink of that water, please? I have often
wished for one as I rode past; it looks so clear and cold." She bowed
her head in assent, and, bringing a cup from the spring-house, stooped
and filled it for him. He thanked her and drank the water eagerly.

"It is good, just as I thought, and cold as ice," he said; then,
noticing the girl more closely, continued: "I have been talking with
your father over there at the corral, and am returning home."

"With my _father_," emphasized the girl. The young man noted with
wonderment the richness of her voice, the soft, alluring grace of every
movement. Someone had jokingly told him before he left his old-country
home that he would bring back an Indian wife, as one of historical fame
had done centuries before. He laughed heartily at the time--he smiled
now, but thought of it. He thought of it again many times that evening
and cursed himself for such folly. Perhaps there was Indian medicine in
the cup she gave him, or perhaps he looked an instant too long into
those dark, unfathomable eyes. He found himself explaining:

"Yes; your father has agreed to sell me that team I have been wanting. I
am coming back for the horses to-morrow."

"My _father_," she began again. "Oh, yes, of course. I thought----Would
you like another drink of the water?"

"Yes, if you please." It seemed good to stand there in the growing
darkness, and another drink would give him fully a minute. He watched
her supple figure as she stooped to refill the tin cup. What perfect
physiques some of these Indian girls possessed! He did not wonder so
much now that some men forgot their families and names for these
dark-skinned women.

"I am coming to-morrow for the horses--in the morning," he repeated
foolishly, returning the cup. She did not speak again, so bidding her a
courteous good-night he mounted his horse and rode slowly into the
gathering dusk.

Hope stood there for a moment, returning to her study of the water; then
two of the breed girls came toward her. One of them was giggling
audibly.

"We heard him," said Mary. "He thought you was one of us. It'll be fun
to fool him. He's new out here, and don't know much, anyhow. He's Edward
Livingston, an Englishman, an' has got a sheep ranch about three miles
over there."

"A _sheep-man_!" exclaimed Hope, "Isn't that too bad!"

"You hate sheep-men, too?" asked the older girl.

"No, I don't know that I _hate_ them, but there's a feeling--a sort of
something one can't get over, something that grows in the air if you're
raised among cattle. I despise sheep, detest them. They spoil our cattle
range." Then after a short pause: "It's too bad he isn't a cattle-man!"

"That's what I think," said Mary, "because the men are all gettin' down
on him. He runs his sheep all over their range, an' they're makin' a big
talk."

"You shouldn't tell things, Mary, they're only talkin', anyway,"
reproved the older girl.

"_Talkin'!_ Well, I should say so, an' you bet they mean business! But
Miss Hathaway--Hope--don't care, an' I don't care neither, if he gets
into a scrape; only he's got such a nice, pleasant face, an' he ain't on
to the ways out here yet, neither--an' I don't care _what_ the men say!
Tain't as if he meant anything through real meanness."

"That's so," replied the older girl, "but maybe she don't want to hear
such talk. It's bedtime, anyway; let's go in."

"Yes, I'm tired," said Hope wearily, adding as she bade Mary good-night
at her door: "I do hope he won't get into any trouble."




CHAPTER IV


The three months' school had begun in earnest. Each day Hope found new
interest in her small class and in her surroundings. She readily learned
to dispense with all the comforts and luxuries to which she had been
born, substituting instead a rare sense of independence, an expansion of
her naturally wild spirit. She dispensed also with conventionalities,
except such as were ingrained with her nature, yet she was far from
happy in the squaw-man's family. She could have ridden home in a few
hours, but remembered too keenly her mother's anger and her father's
parting words. He said to her:

"You have hurt your mother and spoiled her summer by the stand you have
taken. You are leaving here against my wishes and against your own
judgment. The only thing I've got to say is this: don't come back here
till you've finished your contract up there, till you've kept your word
to the letter. No one of my blood is going back on their word. A few
rough knocks will do you good."

He probably discovered in a very few hours how much he loved his girl,
how she had grown into his life, for the next day after she had left he
drove to the distant town and hunted up his wife's nephew, who had
caused all this trouble.

"You deserve another thrashing," he said when he had found him, "but now
you've got to turn to and do what you can to bring things back to where
they were. Hope's left home and 's gone to teaching school up in the
mountains at Harris'. Now, what in thunder am I going to do about it?
She can't live there with those breeds. Lord, I slept there once and the
fleas nearly ate me up!"

The boy's face turned a trifle pale. "I'm sorry, uncle, about this. I
never thought she would do such a thing, on my account--not after I
left. And she's gone to Joe Harris' place! I know all about that, a
regular nest of low breeds and rustlers. She can't stay there!"

"But she will, just the same," announced the man, "because when she told
me that she'd promised Harris, and that she was going, anyway, I told
her to go and take her medicine till the school term was ended."

"But surely you won't allow her to stay, to _live_ at Joe Harris'! There
are other people up there, white people, with whom she could live. Why,
uncle, you can't allow her to stay there!"

"Why not? She's made her nest, let her lie in it for awhile--fleas and
all. It won't hurt her any. But I'm going to keep a close eye on her
just the same. I couldn't go up there myself on account of your aunt's
being here, but I was thinking about it all last night, and I finally
concluded to send a bunch of cattle up there, beef cattle, and hold 'em
for shipment. Now I came here to town to tell you that your aunt wants
you to come back to the ranch, but you're not going to come back, see?
You're going up there and hold those cattle for a spell, and keep your
eye on my girl. I don't give a damn about the steers--it's the girl; but
you've got to have an excuse for being there. Your aunt's got to have an
excuse, too. These cattle--there's two hundred head of 'em--they're
_yours_--see? I'll have 'em all vented to-morrow, for in case Hope
thought they wasn't yours she might catch on. You can ship 'em in the
fall for your trouble. She won't think anything of you holding cattle up
there, because the range is so good. So you look out for her, see how
she is every day, and send me word by McCullen, who I'll send along with
you. You can take a cook and another man if you need one. And now don't
let her catch on that I had a hand in this! Seen anything of them blame
New Yorkers yet?" Young Carter shook his head absent-mindedly. He was
filled with delight at this clever scheme of his uncle's. "No? Well,
mebbe there's a telegram. Your aunt expected me to take them back to the
ranch to-morrow. Never mind thanking me for the cattle. You do your part
to the letter. Send me word every day and don't forget. And another
thing, just quit your thinking about marrying that girl, and keep your
hands off of her! Remember she's in a wild country up there, among tough
customers, and she probably knows it by now, and the _chances are_ she's
got a gun buckled onto her!"

He was right. Hope found herself among too many rough characters to feel
safe without a gun concealed beneath her blouse or jacket, yet rough as
the men were, they treated this quiet-faced girl with the utmost
respect, perhaps fearing her. Her reputation as a phenomenal shot was
not far-fetched, and had reached the remotest corners of the country.
She had played with a gun as a baby, had been allowed to use one when a
wee child, and had grown up with the passion for firearms strong within
her. Shooting was a gift with her, perfected by daily practice. In one
of her rooms at the ranch the girl had such a collection of firearms as
would have filled the heart of many an old connoisseur with longing. It
was her one passion, perhaps not a more expensive one than most women
possess; yet, for a girl, unique. Her father gratified her in this, just
as other fathers gratify their girls in their desire for music, art,
fine clothes, or all, as the case may be. But the things that most girls
love so well had small place in the life of Hope Hathaway. She cared
little for music, and less for fine clothes. Society she detested,
declaring that a full season in New York would kill her. Perhaps if she
had not been filled with the determination to stay away from it, its
excitement might finally have won her; but she was of the West. Its
vastness filled her with a love that was part of her nature. Its
boundless prairies, its freedom, were greater than all civilization had
to offer her.

She brought with her to the mountains a long-distance rifle and a brace
of six-shooters. A shotgun she seldom used, for the reason that to her
quick, accurate eye a rifle did better, more varied work, and answered
every purpose of a shotgun. It was said that each bird she marked on the
wing dropped at her feet in two pieces, its head severed smoothly. This
may not have been true always, but the fact remains that the birds
dropped when she touched the trigger.

She was an odd character for a girl, reserved and quiet even with her
most intimate friends, rough and impulsive as a boy sometimes, in speech
and actions, again as dignified as the proudest queen. Her friends never
knew how to take her, because they never understood her. She left, so
far along her trail in life, nothing but shattered ideals and delusions,
but she had not become cynical or embittered, only wiser. After her
first week's stay at Harris' she began to realize that perhaps she had
always expected too much of people. Here were people of whom she had
expected nothing opening up new side lights on life that she had never
thought to explore. Life seemed full of possibilities to her now, at
least, immediate possibilities.

She had not met again the courteous, smooth-faced young man who had
mistaken her for an Indian girl, though he had come the next morning for
the horses, and had ridden past the ranch more than once. Yet she had
not forgotten the incident, or what the Harris girls had told her, for
daily as she passed the group of loungers on her return from school she
heard his name gruffly spoken, intermixed with oaths. They certainly
meant mischief, and she was curious to know what it was.

The first school week had ended. On Friday night she wondered how she
could manage to exist through Saturday and Sunday, but Saturday morning
found her in the saddle, accompanied by the three largest Harris boys,
en route for the highest peaks of the mountains.

"This is something like living," she exclaimed, pulling in her horse
after the first few miles. "How pretty all of this is! What people call
scenery, I suppose. But give me the prairie, smooth and level as far as
the eye can reach! There's nothing like it in all the world! The open
prairie, a cool, spring day like this, and a horse that will go till
it's ready to fall dead--that is life! Who is it that lives over there?"
she asked, pointing toward some ranch buildings, nestled in a low, green
valley.

"That's the Englishman's place," answered the soft-voiced twin.

"Sheep-man," explained Dave disgustedly. "See them sheds?"

"Oh, the new man by the name of Livingston. Do you boys know him?" asked
the girl curiously.

"Nope! Don't want to, neither. Seen him lots of times, though," answered
Dave.

"He's come in here without bein' asked, an' thinks he can run the whole
country," explained the soft-voiced twin.

"Is he trying to run the whole country?" asked Hope.

"Well, he's runnin' his sheep over everybody's range, an' they ain't
goin' to stand for it," replied the boy.

"But what can they do about it? Have they asked him to move his sheep?"

"No. What's the use after they've been over the range--spoiled it,
anyhow. No, you bet they ain't goin' to ask him nothing!"

The girl thought for a moment, absently pulling the "witches' knots"
from her horse's mane, while it climbed a hill at a swinging gait, then
continued as though talking to herself:

"Once upon a time a young man took what money he had in the world, and
going into a far-away, wild country started in business for himself. He
had heard, probably, that there was more money in sheep than in cattle.
A great many people do hear that, so he bought sheep, thinking, perhaps,
to make a pile of money in a few years, and then go back to his home and
marry some nice, good girl of his choice. It takes money to get married
and make a home, and to do mostly anything, they say, and so this young
man bought sheep, for no one goes into the sheep business or any other
kind of business unless they want to make money. They don't generally do
it for fun. And, of course, he thought, as they all do, to get rich
immediately. He made a great mistake in the beginning, being extremely
ignorant. He brought his sheep to a cattle country, where there were no
other sheep near his own. All the men around him hated sheep, as men
who own cattle always do, and hating the sheep, they thought they hated
the sheep-man also, who really was a very harmless young man, and
wouldn't have offended them for anything. But these men's dislike for
the sheep grew daily, and so their fancied dislike for the young man
grew in proportion.

"The men in the country would meet together in little groups, and every
day some man would have some new grievance to tell the others. It
finally got on their brains, until all they could think or talk about
was this new man and his sheep. The more they thought and talked, the
more angry they became, until finally they forgot that he was another
man like themselves--in all likelihood a good, honest man, who would not
have done them wrong knowingly. They forgot a great many things, and all
they could think about night or day was how they could do something to
injure his business or himself. They got so after awhile that they
talked only in low whispers about him, taking great pains that their
families, children, and even their big _boys_, should not know their
plans. They made a great mistake in not taking their boys into their
confidence, because _boys_ are very often more reliable than men, and
can always keep a secret a whole lot better. But perhaps the fathers
knew that the boys had very good sense and would not go into anything
like that without a better reason than they had, which was no reason at
all.

"I never heard just what they planned to do to this newcomer to get rid
of him and his sheep, but I know how it had to end." She looked up,
searching each boy's intent, astonished face.

"Say, what're you drivin' at, anyway? You can't fool me--it's _him_!"
exclaimed Dave, pointing toward the sheep-ranch. "You're makin' up a
story about him!"

"How'd you know all that?" asked the quicker, soft-voiced twin.

"Know all that. Why, how did you boys know all that? I suppose that I
have ears, too--and I've heard of such things before," she replied.

"But you don't know how the end'll be. That's one thing you don't know,"
declared the soft-voiced twin. "You can't know that."

"She might be a fortune-teller like grandmother White Blanket," laughed
the other.

"Is that old squaw in the farthest tepee from the house your own
grandmother?" asked the girl.

"Yep, an' she ain't no squaw, either! She's a French half-breed," he
said, with an unconscious proud uplifting of the shoulders.

Hope laughed slightly. "What's the other half?" she asked. The boy gave
her a look of deep commiseration.

"I thought you had more learnin' than that! Why, the other half's white,
of course."

"I beg your pardon!" gasped the girl. "My education along those lines
must have been somewhat neglected. I had an idea that those were Indians
camped down at your place. But French half-breeds,--a mixture of _white_
and _French_,--that's a different matter!" She stopped her horse and
laughed with the immoderation of a boy. "That is rich," she cried. "If
ever I go to New York again I shall spring that on the Prince. '_Mon
Dieu!_' he will exclaim. 'What then are we, Mademoiselle, _we_, the
_aristocracy_--the great nation of the _French_?'" Her face sobered.
"But this is not the question. _I_ do know how this will end, and I am
not a fortune-teller, either. I know that the ones who are in the wrong
about this matter will get the worst of it. Sometimes it means states
prison, sometimes death--at all events, something not expected. I tell
you, boys, I wouldn't want to be on the wrong side of this for anything!
And do you know, I am real glad that your father doesn't need your help.
We will take a little side of our own and watch things--what do you say?
It will be lots of fun, and we'll know all the time that we are in the
right, and maybe we can prevent them from doing any real wrong to
themselves." She watched them closely to see how they accepted the
suggestion. Her inspiration might be considered a reckless one, but
their young minds lent themselves readily to her influence.

"The old man licked me this mornin'," growled Dave. "An' he can go
straight to the hot place now, for all o' me! I'm goin' off on the
round-up, anyway, next year."

"You boys know, don't you, that if your father ever found out that _I_
knew anything about this thing, he would probably give me a licking,
too--and send me out of the country?" This for effect.

"I'd like to see him lay hands on you," roared Dave. "I'd fill him so
full of lead that--that----"

Words failed him.

"I'd kill him if he did, Miss Hathaway," exclaimed the small boy, Ned,
with quiet assurance that brought a hint of laughter to the girl's face.
The soft-voiced twin rode up very close to her.

"He ain't goin' to find it out, an' don't you worry; we'll all stand by
you while there's one of us left!"

"All right, boys, we're comrades now. I'll tell you what we'll do; we'll
form a band--brigade--all by ourselves. I am commanding officer and you
are my faithful scouts. How's that?" Hope's fancy was leading her away.
"Come on," she cried, "let's race this flat!"

The self-appointed commanding officer reached the smooth valley far in
advance of her faithful scouts, who yelled in true Indian fashion as
they rode up with her.

"I'll run you a mile an' beat you all hollow," declared Dave. "But on a
two hundred yard stretch like this here place my horse don't have no
chance to get started."

"I'll bet my quirt against yourn that you lose," said the soft-voiced
twin.

"Keep your quirt! I don't want it, nohow. One's enough fur me. But I
_can_ beat her just the same!" Dave was stubbornly positive.

"You'll have to ride my horse if you do beat her," continued the
soft-voiced twin. Dave grew furious.

"Now, see here, that raw-boned, loose-jointed, watch-eyed cayuse o'
yourn couldn't run a good half mile without fallin' dead in his tracks!
What'er you a-givin' me, anyhow?" At that instant his attention was
fortunately taken. "Where'd all them cattle come from?" he exclaimed.

They had turned up a narrow gulch, the youngest boy and Hope taking the
lead, and had traveled it for perhaps fifty yards when they found
themselves at a stand-still before a drove of cattle that were making
their way slowly down the narrow trail.

"We won't go back," called the girl. "Come on up here and wait till they
pass." And followed by the boys she guided her horse up the steep, rocky
side of a high bank, and waited while the cattle came slowly on. They
counted them as they passed in twos and threes down the narrow valley.
When nearly two hundred had gone by a rider came in sight around the
bend of the hill. Hope's horse whinnied, and the man's answered back,
then the girl gave a scream of delight, and, unmindful of the rocky
bank, or of the appearance of two other riders, rushed down, nearly
unseating the old cow-puncher in her demonstrations of welcome.

"_Jim! Dear old Jim! Where_ did you come from? I am so glad to see you!
Why, Jim, I'd rather see you than anyone in the world! How glad I am!
Boys," she called, "come down here. This is Jim, my dear old father
Jim!" Old Jim McCullen's eyes were dimmed with tears as he looked from
the girl's happy, flushed face to the last of the cattle that were going
out of sight around the bend of the gulch. "Where did you come from,
Jim, and what brings you up here? Whose cattle? Why, they're ours, and
rebranded! What are you doing with them?" Just then the two riders, whom
in her excitement she had failed to notice, rode up. "Why, Syd, hello,"
she said. "And you're here, too! I thought Jim was alone."

She changed instantly from her glad excitement, speaking with the
careless abruptness of a boy. Her cousin rode alongside. She gave one
glance at his companion, then wheeled her horse about and stationed
herself a short distance away beside the breed boys.

"This is a happy surprise, Hope," exclaimed her cousin. "What are you
doing up here so far away from home?" She regarded him a trifle more
friendly.

"Is it possible you don't know? Didn't you tell him, Jim, that I had
gone away? Oh, I forgot, you weren't at the ranch when I left, so you
couldn't tell him. Well, I am here, as you can see, Sydney--partly
because I wanted a change, partly because they wanted a school-teacher
up here. I am staying at Joe Harris'. What are you doing here with those
cattle?"

"Oh, thought I'd go to work for a change. Just some cattle that I bought
to hold for fall shipment." He turned to the man at his side,
apologizing, then proceeded to introduce him to his cousin. The girl cut
it short by a peculiar brief nod.

"Oh, I've met Mr. Livingston before!"

"Indeed?" said Carter in surprise, looking from one to the other.

"At Harris'" explained the sheep-man. "She gave me one of the sweetest,
most refreshing drinks of water it has ever been my privilege to enjoy."
He spoke easily, yet was much perturbed. Here was his shy Indian maid,
a remarkably prepossessed, up-to-date young woman. It took a little time
to get it straightened out in his mind.

"Of course I might have known that you two would have met. There are so
few people here." Carter tried to speak indifferently.

"Well, good-by," said the girl, moving away.

"Don't be in a hurry! Where are you going, Hope?" called her cousin.

"Sorry, but can't wait any longer. We're off for a day's exploring.
Good-by."

"I'll see you this evening. We're going to camp near Harris'," said
Carter.

"No, not this evening," she called back to him as she rode on up the
gulch. "I won't be back till late, and then I'll be too tired to see
anyone. Good-by, Jim--I'll see _you_ to-morrow." Old Jim watched her
until she was lost to sight in the turn of the gulch. Livingston also
watched her until she was out of sight. She rode astride, wearing a neat
divided skirt, and sat her horse with all the ease and perfection of a
young cowboy. Old Jim McCullen went on in trail of the cattle, while
young Carter and Livingston followed leisurely.

"Rather a cool greeting from a girl one expects to marry," said Carter,
under his breath.

"Is it possible--your fiancee!" Livingston's face became thoughtful.
"You are to be congratulated," he said.

Carter laughed nervously. "I can scarcely say she is _that_, yet--but it
is her mother's wish. We have grown up together. Miss Hathaway is my
cousin, my second cousin. I can see no reason why we will not be
married--some time."

"_Miss Hathaway_," mused his companion. "And you love her?" he asked
quietly.

"Certainly," answered Carter, wondering at the other's abrupt way of
speaking.

"And may I ask if she loves you?" The sheep-man's tone was quiet and
friendly. Carter wished that it might have been insolent. As it was he
could only laugh uneasily.

"It would seem not," he answered. "To-day she is like an
icicle--to-morrow she will be a most devoted girl. That is Hope--as
changeable as the wind. One never knows what to expect. One day
loving--the next, cold and indifferent. But then, you see, I am used to
her little ways."

"I wish you all the happiness you deserve, Mr. Carter," said Livingston
a little later, as he rode off, taking a short cut to his ranch.

"_Hope_--_Hope Hathaway_; Carter's cousin. What an idiot I've been to
think of her as an Indian girl! An odd name--Hope. _Hope Hath a way_,"
he mused as he rode homeward. "If only I had the right to hope!"




CHAPTER V


"I wish there was a shorter cut to get home," said the girl wearily.
"I'm just about tired. Climbing mountains is a little out of my line. I
wonder how long it will take to get used to it."

"There is a shorter way, Miss Hathaway," said one of the breed boys.
"It's through that sheep-ranch there. We always used to go that way
before they fenced it in, but there's gates to it if we can find 'em."

"Let's go through that way, then, if it's shorter. Of course it is
shorter--I can see that, and we'll trust to luck to be able to see the
gates. I suppose they're wire gates."

"Yes, just regular wire gates, an' it's gettin' dark pretty blame fast,
but mebbe we can find 'em all right."

So they followed the fence, searching in the dim light for the almost
invisible gate--the girl who had that day appointed herself commanding
officer and her three brave scouts.

Alongside the wire fence they followed a narrow cow-trail for nearly a
quarter of a mile, then the path disappeared inside the field, and the
side-hills along which they were obliged to travel were rough and
dangerous. It was late, and darkness settled down around them, cutting
from their vision everything but a small line of fence and the nearby
hills.

They made slow headway over the rocky banks. Hope, tired with the day's
exploring and hungry after her long ride and the somewhat slender diet
of the past week, was sorry they had not gone the road, which, though
longer, would not have taken such a length of time to travel. The boys
were good scouts, yet it became evident that they had never followed the
new line of fence before. Their horses slipped upon the sides of steep
inclines which became more rocky and dangerous as they proceeded.
Darkness increased rapidly. One horse in the rear fell down, but the
rider was upon his feet in an instant; then they dismounted and led
their horses, traveling along very slowly in Indian file. Some time
later they found the wire gate, much to the girl's relief. It was then
quite dark. The moon had risen, but showed itself fitfully behind black,
stormy looking clouds. Without difficulty they discovered a trail
leading somewhere, and followed it until they rounded a point from which
they could see the light in the sheep-man's house.

"Why, we're almost up to his _house_!" exclaimed Hope. "This isn't the
way. We don't want to go there!"

"I reckon we'll have to get pretty close up to it to find the road that
goes to the other gate," said the soft-voiced twin.

"How foolish we've been," sighed the girl.

"Yep, a pack o' idiots," agreed Dave.

"But it's too dark for anyone to see us--or notice us," she said with
relief. "I think we might go right up to the house and look through the
windows without anyone seeing us."

"Let's do it," suggested Dave.

"Well I should say not!" exclaimed the girl. "It's the last thing on
earth I would do--_peek_ into anyone's window! I am not so curious to
see the interior of _his_ house--or anyone's else."

"I'll bet they're just eatin' supper," said Ned hungrily.

"All the better," replied Hope; "there will be no one around to see us
then. I wonder how much closer we'll have to go?"

"Not much further," answered the soft-voiced twin wisely. "See, there's
the barns, an' the road ain't a great ways off." He led the way, while
Hope and the boy, Dave, followed close, and the youngest boy trailed
along somewhere in the rear. They passed between the stables and the
house, then, aided by the fitful moon, found the road, along which they
made better time.

Hope felt a great relief as they began to leave the house in the
distance, though why, she could scarcely have explained. She said to
herself that she was in a hurry to reach home, but as they neared the
huge, flat-roofed sheep-sheds she slowed up her horse, which had gone
on ahead of the others, and glanced back at her approaching scouts. The
twins came up with her, then she stopped and looked behind.

"Where's Ned?" she asked sharply, a sudden suspicion entering her head.
"What's keeping him?"

"He went up to the house to see what's goin' on," replied Dave. "I saw
him start for that way."

"How dared he do it! He will be seen and then what will they think! We
will wait for him here." Then angrily to the boy: "If you knew he was
going to do that Indian trick why didn't you stop him?"

"I didn't know nothin' till I missed him," replied the boy.

"No, we didn't know he was goin', but when we saw he was gone for sure
it wouldn't 'a' done no good to 'a' gone after him. Anyway, we wouldn't
'a' left _you_ alone!" The soft-voiced twin was a genius at finding
explanations. He was never at a loss.

The girl recovered her temper instantly. "You did quite right, my brave
scout," she cried. "I see you have learned the first and greatest
principle of your vocation. _Never desert a lady, no matter what danger
she may be in._ But what a temptation it must have been to you to follow
him and bring him back to me!" There is no doubt but that the sarcasm
was wasted upon the breed boys, who waited stolidly with her near some
sheltering brush for the truant Ned, whose mischievousness had led him
off the trail.

At last he rode up with them, surprised out of breath to find them there
waiting for him. The girl took him by the sleeve. "You're a bad boy.
Next time ask me when you have an inclination to do anything like that.
Now give an account of yourself. What did you see?"

"I just wanted to see what they had to eat, so I peeked in," apologized
the youngster. "There was two men eatin' their supper. The boss wasn't
there. I heard old Morris tell another fellow that he was out helpin'
put in the sheep."

"But here are the sheds, and surely there are no sheep here," she
exclaimed anxiously.

"They're keepin' 'em in the open corrals down the road a piece,"
explained the soft-voiced twin. "They don't keep no sheep here in the
sheds now."

The commanding officer breathed easier. "That's good; come on then," she
said, riding ahead. They had not proceeded fifty yards when the low
tones of men's voices reached them. Simultaneously they stopped their
horses and listened, but nothing save an indistinct murmur could be
heard. One of the twins slipped from his horse and handed the bridle
reins to the girl, then crept forward. In the darkness she could not
tell which one it was, nor did she care. She was filled with excitement
and the longing for adventure which the time and place aggravated. Had
they not that day formed a band of secrecy--she and her three brave
scouts? It occurred to her that it might be the sheep-man returning with
a herder, but if so he had no right to stand at such a distance and talk
in guarded tones. The very atmosphere of the place felt suspicious.
They drew their horses to one side of the roadway, waiting in absolute
silence for the return of the scout. The voices reached them
occasionally from the opposite side of a clump of brush not a stone's
throw away.

They waited several minutes, which seemed interminable, then a dark form
appeared and a voice whispered softly: "Somethin's up! Let's get the
horses over by the fence so's they can't hear us." The twin led the way,
taking a wide circuit about the spot from where the sound of voices
came. They reached the fence quickly without noise, securing their
horses behind a screen of scrubby willows.

"Now, go on," said the girl. "What did you hear?"

"When I crawled up close I saw two men. One of 'em said, 'Shut up.
You're makin' too much noise! Do you want 'em to hear you up to the
house?' The other said he didn't give a damn, that they might just as
well make a good job of it an' kill off Livingston while they were
getting rid of his sheep. These two fellers have just come over to
guard the road from the house to keep the men there from interferin',
but the mob's down there at the corral waitin' to do the work. I found
that much out an' then I sneaked back. I reckon they're goin' to drive
the sheep over the cut-bank."

"The devils!" cried Hope, under her breath. "They're going to pile up
the sheep and kill him if he interferes, are they? _We'll show them!_"

"We can't do anything," said the boy. "There's more'n a dozen men out
there at the corrals, an' it's darker'n pitch."

"So we'll just have to stand here and see that crime committed!" she
burst out. "No, not on your life! You boys have got to stand by me.
Surely you're just as brave as a girl? We're going over there where we
can see what's going on, and the first man that tries to drive a sheep
out of that corral gets one of these!" She patted the barrel of her
rifle as she pulled it from its saddle case. "Get your guns and come
along." But they were not far behind her in getting their weapons. The
older boys had revolvers, and little Ned was armed with a Winchester
repeating shotgun.

The twins were never seen without their guns, and had the reputation of
sleeping with them at night. For wildness those two boys were the terror
of the country. Their hearts sang a heathenish song of joy at this new
adventure. Surely they were as brave as a girl! Her taunt rankled some.
They would show her that they were not cowards! She had begun to worry
already!

"Oh, what if it should be too late! What if we should be too late! Oh,
it can't be! Let's go faster!" she cried.

The breed boys crept along close to the ground, making altogether much
less noise than the girl, who seemed to think that speed and action were
all that was necessary.

"Sh! Keep quieter. You musn't let them know anyone's 'round. Those
fellers by the road 're just over there, an' they'll hear us," whispered
Dan.

Then slower, more stealthily, they crept around the two men who guarded
the road, and with less caution approached the corrals, the girl
meanwhile recovering her composure to a great degree, though her heart
still beat wildly. The night seemed a trifle lighter now to her
straining eyes. What if the moon should come out, revealing them to the
men waiting beyond the corrals? She grasped her rifle firmly, and her
heart beat quicker at the thought. The soft-voiced twin must have felt
the same fear, for he came close and whispered in her ear: "The corrals
ain't more'n a rod, right over there. We'd better make a run for that
bush there on this side of it, for the moon's comin' out--see!" He
pointed upward. A rift had come in the black cloud from which the moon
shone dimly, growing momentarily brighter. Before them the corral loomed
up like a great flat patch of darkness, and to one side of this dark
patch something taller stood in dim relief--a small clump of brush,
toward which the odd little scouting party ran in all haste. Safe within
its shelter, a fierce joy, savage in its intensity, filled the girl.

"Come on, Moon, come on in all your glory!" she whispered; then, as if
in answer to her command, it came in full splendor from behind its veil
of black. It might have been a signal. Back in the hills a coyote called
weirdly to its mate, but before the last wailing note had died away a
sharp report sounded on the still air, followed by the groans of a man
in mortal agony. Hope, upon her knees in the brush, clasped her hands to
her throat to stifle a cry.

"Now drive his damn'd sheep into the gulch!" commanded a gruff voice.

Following the pain, a fierce light came into the girl's eyes. Over
tightly closed teeth her lips parted dryly. Instinctively the breed boys
crept behind her, leaving her upon one knee before the heap of brush. A
man leaped into the corral among the stupid sheep, and as he leaped a
bullet passed through his hand.

"God, I'm killed!" he cried, as he sank limply out of sight among the
sheep. For a few moments not a sound came except the occasional bleating
of a lamb, then the gate of the corral, which was ajar, opened as by
some invisible hand, and the great body of animals crowded slowly toward
the entrance.

"They think there's only one man here, and they're not going to be
bluffed by one," whispered Hope. "See, they must be coaxing the leaders
with hay, and there's something going on back there that will make them
stampede in a moment, and then the cut-bank! But we'll bluff them; make
them think there's a whole regiment here. There's four of us. Now get
your guns ready. Good; now when I start, all of you shoot at once as
fast as you can load. Aim high in that direction. Shoot in the air, not
_anywhere_ else. Now do as I tell you. Now, all together!" For two or
three minutes those four guns made music. The hills gathered up the
noise and flung it back, making the air ring with a deafening sound.
"Shoot up! Shoot higher, or you'll be hitting someone," she admonished,
as dark forms began to rise from the ground beyond the corral and run
away.

"They're crawling away like whipped dogs," exclaimed a twin in glee.
"I'd like to shoot one for luck!"

"Shame on you," cried the girl softly. "That would be downright murder
while they're running."

"I reckon there's been murder already to-night," said the soft-voiced
twin. Hope turned upon him fiercely: "That wasn't murder! I shot him
through the hand. Murder? Do you call it murder to kill one of those
beasts? You mean--you mean that they killed _him_! I forgot for a
minute! Oh, it couldn't be that they killed _him_--Mr. Livingston! Are
you sure he wasn't up at the house, Ned? I must find out." She started
toward the corral. Dave pulled her back roughly.

"See there! Those fellers that was on guard down there 're comin' back.
They must have left their horses down by that rock. They'll ketch us
sure!" She drew back into the brush again, waiting until the two men,
whose voices first brought suspicion to their minds, had passed by,
skirting the corral in diplomatic manner.

Hope, who had been so eager to search the scene of bloodshed, crept from
the brush and took the opposite direction, followed closely by the breed
boys. When they reached their horses she spoke:

"Now you boys go home. Go in from the back coulee and sneak into bed.
Don't let anyone see you, whatever you do, for if this was ever found
out----" She waited for their imaginations to finish the sentence.

"We can sneak in all right," exclaimed Dave. "We know how to do that!
They'll never find it out in ten years!"

"Then go at once. Ride fast by the Spring coulee and get there ahead of
the men--if there should be any that belong there. I will come later. If
they ask, say that I'm in bed, or taking a walk, or anything that comes
into your head. But you won't be questioned. You mustn't be! Now hurry
up!"

"But why won't you come along with us?" asked Dave.

"Because if we should be caught together they would know who did the
shooting. If they see you alone they will not suspect you, and if they
see me alone they will never think of such a thing. It is the wisest
way, besides I have other reasons. Now don't stand there all night
talking to me, but go, unless you want to make trouble." She watched
them until they were lost to sight, then mounted her horse and rode back
over the road that she had come, straight up to the sheep-man's house.




CHAPTER VI


It was fully half a mile to Livingston's house. The trail showed plainly
in the moonlight, winding in ghostly fashion through thick underbrush,
and crossed in several places by a small mountain stream through which
the horse plunged, splashing the girl plentifully. She had an impression
that she ought to go back to the corral and discover just what mischief
had been done, but shivered at the thought of hunting for dead men in
the darkness. A feeling of weird uneasiness crept over her. She wished
that she had brought the breed boys with her, though realizing that the
proper thing had been done in sending them home in order that their
secret might be safe, and so prevent more evil. She knew that she would
find men at the house who could take lanterns and go to the scene of
the trouble. The past half hour seemed remote and unreal, yet the
picture of it passed through her brain again and again before she
reached the house. She could hear the first shot, so startling and
unexpected, and the man's terrible groans rang in her ears until she
cried out as if to drive them from her. Was he dead? she wondered.
Perhaps he lay there wounded and helpless! Was it Livingston? If it
should be! She thought that she should be there, groping over the bloody
ground for him. She shook as with a chill. How helpless she was, after
all--a veritable coward, for she must go on to the house for assistance!

She slipped from her horse at some distance, and walked toward the ray
of light that came from a side window. Her knees were weak, she felt
faint and wearied. At the house her courage failed, she sank limply
beside the window, and looked into the lighted room beyond. He was not
there! One man was reading a newspaper while another sat on an end of
the table playing a mouth harp.

In her mind she could see the body of Livingston in the corral,
trampled upon and mangled by a multitude of frightened sheep. She
stifled a cry of horror. Why had she not gone there at once? For no
reason except the hope in her heart that it might not have been him who
had been shot--that she might find him at the house. But he was not
there! Then it must have been he; his groans she had heard--that still
sounded in her ears. He had brown hair that waved softly from a brow
broad and white. His face was boyish and sad in repose. She could see it
now as she had seen it by the spring, and his eyes were gray and tender.
She had noticed them this day. What was she doing there by the window?
Perhaps after all he was not dead, but suffering terribly while she
lingered!

She rose quickly with new courage. As she turned a hand touched her on
the shoulder, and she fell back weak against the house.

"I beg your pardon! I did not know--could scarcely believe that it was
you--Miss--Hathaway! Won't you come into the house?"

"_You!_" she cried as in a dream. "_Where_ have you been?"

His tone, quiet, polite, hid the surprise that her question caused.

"I've been back there in the hills hunting chickens. You see I have been
fortunate enough to get some. I followed them a great distance, and
night overtook me up there so suddenly that I've had some difficulty in
finding my way back. Now may I ask to what I owe the honor of
this--visit?"

All fear and weakness had gone. She stood erect before him, her head
thrown back from her shoulders, her position, as it must appear to him,
driving all else from her mind.

"In other words, you want to know why I was peeking into your window at
this time of the day!"

"Just so, if you put it that way. At least I should be pleased to know
the nature of your visit." He threw the prairie chickens down beside the
house, watching meanwhile the girl's erect figure. The soft, quiet
grace he had seen at the spring had given place to something
different--greater.

"Not a very dignified position in which to be caught--and I do not like
you any better for having caught me so!" she finally flashed back at
him. "I have no apologies to offer you, and wouldn't offer one,
anyway--under the circumstances. I'll tell you what brought me here,
though. While passing by your corral, down the road, I heard a great
commotion, and some shooting, so I came over here to tell you. Perhaps I
was afraid to pass the corral after that." She smiled wickedly, but he,
innocently believing, exclaimed:

"Why were you alone? Where were the boys that I saw with you this
morning? It isn't right that you should be out alone after night like
this."

"They went on--ahead of me. I rode slowly," she replied hesitatingly. He
did not notice her nervous manner of speech.

"They ought to have stayed with you," he declared. "You should never
ride alone, particularly after dark. Don't do it again."

"But the shooting," she interrupted. "I came to tell you about it.
Someone may have been hurt."

"It was kind of you to come. There may be trouble of some sort. I heard
shooting, too, but thought it must be down at Harris'. There is very
often a commotion down there, and sometimes the air carries sound very
clearly. You are sure it was at the corrals?"

She became impatient. "Positively! I not only heard the shots plainly,
but saw men ride away. Please lose no more time, but get your men and a
lantern, and come on. There's evidently been trouble down there, Mr.
Livingston, and your herder may have been hurt. They are not all good
people in these mountains, by any means."

"Is that so? I had not discovered it. Probably some of them thought they
would like mutton for their Sunday dinner. It seemed to me there was
considerable firing, though. You are perfectly sure it was at the
corrals?"

"That was my impression, Mr. Livingston," she replied briefly.

His face suddenly became anxious. "They may have hurt Fritz. If anything
has happened to that boy there will be something to pay! But unless
something occurred to delay the sheep they should have been put in
before dark. I will go at once. Will you come in the house and stay
until my return? It might not be safe for a lady down there."

"No!" Then, less fiercely: "Have your men bring their guns and hurry up!
I'm going along with you;" adding: "It's on my way back."

She waited outside while Livingston informed his men, who secured
rifles, and started at once for the corrals; then leading her horse she
walked on ahead with him, followed closely by the two men, who carried
lanterns, which they decided not to light until they reached the sheep.

Hope never could define her feelings when she found Livingston safe and
unhurt, though she made a careless attempt at doing so that night, and
afterwards. She walked beside him in absolute silence. They were going
to see if the herder had been injured in any way. She knew that he was
not only hurt, but in all likelihood fatally so. His groans rang
continually in her ears, yet it brought her not the least pain, only a
horror, such as she had experienced when it happened. It was a relief to
her that it had not been Livingston. She felt sorry, naturally, that a
man had been shot, but what did it matter to her--one man more or less?
She had never known him.

When they reached the sheep-corrals the moon still shone brightly, and
Hope was filled with a new fear lest some of the ruffians had remained
behind, and would pick off Livingston. After the lanterns were lighted
she felt still more nervous for his safety, and could not restrain her
foolish concern until she had mounted her horse, and made a complete
circuit of the corrals, riding into every patch of brush about; then
only did this fear, which was such a stranger to her, depart. She rode
in haste back to the corrals, satisfied that the men had all left,
probably badly frightened.

To one side of the paneled enclosure the men held their lanterns over
an inert figure stretched upon the ground. Livingston was kneeling
beside it. The girl got down from her horse, and came near them.

"Is he dead?" she asked.

"_Dead_--yes! The poor boy! May God have mercy on the brute who
committed this crime! It is terrible--_terrible!_ Poor faithful Fritz!
Scarcely more than a boy, yet possessing a man's courage and a man's
heart!" He looked up at the girl's face, and was amazed at her
indifference. Then he spoke to the men: "Go back and get a wagon and my
saddle horse. I will stay here until you return. Leave one of the
lanterns."

They hurried away, while the man continued to kneel by the side of the
dead herder. Hope watched him, wondering at his depth of feeling.
Finally she asked: "Was he some relative of yours?"

"No, only one of my herders--Fritz, a bright, good German boy. Why did
you ask, Miss Hathaway?"

"I thought because you cared so much,--seemed to feel so badly,--that
he must be very near to you."

"He is near to me," he replied, "only as all children of earth should be
near to one another. Are you not also pained at this sight--this boy, in
the very beginning of his manhood, lying here dead?"

"Not _pained_--I can't truthfully say that I am pained--or care much in
that way. He is dead, so what is the use of caring or worrying about it.
That cannot bring him back to life again. Of course I would rather he
had lived--that this had never happened, yet I do not feel pain, only an
abhorrence. I couldn't touch him as you are doing, not for anything!"

"And you are not pained! _You_, a woman with a white soul and a clean
heart--one of God's choicest creations--_you_ stand there without a pang
of sorrow--dry-eyed. Haven't you a heart, girl?" He rose to his feet,
holding up the lantern until it shone squarely in her face. "Look at him
lying there! See the blood upon his clothes--the look on his face! What
he suffered! See what he holds so tightly in his hand,--his last
thought,--a letter from his sweetheart over in Germany, the girl he was
to have married, who is even now on her way to him. He had been reading
her letter all day. It came this morning, and he held it in his hand
planning their future with a happy heart, when some brute sent a bullet
here. If it could have been me, how gladly I would make the exchange,
for I have nothing that this poor boy possessed--mother, sweetheart--no
one. Yet _you_, a girl, can see him so, unmoved! Good God, what are you,
_stone_? See his face, he did not die at once, and suffering, _dying_,
still held that letter. If not his story, then does not his suffering
appeal to you? His dying groans, can you not hear them?"

"Stop!" she cried, backing away from him until she leaned against her
horse for support. "Stop! How _dare_ you talk like that to me! His
_groans_----" She sobbed wildly, her face buried in her saddle, which
she clutched.

He came close beside her, touching her lightly, wondering. "I am so
sorry, forgive me! I did not realize what I was doing. I did not wish
to frighten you, believe me!"

The sobs were hushed instantly. She raised her head, and looked at him,
still dry-eyed.

"You were right," she said. "I do not even now _feel_ for him--perhaps
some for the little girl now on her way to him; but it is all unreal. I
have seen men dead like this before, and I could not feel anything but
horror--no sorrow. I am as I am. It makes no difference what you
say,--what anyone says,--I cannot change. I am not tender--only please
do not terrify me again!"

"I was a brute!" he exclaimed, then left her and returned to the dead
man's side.

The girl stood for some time quietly beside her horse, then began to
loosen the cinch. Livingston watched her wonderingly as she drew out the
blanket, and secured the saddle once more into place. He did not realize
her motive until she stood beside him, holding in her hand the gayly
colored saddle blanket. Kneeling opposite him, beside the body of the
boy, she tenderly lifted the long hair from his forehead, spread over
his face a white handkerchief, then stood up and unfolded the blanket,
covering the rigid form with it.

"You have a heart!" exclaimed Livingston softly. "You are thinking of
him tenderly, as a sister might, and of his sweetheart coming over the
water to him!"

"No, not of that at all," said the girl simply, "nor of him, as you
think; but of one who might be lying here in his place--one who has no
sweetheart, near or far away, to cover him with the mantle of her
love."




CHAPTER VII


She stood up, listening. From the distance came the low rumble of a
wagon. The men were returning. For some time she kept her face from him,
in attitude intent upon the distant rumble. She was thinking hard. She
could not be rude to Livingston, she could not very well explain, yet
she dared not allow him to accompany her back to Harris' ranch. What
should she do? Naturally he would insist, yet how could she tell him
that she feared for his safety? That would sound idiotic without a
complete explanation, for she was almost a total stranger to him. She
was concerned, that was the worst of it; but not without reason.
To-night the men were in a fever of revenge. If he were seen that would
settle it. To-morrow not one of them but would hesitate a long time
before committing such a crime; so, she argued, she had a right to be
concerned. But, after all, how foolish of her! Surely he was not a baby
that he could not protect himself! Did she expect to worry about him
during the whole summer? As she stood there gazing into the darkness, he
watched her, speechless, something that was not sorrow piercing his
heart with a greater pain. In her moment of tenderness she had become to
him a woman divine. He not only loved her, and knew it, but felt the
hopelessness of ever winning her. It was not exactly new, only revealed
to him, for it had come upon him gradually since the evening that she
had given him the water at the spring. He had cursed himself that night
for thinking of an Indian girl, he, a man with a name to sustain--a name
which counted little in this new country of the West. He tried to
imagine her as married to Carter. The thought sickened him. Carter might
be all right,--he had met him when he first came into the country; he
undoubtedly was all right,--but married to this girl! As he thought,
bitterly, forgetting even the dead young German at his feet, Hope was
alternately calling herself a fool and wondering what she could do to
prevent him from taking her home. But her fertile brain could not solve
it. She turned toward him with manner constrained and frigid. It was
shyness, nothing less, yet it affected him unpleasantly.

"The wagon is coming." Relief sounded in her tone, giving the lie to her
moment of tenderness. "You can hear it quite plainly. These corrals
should not be so far from the house. It must be nearly a mile. I suppose
you've not been in the business very long or you wouldn't have put it
here, on the edge of this cut-bank."

"You are right, Miss Hathaway, I have not been long in the business nor
in your country. This is quite new to me. Any place seemed good enough
for a corral, to my ignorant mind. Are you interested in the sheep
industry?" He spoke pleasantly. She threw back her head as she always
did when angered or excited.

"_Interested in the sheep industry?_ Well, I should say not! It never
occurred to me before as an industry, only as a nuisance. I hate sheep.
They ruin our range. One band can eat off miles and miles in a season,
and spoil all the water in the country. I would go miles out of my way
to avoid a band of them."

He began slowly to comprehend. "Your people have cattle, I understand.
Everyone up here seems to have cattle, too. I have heard that a strong
feeling of antagonism existed between sheep and cattle owners, but
thought nothing about it. I see that the feeling is not confined to the
men only. Does that explain this--outrage here to-night?"

She shrugged her shoulders slightly and turned away.

"You can draw your own conclusions. Why do you ask me? I am neither a
cattle-man nor a sheep-man, yet I could advise that you look about the
place and see, if you can, what is meant by it all--what damage has been
done. The wagon is still some distance away." Her shyness was fast
disappearing. The ground she trod now was her own. He smiled down at
her, finding her more natural, more prepossessing in that mood.

"I should have thought of that myself before this. After what you have
told me of your dislike for the animals, I can hardly ask you to go with
me, but I do not like to leave you here alone in the dark, for I must
take the lantern; however, I can wait until the men get here."

"You don't need to wait at all," she said quickly. "I'll go with you,
for I am curious to see what has been done--the cause of all this."

"Then come on," said the man briefly, turning toward the corral. She
kept near him, her eyes following the bright rays of the lantern that
swung in his hand. She feared that the boys had aimed too low, and was
nervously anxious to see just what mischief had been done. Almost
anything, she thought, would have been better than permitting those
thousands of sheep to be piled up at the bottom of the cut-bank and the
brutes of men to ride away satisfied with their dirty work.

Livingston examined the sheep while Hope, with a glance here and there
about the enclosure, went to one side and looked at the panels
carefully, discovering many bullet holes which told that her brave
scouts, more bloodthirsty than she suspected, had aimed too low.

"I think this one is dead," said Livingston, dragging out a sheep from
the midst of a number huddled in one corner. "Judging from the blood, I
should say it is shot. A few are piled up over there from fright, but so
many are sleeping that it will be impossible to determine the loss until
morning. The loss is small; probably a hundred piled up and hurt, not
more, from the looks of the band. I heard considerable firing, which
lasted about a minute. I wonder if my friends about here thought they
could kill off a band of sheep so easily."

Hope had not been searching for sheep, but for dead or wounded men, and
finding none breathed easier. She thought of the man whose hand she had
marked and who fell in such a panic among the sheep. It struck her as
being a very funny incident, and laughed a little. Livingston heard the
laugh and looked around in wonderment. He could see nothing amusing.
This Western girl was totally different from any girl that he had known,
English or American. She must possess a sense of humor out of all
proportion with anything of his conception. He thought a few minutes
before that he loved her, but she seemed far removed now--an absolute
stranger. The boyish laugh annoyed him. His manner as he turned to her
was quite as formally polite as ever her own had been. She resented it,
naturally.

"Step outside, please, until I drive in the ones near the gate, so that
I may close it."

Instinctively she obeyed, with a defiant look which was lost in the
dimness of the night, and hurrying past him never stopped until she drew
back with a shudder at the blanket-covered form of the dead herder. A
deep roar of thunder startled her into a half-suppressed scream. In the
lantern's light she had not noticed the steadily increasing darkness, or
the flashes of lightning. She felt herself shaking with a nervous
excitement which was half fear.

Thunderstorms often made her nervous, yet she would not have
acknowledged that she feared them, or any other thing. But her
nervousness was only the culmination of the night, every moment of which
had been a strain upon her. Another peal of thunder followed the first,
fairly weakening her. She ran to her horse and, mounting, rode up near
the corral. At the same instant the wagon came up, and Livingston,
having placed the panel in position, turned toward it. He was close
beside the girl before he saw her, and she, for an instant at a loss,
sat there speechless; but as he held up the lantern, looking at her by
its light, she blurted out, in a tone that she had little intention of
using: "I'm going. Hope you will get along all right. Good-night."

"Wait!" he exclaimed. "I will accompany you. My horse is here now. Just
a moment----"

"You don't need to go with me. Someone is waiting for me down there. I
think I hear a whistle."

"Then I will go along with you until you meet the person whose whistle
you hear. You do not imagine that I will allow you to go alone?"

She leaned toward him impulsively, placing her hand down upon his
shoulder.

"Listen," she said softly, "I heard no whistle. There is no one waiting
for me. A moment ago it seemed easy to lie to you, to make you believe
things that were not absolutely true, but I can't do it now, nor
again--_ever_. You think I am heartless, a creature of stone--indifferent.
It isn't so. My heart has held a little place for aching all these
years. Think of me as half-witted,--idiotic,--but not _that_. Listen to
me. You have such a heart--such _tenderness_--you are good and kind. You
will understand me--or try to, and not be offended. I want to go home by
myself. I _must_ go back _alone_. There is a reason which I will tell
you--sometime. I ask as a favor--as a friend to a friend, that you will
stay behind."

"But are you not afraid?"

She interrupted him. "Afraid? Not I! Why, I was born here, and am a part
of it, and it of me! Ask your men there, they know. I want to ride like
the wind--alone--ahead of the storm, to get there soon. I am tired." Her
low, quick speech bewildered him. Her words were too inconsistent, too
hurried, to convey any real meaning.

"Will you ride with one of my men?" he asked.

"Oh, why _can't_ you let me do as I wish!" she cried impatiently. "I
want to go alone."

"It seems quite evident that you do not want _my_ company, but one of
the men must go and take a lantern. It's too dark to see the road." His
tone was decisive.

She leaned toward him again. This time her words fell harshly.

"You are a man of your word?"

"I hope so; but that is not the issue just now."

"Then promise you will not go with me to-night."

"No need of that. I have decided to send one of my men--and I think," he
added briefly, "that there is no necessity of prolonging this
conversation. Good-evening."

"Then you will not come!" she exclaimed, relieved. "And never mind
telling your man, for I shall ride like the wind, and will be halfway
home before he can get on his horse." She turned like a flash. The quick
beats of her horse's hoofs echoed back until the sound was lost in the
distance.

Livingston stood silent, listening, until he could no longer hear the
dull notes on the dry earth--his thoughts perturbed as the night.




CHAPTER VIII


Captain Bill Henry, foreman of the Bar O outfit, and head by choice of
the season's round up, had just ridden into camp. Most of the men were
in the cook-tent when he turned his dripping bay horse in with the
others. Then he picked up his saddle, bridle, and blanket and carried
them up to the cook-tent, where he threw them down, hitting one of the
stake-ropes with such violence as to cause the whole tent to quiver, and
one of the boys inside to mutter under his breath:

"Lord, the Cap's on the prod! What in the devil's he got in his gizzard
now?"

"Don't know," answered the second, returning from the stove, where he
had loaded his plate with a wonderful assortment of eatables and seated
himself on a roll of bedding beside the first speaker. "Too bad he
couldn't knock the roof off'n our heads. He's sure enough mad, just
look at him!" he whispered, as Captain Bill Henry stooped his tall, lank
frame to come into the tent.

The men, sitting about inside, glanced up when he entered. Some of them
grinned, others went on with their supper, but the "Cap" from under his
bushy red eyebrows hardly noticed them as he took the necessary dishes
from the mess-box and strode over to the stove, around which old Evans,
the cook, moved in great concern.

"Now just try some o' them beans. Regular Boston baked, Cap, they'll
melt in your mouth. An' here's a kidney stew I've been savin' fer you,"
taking from the oven a well concealed stew-pan. "If any o' them boys 'ud
a found it they'd made short work of it, I reckon."

He removed the cover and held the dish under Bill Henry's nose. The
"Cap" gave one sniff. "Phew! Take it away! Don't like the damn'd stuff,
nohow!"

A dazed look passed over old Evans' face, giving way to one of mortal
injury. Not a man smiled, though several seemed about to collapse with
a sudden spasm which they tried in vain to control. Away went the
contents of the pan, leaving a streak of kidney-stew almost down to the
horse ropes. "If it ain't good enough fer you, it ain't fer me," said
the cook, his bald head thrown well back upon thin shoulders.

The "Cap" glared at him as he poured out a generous measure of strong
coffee into a large tin cup, then ran his eye about the tent for a
possible seat.

A quiet-looking fellow, a youth fresh from the East, got up, politely
offering him the case of tomatoes upon which he had been sitting. Bill
Henry refused it with a scowl, taking a seat upon the ground near the
front of the tent, where he crossed his lank legs in front of him. The
cow-puncher sank back upon his case of tomatoes while the "Cap" ate in
great, hungry mouthfuls, soaking his bread in the sloppy beans and
washing it down with frequent noisy sips of hot coffee. Finally he began
to speak, with a full Missouri twang:

"This beats hell! Not a dang man around this part of the country wants
to throw in with this here outfit. Never saw no such luck! Here we are
with two months' steady work before we make town, an' only ten men to do
the work o' fifteen! I'll hire no more devilish breeds. You can't trust
'em no more'n you can a rattler, no, sir! All of 'em quit last night,
an' Long Bill along with 'em! I'd never thought it o' Bill. Been ridin'
all the evenin' an' couldn't find hair or hide of him. It's enough to
make a man swear a blue streak, yes, sir! Well, I rounded up one breed
limpin' 'round Harris' shack, an' he said his gun went off by accident
an' give him a scratch on the calf o' the leg. Bet ten dollars he's been
in a fight over there! Damn'd nest o' drunken louts! I'll be glad when
we're away from these here parts!"

At this point one of the cowboys got up, threw his dishes into the pan,
and strode outside.

"You on night-herd to-night?" asked the Captain.

"Yep," answered the cow-puncher. "Going to relieve Jack."

"Tell them other fellers to come along in an' git their chuck; it's
mighty nigh time to turn in now. Got to make Miller's crossing in the
morning."

"All right," answered the man from outside. Then putting his head back
into the tent, exclaimed in a loud whisper: "Here comes Long Bill!"

"The devil he is! It's about time," growled Bill Henry. He had no more
than got the words out of his mouth before a man, head and shoulders
above any cow-puncher there, stalked in.

"Well, Cap, I've come round to git paid off, fer I reckon I'm knocked
out of the ring fer a little spell." He stooped and held down for
inspection a hand bandaged in a much-stained bandanna handkerchief. "One
o' them damn'd dogs o' Harris' run his teeth all the way through it," he
explained.

The captain grunted, threw his well cleaned plate over into the dish
pan, and rose stiffly to his feet. "What'd you do to the dog?" he
asked.

"That was his last bite," roared out Long Bill. "I sent him flyin' into
Kingdom Come!"

"Let's see your hand," demanded his chief; thereupon the tall cowboy
hesitated an instant, then removed the bandage, and, with an air of
bravado, held out his hand for inspection. Some of the men crowded about
curiously, throwing careless jokes of condolement at the sufferer, while
others passed by regardless.

Captain Bill Henry examined the wounded member carefully, then grunted
again, while his eyelids contracted until only a sparkle of liquid blue
showed beneath his bushy red brows.

"A mighty bad bite! You'll have a hell of a time with that hand! What
were yo' tryin' to do, anyhow--makin' a mark out o' it? Was you holdin'
your hand up, or down, or what? That _dog_ must 'a' had a pretty good
eye. Do you know what that looks like to me? Well, sir, it looks mighty
like you'd held up your hand to the muzzle of your gun an' pulled the
trigger! Yes, sir, only there ain't no powder marks; so I calculate the
_dog_ must 'a' been some distance away when he took aim! The hole's
clean through, just as slick as any bullet could 'a' made it. That dog
must 'a' had a powerful sharp tooth! Well, you ain't goin' to be able to
handle a rope very soon, dog or no dog, that's plain as the nose on your
face. You'd make a mighty good ornament to have around camp, but I
reckon I'll pay you off." Later: "Know of any men I can git around
here?"

"Nary one but them breeds over to Harris'," replied Long Bill. "They're
drunker'n lords now, but they'll be wantin' a job in a day or so when
they sober up, an' I'll send 'em 'round here. I'll be huntin' a job
myself in about a month, when this here paw o' mine gits well. It's
mighty painful."

"You'd better go to town an' see a doctor," drawled the "Cap." "An'
while you're on your way stop at Hathaway's an' give him or Jim McCullen
a letter fer me. I'll have it ready in a minute an' it'll save me
sendin' a man over."

Without waiting for a reply from the tall cow-puncher, Captain Bill
Henry stalked over to his bed, took from the roll a pad of paper, and
was soon lost in the mysteries of letter-writing.

He was an awkwardly built man, but his whole appearance gave one the
impression that he meant business--and he was crammed full of it. Seated
astride his tarp-covered bed, with his back to the few straggling
cow-punchers about the tents, he proceeded in a determined,
business-like way to write the letter. Before he had finished the
difficult operation some men rode up to the camp--the men who had been
on herd, hungry for their supper, and two outsiders.

Around the mess-wagon, which had been backed into the cook-tent in the
usual order, lounged a group of cowboys whose appetites had been
satisfied and whose duties for the time being were over. Two of the men
who had just come up on horseback joined these, while Captain Bill
Henry, without looking around, continued his somewhat difficult task of
composing a letter, which, when accomplished, he folded carefully.

"Hello! Where did you'ns drop from?" he drawled as he approached the
newcomers. "I was just goin' to send word over to have your wagon join
me at west fork o' Stony Creek. I'm too short o' men to work Stony Creek
country, anyhow. Hathaway's reps all left me awhile back, an' Long Bill,
he's leavin' to-day--got bit by a mad dog over here. Jackson's wagon an'
the U Bar ain't goin' to join me till we git down in the Lonesome
Prairie country, so I was just goin' to send a letter over to your
place, for if he wants a good round-up on this range he'd better send
over that extra wagon o' his'n. You'ns goin' right back?"

"I'm not," replied Carter. "But McCullen can take word over to the
ranch. He's going the first thing in the morning."

"Cert. Got to go, anyway, an' I reckon my horse can pack your message to
the boss if it ain't too heavy," said McCullen.

Old Jim McCullen had been Hathaway's right hand man as long as anyone
could remember. He had put in many years as wagon-boss, and finally
retired from active life to the quieter one at the home-ranch, where he
drew the biggest pay of any man in Hathaway's employ, and practically
managed all the details of the great cattle concern. He saw that the
wagons were properly provisioned, manned, and started out in the spring,
that the men who brought up the trail-herds were paid off; he attended
to the haying, the small irrigating plant that had been started, and to
all the innumerable details that go toward the smooth running of a large
ranch. Now the "boss" had sent him on a mission whose import he
understood perfectly--something altogether out of the line of his usual
duties, but of greater importance than anything he had ever undertaken.
He was going back to the ranch in the morning to tell Hathaway that his
daughter was apparently all right. He and Carter had pitched their tent
not far from where the round-up was camped, and had ridden over for some
beef. One of the men cut them a liberal piece from a yearling that they
had just butchered. Carter tied it upon the back of his saddle and rode
off toward camp, while old Jim McCullen sat down, lighted a cigarette,
and listened to the gossip of the round-up.

"Right smart lot o' dogs round them breeds down there," remarked Bill
Henry, nodding his head toward Harris' ranch. "Long Bill, here, he's
been unfortunate. Went up there a-courtin' one o' them pretty Harris
girls last eyenin', an' blamed if she didn't go an' sick the dogs on
him!"

McCullen sized up his bandaged hand. "Mighty bad-lookin' fist there," he
chuckled. "Must 'a' bled some by the looks of that rag. When'd it
happen?"

"This mornin', just as I was startin' to come over to camp."

"You don't tell!" condoled the visitor. "That's mighty bad after sitting
up all-night with your best girl!"

"Long Bill's pretty intent after them breed girls," remarked Captain
Bill Henry; thereupon the cowboy flushed angrily.

"No breed girls in mine! The new school-marm's more to my likin'," he
boasted. "An' from the sweet looks she give me, I reckon I ain't goin'
to have no trouble there!"

The next instant Long Bill lay sprawling in the dust, while old Jim
McCullen rained blow after blow upon him. When he finished, Long Bill
remained motionless, the blood streaming from his nose and mouth. Old
Jim straightened up and looked down at the fallen giant with utmost
contempt, then he pulled his disarranged cartridge belt into shape and
glanced at his hands. They were covered with the cowboy's blood.

"Reckon I'd better wash up a bit," he remarked easily, and went into the
cook-tent.

The men lounged about, apparently indifferent to the scene which was
being enacted. It might have been an every day occurrence, so little
interest they showed, yet several stalwart fellows gave old Jim McCullen
an admiring glance as he passed them.

On the crest of a near divide stood a group of squaws. After a short
conference they proceeded slowly, shyly toward the round-up camp. Some
distance from it they grouped together again and waited while a very old
woman wrapped in a dingy white blanket came boldly up to the group of
men, and in a jargon of French and Indian asked for the refuse of the
newly killed yearling. The foreman pointed to where it lay, and gruffly
told her to go and get it, but she spied the unconscious figure of Long
Bill stretched out upon the grassy flat, and with a low cry of woe flung
herself down beside him.

"Who done this?" she cried in very plain English, facing the cowboys
with a look of blackest anger. No answer came.

"Better tell her," suggested a cow-puncher who was unrolling his bed.
"She's a witch, you know."

"If she's a witch she don't need no telling," replied another, at which
they all laughed.

"A witch?" said one. "I sure thought witches were all burned up!"

The old squaw was examining the fallen man, who began to show signs of
consciousness. She bristled like a dog at the cowboy's remark.

"_I see beyond!_ I know the future, the past, _everything_!" she cried
impressively. "I read your thoughts! Say what you like, you dogs, but
not one o' you would like me to tell what I read in your lives. _I know!
I know! I know everything!_" Her voice reached a high, weird cry. Her
blanket had slipped down, leaving her hair in wisps about her mummified
face. To all appearances she might have been a genuine witch as she
groveled over Long Bill.

"Ask her how she tells fortunes--cards or tea-leaves," said one.

"Or by the palm of your hand or the stars above," suggested another.

"Wonder where she keeps her broomstick," mused a third.

Just then McCullen came out of the cook-tent and faced the spectacle.

"I see he's found a nurse," he remarked, and walked over to his horse.

The old woman stood and gesticulated wildly, throwing mad, incoherent
words at him. Finally her jargon changed into fair English.

"You dog, _you_ did this! And why? Ah, ha, ha! _I know!_ I know all
things! Because of the white girl! So! Ha, ha! Must you alone love the
white girl so that no man can speak her name? Oh, you can't deny you
love her! _You_, who ride and hunt with her for fifteen years. Cannot
another man open his mouth but that you must fly at him? Ha, ha! _I
know!_"

"I'll wring your neck, you old----!" said McCullen at his horse's head.

"You will stop my tongue, will you! I'll show you! You are up here to
watch that girl--but where's your eyes? What are you doing? This is my
son-in-law, and you'd like to wipe him from the face of the earth! You
beat him in the face--him with one hand! See! How did he get it? Why are
some of my other son-in-laws limping about with bullets in their legs?
Why is a man lying dead up in the mountains? Why all this at once? Ask
that white girl who teaches little children to be good! Ask that
devil's child who can put a bullet straight as her eye! _Ask her!_ She
would destroy my people. Curse her soul, I say!"

Suddenly the witch-like spirit in her seemed to shrivel into the blanket
which she wrapped about her, then with placid, expressionless face she
made her way to where the yearling had been butchered and hurriedly
stuffed the refuse into a gunny sack which she dragged to where the
other squaws were waiting, then they all made off.

Long Bill sat up and looked about him. "Curse who?" he asked. "Curse me,
I reckon fer not knowin' enough to keep my mouth shut!"

McCullen, with face and lips pallid, had mounted his horse. Long Bill
pulled himself together and walked over toward him.

"I'll take that back," he said. "I didn't mean it, nohow."

"I reckon I was over-hasty," McCullen replied. "But that was our little
girl you were talkin' about--little Hope; an' no man on earth, let
alone a common squaw-man, ain't goin' to even breathe her name
disrespectfully. She's like my own child. I've almost brought her up.
Learned her little baby fingers to shoot, an' had her on a horse before
she could talk plain. Don't let her find this out, for I'm plumb sorry I
had to hurt you; but the man who says more than you did _dies_!" He rode
away and soon was lost in the deep falling shadows. The men in the
cow-camp unrolled their bedding, and all was soon one with the stillness
of the night.




CHAPTER IX


All the small ranchers and disreputable stragglers about that immediate
vicinity were of one opinion in regard to the new sheep-man. This
particular section of the country promised to be soon over-crowded with
cattle and horses. There was no room in their mountains for sheep.
Livingston, the interloper, must vacate. That was the unanimous decision
of the whole Harris faction. This gang was a mixture of badness, a scum
of the roughest element from the face of the globe, which in new
countries invariably drifts close upon the heels of the first settlers.
It is the herald of civilization, but fortunately goes on before its
advance to other fields or is deeply buried in its midst. The breeds,
pliable to the strong will of Joe Harris, were not an unimportant
factor, and among these, old Mother White Blanket was the ruling
spirit.

She lived in a tepee not a rod to the left of Harris' squalid log
buildings. Her daughter was the cattle-man's wife, therefore the old
woman had particular rights about the premises, a mother-in-law's
rights, more honored and considered among Indians than among civilized
whites.

Her tepee was the usual Indian affair, its conical, pointed top, dingy
with the smoke of many camp-fires. Back of the old woman's tepee, at
various distances, stood a few ordinary wall tents. These were occupied
by the families of some breeds who were working for Harris. The whole,
heightened by numerous dogs and the old squaw stooping over her fire,
presented the appearance of a small Indian camp, such as may be seen
about any reservation. The old woman's rattle-trap cart stood beside her
lodge, for she had her periods of wandering, after the manner of her
race. The running gears of a couple of dilapidated wagons were drawn up
between the other tents, and not far away two closely hobbled horses,
unmistakably Indian, for horses resemble their human associates, fed
eagerly upon the short, new grass.

At an early hour, when the rising sun cast rosy lights upon every
grass-covered mountain top, when bird notes from the distant brush
sounded the most melodious, when the chanticleer in the barnyard became
loudest in his crowing, when the dew of night began to steam upward in
its vitality-giving stream, when the pigs with a grunt rose lazily upon
their fore-legs, and old Mother White Blanket bent over the smoke of her
newly built camp-fire, the girl school-teacher came out of her room and
leaned against the smooth rain-washed logs of the building. She drew in
with every deep breath new vitality to add to her plentiful fund of it,
she saw the rosy glow upon the mountains, listened in awe and rapture to
the bird notes from the brush, and finally brought herself back to more
material things; to old Mother White Blanket and the Indian scene spread
out before her.

The old woman was bending over the fire apparently unconscious of the
girl's presence. From the school children Hope had learned something of
the wonderful perceptive powers of Mother White Blanket. They had
innumerable stories of witchcraft to tell, as various as they were
astonishing, and, while crediting nothing, she felt a quickened interest
in the old squaw. But she had so far no opportunity to cultivate her
acquaintance. Generally the spaces between the tents were filled with
groups of breeds, and these she had no inclination to approach. Now,
quiet pervaded the place. No one except the old woman and herself were
about. She knew full well that the squaw had seen her, but on an impulse
walked over beside the tepee, spreading out her hands to the warmth of
the fire.

"Good-morning!" she exclaimed. Mother White Blanket made no reply, and
turning her back proceeded to fill a large black kettle with water.

"Good-morning!" repeated Hope in French, to which greeting the old
woman grunted, while she placed the kettle over the fire.

"I beg your pardon," continued Hope. "I forgot for the moment you were
French."

At this old White Blanket stood up, anger bristling all over her.

"What you come here for? You stand there and make fun. You think I don't
know you make fun at me? Go away, girl, or you be sorry! You call me
French and laugh to yourself. Go away, I say!"

"No," said the girl, "I shall not go away until it pleases me. I have
heard that you are a great woman, a witch, and I want to find out if it
is true." She had not one particle of belief in the old woman's
generally credited supernatural powers, but she thought she must possess
sharp wit to so deceive the people and was curious to know more about
her. This she was destined to do.

"I have heard," she continued, "that you can bring the wild deer to your
side by calling to them, that a horse or cow will lie down and die when
you command, and that little children who annoy you are taken with
severe pains in their stomachs. I have heard that you can say 'go' to
any of your men or women and they go; that if anyone is sick you can lay
your hand on them and they are well, and that you can tell the future
and the past of anyone. If all these things are true you must be a very
great, remarkable woman. Is it true that you can do all these things?"
She waited a moment and, as the old woman offered no reply, went on:
"Whether you can do these things or not, you still remain, in my eyes, a
remarkable woman in possessing the ability to make people believe that
you can."

"You shall believe them too, _you_!" said the woman, suddenly rising and
confronting the girl.

As she spoke two yellow fangs of teeth protruded from her thin lips, and
on her face was the snarl of a dog. She drew up her mummified face
within two inches of the girl's own. Hope shuddered and involuntarily
moved backward toward the house. With every step she took the squaw
followed, her weazened face and cruel, baneful eyes held close to hers.

"You murderer of men, you teacher of little children, you butcher, I
will show you my power!"

The girl recoiled from the frenzied woman, shutting out the sight with
her hands and moving backward step by step until she leaned against the
smooth logs of the building. There the foolishness of her sudden fright
presented itself. Should the grimaces of a weazened old squaw frighten
her into a fit, or should she pick up the bony thing and throw her over
the top of the tepee? An impulse to do the latter came over her--then to
her fancy she could hear the crashing of brittle bones. What she did do,
however, was to take her hands away from her eyes and look at the old
witch fearlessly. At this old White Blanket broke into a terrible
jargon, not a word of which was intelligible. Her voice rose to its
utmost pitch. The crisp morning air resounded with its sharp
intonations.

Hope leaned against the logs of the house, lashing the squaw into
greater fury by her cool, impertinent gaze. She began to be interested
in the performance, speculating to just what degree of rage the old
woman would reach before she foamed at the mouth, and as to how much
strength she would have to exert to pitch the frail thing bodily into
the top of the tepee.

At that instant a man, apparently hurriedly dressed, rushed from the
lodge and grasped the old woman by the arm.

"What're you doin'? Go over there and git my breakfast, and don't be all
day about it!"

The old woman's face changed marvelously. She calmed like a dove, under
the hand of her son-in-law, but before turning away began muttering what
might have been intended for an apology.

"I no hurt her. She think I know nothing. I _show_ her."

The man laughed good-naturedly.

"Well, you show me some grub an' that'll be enough fer one day, I
reckon. Wimmen folks should be seen an' not heard, an' you make as much
noise as an old guinea hen." Meekly the old woman continued her
interrupted task, showing that in spite of his gruff speech she
entertained great respect for her tall son-in-law, Long Bill.

"Hope the old woman didn't frighten you, Miss. She don't mean nothin' by
it, only she gits them spells once in a while," apologized Long Bill
politely. Hope gave a short laugh, while the man continued: "Seems like
all Hades is turned loose when she does git on the rampage, though."

"Probably I aggravated her. If so, I am sorry. But I wouldn't have
missed it--not for anything. Her rage was perfect--such gestures, and
_such_ expressions!"

At her words the man smiled, holding up to his face as he did so a
bandaged hand. In an instant her eyes were riveted upon it. She had
searched for that hand since Saturday evening among all the men she had
chanced to see. That this great, strong fellow possessed it eased her
conscience, if, indeed, it had greatly troubled her. She wanted to get
him to talk about the hand, but shifted her eyes from it to the old
woman moving slowly before the tepee.

"She seems a very interesting woman," she remarked casually to Long
Bill, who through sheer awkwardness made no attempt to move away.

"Oh, she's a little locoed, but barrin' that she's smarter'n a steel
trap. They ain't nothin' goin' on but she's got her eye peeled. If she
takes a likin' to anyone she'll just about break her neck to please,
but," he added in a lower voice, "if she ain't a-likin' anyone she's
just about the _orneriest_, _cussedest_----" Words failed, in view of
the critical eyes before him.

"Do you belong to the family?" asked Hope, observing: "I noticed you
came from the tepee."

"Well, you see," replied the man awkwardly, "I sort of do--that is, I
did. I married her youngest girl awhile back, but I ain't sure now we're
goin' to make it a go. You see I 'lowed to meet her here when the
round-up come 'round to these parts, but here's she's done run off to
Canada with some o' her folks, and I ain't set eyes on her fer nigh on
to four months. But we've been spliced all right 'nough, an' the old
woman's mighty fond o' me."

"I should think you would be glad of that!" exclaimed Hope. "It would be
too bad if she didn't like you. I am sorry she is not in a more amiable
mood, for I'd really like to talk with her; but perhaps I will be
permitted to approach her later in the day."

"Oh, she'll be all right, now she's had her spell out," assured Long
Bill.

"You speak of the round-up; why are you not with it?" queried the girl,
with cool intent.

Long Bill brought his huge bandaged fist up before him, resting it upon
the well one.

"I had a little accident th' other day," he explained, "an' hurt my hand
powerful bad. It ain't goin' to be much use fer handlin' a rope fer
quite a spell. Had to let the round-up move away without me." His voice
grew plaintive.

She spoke quickly, with great compassion. "I am sorry! It seems too bad
to see a great big fellow like you disabled. How did it happen?"

"Well, it was like this: I come over here th' other night an' got to
settin' 'round here doin' nothin', so I thought I'd improve th' time an'
clean this here gun o' mine. It's been a-needin' it powerful bad fer
awhile back. I didn't know there was nary load in it until the blame
thing went off an' I felt somethin' kind o' sudden an' hot piercin' my
left hand. It was a fool trick to do, but it's the gospel truth, Miss."

"I heard--that is, the boys said something about a shooting affair up
the road." She pointed toward the sheep-man's ranch. "I thought for a
moment that perhaps you had been mixed up in that. I'm very glad to know
that you were not, because you know it wasn't a very nice, manly thing
to do to a defenseless stranger." Her cool eyes watched his nervous
shifting. "You see I can't very well help hearing a lot of things around
here. The girls hear things and they tell me, and then I am often forced
to overhear the men and boys talking among themselves. It's none of my
business, but yet I am glad to know that you were not one to set upon an
innocent white man. I scarcely know this Mr. Livingston by sight, but he
is a friend of Sydney's, my cousin, and they say,"--here she drew out
her words slowly and impressively,--"that over in his country he has
been in the army and is well versed in firearms; also that he has a
small Gatling gun with him over here that shoots hundreds of shots a
minute. So he really isn't so defenseless as he seems." This startled
the man into open-mouth astonishment.

"I thought there was something!--I mean I thought, when I heard tell
about the fracas over there, that there was somethin' like that in the
wind," stammered the man.

Apparently Hope had told a deliberate untruth to force a confession from
Long Bill, but yet it was a fact that she had heard something very
similar. On the day before, Sunday, Jim McCullen had come to visit her.
From his camp the noise of the shooting had been plainly heard, and
through curiosity he and Carter had ridden to Livingston's ranch to
inquire into it, but the sheep-man had been very reticent about the
matter. Had told them only that there had been trouble with some breeds,
and his herder had been killed. This old Jim repeated to Hope, adding
that Livingston must have a Gatling gun concealed on his place, judging
from the sound of the firing. So Hope in her effort to impress the tall
cow-puncher had not used her imagination wholly.

"I am glad you had nothing to do with it," she concluded, walking slowly
away toward the kitchen end of the house. "And I hope your hand will
soon be well."

"That's right," said Long Bill. "I didn't have nothin' to do with it. No
Gatlin' guns in mine, Miss!"




CHAPTER X


"We'll beat any cow-pony workin' on the round-up," declared the
soft-voiced twin as he coiled up the stake-rope and tied it on to his
saddle.

It was four o'clock in the afternoon of the same day. School had been
dismissed and the dozen children of various sizes were straggling
homeward. Hope stood beside her horse patiently waiting for the twins to
go, but they seemed in no particular hurry. She listened absent-mindedly
to the boys' conversation.

"An' another thing about this pony o' mine, he'll never slack up on a
rope," continued Dan. "Once you've got a rope on a steer he'll never
budge till the cinch busts off the saddle. He'll just sit right back on
his haunches an' _pull_. Yes, sir; you'd think he knew just as much as a
man!"

Dave grunted. "He's all right 'nough, only he'll bust the bridle if you
tie him, an' he won't stand without bein' tied. He'll buck if he's
cinched too tight or gets too much to eat, an' he ain't fit for a lady
to ride, nohow. He's an Indian pinto to boot, a regular fool calico
pony! Now _my_ horse is an all 'round good one, an' so gentle any lady
can ride him, just like any sensible horse ought to be."

"Yes, that's all he's good for, is to stand 'round an' look pretty, like
some o' these here bloods--an' them pretty soldiers over to the post. I
notice when there's any real work to be done, Mr. Dude ain't in it. Oh,
he can stand 'round an' look pretty all right, but the pinto's the best
all 'round, an's got the most sense!"

Their discussion seemed at an end, for the soft-voiced twin having
fastened the rope securely, walked around to the other side of his pinto
and had just turned the stirrup toward him, preliminary to mounting,
when the other boy grasped him roughly by the collar, throwing him
backward to the ground.

"That's my lariat; you hand it over here!" he exclaimed gruffly;
thereupon the soft-voiced twin picked himself up, very carefully brushed
the dust from his sleeve, and answered slowly, in a particularly sweet
tone:

"I ain't a-goin' to fight you here in front of the teacher. That's my
rope. Go an' get it if you want it! But _she's_ got yourn. I saw her
pick it up by mistake this mornin'. You've tied up your dude cayuse
twice with her'n to-day. Must have somethin' the matter with your eyes.
I ain't a-goin' to lick you er fight with you, but I'm goin' to get even
with you for this!"

"Here's your rope," said Hope, taking it from her saddle and handing it
to the boy. Dave took it shamefacedly, throwing her rope on the ground,
then hid himself on the opposite side of his pony. In an instant the
soft-voiced twin picked up the teacher's stake-rope, coiled it, and tied
it on to her saddle.

The girl stood to one side watching him. She wondered at his quickness.
He must have inherited something of his grandmother's acuteness. But her
sympathy turned to the other boy--big, clumsy, rough Dave. He was
standing out of sight behind his horse, embarrassed by his own error.
Hope felt sorry for him. She had already found it very difficult to keep
peace between these boys and herself. Each day brought some new ruffle
that required all her wit to smooth over.

The soft-voiced twin handed the bridle reins to her, then turned to his
own horse, which had wandered away toward more tempting pasture. The
girl thanked him, and walked over to Dave. He looked at her sullenly, a
certain dogged obstinacy in his eyes. She had intended to say something
kind to him, instead she spoke indifferently, yet to the point.

"Go home with Dan the same as usual. Say nothing about it, but get my
rifle and meet me here at the school in two hours--six o'clock. There is
a big flock of chickens that fly over that point every evening."

The boy made no reply, but his face changed noticeably, and he jumped on
his horse, calling his twin to hurry up; but the soft-voiced boy had no
notion of leaving his teacher, so Dave, with a savage whoop, ran his
pony to the top of the hill, leaving the school-house and his
uncomfortable feelings far in the background.

"Why don't you go with him?" asked the girl.

"I'm waitin' for you," replied the boy.

"But I'm not going just now. You'd better run along with Dave."

"I ain't in no hurry."

"Aren't you? Well, that is good, for I just happened to think of
something. I want you to go down to Pete La Due's place where they are
branding, and hang around awhile and keep your ears open. There will be
a lot of breeds there, and some of those men over on Crow Creek, and
maybe something will be said that we ought to know about. You
understand. You are my faithful scout, you know. And another
thing--don't try to pay Dave back for what he did. He's sorry enough
about it."

The boy's face took on a shrewd, determined expression, causing him at
once to look years older. For an instant Hope imagined that he
resembled his aged grandmother, old White Blanket, the "witch."

"I'll go over there," he replied, "an' I'll see what I can find out, but
about Dave--I'll get even with him if it takes me ten years. He needs
teachin'."

"We all do," said the girl thoughtfully. "I have begun a series of
lessons myself--on humanity. No, on sympathy, on what is expected of a
womanly woman. We're lucky when we have a good teacher, aren't we? But
it's pretty hard to learn what doesn't come natural. Remember Dave isn't
like you. He wasn't made like you, and never will be like you. Think of
this, and don't be hard on him, that's a good boy."

The soft-voiced twin smiled sweetly, and mounting his horse, remarked:

"I expect I'd better be movin' over there if I'm goin' to find out
anything to-day."

"Yes," said Hope, pleased that he should leave her at last. "I think
you're right. Be sure to come home before bedtime and _report_."

The boy dug his heels into the pinto's sides, starting off on a bound.
She watched him, absent-mindedly, until he disappeared over the
hill-top, then she rode away at a lively canter toward the sheep-man's
ranch.

A horseman came rapidly toward her before she reached Livingston's gate.
It was a slender, boyish figure, who sat his horse with remarkable ease
and grace. The girl frowned savagely when she saw him, but only for an
instant. He waved his hat above his dark head and called to her from the
distance. His voice possessed a rich musical ring which might have stood
for honesty and youthful buoyancy.

When Hope met him she was smiling. In fun she passed rapidly, seeing
which he wheeled his horse about, caught up with her, and leaning far
over, grasped the bridle, bringing her horse to a stand-still beside
him. It was an old trick of his boyhood. The girl's ringing laughter
reached a small group of men at work with shovels upon the rise of a
green knoll not far away. They stopped work and listened, but the notes
died away and nothing more could be heard.

"That wasn't fair, Syd!" she cried. "I thought you'd forgotten it. I was
going to run you a race."

"Rowdy's thin, he couldn't run. A stake-rope don't agree with him, and
I'll bet he hasn't seen an oat since you've been here," he answered,
growing sober. "Hopie, dear, leave these breeds and go home, that's a
good girl! I can't bear to have you stay there. You've been up here a
week and you look thin already. I'll bet you're starving right now!
Come, own up, aren't you hungry?"

"I hadn't thought of it," replied Hope. "But now that you remind me, I
believe I am--the least bit. A steady diet of eggs--boiled in their
_own_ shells, is apt to make one hungry at times for a good dinner. But
what's the difference? I feel fine. It certainly agrees."

"But that's terrible! Eggs! Eggs only--eggs in the shell. Haven't you
brought yourself to meat, bread, and potatoes yet? Eggs only! It's a
joke, Hope, but somehow I can't feel amused. I've eaten eggs for a meal
or two, around those places, but a week of it! Hope, your father wants
you. Go home to him!"

"No; you see it's this way, Sydney, I couldn't if I would, and I
wouldn't if I could. I couldn't because father told me to stay until the
school term ended, and I wouldn't because--I like it here. It's new and
exciting. I feel just like a boy does in going out into the world for
the first time. You know how that is, Syd, how you roamed about for
months and months. You had your fling and then you were satisfied."

"I know," said Carter softly, stroking her horse's neck. "But you had
such a free 'fling' there at the ranch, what else could you want? You
had your choice between the ranch and New York. You could travel if you
wished. Surely there was nothing left to be desired. You can't make me
believe that you really like it up here among these breeds, teaching a
handful of stupid children their A B C's! I can't see the attraction.
Clarice Van Rensselaer with the Cresmonds and that little jay
Englishman, Rosehill, are due at the ranch this week. You like Clarice;
go home, Hope, and look after things there. You're needed, and you know
it. Do go, that's a good girlie!"

"Don't say anything more about it to me, Sydney. I can't go, I'm not
going, and I want to forget for this one summer about the ranch and
everyone on it."

"I am wasting my breath, but yet," he looked at her searchingly, "I
don't understand you in this. I see no attraction here for you. Why,
even the hunting isn't good! I'll not admit that there is any attraction
for you in this Englishman over here. You've known dozens of them, and
you've always expressed an aversion to every one. I'm not going to be
scared of one lone Englishman!" He grasped her hand and his face
darkened. "Hope, if I thought you would ever care for him I'd----"

She interrupted:

"You need not finish that! Show a little manhood! Oh, Syd, a moment ago
you were my dear old companion--my brother, and now----If you knew how
I detest you in this! It is not yourself--your dear self, at all, but
the very devil that has taken possession of you. Sydney, are you sure
there isn't something the matter with your brain? Do you realize how
awful it seems? Doesn't it make you feel ashamed of yourself when you
think of all the sweetness of our past life? It makes me, Syd. Sometimes
at night before I go to sleep I think of the way you've acted lately,
and I can feel a hot flush creep all over my face. It makes me so
ashamed! I've grown up with you for my brother, I think of you always as
my brother, and this makes a new person out of you--a person whom I
neither love nor respect. Syd, dear Syd, forget it and I will never
think of it again, for I will have my brother back. I loved you, Sydney,
you and father, better than anyone else in this world. And now----" She
turned her head away from him and began to cry quietly. In an instant he
was filled with commiseration and tenderness.

"Don't, Hope!" he exclaimed, bending close to her. "I can't stand
anything like that! Don't cry. I'm sorry, girlie. I've been a fool, a
brute, a low-lived beggar, but I can't stand tears from _you_! Here
you're hungry, starving, living among a lot of breeds, and I've added
more to your misery. It's all a mistake. I know now when I see you
crying--don't do it, dear! You've never cried since you were a baby, and
now you're such a great big girl. The other feeling's all gone. I guess
it must have been because you were the only girl out here and I let
myself think of you that way until it grew on me. But you are my
sister--my dear little pard!"

He had dismounted and stood beside her. Now he reached up and took her
hands away from her face. She was ashamed of her tears, as people are
who seldom cry, and hastily mopped her face with her handkerchief.

"I'm so glad, Syd, dear!" she exclaimed in a moment, then reached down
and kissed him. "What a baby you must think I am!"

"Your tears woke me up, dear; don't be sorry. Maybe some time they'll
make a man out of me."

"Nonsense! you were a man all the time, only you didn't know it. You
don't know how happy I was all at once when you called me 'pard' again.
I knew then I had my brother back."

The young fellow mounted his horse again. His own eyes were suspiciously
moist.

"And I have my sister, which seems better than anything to me," he said.
Then they both laughed.

"I was going to the Englishman's," said Hope, "to see if I could help
any about the poor herder who was shot."

"They're burying him now," announced her cousin, "right around the bend
of this hill just inside the fence. Do you want to go over there?"

"Yes, I think I do," she replied. "I want to ask Mr. Livingston when the
little German girl is expected to arrive and what is going to be done
about her."

"The herder's sister?" asked Sydney.

"No, his sweetheart. Just think, Sydney, his little sweetheart, who is
on her way to marry him! Isn't it sad? Who will meet her and who will
tell her, I wonder, and what will she do? How are such things managed, I
wonder. Isn't it terrible, Syd?"

"Some beggars around here shot the poor fellow, Livingston told me. The
whole bunch ought to be hanged for it."

"It was a cowardly thing to do!" exclaimed the girl.

"Sheep in a cattle country, the same old story. I imagine old Harris is
a pretty strong element here. They've driven out a couple of bands
already. Someone ought to put Livingston next. But he probably scents
the situation now from this occurrence. He is one of the kind who trusts
everyone. I met him last fall in town when he first came out here. He
has put a lot of money into this business, and I'd like to see him make
it a go. He'll have something to learn by experience."

"Isn't it too bad he didn't invest in cattle?" deplored Hope.

"Yes, though they say there's bigger returns in sheep." He pointed
ahead. "You can't see the men, but they're just around that point of
rocks, though they must be about through with the job by now."

"You'll go along, won't you? Then you can ride back to the school-house
with me. I'm going to meet one of the twins there at six o'clock, and
we're going to see if we can get some chickens."

"If you will promise to bring the chickens over to the camp and let the
cook get you up a good, square meal," he replied. "Jim will be back
before dark."

"If I shouldn't happen to get any birds," she asked, "does the
invitation still hold good?"

"Pard!" he reproved.




CHAPTER XI


Livingston stood alone beside the fresh mound, hatless, with head bowed
in deep meditation. His men had returned to their respective duties,
having shown their last kindness toward the young herder gone on before
them to the great, mysterious Beyond.

When Hope and her companion rounded the point of rocks inside the
pasture fence they came directly upon the sheep-man and the newly made
grave. The girl reined in her horse suddenly.

"Syd," she said softly, wonderingly, "he's _praying_!" She had an
impulse to flee before he should see her, and with a look communicated
the thought to Sydney, but Livingston turned around and came quickly
down the grassy slope toward them. He greeted them cordially, heartily
shaking hands with each.

"Is this not a beautiful day? I am glad you have come, Miss Hathaway. I
wanted you to see this spot. Could any place be prettier? See this green
slope and the gigantic ridge of rocks beside it."

"It's magnificent!" she exclaimed. "What a monument!"

"I had an idea he would like it if he could know," he continued. "Day
after day he has stood up there on that point of rocks and watched his
sheep."

Hope pointed across the valley to where the grassy slope terminated in a
deep cut-bank, exclaiming:

"There is the corral!" It came involuntarily. She shot a quick glance at
her cousin, but he was gazing thoughtfully at the magnificence of the
scene before him, and had not noticed the words, or her confusion which
followed them, which was fortunate, she thought.

If asked she could not have explained why she felt in this manner about
it, and it is certain that she did ask herself. She had probably saved
Livingston's sheep. Well, what of it? She only knew that she wanted no
one to find it out, least of all Livingston himself. She had a half fear
that if Sydney ever got an inkling of it he might sometime tell him, and
Sydney was very quick; so she adroitly eased her involuntary exclamation
by remarking:

"That is a queer place to put a corral! Aren't you afraid of a pile up
so near the bank?"

"I am not using it now," he replied. "I put it there because Fritz ran
his band on that side and it was more convenient not to drive them so
far. I am using this shed below here, at present."

Sydney looked at Hope and began to laugh, then leaned over toward
Livingston and placed his hand upon his shoulder.

"She'll be telling you how to run your sheep next. You mustn't mind her,
though, for she's been teaching school a whole week, and dictating is
getting to be sort of second nature with her, isn't it, Hopie? And
besides that she isn't responsible. A steady diet of hard-boiled eggs
isn't conducive----"

She stopped him with a gesture, laughing.

"That's awfully true, only I haven't eaten even hard-boiled eggs since
breakfast, and I'm famished! It was cruel of you to remind me, Syd!"

"You poor youngster!" he exclaimed in real commiseration. "Is it as bad
as that? I'm going over and start supper at once. The camp is just over
the hill there, up that next draw." He pointed ahead, then looked at his
watch. "It's after five now. You keep your appointment with the
half-breed, but never mind the chickens till you've had a square meal."

She nodded in answer, smiling at him.

"They're starving her over there," he explained to Livingston, who
looked at them in some wonderment. "They don't feed her anything but
boiled eggs. Tell him why you don't eat anything but eggs, Hope,
boiled,--hard and soft,--in their _own shells_. Maybe you can get them
to bake you a potato or two in their _own jackets_!"

"What an idea! I never thought of that," she exclaimed. "You're a
genius, Syd. But go home or I shall famish! I'll meet Dave and come
right over there. I think the chickens will fly that way to-night,
anyway, don't you?"

"Of course they will," replied her cousin, "they fly right over the top
of my tent every evening!" Then he started away, but turned about
quickly as though he had forgotten something, and asked Livingston if he
would not come over to camp for supper, too.

Livingston looked up into the dark eyes of the girl beside him, then
accepted.

"Good!" said Sydney. "Come along with Hope."

"Be sure and see that there's enough cooked," called the girl as he rode
away.

"Don't worry about that, pard," he answered, then, lifting his hat,
waved it high above his head as he disappeared around the reef of
rocks.

Hope looked after him and was still smiling when she turned to
Livingston. It may have been something in his face that caused her own
to settle instantly into its natural quiet.

"I'd like to go up there for a moment," she said, then dismounted, and
leaving her horse walked quickly up the grassy hill until she stood
beside the grave. Some sod had been roughly placed upon the dirt, and
scattered over that was a handful of freshly picked wild flowers.

"_You_ picked them!" exclaimed the girl softly, turning toward him as he
came and stood near her. "And _I_ never even thought of it! How could
you think of it! I had supposed only women thought of those things--were
expected to think of them, I mean," she added hastily. "You make me
wonder what----"

He looked at her curiously.

"Make you wonder what?" he asked in his quiet, well modulated voice.

A flush came over her face. Her eyes shifted from his until they rested
upon the grave at her feet. The breeze threw a loose strand of dark hair
across one eye. She rapidly drew her hand over her forehead, putting it
away from her vision, then looked full and straight at the man beside
her.

"I beg your pardon; I cannot finish what was in my mind to say. I
forgot, Mr. Livingston, that we are comparative strangers."

"I am sorry, then, that you remember it," he replied. "It never seemed
to me that we were strangers, Miss Hathaway. I do not think so now.
There is something, I know not what, that draws people to each other in
this country. It does not take weeks or months or years to form a
friendship here. Two people meet, they speak, look into one another's
eyes, then they are friends, comrades--or nothing, as it sometimes
happens. They decide quickly here, not hampered by stiff
conventionalities. It is instinct guides. Are you different from your
countrymen?"

"No," she replied quickly. "Not in that one thing, at least. To be
honest, I have never _felt_ that you were a stranger to me; but a girl,
even a rough Western girl, must sometimes remember and be restricted by
conventionalities. I know what you are thinking, that conventionalities
include politeness, and I have been rude to you. Perhaps that is the
reason I wouldn't let you go back to Harris' with me the other night--I
had not known you long enough."

He answered her simply: "I am not thinking of that night, but that you
have just told me you are my friend--that you think kindly of me." She
flashed him a look of surprise.

"But I _never_ told you that!" she exclaimed.

"Not in just those words, true," he said. "But it is so. Didn't you say
that you had never felt me to be a _stranger_ to you? If you had not
approved of me--thought kindly of me in the start, could you have felt
so? No. When two people meet, they are friends, or they are still
strangers--and _you have never felt me to be a stranger_. Is that not
so?"

"I cannot deny what I have just said," she replied. "And I will not deny
that I believed what I was saying, but your argument, though good,
doesn't down me, because I honestly think that a person may see another
person just once, feel that he never could be a stranger, and yet have
no earthly regard or respect for that person."

"Have you ever experienced that?" he inquired.

"N--no. You are trying to corner me; but that isn't what I came to talk
about, and it is time to go," she said, turning away from the grave. He
walked with her down the hill toward her horse.

"I wanted to ask you, Mr. Livingston, about the little German girl," she
said, standing with her back against the side of her horse, one arm
around the pommel loosely holding the reins, and the other stretched
upon the glossy back of the gentle animal. "When are you expecting her,
and what are you going to do about her?"

"She should be here the last of the week. Poor girl! My heart bleeds for
her. There is nothing to do except to tell her the sad story, and see
that she gets started safely back to her country and her friends," he
answered.

Hope stood upright, taking a step toward him.

"You would not--oh, it would be inhuman to send her back over the long,
terrible journey with that cruel pain in her heart! Think how tired she
will be, the thousands of miles of travel through strange lands, and the
multitude of foreigners she will have passed! Think of the way she has
traveled, those close, packed emigrant cars, and everything. It is
terrible!"

"I never thought of that. She will be tired. You are right, it would
never do to send her over that long journey so soon, though she is not
coming through as an emigrant, but first class, for she is of good
family over there. So was Fritz--a sort of cousin, I believe, but the
poor boy got into some trouble with his family and came over here
penniless. He was to have met her in town and they expected to get
married at once. He was going to bring her out here to the ranch to live
until he had hunted up a location for a home. If I am not mistaken she
has some money of her own with which they were going to buy sheep. She
has been well educated, and has had some instruction in English, as had
Fritz.

"I thought only of getting her back among her friends again and I never
gave a thought about the long, weary trip and the poor, tired girl. She
must rest for a time. You have shown me the right way, Miss
Hathaway--and yet, what am I to do? I could bring her out here to the
ranch, but there is no woman on the place. Perhaps I may be able to
secure a man and his wife who need a situation, but it is not likely.
There may be some good family about who would keep her for awhile. Do
you know of one?"

"There are several families around here who might welcome a boarder, but
none with whom a girl of that kind could be contented, or even
comfortable. If only I were at home, and could take her there! I _might_
send her over there. But, no, that would be worse than anything! There
is no other way," she said suddenly, placing her hand upon his sleeve
with a quick unconscious motion. "You must let me take care of her, up
here, as I am, at Harris'!" Excitement had flushed her cheeks scarlet.
Her eyes were filled with the light of inspiration and more than earthly
beauty. She waited, intense, for him to speak, but he could not. He felt
her hand upon his arm, saw the wonderful light in her face--and was
dumb.

"Tell me that I may take care of her. I must--there is no other way,"
she insisted. "And it will give me the privilege of doing one little act
of kindness. Say it will be all right!"

"If she cannot find comfort and strength in you, she cannot find it upon
earth," he said softly. "I have no words with which to thank you!"

She took her hand from his arm with a little sigh of content, turned
around and stood at her horse's head a moment, then mounted as lightly
and quickly as a boy.

"Where's your horse?" she asked, whirling the animal about until it
faced him. The wonderful light in her face had given place to a
careless, light-hearted look.

"Up at the stable. Have you the time and patience to wait for me?" said
Livingston.

"Plenty of patience, but no time," she replied. "I promised to meet one
of the twins at six o'clock, so I've got to hurry up. I'll meet you over
at Syd's camp in a little while."

Before he had time to either speak or bow she was gone. As she
disappeared behind the ledge of rocks a clear boyish whistle of some
popular air floated back to him.

Walking quickly through the pasture toward the ranch buildings Edward
Livingston thought of many things--and wondered.




CHAPTER XII


At six o'clock on this afternoon in May the sun was still high above the
mountain tops. By the time Edward Livingston reached his ranch buildings
and saddled his horse to go to Carter's camp Hope had ridden the two
miles or more between his fence and the school-house. There she found,
idly waiting beside the isolated building, surrounded by several gaunt
staghounds, not one of the twins, but both.

The soft-voiced twin was all smiles, but Dave with his back against the
front of the building was scowling sullenly, giving vent to his ugliness
by kicking small stones with the toe of his boot and watching them as
they went sailing high into the air, then down the sloping stretch of
young green below. At one of those stones Hope's horse shied, but the
girl smiled, knowing full well the young savage's mood. She rode
rapidly, and stopped beside the boys, but did not dismount.

"Am I late?" she inquired of the scowling twin. "I see you are on time
with the gun like a good boy, Dave, and you've brought your own along,
too. We won't do a thing to those chickens if we get sight of them
to-night!" She smiled at the boy, who became a trifle more amiable; then
she turned to his soft-voiced twin. "How is it you're back so soon?"

He brushed a speck of dust from his overalls before replying, and his
voice was particularly sweet.

"Had to come to report. You see when I got there they was just quittin',
so I came along back with some o' the fellers. Didn't you meet Long Bill
and Shorty Smith up the road there a piece when you come along?" The
girl nodded. "Well, I come back with them's far as home; then I saw Dave
getting the guns, so I thought I'd get mine an' come along, too. Say,
what's a gating gun?" Hope looked perplexed for an instant, then laughed
outright.

"Oh, you mean a Gatling gun!" She laughed, then very soberly: "It's a
terrible weapon of war--a wicked thing. Why do you ask?"

"Oh, I just wanted to know," replied the boy evasively. "I heard some o'
the men talkin' about one, so I thought I'd ask you. Must shoot pretty
fast, don't they? Long Bill was tellin' about one that fired two
thousand shots a second."

"That must have been a terror of one!" exclaimed the girl. "But they
don't shoot quite as many as that, not even in a minute, but they are
bad enough. A few of them would simply perforate an army of men. They're
a machine gun," she went on to explain. "Just a lot of barrels fastened
in a bunch together and turned by a crank which feeds in the cartridges
and fires them, too. They shoot over a thousand shots a minute."

"I wish we'd 'a' had one the other night," exclaimed Dave, waking at
last to a new interest in life. "And I'd 'a' had hold of the crank!"

"Wasn't it bad enough!" remonstrated the girl. "Didn't you do enough
damage to satisfy your savage soul for awhile?"

"Shorty Smith's got a game leg," returned the boy gleefully, "an' so's
old Peter. Long Bill, he's got his hand all done up in a sling, too, an'
couldn't go back on the round-up!"

"I wonder how Bill done that," mused the other twin with a sweet,
indrawn breath. Hope flushed scarlet, which faded instantly, leaving her
face its rich, dark olive.

"Come on," she cried severely, "if we are to get any birds to-day!"

"I know where there's a coyote's den," said the soft-voiced twin. Dave
was all attention immediately.

"Where?" he exclaimed eagerly. Hope, interested, too, leaned forward
resting her arm upon the pommel of the saddle.

"Well," said the boy, deliberately, sweetly--too sweetly, thought the
girl, who watched him keenly--"I was goin' to keep it to myself, an' get
'em all on the quiet, but it's in a kind of a bad place to get at, so
mebbe I can't do it alone. It's 'bout a half mile back there, between
here an' home, up on that ridge behind old Peter's shack. There's a hole
under the side of the rocks, but it's hard diggin', kind of sandstone, I
reckon. I left a pickax an' shovel up there."

"Let's go up there now," cried Dave, "an' get the whole bloomin' nest of
'em! We can get the chickens later."

"Now, look here," said the other quietly. "The find's mine. If you're in
on this here deal, you'll have to work for your share. If you'll do the
diggin' you can have half of the bounty on 'em. How's that?"

Dave grunted. "Supposin' there ain't any there," he demurred.

The soft-voiced twin shrugged his shoulders contemptuously.

"What'd you suppose _I'd_ be diggin' there for if there wasn't none?
There's a whole litter o' pups."

"Come on, then!" exclaimed Dave, convinced of his good fortune, for the
bounty on coyotes was four dollars for each and every one.

Hope looked dubiously at the soft-voiced twin, she thought of the supper
at Sydney's camp, then fired with the fun of the thing rode gayly away
with the boys.

The hounds leaped after them, clearing the ground with long, easy
bounds. The girl watched them glide along, yelping, barking, filling the
air with their voices. Her horse loped neck to neck with the soft-voiced
twin's. She pointed at the dogs, drawing the boy's attention to them.

"Why did you bring them?" she asked. "They'll warn your old ones and
they'll be far away by the time we get there. You're usually so
quick-witted, Dan, I wonder you did not think of it!"

The boy made no reply, but gave her a look filled with cunning, cool
intent.

So this was his revenge--his twin was to dig into a rocky ledge for an
empty coyote's den! She marveled at the boy's deliberate scheming, and
rode gayly along to see the outcome. To this sort of revenge she had no
actual objection.

They rode up over the top of a high divide, then followed down a narrow
draw until it widened into a tiny basin, and there, in the center of
vivid green, like a smooth, well-kept lawn, nestled old Peter's cabin.
Surrounding this pretty basin were steep, high ridges and hills,
smooth-carpeted, too, except the ever narrow terraced "buffalo trails,"
and here and there a broken line where sharp crags of sandstone jutted
out. To the base of one of these ridges of rock, back of the old
hermit's one-roomed log shack, the soft-voiced twin led the way,
followed closely by his eager brother.

The twins left their horses at the foot of the hill and climbed up about
thirty feet to a narrow ledge, where a shovel and pickax marked the
small entrance of a coyote's den.

Dave set immediately at work plying the pickax with vigor, and shoveling
out the stones and the hardened sand about the opening, while his twin
superintended the job and occasionally offered words of encouragement.

Hope watched them from below. Evidently the soft-voiced boy was
enjoying himself immensely. He sat on one end of the ledge, his
blue-overalled legs dangling over the side, while Dave worked
industriously, hopefully on.

The hounds evidently had found a trail of some kind, for after sniffing
about busily for a moment they made a straight line along the hill,
disappearing over the high ridge. Hope watched them out of sight,
feeling an impulse to follow, but changed her mind and rode over to old
Peter's cabin instead. The old man limped to the door and peered out
cautiously.

He was a squat-figured, broad-shouldered, grizzled little man, with
unkempt beard and a shaggy sheaf of iron-gray hair, beneath which peered
bright, shifting blue eyes. He added to his natural stoop-shouldered
posture by a rude crutch of hasty manufacture much too short for him,
which he leaned heavily upon. He opened the door only wide enough to put
out his head, which he did cautiously, holding his hand upon the wooden
latch.

"How d'!" he said in a deep, gruff voice that seemed to come from
somewhere between his shoulders.

She nodded brightly, remembering to have seen the old fellow around
Harris'.

"You have no objection to our digging out a den of coyotes back here,
have you?" she asked.

"Umph! There ain't no den 'round here that I know about," he replied,
still retaining his position in the door.

"But see here," pointing toward the side hill, "the boys have found one
and are at work up there right now."

"More fools they, then," declared old Peter, limping cautiously outside
the door. "I cleaned out that den three year ago, an' I never knowed a
coyote to come an' live in a place that'd been monkeyed with. Too much
sense fer that. I always said a coyote had more sense 'n them boys!
Better go tell 'em they'd as well dig fer water on the top o' that peak,
Miss!" He shook his tousled head dubiously, watched the boys on the hill
for a moment, then limped back again, taking up his first position,
half in, half out the door. His attitude invited her to be gone, but she
held in her uneasy horse and proceeded in a friendly manner to encourage
some more deep-seated, guttural tones from the old man.

"Do you live here all alone?"

"Humph! I reckon I do."

"Have you lived here long?"

"Reckon I have."

"Are those your cattle up on the divide?"

"I reckon they be."

"It must be awful lonesome for you here all by yourself. Do coyotes or
wolves trouble you much? Whoa, Rowdy!"

"They're a plumb nuisance, Miss. Better kill off a few of 'em while
you're here. I reckon you kin use yer gun."

"I _reckon_ I can, a little," she replied.

"When I was in the war," he continued, "they had some sharpshooters
along, but they wan't no wimmen among 'em. I reckon you're right handy
with a gun."

"Who told you?" she asked suddenly.

"I reckon I know from the way you hold that 'ere gun."

Just then the soft-voiced twin rode up to the cabin. Hope accosted him.

"Did you get the coyotes _already_?"

"Nope, Dave's still diggin'. I'm goin' home er the old man'll be huntin'
me with the end of his rope."

"Oh, you'd better stay," she coaxed. "Think of the fun you'll miss when
Dave gets into the den. It's your find; you ought to stay for the
finish."

"I'll stake you to my share," said the boy. "He'll soon find all there
is. But I guess I'd better be a-goin'."

"Perhaps you had," Hope replied, thoughtfully; then she rode over to the
industrious Dave, while the soft-voiced twin wisely took a straight
bee-line across the hills to his father's ranch.

This time Hope herself climbed the hill to the spot where the boy was
digging.

"Dave, I'm afraid there are no coyotes in there, aren't you?"

He stopped work, wiped his brow with something that had once been a red
bandanna handkerchief, then gravely eyed the girl, who leaned against
the rocks beside him.

"But he said," pondering in perplexity. "But he said----" He looked into
the ragged entrance of the hole, then at his shovel, then up again at
the girl. "What makes you think there ain't no coyotes there?"

She was filled with sympathy for the boy, which perhaps he did not
deserve, and she had recollected the supper at Sydney's camp, and
concluded that this foolishness had gone far enough. She coaxed the boy
to leave it until morning, but he was obdurate.

"No, I'm goin' to _know_ if there's anything in here er not, an' if
there _ain't_----" His silence was ominous; then he set to work again
with renewed energy and grim determination.

She watched him for awhile, then walked out to the end of the bulging
sand-rocks and climbed the grassy hill. When at length she reached the
summit, the jagged rocks below which labored the breed boy seemed but a
line in the smooth green of the mountain, while old Peter's cabin and
the setting of green carpeted basin looked very small. On the opposite
side a fine view presented itself, showing, in all of Nature's
magnificent display, soft lines of green ridges, broken chains of
gigantic rocks, narrow valleys traced with winding, silvery threads of
rushing water. Such a picture would hold the attention of anyone, but
this girl of the West, of freedom and wildness, was one with it--a part
of it, and not the least beautiful and wonderful in this lavish display
of God's handiwork.

She stood with bared head upon a high green ridge. A soft, gentle
chinook smoothed back from her forehead the waving masses of dark hair.
Myriads of wild flowers surrounded her, and from the millions below and
about drifted and mingled their combined fragrance. The great orb of
setting sun cast its parting rays full on her face, and lingered, while
the valleys below darkened into shadow. As the last rays lighted up her
hair and departed, the yep! yep! of the hounds attracted her attention,
and turning about with quick, alert step she moved out of this
picture--forever.

Standing upon a rocky ledge a hundred feet below the summit of the ridge
she watched another scene, not the quiet picture of Nature's benevolent
hand, but a discord in keeping, yet out of all harmony with it, in which
she blended as naturally and completely as she had in the first. It was
a race between a little fleet-footed coyote and half a dozen mongrel
staghounds; they came toward her, a twisting, turning streak, led by a
desperate gray animal, making, to all appearance, for the very rocks
upon which she stood. Not ten yards behind the coyote a lank,
slate-colored hound, more gray than stag, was closing in inch by inch.
The coyote was doing nobly, so was the mongrel hound, thought Hope, who
watched the race with breathless interest. The yellow dogs were falling
behind, losing ground at every step, but the blue mongrel was spurting.
On they came--on--on, and the girl in a tremor of excitement lay flat
down upon the rocks and watched them. Her heart went out to the dog.
She had seen it kicked around the yard at Harris', noticed it as it
slunk about for its scanty food, and now how nobly it was doing! She
wondered if any of her thoroughbreds at home could do as well, and
thought not. The others were straggling far behind, but now the blue
hound was but two lengths from the coyote, and its chances seemed small,
but on a sudden it turned and made direct for the rocks from which the
girl watched. That instant the dog saw failure, and the light of
determination, of victory, died from its eyes. That same instant the
coyote saw salvation from a quick end in the narrow crevices of rock so
near, and the next it lay stone dead with a bullet through its brain.
The gaunt hound bounded over its body, then stopped short, bewildered,
and eyed its fallen foe. Then with a savage snarl he seized it by the
throat as if to utterly demolish it, but the girl called him off, and
somehow, in his dog's heart, he understood that the game was not his.




CHAPTER XIII


In the deepening shadows of the evening Hope and the breed boy rode
rapidly toward the camp, hungry for the long-delayed supper.

"Dan staked me to his share of the coyotes, so you may have them," said
the girl.

"Seven pups an' the old one!" exclaimed Dave; "that's better'n huntin'
chickens."

"And supper just now is better than anything," sighed Hope to herself.
The boy heard, but did not reply, his mind being busy with a
mathematical problem.

"How much is eight times four dollars, an' seventy-five cents for the
hide?" he asked.

"That's a little example I'll let you work out for yourself," replied
his teacher. "You're awfully stupid in arithmetic, Dave, and it's too
bad, for in cases of coyotes' bounty and so forth it would be a pretty
good thing for you to know. You hurry up and figure that out, for
to-morrow you're going to get a hard one. It's this: If a Gatling gun
fires two thousand shots a minute how many can it fire in half an hour?"

"Whew! you don't expect anybody to answer _that_, do you?" exclaimed the
boy.

"Oh, that's easy," she laughed. "If you can't figure it out yourself you
might ask old Peter or Long Bill, maybe they'd know."

The boy rode along, his thoughts absorbed in a brown study. At length he
sighed and looked up.

"Well, anyway, it'll be enough to buy a horse or a new saddle with."
Then as though struck with a sudden thought he asked: "Say, what made
Dan give you his share of them coyotes?" She suppressed a faint
inclination to smile.

"Perhaps he gave up as I did, and thought there was nothing there. Old
Peter said he knew there wasn't. But it's just possible Dan wanted to be
generous. Don't you think so?"

"Not Dan!" exclaimed the boy. "There ain't one chance in a million
_he'd_ ever give such snap as that away! I reckon," he concluded after
some studying, "he must 'a' thought that den was empty an' was goin' to
pay me back. Ain't I got it on him now, though!"

"And instead of being paid back you are getting both shares of the
coyote bounty, and you know you don't deserve it. What are you going to
do about it?"

"You bet _he_ ain't a-goin' to get none of it!" was the emphatic reply;
to which the girl had nothing to say.

In a few moments they came in sight of Sydney's camp. From out of the
small stove-pipe of the first of the two tents rolled a volume of smoke,
and across the narrow brush-covered valley came the delicious odor of
cooking food. Simultaneously the two riders urged on their horses to a
faster gait, for Hope at least was hungry. It is safe to say that the
breed boy was in the same condition, and this invitation out to supper
pleased him mightily. He was a large, stolidly built lad of fourteen
years, and like all boys of that age, whether stolidly built or slender
as a sapling, was always hungry.

"I'll bet I can eat the whole shootin' match," he declared, actually
believing that he spoke the truth.

"I think the meal is prepared for hungry people," replied Hope, heartily
agreeing with the boy's sentiments. "And I hope they have waited for us.
But for goodness' sake be careful not to make yourself sick, Dave!"

The camp was pitched in an open flat beside a small sparkling mountain
stream. Upon one side of the creek was brush-covered bottom land,
through which the riders followed a winding trail, dim in the
semi-darkness. Then they splashed across the creek, and rode up its
steep bank into the clear, grass-covered government dooryard of the
campers.

"Well, at last!" called a voice from the tent. "The posse was just
getting ready to go in search of you. Thought the chickens must have
lured you away. Come right in, the feast is prepared!"

"All right, Syd," called the girl happily, dismounting almost in the
arms of old Jim McCullen, her dear "father Jim," to whom she gave the
heartiest handshake he had ever received.

"Oh, I'm so glad you're back!" she exclaimed as he led her horse away to
stake it out. "How's everything at home--the dogs and horses, and
everything? Never mind the _people_! I don't want to hear a single thing
about them! We're late, Syd," she apologized, as her cousin held open
the tent flap for her to enter, "but oh, we've had such a stack of fun!"

She greeted the little English cook, an old acquaintance, who beamed
with smiles as she entered. Then she cast her dark eyes about the tent
and encountered those of Livingston.

"We were beginning to fear for your safety, Miss Hathaway," he said to
her, then wondered why she should laugh. And she did laugh loudly, with
a clear, sweet, reverberant ring that echoed through the little valley.
Before it had died away her face settled back into its natural quiet.
She threw her cowboy's hat into a far corner, and seated herself on a
case of canned goods opposite Livingston, to whom she immediately
devoted herself.

She was not bold, this slender, well-built girl of the prairies,--no one
who knew her could conceive such an idea,--but she moved with a
forwardness, a certain freedom of manner that was her own divine right.
Whatever she did, whatever she said, appeared right in her--in another
less graceful, less charming, less magnetic, it would in many instances
seem gross boldness. But with her wonderful, forceful personality
whatever she did or said was the embodiment of grace and right.

Many of her acquaintances aped her ways and little peculiarities of
speech, to the utter ruination of any originality or fascination they
may have themselves possessed, for such originality cannot be imitated.

She leaned nearer to Livingston.

"You should have been with us--we've had a great time! Just think, we
got eight coyotes! Isn't that fine for one evening?"

"Indeed," he exclaimed, "I think that remarkable! Your cousin said that
something of the kind was keeping you. I take it that you are
passionately fond of hunting."

"Yes, it is the greatest sport there is in this country, and where the
hunting is good, as it is at home along the Missouri River, there is
nothing like it. But up here there is really no game to speak of, though
the mountains at one time abounded with it. Even chickens are as hard to
find as a needle in a haystack. We found a den of coyotes, seven little
ones, and one of the old ones we got with the help of the dogs. You
know," she said confidentially, "I shouldn't have delayed this supper
for anything less than a den of coyotes."

"There won't be the sign of any kind of game left up here by the time
she leaves," remarked Sydney, taking a seat on the ground beside her.

"I heard tell as how she was tryin' to make a clearance," said old Jim
McCullen from the entrance.

She flashed him a quick look of surprise. He answered it with a barely
perceptible squint, which she understood from years of comradeship to
mean that he shared her secret. It meant more than that. He not only
shared her secret, but his right hand--his life--was at her disposal, if
necessary. Then, in acknowledgment of his silent message she gave him
one of her rare, glorious smiles.

"You did make a pretty lively clearing," said her cousin. "Eight coyotes
isn't so bad. That means numerous calves saved, young colts, a hundred
or so sheep, not to mention innumerable wild birds and barnyard fowl."

"Truly, it makes us feel like conquerors, doesn't it, Dave? But we're
famished, Syd!" Then placing her seat beside the table she motioned the
others to join her, and soon they were enjoying a remarkably good camp
supper.

The cook bustled about the tent, pouring out coffee, apologizing,
praising this dish or that, and urging them to partake of more, all in
one breath.

Sydney and his friend Livingston kept up the conversation, to which Hope
listened, too contented and happy with the meal, the hour, and the
company to enter it herself. She finally pushed back her plate,
congratulated the cook upon the success of his supper, and gave the twin
a warning look, which he completely ignored.

"Here, take another piece o' this pie," said the cook, who had
intercepted the girl's glance. At this invitation the boy helped himself
with alacrity, and with a broad smile the cook continued: "I never
knowed a boy yet to kill himself eatin'. You can fill 'em plumb full to
the brim, an' in a 'alf hour they're lookin' fer more. All the same, dog
er Injun, halways hungry; an' a boy's just the same."

"Eat all you want, youngster, you're not in school now," said Carter. "I
have a slight recollection myself of a time when I had an appetite."

"I failed to notice anything wrong with it to-night, Sydney," remarked
the girl.

"There's nothin' like a happetite," observed the cook. "Did you's ever
hear the meaning hoff the word? This is how hit was told to _me_." He
stood before them emphasizing each word with a forward shake of his
first finger. "H-a-p-p-y,--happy,--t-i-t-e, tight,--happy--tite--that's
right, ain't hit? When you're heatin' hall you want you're _tight_, an'
then you're happy, ain't you? An' that's what hit means,--happy-tight."

Whether this observation of the small English cook's was original or not
those present had no way of ascertaining. But since this was but a
sample of the many observations he aired each day, it is reasonable to
suppose that it originated in his fertile brain.

"I think there's no doubt about that being the true derivation of the
word," said Hope. "In fact, I am sure it is. Isn't it, Dave?"

"I don't know nothin' about it," said the boy, looking up from his last
bite of pie; then giving a deep sigh he reluctantly moved away from the
table.

"Well, I can guarantee that you're happy," said Hope, "and that is a
positive demonstration of the truth of William's observation. But now we
must go," she said, rising abruptly and picking up her hat from the
corner of the tent.

"You haven't been here a half hour yet, Hopie, but I suppose I must be
thankful for small favors," deplored Carter.

"I've had my supper,--a nice one, too,--and that's what I came for, Syd,
dear," said the girl. "And if I may, I will come again, until you and
dear old Jim both get tired of me."

"_Get tired_--fiddlesticks!" exclaimed McCullen, while Sydney laughed a
little, and left the tent to saddle her horse. The breed boy followed
him; then Livingston, too, was about to leave when McCullen stopped him.

"Just stay in here by the fire and talk to Hopie till we get your
horses," he said, abruptly leaving them together.

The girl drew nearer the stove.

"It's quite chilly out this evening," she remarked.

"That is the beauty of the nights in this northern country," he replied,
coming near to her.

"Why, we're alone," she observed. "I wonder where William went!"

"I didn't notice his disappearance," he replied. "But we are
alone--together. Are you not frightened?"

"Frightened? No!" she said softly. "Why?"

"A senseless remark. Do not notice it--or anything, I beg of you. I am
quite too happy to weigh my words."

"Then you have proved the cook's theory correct; providing you have
eaten--sufficiently," she replied. They both smiled, and darts of light
from the stove played about their faces.

"Will you allow me--this night--to ride home with you?" he asked,
watching the fantastic shadows upon her face and catching gleams of her
deep eyes as they occasionally sought his own.

She hesitated a moment before replying.

"You think me a strange girl," she said. "I wonder what you will think
of me now if I refuse this."

"I think nothing except that you are the sweetest girl I have ever
known--and the _noblest_. I thank my Maker for having met you, and
spoken with you, and sat here in the firelight beside you! Your ways are
your own. I shall not--cannot question you, or impose myself upon you.
Our lives, it seems, lie far apart. But I cannot help it--the words burn
themselves out--I love you, _Hope_--I love you! Forgive me!" He raised
her hand to his lips and left her standing alone in the firelight.

"He loves me," she thought, far into the quiet hours of the night. "He
loves me, and yet he ran away from me!"




CHAPTER XIV


Late one afternoon during the following week Livingston drove up to
Harris' ranch and helped from his buggy a small, fair-haired girl who
looked with wonderment at the squalid log buildings, the squealing,
scurrying pigs and children, and the usual group of roughly dressed men
waiting for their supper. The pain in her eyes deepened, and she clasped
Livingston's arm like a frightened child.

"_O_, _mein Freund_, I fear!" she cried, drawing back.

"Come," he urged gently. "There is nothing to fear. You must trust me,
for I am indeed your friend, little girl. We will find the one who is
expecting you--who will love you and be a sister to you."

A look of trustful obedience came into her sweet blue eyes, now
disfigured by much weeping, and without hesitation she walked beside him
past the group of rough-looking men, dirty, barefooted children,
scurrying pigs and dogs, to the kitchen door.

An Indian woman with a baby in her arms stood in the shadow of the room
and motioned them to enter.

"Is Miss Hathaway here?" inquired Livingston.

At the sound of his voice the door of an inner room opened and Hope, her
slender form gowned as he had first seen her, came quickly across the
untidy room toward them.

"I am Hope," she said to the girl, taking both of her soft little hands
in her own and looking in wonder at the childish face with its setting
of wavy gold hair. Suddenly the broken-hearted girl was in her arms
sobbing out her grief upon her shoulder. Hope led her to a seat, removed
her hat and coat, and uttered words of endearment to her, soothing her
as she would have done a child.

Could this impulsive, loving girl be Hope, wondered Livingston, who
still stood in the doorway. She smoothed back the bright hair from the
pretty, childish face, exclaiming:

"How beautiful you are! And what a little thing to have such a grief!
Oh, it is cruel, _cruel_! Cry, dear, cry all you want to--it will do you
good, and the pain will sooner be gone."

"_O, Gott im Himmel_," sobbed the German girl, "_gieb mir Muth es zu
ertragen!_"

"But you are, oh, so much braver than I. Look at me, see what a great,
big strong thing I am, and _I_ moaned and cried because the world wasn't
made to my liking! Oh, it makes me _ashamed_ now, when I see such a
little, frail thing as you suffer such a real sorrow! But I am your
friend--your sister, if you will have me."

"How goot you are, _meine liebe Freundin_!" sobbed the girl.

"May you never have reason to change your opinion," replied Hope slowly,
in German.

"She speaks my language!" exclaimed the German girl, with something like
hopefulness in her voice.

"But very poorly," apologized Hope, looking for the first time at the
man standing quietly in the doorway.

"It will comfort her that you speak it at all," he replied. "But without
any language you would still be a comfort to her. I will leave her in
your hands, Miss Hathaway. She has had a long journey and--must be very
tired." He bowed and turned to go, but, recollecting something, came
back into the room. "I am going now," he said to the German girl, "but I
will come to see you often. You need have no fear when you are
with--Hope."

Hope turned to him impulsively.

"You will do as you say," she begged. "You will come often to see her."
Then added, "You know she'll be terribly lonely at first!"

"It will give me great pleasure, if I may," he replied.

She held out her hand to him.

"If you _may_! Are you not master of your own actions? Good-by!"

She took her hand from his firm clasp with something like a jerk, and
found herself blushing furiously as she turned to the little German
girl.

As far as anyone could be made comfortable in the Harris home Hope made
her little charge so. She shared her room, her bed with her, took her to
school each day and kept her constantly at her side.

She was a simple, trusting German girl, bright, and extremely pretty,
and her name was Louisa Schulte. From the first she had loved Hope with
an affection that was as touching as it was beautiful, and as she came
to know her better, day by day her love and admiration grew akin to
worship. She believed her to be the most wonderful girl that ever lived,
in some respects fairly superhuman. She marveled at the skill with which
she could ride and shoot, and her wisdom in Western lore. And behind
every accomplishment, every word and act, Louisa read her heart, which
no one before had ever known.

So finding in the bereaved girl, who had so strangely come into her
life, the sympathy and love for which she had vainly searched in one of
her own sex, Hope gave her in return the true wealth of a sister's
heart.

For some time after Louisa's arrival Hope was with her almost
constantly, but the inactive life began to tell upon her. Her eyes would
light up with an involuntary longing at the sight of the breed boys
racing over the hills upon their ponies.

"Why don't you go?" asked the German girl, one morning, reading her
friend with observant eyes as the boys started out for a holiday.

It was a beautiful warm Saturday morning. The two girls were sitting on
a pile of logs by the side of the road sunning themselves, far enough
away from the Harris house and its surroundings to enjoy the beauty of a
perfect day.

"I would rather stay here with you," replied Hope, arranging a waving
lock which the wind had displaced from Louisa's golden tresses. "When
the horse comes that I have sent for, and you have learned to ride
better, we will go all over these mountains together. I will show you
Sydney's camp and take you to old Peter's cabin, and let you see where
we found the den of coyotes. We will go everywhere then, and have such a
good time!"

Louisa looked at her tenderly, but her eyes were filled with the pain of
a great sorrow.

"O, _Fraeulein_, you are goot, so goot to me! If I may ask, not too much,
I wish to see where lies _mein lieber Fritz_. I vill weep no more--then.
Ven I sleep the dreams come so much. If I could see once the place it
would be better, _nicht wahr_?"

"Yes," replied Hope, "it is a lovely spot and you shall see it. Mr.
Livingston could not have found a more beautiful place. Just now it is
all a mass of flowers and green grass as far as you can see, and behind
it is a great high jagged wall of stone. It is beautiful!"

"Mr. Livingston is a good, true man," mused Louisa, lapsing into German,
which Hope followed with some difficulty. "He was very kind to my poor
Fritz, who loved him dearly. His letters were filled with his praises.
It was of him, of the beautiful country, and our love of which he always
wrote. He was a good boy, _Fraeulein_."

"Tell me about him," said Hope, adding hastily, "if you feel like it. I
would love to hear."

Hope could not have suggested a wiser course, for to speak of a grief or
trouble wears off its sharp edges.

"He was a good boy," replied Louisa. "I cannot see why God has taken him
from this beautiful place, and from me. It has been a year, now, since I
last saw him. He left in a hurry. He had never spoken of love until that
day, nor until he told me of it did I know that it was real love I had
so long felt for him. We grew up together. He was my cousin. I had other
cousins, but he was ever my best companion--my first thought. He came
to me that day and said: 'Louisa, I am going far away from here to the
free America. It breaks my heart to leave you. Will you promise to some
day join me there and be my wife?' I promised him, and then cried much
because he was going so far. It was even worse than the army, I thought,
and somehow it held a strange dread for me. But Fritz would not think of
the army. His eldest brother returned, and as head of the family all the
money went to him. My aunt married again. Her husband is a wholesale
merchant of wines. He gave Fritz a position in his warehouse, but very
soon they quarreled. He seemed not to like Fritz. Then there was nothing
for the poor boy but the army, or far America. I could not blame him
when he chose freedom. The lot of the youngest son is not always a happy
one. A friend who had been here told all about this great country and
the good opportunities, so he came. His letters were so beautiful! I
used to read them over and over until the paper was worn and would break
in pieces. For a whole year I waited, and planned, and lived on the
letters and my dreams, then filled with happiness I started to him. To
think that I have come to the end of this long, strange journey to a
foreign land to see but his grave! Oh, God in heaven, help me be brave!"

"There is no death," said Hope, rising abruptly from the log upon which
she had been sitting and standing erect before Louisa, her dark
commanding eyes forcing the attention of the grief-stricken girl. "I
know there is no death. I feel it with every throb of my pulse--in every
atom of my being! _I_ and my _body_!--_I_ and my _body_!" she continued
impressively. "How distinct the two! Can the death of this lump of clay
change the _I_ that is really myself? Can anything exterminate the
living me? Every throb of my whole being tells me that I am more than
this perishable flesh--that I am more than time or place or condition or
_death_! I believe, like the Indians, that when we are freed from this
husk of death--this perishing flesh, that the we, as we truly are, is
like a prisoner turned loose--that then, only do we realize what _life_
really means."

Louisa's innocent eyes were intent upon her as she strove to grasp the
full meaning of the English words.

"_Ich weiss; es ist wahr_," she replied softly, "_aber wenn der Kummer
so frisch ist, dann ist es unmoeglich in dem Gedanken Trost zu finden_."

"I should have said nothing," said Hope in contrition, seating herself
upon the log pile again.

"_Nein_, my dear, dear friend! I have now dis misery, but I belief you.
Somedimes your vords vill help--vat you calls 'em--vill _soothe_, und I
vill be better."

"Then it's all right," said Hope, jumping from the logs and giving her
hand to Louisa to assist her down. "Let's walk a little."

They went slowly up the road toward the school-house, and had not
proceeded far when they met Livingston driving toward them in an open
buggy.

Hope waved her hand to him and hastened forward, while Louisa smiled
upon him the faintest of dimpled greetings, then drew back to the side
of the road while the girl of the prairies stepped up to the side of his
buggy.

"You haven't kept your word very well," she said. "We have seen you only
twice, and Louisa has wondered many times what has been keeping you.
Isn't that so, Louisa?" she nodded at the girl. "I am glad you have come
this morning, because I want to ask you a favor."

"I am at your service," he replied.

"You know Louisa hasn't learned to ride yet, and Harris' have no other
way of conveyance, so I wanted to ask you to take her in your buggy--to
see Fritz's grave." The last few words were added below her breath.

"I came this morning to ask you if she did not wish to see it," he
replied. "It might be good for her."

"Of course _you_ should be the first one to think of it!" she said
quickly, shading her eyes with her hand to look down the long, crooked
stretch of road. "I didn't think of it at all myself. She has just asked
me if she might see it. All the virtues are yours by right," she
continued, showing, as she again faced him, a flash of her strong white
teeth. "And the funny part of it is, I think I am getting jealous of the
very virtues you possess!"

"You should see with my eyes awhile," he replied, "and you would have no
cause for jealousy."

"I do not know jealousy in the ordinary sense of the word--that was
entirely left out of my make-up, but for once I covet the attributes of
thoughtfulness that should be ingrained in every woman's nature."

When she had spoken he seemed struggling for an instant with some strong
emotion. Without replying he stepped from his buggy and walked to the
heads of his horses, presumably to arrange some part of the harness.

Livingston struggled to keep back the words which sprang to his lips. He
loved the girl with all the strength of his nature. Her whole attitude
toward him artlessly invited him to speak, but his manhood forbade it.

He was a puzzle, she thought, impatiently. Why did he not make a little
effort to woo her, after having declared his love in no uncertain
manner? She was not sure that she wanted to receive his advances if he
should make any, but why did he not make them? She knew that she was
interested in him, and she knew, also, that she was piqued by his
apparent indifference. She knew he was like a smoldering volcano, and
she had all a girl's curiosity to see it burst forth; but with the
thought came a regret that their acquaintance would then be at an end.

"I can take you both up there now, if you wish," he said, coming around
to the side of the buggy. "The seat is wide and I do not think you will
be uncomfortable."

Hope had turned her eyes once more down the narrow, winding stretch of
gray toward the Harris ranch.

"I think I will not go," she replied, still peering ahead from under the
shade of her hand. "Yes, I am sure now that's Sydney. See, just going
into the corral. Jim was to have brought me an extra saddle horse
to-day, but Sydney has come instead, so I'll go back. Louisa can go
alone with you." She motioned to the girl. "Come, Louisa, Mr. Livingston
wants to take you for a little drive. I will be down there at the house
when you come back."

The girl understood enough of their conversation to know where she was
expected to go. Obediently, trustfully, with one loving glance at Hope,
she climbed into the buggy beside Livingston and was soon riding rapidly
up the mountain road to the grave of her sweetheart.




CHAPTER XV


Hope's anxiety to reach the ranch could not have been great, for she
walked slowly along the dark, gray stretch of road, vaguely dreaming the
while, and offering excuses to herself for not having accepted
Livingston's invitation. She managed to find several reasons. First, it
would have been too crowded; second, Sydney had brought the horse, and
was probably waiting to see her; third, she had no particular desire to
go, because he had so obviously wanted her to do so. Finally, after
weighing all her excuses, she was obliged to admit that the only thing
that really troubled her was Livingston's evident unconcern at her
refusal to accompany them.

She had reached a point in her life where self-analysis was fast
becoming an interesting study. At present it struck her as being
amusing.

The clatter of hoofs and a wild whoop brought her out of her absorbing
study, as down the nearest side-hill the twins raced pell-mell, the
pinto pony leading the stylish Dude by half a length. They drew up
suddenly in the road beside her.

"Now you can see fer yourself that that Dude cayuse of Dave's ain't in
it with my pinto!" exclaimed the soft-voiced twin.

"What'er you givin' us!" shouted Dave. "Just hear him brag about that
spotted cayuse of his'n! 'Twasn't no even race at all. He had 'bout a
mile the start!"

"Oh, come off your perch!" retorted the other sweetly.

"Where are you boys going?" asked Hope.

"Nowheres. We seen you from the top of the divide, an' I thought I'd
just show you what was in Pinto. He's all right--you bet! Ain't you, old
man?" said the boy, pulling his pony's mane affectionately.

"Oh, _I_ wasn't tryin' to show off!" exclaimed Dave. "But just give me
a level road an' I'll beat you all to pieces!"

"Where have you been?" inquired Hope.

The boys looked at each other in a sheepish manner.

"I'm going to guess," said the girl suspiciously, "and if I am right
you'll have to own up. In the first place your father sent you out to
bring in those cows and calves over near old Peter's basin. Instead of
that you went on farther and found a camp. You went in one of the tents
and ate some dried blackberry pie, instead of bringing in the cattle.
Now, isn't that so?"

Dave looked dumfounded.

"I don't see how you knew that when you wasn't along! Gee, you must know
things like grandmother White Blanket!" he exclaimed.

The soft-voiced twin began to laugh. "I told you that you was gettin'
more o' that pie on your face 'n you was in your mouth!" he exclaimed,
whereupon the other quickly turned away his besmeared countenance,
proceeding to wipe it vigorously with the sleeve of his coat.

"Have you got your bounty yet for the coyotes you dug out of the hill?"
asked Hope, to allay his discomfort. She glanced sideways at the
soft-voiced twin, who assumed his most docile, innocent expression, and
rode on ahead. It had become a sore subject with him. Suddenly giving a
wild whoop he spurred up his pinto and dashed in among the assortment of
tents, bringing to the entrance of her abode old Mother White Blanket,
who hurled after him numerous blood-curdling, Indian invectives. Then
she covered her yellow prongs of teeth under a wrinkled lip and scowled
fiercely at Hope as she passed along the road, causing the breed boy to
say:

"The old woman's got it in fer you, I reckon. But don't you care, she
ain't so all-fired smart as she makes out to be!"

"I'm not afraid of her," replied Hope. "She suspects me of having had a
hand in the shooting that night at the sheep-corrals up there, and in
consequence has a very bad heart for me. Now how could she think such a
thing as that? I don't believe she's much of a witch, though, because
when she gets in one of her fits of passion she'd ride off on a
broomstick if she were."

"She's got eyes like a hawk," said the boy, "always seem' everything
that's goin' on."

"She don't miss much, that's sure," mused Hope, as they passed by the
house and approached the corrals. There the soft-voiced twin was talking
with Carter, praising, enthusiastically, the points of his pinto cayuse,
and comparing it with the blooded saddle horse which Sydney had just
brought from Hathaway's home-ranch at Hope's request. The boy never knew
just how his statements were received, for at sight of Hope the young
man went out into the road to meet her.

She welcomed him with a quick smile, which a year previous would have
been accompanied by a sisterly kiss. Carter noted its omission this day
with singular impatience. How long, he wondered, before she would forget
his foolishness. It occurred to him then, that in spite of her
girlishness she was very much a woman, and his actions toward her, which
now he most heartily regretted, had ignited a spark of self-consciousness
in her nature, raising an effective barrier between them that only time
could wear away.

"I expected Jim with the horse instead of you, Sydney," she said. "How
did it happen?"

"A lot of men are up with the trail herds, and your father needed Jim to
help pay them off, so I brought the horse instead. Jim will be back in a
couple of days," he explained.

"You went down to the ranch, then, with him yesterday evening, I
suppose," said Hope. "What are they all doing there?"

"It looks just as it did any evening last summer, if you happened to
drop in on them. Little Freddie Rosehill thumping away at the piano and
singing bass from the soles of his feet, that tallest Cresmond girl,
with the red hair, yelling falsetto, and the others joining in when they
got the chance. Then down at the other end of the room the usual card
table--your father, mother, Clarice, and O'Hara, and father and mother
Cresmond watching the game and listening to the warbling of their
offspring."

"Is _Larry O'Hara_ there?" asked Hope in surprise. "I thought he was not
coming this year."

"Don't you ever think O'Hara is going to give you up as easy as that,"
replied Sydney, laughing. "He just got there yesterday, and was in the
depths of despair when he discovered you had flown. He told Clarice he
was coming over here to see you as soon as he could decently get away.
His mother's with him, which makes that proposition a little more
awkward for him than if he were alone. It was late when I got there and
I didn't have time to change my clothes, so I just walked in on them in
this outfit. But they seemed pretty glad to see me."

"I'll bet they nearly smothered you with welcome! I can just see them,"
said Hope. "That Lily Cresmond with the red hair always was so
demonstrative to you, Syd. I'm sorry O'Hara is there, and Clarice Van
Renssalaer, too--or rather, I mean, I'm sorry only because they are
there that I am not at home, for I like them; but I'm not very sorry
either, Syd. I'd rather be up here in the mountains, free like this,
with my poor little Louisa, and you and Jim camping over the hills
there, than stifling in the atmosphere of those New York people."

"You're a queer girl, Hope, but I don't believe I blame you much. I was
glad to leave this morning and head my horse this way."

"Did father--ask about me?" she inquired hesitatingly.

"He didn't lose any time in getting me off alone and questioning me for
about an hour," he replied. "He misses you, Hope."

"Poor father--poor old Dad!" exclaimed the girl softly. Then with a
peculiar motion of her head and shoulders, as if throwing off a load,
she remarked firmly: "But that makes no difference. I am glad, anyway,
to be here. I have you and Jim so near, and my dear little German
girl--and perfect freedom!"

"And you have Livingston to take the place of O'Hara," he returned, "and
there is nothing lacking, as far as I can see, except a good cook in the
Harris family."

"Mr. Livingston is nothing to me," replied Hope quickly, "and he doesn't
care anything for me, if that is what you mean to imply." Her eyes
flashed and she spoke with unusual sharpness.

"We can't afford to quarrel, Hope," exclaimed Carter. Then, putting his
hand upon her shoulder, said very earnestly: "I was just joking, and
didn't mean to imply anything, so don't be angry with me. Besides, it
won't do. It's near noon and I was going to suggest that we go over to
camp and have William get us up a good dinner, and then we'll go
fishing. What do you say? You can invite your breed brigade; they look
hungry," pointing to the two boys sitting on the ground in the shade of
a log barn, their knees drawn up under their chins.

"Oh, I don't mind what you say, Syd, dear," she said abruptly. "I
believe I am getting to be quite as foolish as other people, to be
offended so easily. I should as soon expect you to turn upon me in wrath
if I told you to look out for little Louisa."

"Poor little Louisa," he exclaimed. "Where is she?"

"We went up the road for a walk, and Mr. Livingston drove along and took
her up to see her Fritz's grave," she explained.

"Now then, my girl, _you_ look out for Louisa! There's nothing like
consoling grief to bring two hearts close together. How did you ever
come to allow him to carry her away up there and do the consolation act?
You'll sure lose him now! I thought you had more diplomacy!"

She laughed a little.

"Unless a man loved me with every atom of his being, with his whole
life, I couldn't feel the least attraction for him in _that_ way," she
said. "That is the way I have planned for the _one_ man to love, my
ideal man, Syd. When such a man comes along I shall love him, but I very
much fear he does not exist."

"Then you're doomed to die an old maid, Hope! But don't you think O'Hara
entertains that kind of affection for you?"

"Do you know, I have a perfect horror of being an old maid. Probably
I'll outgrow it. O'Hara? No, indeed! He'll get over it soon enough, and
think just as much of some other girl. He's a nice boy, a good friend,
but he isn't just my idea of what a man should be."

"I'm afraid you're doomed, Hope," said her cousin, shaking his head
solemnly. "What will you do, spend your lonely maidenhood out here on
the prairie, or take a life interest in some Old Ladies' Home?"

"Did you say something about going up to camp?" she asked. "But I ought
to wait for Louisa; she should be back now."

"I've ridden twenty miles this morning, and the consequence is my
appetite is rather annoying," replied Sydney. He called to the two boys,
sitting drowsily in the shade. "Here, you boys, if you want to go out
and get some grub with this lady, just run in her horse for her as fast
as you can."

"Well, I should say so!" exclaimed the soft-voiced twin, who jumped up
with wonderful alacrity, followed more slowly by Dave. Another moment
they were spurring their ponies across the large, fenced pasture toward
a bunch of horses grazing quietly in the distance.

"Those boys are all right when there's anything to eat in sight,"
remarked Carter.

"Or any fun," added the girl.

"How in the world do you tell them apart?" he inquired. "I look at one
and think I've got him spotted for sure, and then when the other one
turns up I'm all mixed again. You seem to know them so well, you must
have some kind of a mark to go by."

"They are so entirely different in their natures," she said, "that I
almost know them apart without looking at them. Their faces look
different to me, too. Dan has certain expressions that Dave never had;
and their voices are nothing alike."

"I've noticed their voices," said her cousin, watching the boys as they
deftly turned the bunch of horses and headed them toward the corral.
"Well, they can sure ride to beat three of a kind! They're not losing
any time with those horses, either."

The corral was built in a corner of the pasture fence, near the stables.
It took the breed boys scarcely five minutes to corral the horses, rope
the saddle animal wanted, throw open the large gate and lead out the
horse. The other horses followed with a mad dash, kicking up their heels
in very joy for their unexpected freedom.

Hope watched the road, as far as she could see it, looking for the
return of her small German friend.

"We'll ride along," suggested Sydney, throwing the saddle upon her
horse, "and we'll probably meet them. I don't think we'll have any
trouble getting Livingston to drive over to camp, and we'll all go
fishing together."

This seemed to take a load from the mind of Hope, and light-heartedly
she rode away toward the camp with her cousin and the breed boys.




CHAPTER XVI


They met Livingston and his charge just as they reached the dimly marked
trail that led up a gulch toward Sydney's camp. At the invitation
extended for dinner the sheep-man drove up the coulee and followed the
riders.

William, the cook, greeted his guests with a generous smile, then
proceeded to do a great amount of hustling about preparing for the meal,
which he promised would be an excellent one. Being a round-up cook of
much experience, he soon set before them such an assortment of edibles
as would have dumfounded the uninitiated.

The afternoon passed off pleasantly. Hope was unusually vivacious, and
Sydney full of amusing small talk, principally concerning his sundry
adventures and impressions during his brief absence from camp.

They all felt the grief of the German girl, and each showed his sympathy
in a different manner. Sydney talked, often in an aimless, senseless
way, but obviously to divert the unhappy girl. Hope filled each pause,
concluded every description with rich drollery and mimicry, while
Livingston's quiet attentiveness betokened the deepest compassion. Even
William gave her many smiles and made numerous witty remarks, which were
wholly lost upon her.

"You're in a very bad crowd of people, Miss Louisa," said Sydney. "But
after awhile you'll be so much like us that you won't notice how bad we
are!"

"Shame on you, Sydney!" exclaimed Hope. "Louisa never could be bad!"
Then to the girl: "The truth is, _he's_ the only bad one in the whole
outfit, so don't let him make you think that the rest of us are bad,
too!"

"You are all _so_ goot," said Louisa, in great earnestness.

"Now listen to that!" cried Sydney. "That's the first time anybody ever
accused _me_ of being good! I'll get a gold medal and hang it about
your neck, Miss Louisa, and I'll be your faithful servant from now on."

"And you'll bring her fresh flowers every day, and maybe you could
borrow Mr. Livingston's buggy since you haven't one of your own. But
don't soar too high, Sydney, she doesn't know you yet!" returned his
cousin.

"But _you_ like him," said Louisa, "and daat iss--vat you calls
'em--_recommend_ enough!"

They were all surprised by this first flash of the real Louisa, the
Louisa of sunshine and mirth, whom Sorrow had so soon branded.

It was the first time Sydney had heard her utter anything but the
briefest monosyllables. He looked at her, astonished. For an instant
silence reigned, then Hope, with sudden abandonment, threw her arms
about her, exclaiming:

"Oh, you're the dearest thing I ever saw! Isn't she, Syd?" And then, as
if ashamed of her impulsiveness, she jumped up and laughingly left the
tent. A few moments later she put her head inside, remarking: "The
trout haven't begun to feed yet. I'd like to know how we are going to
put in the time waiting for them! It's too hot for anything in there,
and it won't be a bit of use to try to fish for an hour, at least. All
of you come outside."

"Yes," said Carter, rising lazily to his feet. "I've discovered a small
Eden down there under the willows, along the creek. All green and mossy
and pepperminty, but the snake's never showed up yet. Come on, we'll all
go down there."

He led the way along the steep bank of the small creek and down its
opposite side until a parting in the willow brush revealed one of
Nature's hidden glories, a small glen, shady and beautiful. From its
very center sprang a tiny spring, forming a clear, glassy pool of water
which narrowed into a tiny trickling rill that went creeping through the
grass-carpeted arbor to the larger stream beyond.

It was beautifully inviting, and Hope sank down upon a mossy cushion
with an exclamation of delight.

"Now, how am I for an entertainer?" asked Sydney gayly. Hope turned her
dark eyes upon him, then about the little arbor.

"Wait," she said softly, "don't talk for a minute--don't even breathe.
This is glorious!" Then after a brief pause, continued: "There, the
spell's passed! This place is no longer enchanting, but lovely and cool,
just the same, and is a whole lot better than that roasting tent up
there. What became of the twins? Probably they are more attracted by
William's mode of entertainment than yours, Syd!" She turned to
Livingston and smiled. "William has two regular customers already, you
know. I am afraid to think what will happen if he camps here all
summer."

"I am inclined to add my name to the list if he entertains such charming
ones every day," replied the sheep-man.

"I meant the _boys_," said Hope in all seriousness.

Sydney laughed outright.

"How do you know but what he meant the boys, too?" he asked. She looked
at him with an assumption of surprise. "A girl never makes such a
mistake as that," she said. "It was a very pretty compliment."

"Worthy of O'Hara," he put in.

"Worthy of Mr. Livingston," she declared. "O'Hara's compliments are not
so delicate. They are beautifully worded, but unconvincing."

"I believe she's actually giving you credit for extreme honesty!"
exclaimed Carter.

"I sincerely trust so," replied his friend heartily. "It would be a most
pleasing compliment."

"Well, I should say it would be the biggest one _she_ ever paid anyone!
You're the first one Hope ever credited with honesty. You can sit for an
hour and tell her a great long story and she'll never give you the
satisfaction of knowing for sure whether she believes you or not. The
chances are she don't. She'll take your assertions, weigh every word,
and then draw her own conclusions."

"You only know from your own experience," demurred Hope. "All people
haven't your habit of departing from the truth, you know." Then to
Livingston: "Really, he can tell a terrible whopper with the straightest
face imaginable! He only proves to you how well I know him. Last summer
he told a girl a ridiculous story about snakes. It was her first visit
at the ranch, and for several days I thought something was the matter
with her brain. Every time she heard a grasshopper buzz anywhere near
she would give a shriek and turn deathly pale. She finally told me that
she feared rattlesnakes because Sydney had told her that that particular
buzz was the snake's death rattle and that something or somebody was
doomed for sure, that if the snake couldn't get the human victim it had
set its eyes upon, it crept into a prairie-dog hole and got one of them.
Of course that is only a sample of his very foolish yarns, which no one
but an ignorant person would think of believing."

"I remember," laughed Sydney. "That was that fair Lily Cresmond. She got
up and had breakfast with me at six o'clock this morning. Poor girl!
I'm afraid I've put my foot in it this time!"

"For goodness' sake, did she propose to you?" asked Hope, aghast.

"Not that I'm aware of!" answered Sydney. "No, it's worse than that. She
asked me to tell her really and truly why _you_ weren't at home this
summer. She crossed her heart, hoped to die she'd never breathe a word
of it to a living, human creature, so I told her that it pained me to
tell the sad story, but last season Freddie Rosehill had shown you such
evident admiration that your father had become thoroughly alarmed and
thought it best to keep you out of his way for the present. But I
suggested that you might face paternal wrath and come back just for one
look at the dear little boy."

"Sydney, you never did!" gasped Hope. "_How could you?_"

"Freddie came trotting out for his morning constitutional just as I was
riding away," he continued, "and he waved his cane in the air and
actually _ran_ down to the corral to say good-by. I really believe he
liked me for once because I was leaving, and he very gingerly asked
about you, and naturally was visibly relieved when I assured him that
you would probably not be home while he was there. Talk about your
joshers!" he said to Livingston. "Hope had the little Englishman so he
didn't know his soul was his own! She'd take him out on the prairie and
lose him, have him pop away for an hour at a stuffed chicken tied to the
top of a tree, shoot bullets through his hat by mistake, and about a
million other things too blood-curdling to mention. He didn't want to
refuse my aunt's invitation to join the party at the ranch every summer,
but his days and nights were spent in mortal terror of this dignified
daughter of the house. And I must say there wasn't much love lost
between them."

"A brainless little fop!" commented Hope.

"Well, it seems he had sense enough to catch that oldest Cresmond girl,
Lily, whose ears I filled with the pathetic story; but I didn't know it
then, that's the fun of it! He held out his fat little hand to me when
I started out this morning and said: 'I want your congratulations. Lily
has promised to be my Lady.' 'You don't say so,' I said. 'Lord, but what
a haul you've made, Rosehill!' 'Yes,' said he, 'she's a beauty!' 'And a
million or so from her papa'll set you up in housekeeping in great shape
over in Old England. I certainly congratulate you!' said I. He didn't
seem to have anything more to say, so I rode off, and do you know I
never once thought of what I'd told that girl about him liking you until
I was halfway here."

"Oh, Syd, what have you done!" cried Hope. "You ought to go right back
to the ranch and fix it up for them. It might be real serious!"

"Don't worry; they'll fix it up between them, just give 'em time,"
laughed Sydney. "But then I shouldn't like to be the cause of breaking
up such a match. I sure wouldn't!"

"I should say not! It would be terrible!" agreed Hope.

"No, I wouldn't like it on my conscience," continued Sydney, "to break
up such a good match by my thoughtless words. It would be too bad to
spoil two families!"

"I quite agree with you, excepting the lady, whom I do not know,"
remarked Livingston. "But I have met Rosehill. He is, in my estimation,
a worthless specimen of English aristocracy."

"Oh, they're mostly all alike, a mighty poor outfit all through, from
the ones I've known! But I guess they'll manage to fix it up among
themselves," laughed Hope.

At this remark Livingston looked oddly at the girl, then the brush
crackled near them, followed by the appearance of one of the twins, who,
smiling victoriously, held up for inspection a small string of trout.

"And here we've been wasting our time when we might have been fishing
instead!" exclaimed Hope, springing up from her mossy couch and minutely
examining the string of fish.

"You'll find fishing tackle, all you want, up at camp. William'll show
you," remarked Sydney. "For my part I shall stay here and gather
strawberry leaves for Miss Louisa to make into wreaths. Isn't this one a
daisy? It's too warm to fish, anyway," he concluded.

"You shall not decide for her, Syd," declared Hope. "Which would you
rather do, Louisa?"

The German girl shook her head, smiling a little. "It is very warm," she
said.

"Then you shall stay with Sydney," decided Hope. "But I am only going to
fish a little while, anyway, because I've got something else I want to
do." She looked up at Livingston, who had come near her, and laughed.
"Yes, you may go with me if you will show me how to cast a fly. Sydney
says you are an expert fisherman, but I don't know the first thing about
it. We will walk up the creek and fish down, because the boys are
fishing down here." She called to the boy, who was walking toward the
stream: "I'll be ready to go home in about an hour, wait for me!" He
nodded in reply. "Come on," she said to Livingston.

They had fished in silence some minutes, far up the stream at an open
point where several other smaller streams joined this, forming a broad
group of tiny, gravelly islands.

"I do think," said the girl finally, "that this is great sport, though I
cannot haul them out like you do. Now it must be luck--nothing more, for
we both have exactly the same kind of flies."

"You leave your fly too long in the water," said the man. "You should
cast more--like this."

"But I can't for the life of me get the hang of it," she exclaimed,
making a desperate attempt.

"Not like that," said Livingston. "Look, this is the way. There, you've
caught yourself!"

"Yes, how foolish," laughed the girl. "It's in there to stay, too!"

"Wait, I will assist you," he said, leaping across the stream which
separated them, and coming to her side.

"I think I can get it out all right," she said, throwing down her pole,
and using on the entangled hook more force than discretion. She laughed
in a half-vexed manner at her attempts, while Livingston stood near
watching, his eyes earnest, intent, his face illumed by a soft, boyish
smile of quiet enjoyment.

"If I had another hook I'd cut this off and leave it in there," she
said, "but the fishing is too fine to leave now. No, wait a minute,"
motioning him back with the disengaged hand while she tugged vigorously
at the hook with the other. "I can do it. If only the material in this
waist wasn't so strong, I might tear it out. How perfectly idiotic of me
to do such a thing, anyway!" Her cheeks were aflame with the exertion.
"You see," she continued, still twisting her neck and looking down
sideways at the shoulder of her gown where the hook was imbedded, "I
don't want to break it because we'd have to go way back to the camp and
start in over, and then it would be too late in the day. I don't see
what possessed that fish to get away with my other hook! But this goods
simply won't tear!"

"There's no other way," declared Livingston, with conviction. "You will
have to let me help you. I'll cut it out. See," he scrutinized the hook
very closely, while Hope threw down her arms in despair, "it's only held
by a few threads. If you don't mind doing a little mending, I will
perform the operation in a moment to your entire satisfaction."

"Well, hurry, please, because we are certainly wasting good time and
lots of fish."

"If all time were but wasted like this," he exclaimed softly, prolonging
the task.

She knew that he was taking undue advantage of the situation and that
she was strangely glad of it, recklessly glad, in her own fashion. She
had never looked at him so closely before. In this position he could not
see her. She noticed his broad, white forehead, and felt a strong desire
to touch the hair that dropped over it, then admonished herself for
feeling glad at his slowness.

From the hillside above them a man on a piebald horse watched the scene
interestedly. Without warning the girl's eyes lifted suddenly from the
soft, brown hair so near, and met those of the rider above.
Livingston's head was bent close to her own, so that he did not see the
leering, grinning face that peered down at them, but Hope caught the
look direct, and all, and more, than it seemed to imply. Her eyes
glittered with anger. Like a flash her hand sought her blouse and for an
instant the bright sunlight gleamed upon a small weapon. As quickly the
man wheeled his horse and disappeared behind the hill. With a deep flush
the girl hid the little revolver as Livingston, ignorant of the scene,
triumphantly held up for inspection the rescued fishhook.

"Making love, by the holy smoke," chuckled Shorty Smith to himself,
spurring up his piebald horse and heading off a stray calf. "So that's
what she does 'longside o' teachin' kids!"




CHAPTER XVII


Upon the highest ridge between the camp and old Peter's basin Hope and
the twins met Ned riding slowly along, his sturdy little legs drawn up
into the straps of a man's saddle. He had an old, discarded felt hat of
his father's, several sizes too large for him, pulled down until his
ears laid flat along the brim. From under its wide, dingy expanse his
sharp, little black eyes peered out inquisitively. In imitation of a
certain French breed whom he greatly admired, a large red handkerchief
was knotted about his waist.

He made a picturesque little figure in the bright sunlight as he rode
leisurely toward them.

"Where've you all been?" he called at the top of his boyish treble. "You
boys're goin' to catch it if you don't bring in those cows before
dark!"

"Who told you?" roared Dave.

"The old man told me to come an' look you fellers up. Where've you
been?" inquired the child, riding up alongside and swinging his horse
into pace with the others.

"Now you want to find out something," said Dan complacently.

"I don't _care_ where you've been," said the child indignantly, "but
you'd better be roundin' in them cows or you'll catch it!"

Hope rode up beside him. "I'm sorry you weren't home when we left. We've
been over at my cousin's camp. The next time you shall go along."

"Let's go to-morrow," suggested the boy eagerly, to which amusing
proposition she immediately agreed. "Say," he continued, "I seen Long
Bill and some o' them fellers drive in a bunch of mavericks off'n the
range, an' they're goin' to brand 'em back of old Peter's this evenin'.
There was a cow with an O Bar brand on her, followed 'em all the way
down, bellerin' an' makin' a big fuss, an' they can't get rid of her.
They give me a half a dollar to drive her back, but she turned so quick
I couldn't do nothin' with her, so I thought I'd just let 'em take care
of her themselves."

"Are you sure about that brand?" asked Hope quickly.

"Sure as anything," replied the boy. "Why?"

"I think you must be mistaken," she told him. "For it would be very
queer if one of my father's cows should be following a stray maverick up
to old Peter's place."

"I'll tell you something," whispered the boy, leaning toward her. "They
wasn't yearlings at all, they was bringin' in, only big calves."

Her face darkened savagely. "Come," she exclaimed, "I'm going to see for
myself!"

"Tattle-tale!" cried the sweet-voiced twin. "Now you'll get us into a
scrape for tellin'. I'll lick you for this!"

The girl turned her horse sharply about, stopped it short, facing them
fiercely.

"You coward!" she exclaimed. "That child didn't know what he was
telling! He's honest. If either of you touch him, or say one unkind word
to him about this, I'll make you smart for it!"

"I didn't mean nothin'," declared the soft-voiced twin suavely.

"Well, I guess you didn't if you know what's good for you!" she
exclaimed, still angry. "Now what are you going to do about it, go home
like babies, or stand by me and do what I tell you?"

"You bet I'll stand by you!" roared Dave.

"I reckon you're our captain, ain't you?" said the other sweetly.

"I'm a scout, I am!" exclaimed the boy, Ned, riding close beside her.

She mused for a moment with darkening eyes, putting her elbow upon the
saddle's horn and resting her chin in the hollow of her hand.

"It's all right," she said at length deliberately. "Ned will show you
where the cow is, and you boys drive it up to old Peter's corral just as
quickly as you can ride. Don't let anyone see you. When you have done
that, go up to the school-house and wait there for me. Now hurry, and
don't let anyone see you drive in that cow. Go around this other side of
old Peter's."

She motioned her hand for them to go, and waited until they were out of
sight, then rode on to the school coulee which led into old Peter's
basin. It was a long, roundabout way, but her horse covered the ground
rapidly.

From the hill behind the school-house she saw Livingston driving back to
his ranch. She stood out in full relief against the green hillside, and
if he had glanced in that direction must surely have seen her. From that
distance she could not tell if he had done so or not. She wondered what
he would think if he saw her there alone. Then to get sooner out of
sight she ran her horse at full speed up the school coulee toward old
Peter's basin.

Livingston saw her quite plainly; from that distance there was no
mistaking her. Then he proceeded to do a very unwise thing. He put his
horses to their full speed, reached his stables in a few moments, threw
his saddle on his best horse and set out in the direction the girl had
taken.

Hope made her way quickly up to the top of the divide, then skirmished
from brush patch to brush patch, keeping well out of sight until she
reached the brush-covered entrance of Peter's basin. There she had a
plain view of the small cabin, the rude stable, and corral, without
herself being observed by the occupants of the place, and there she
settled herself to wait the appearance of the cow, whose queer actions
had been reviewed to her.

It was difficult to believe that she was actually in the midst of cattle
thieves, though the suspicion had more than once crossed her mind.

She held that class of men in the utmost loathing, and felt herself to
be, now, in the actual discovery of the crime, a righteous instrument in
the arm of justice.

The unmistakable figure of Long Bill loafed serenely in the doorway; old
Peter hobbled about, in and out of the house, while back near the corral
a man was carrying an armful of wood. This man the girl watched with
particular interest. He took the sticks to one side of the corral, and
getting down upon his knees proceeded to arrange them on the ground in
methodical order, into the shape of a small pyramid. That done to his
satisfaction, he lounged back to the cabin and took a seat beside Long
Bill in the doorway.

Presently all three men went back to the corral, and looked over the
rails at several small creatures which were running about the enclosure.

"Them ain't bad-lookin' fellers," Long Bill was saying.

Hope, from her position in the brush, tried to imagine what they were
talking about, for the distance was too great to carry the sound of
their voices.

"I reckon we might as well git 'em branded an' have it over with,"
suggested Shorty Smith, the third man of the party.

"I reckon we might as well," replied Long Bill. Old Peter shook his head
doubtfully.

"Go ahead," he grunted. "But remember I don't know nothin' about these
here calves! You're just usin' my corral here to-day, an' the devil keep
your skins if you git caught!"

"Oh, I don't know!" drawled Shorty Smith.

"Well, I know!" roared the old man. "If you can't take my advice an' put
this here thing off till after dark you kin take the consequences.
Anybody's likely to ride along here, an' I'd like to know what kind of a
yarn you'd have to tell!"

"Now you know them calves 're yourn," drawled Shorty Smith, in an
aggravating tone, as he climbed up and seated himself on the top pole of
the corral. "You know them 're yourn, every blame one, an' their mothers
're back in the hills there!"

"Your cows all had twins, so you picked out these here ones to wean 'em,
if anybody should ask," said Long Bill, continuing the sport.

The old man uttered a string of oaths.

"Not much you don't pan 'em off onto me!" he exclaimed. "My cows ain't
havin' twins this year!"

"Some of Harris' has got triplets," mused Shorty Smith, at which Long
Bill laughed, exclaiming:

"Been lary ever since them stock-inspectors was up here last fall, ain't
you? Before that some o' your cows had a half a dozen calves. I should
'a' thought you had more grit'n that, Peter!"

The old man cursed some more. Shorty Smith jumped down from his high
perch and fetched a long, slender rod of iron from between two logs of
the cow-shed.

"Might as well git down to business," he said as he threw the branding
iron on the ground beside the symmetrical pyramid of fire-wood, which he
proceeded to ignite.

"Let up, old man," growled Long Bill, "I'll take the blame o' the whole
concern an' you ken rake in your share in the fall without any
interference whatsomever."

"Don't git scared, Peter, you ain't got long to live on this here
planet, nohow, so you can finish your days in peace. If there's any time
to be served we'll do it for you," drawled Shorty.

"That's what I call a mighty generous proposition," remarked Long Bill,
as he coiled up his rope. "We'll just git the orniments on these
innocent creatures an' shut 'em up in the shed fer a spell."

"Yes, yes! Git the job over with if you ain't goin' to wait till after
sundown," exclaimed old Peter nervously.

They set to work at once, roping, throwing, and putting a running brand
on the frightened calves. As each one was finished to the satisfaction
of the operator it was put into the cow-shed nearby--a rude sort of
stable, where it was turned loose and the door securely fastened on the
outside with a large wooden peg.

They had been working industriously for perhaps half an hour when old
Peter glanced up from the calf upon which he was sitting and encountered
Hope Hathaway's quiet eyes watching them interestedly. She stood beside
the cow-shed but a few feet away, and held her horse by the bridle.

"Good God!" screamed the old man, nearly losing his balance. "Where did
you come from?"

The other men, whose backs were toward her, glanced about quickly, then
proceeded in well assumed unconcern with the work upon which they were
engaged.

"I hope I'm not intruding," said the girl.

"Not at all," replied Shorty Smith politely. "It ain't often we're
favored by the company of wimmen folks."

"Those are fine-looking calves you've got there," observed the girl.

"Pretty fair," replied Shorty Smith, assisting the animal to its feet.

The visitor stepped to one side while he dragged it into the shed and
closed the door, fastening it with the peg. Then Long Bill proceeded to
throw another victim with as much coolness as though Hope had not been
there with her quiet eyes taking in every detail.

Old Peter had not uttered a word since his first involuntary
exclamation, and though visibly agitated, proceeded in a mechanical
manner to assist with the branding, but he kept his head down and his
eyes obstinately averted from the girl's.

Nearly a dozen had been branded, and only one, besides the last victim
already thrown to the ground, remained in the corral.

Hope's whole attention was apparently taken up with the branding, which
she watched with great interest. Old Peter gradually regained his
equilibrium, while Long Bill and Shorty Smith had begun to congratulate
themselves that their spectator was most innocent and harmless. Yet as
Hope moved quietly back to her position beside the rude stable building
she not only observed the three men intent upon the branding, but noted
the approach of a large cow which had appeared from the right-hand
coulee about the time she left her hiding-place in the brush.

If the men had not been so busy they would undoubtedly have seen this
particular cow coming on steadily toward the corral, now but a rod
distant. They would have noticed, too, the girl's hand leave her side
like a flash and remove the large, smooth peg from where Shorty Smith
had hastily inserted it in the building. They would have seen the stable
door open slowly by its own weight, and then the peg quickly replaced.
What they did notice was that Miss Hathaway came very near to them, so
close that she leaned over old Peter's shoulders to observe the smoking,
steaming operation.

For a moment she stood there quietly, then all at once exclaimed in some
surprise:

"Why, your calves are all out!" Instantly the greatest consternation
reigned, then old Peter hobbled to his feet with an oath.

"Every blamed one," said Shorty Smith. "How 'n blazes did that happen?"

"I reckon you didn't put that peg in right," drawled Long Bill.

"Look!" screamed old Peter, pointing at the large cow that had come
nearer and had picked out from the assortment of calves one of which it
claimed absolute possession. It was at this unfortunate moment that
Livingston, quite unobserved, rode into Peter's basin.

"I'll help you drive them in," volunteered Hope, instantly mounting her
horse and riding into their midst. Then a queer thing followed. Old
Peter, with a cat-like motion, sprang toward her and covered her with a
six-shooter.

"Git off'n my place, you she-devil!" he cried, his face livid with rage
and fear.

"Good God, don't shoot, you fool!" cried Shorty Smith, while Long Bill
made a stride toward the frenzied old man.

Livingston's heart stood still. He was some distance away and, as usual,
unarmed. For an instant he stopped short, paralyzed by the sight. Then
the girl wheeled her horse suddenly about as if to obey the command. As
she did so a report rang out and old Peter, with the flesh ripped from
wrist to elbow, rolled over in a convulsed heap. It was all so sudden
that it seemed unreal. Hope sat on her quivering horse, motionless,
serene, holding in her hand a smoking revolver.

Long Bill and his companion stood like statues, dumfounded for the
instant, but Livingston, with a bound, was at the girl's side, his face
white, his whole being shaken.

"Thank God!" he cried in great tenderness. "You are all right!"

"What made you come here?" she exclaimed in sudden nervousness, which
sounded more like impatience.

Then their eyes met. Her own softened, then dropped, until they rested
upon the gun in her hand. A flush rose to her face and her heart beat
strangely, for in his eyes she had seen the undisguised love of a great,
true soul. For an instant she was filled with the wild intoxication of
it, then the present situation, which might now involve him, returned to
her with all its seriousness. The danger must be averted at once, she
decided, before he learned the actual truth.

"Poor old man!" she exclaimed. Then turned to Long Bill and his
companion. "I'm awfully sorry I had to hurt him, but he actually made me
nervous! I had an idea he was crazy, but I never believed he was
perfectly mad. He ought to be watched constantly and all dangerous
weapons kept away from him. Didn't you know he was dangerous?"

Shorty Smith suddenly rose to meet the situation.

"I knowed he was crazy," he said, "but I didn't know he was as plumb
locoed as that."

"Well, he's out of business for awhile," remarked the girl. "You boys
better bandage up his arm and carry him into the house. I'll send over
old Mother White Blanket when I get back. I guess you can get in the
calves by yourselves all right, for really I feel very shaken and I
think I'll go right home. You'll go with me, won't you, Mr. Livingston.
But the poor old crazy man! You boys will take good care of him, won't
you--and let me know if I can be of any assistance."

"Well, what do yo' think?" asked Shorty Smith, as Hope and her companion
disappeared from the basin.

"What'd I think?" exclaimed Long Bill. "I think we've been pretty badly
_done_!"

"Oh, I don't know," drawled Shorty Smith, "I reckon she ain't goin' to
say nothin' about _me_!"




CHAPTER XVIII


"I'll tell you what I'd do 'bout it, if I was you," said Shorty Smith to
the twins, several days later, as he handed back a folded sheet of
paper. "I'd git your teacher to read that there letter. There's
something in it she ought to know 'bout. Better not tell her first where
you got it. Let on you don't know where it come from. There's somethin'
there she'll like to hear 'bout, that you kids ain't old enough to
understand."

"Oh, is that so!" interposed Dan.

"I ain't a-goin' to tell you nothin' about it, but like enough she will,
an'll thank you fer givin' it to her," said Shorty.

"If that writin' wasn't so funny I'd make it out myself," replied the
soft-voiced twin, "fer I think you're jobbin' us, Shorty."

"No, I ain't," he replied. "An' I'll back up my friendship fer you by
givin' you this!" He took from his pocket a silver dollar and handed it
to the boy, who pocketed it, and, followed by his brother, walked away
without another word.

Shorty Smith also walked away, in the opposite direction, without a
word, but he chuckled to himself, and his mood was exceedingly jubilant.

"She done us all right, an' may play the devil yet, but I'll git in a
little work, er my name ain't Shorty Smith!" Such was the substance of
his thoughts during the next few days.

That afternoon Hope stood in the doorway of the school-house, watching
her little brood of pupils straggling down the hill.

Louisa, who came daily to be with her beloved friend, had started home
with the two eldest Harris girls, for Hope, in her capacity of teacher,
occasionally found work to detain her for a short time after the others
had gone. This teaching school was not exactly play, after all.

The twins lingered behind, seemingly engaged in a quiet discussion.
Finally they came back to the door.

"Here's somethin' for you to read," said the soft-voiced boy, handing
her a folded paper, while Dave leaned against the building with an ugly
scowl on his face.

"To read," asked Hope, turning it over in her hand. "Who wrote it, and
where did you get it?" She stepped out of the doorway onto the green
grass beside them.

"Read it," said the breed boy. "It's somethin' you ought to know."

"Something I ought to know? But who wrote it?" insisted the girl.

"A woman, I reckon," replied the boy. "You just read it, an' then you'll
know all about it."

Hope laughed, and slowly opened the much soiled, creased missive. "Why
didn't you tell me at once that it was for me?" she asked.

The writing was in a bold, feminine back-hand, and held her attention
for a moment. The thought occurred to her that Clarice might have
written from the ranch, but there was something unfamiliar about it.
She looked first at the signature. "Your repentant Helene," it was
signed. Helene,--who was Helene, she wondered; then turned the paper
over. "My darling Boy," it started. In her surprise she said the words
aloud.

"Why, that's not for me! Where did you boys get this letter? Now tell
me!" She was very much provoked with them.

The soft-voiced twin smiled.

"I thought you'd like to know what was in it," he remarked, in evident
earnestness.

"That doesn't answer my question," she said with some impatience.
"_Where_ did you get it?"

"We found it," replied Dave gruffly, still scowling.

"And you boys bring a letter to _me_ that was intended for someone else,
and _expect_ me to _read_ it!" She folded it up and handed it back to
the boy. "Go and give that to whom it belongs, and remember it's very
wrong to read another person's letter. Tell me where you got it. I
insist upon knowing."

"Oh, we just found it up on the hill last night," replied the
soft-voiced twin evasively.

"Why don't you tell her the whole shootin' match!" roared the blunt
Dave. "You're a dandy! We found it up in the spring coulee last night
near where Mr. Livingston's sheep're camped. He was up there before
dark, cuttin' 'em out. This here letter dropped out of his pocket when
he threw his coat on a rock up there, an' so Dan an' me an' Shorty Smith
came along an' picked it up."

"Mr. Livingston's," said Hope, suddenly feeling oddly alarmed. "Not
_his_--you must be mistaken! Why, it began--it was too--_informal_--even
for a sister, and he has no sister, he told me so!"

"It's for him all right, for here's the envelope." Dan took it from his
pocket and handed it to her. It left no room for doubt. It was directed
to him, and bore an English postmark. He had no sister. Then it must be
from his sweetheart--and he told her he had no sweetheart. A sudden pain
consumed her.

"I reckon it's from his wife," said the soft-voiced twin.

"He has no wife," said Hope quietly.

"Oh, yes, he has! That's what they say," declared the boy.

"They lie," she replied softly. "I _know_ he has no wife."

"I'll bet you he left her in England," said the boy. "That's what the
men say."

"Your repentant Helene," repeated the girl over and over to herself.

Suddenly suspicion, jealousy, rage, entered her heart, setting her brain
on fire. She turned to the boy like a fury. "Give me that letter!"

Frightened beyond speech by the storm in her black eyes, he handed it to
her and watched her as with a set face and strangely brilliant eyes she
began to read. Every word branded itself upon her heart indelibly.

       *       *       *       *       *

MY DARLING BOY: Can it be that you actually refuse to allow me to come
there? Admitting I have wronged you in the past, can you not in your
greatness of heart find forgiveness for a weak woman--a pleading
woman----

       *       *       *       *       *

There at the foot of the first page the girl stopped, a sudden terror
coming over her.

"_What have I done!_" she cried, crushing the letter in her hand. "_What
have I done!_" Hysterically she began tearing it into small pieces,
throwing them upon the ground.

"Now we can't give it back to him," deplored the twin, recovering from
his fright.

"What have I done?" repeated the girl again, softly. Then in an agony of
remorse she went down upon her knees in the cool grass and picked up
each tiny scrap of paper, putting it all back into the envelope. She
stood for a moment looking down the long green slope below, shamed,
disgusted--a world of misery showing in her dark eyes. "You're a mighty
fine specimen of womanhood!" she exclaimed aloud; then turning about
suddenly became aware that her small audience was watching her with some
interest.

"You boys get on your ponies and go right straight home!" she exclaimed
in a burst of temper. "You're very bad, both of you, and I've a good
notion to punish you!" She went into the school-house and slammed the
door, while the twins lost no time in leaving the premises. Not far away
they met old Jim McCullen.

"Where's your teacher?" he asked, stopping his horse in the road.

"She's back there," said the soft-voiced twin, pointing toward the
school-house. "But you'd better stay away, for she's got blood in her
eye to-day!"

"No wonder, you young devils!" laughed Jim, riding on.

He knocked at the school-house door and, receiving no answer, walked in.

"Oh, Jim!" exclaimed the girl, rising from the small table at the end of
the room. "I thought it was some of the children returning. I'm awfully
glad to see you! You've been gone an age. Come, sit down here in this
chair, I'm afraid those seats aren't large enough for you."

"I'll just sit on this here recitation bench," replied Jim, "that's what
you call it, ain't it? I want to see how it feels to be in school again.
I reckon it'll hold me all right."

He seated himself with some care, while the teacher sank back at her
table.

"You don't seem very pert-lookin', Hopie," he continued, noticing her
more carefully. "What's the matter?"

She looked down at her papers, then up at him with something of a smile.

"I'm twenty years old," she replied, "and I don't know as much as I did
ten years ago."

"You know too much," replied McCullen. "You know too much to be happy,
an' you think too much. You wasn't happy at home, so you come up here,
an' now your gittin' the same way here. You'll have to git married,
Hopie, an' settle down; there ain't no other way."

"Mercy!" exclaimed the girl, "that would settle me sure enough! What a
horrible proposition to consider! Just look at my mother--beset with
nervousness and unrest; look at that poor Mrs. Cresmond and a dozen
others--perfect slaves to their husbands. Look at Clarice--she never
knew a moment's happiness until Henry Van Rensselaer died! Yes, I think
marriage _settles_ a girl all right! What terrible mismated failures on
every hand! It's simply appalling, Jim! I've never yet known one
perfectly happy couple, and how any girl who sees this condition about
her, everywhere, can dream her own ideal love dream, picture her ideal
man, and plan and believe in an ideal life, while she herself is
surrounded by such pitiful object-lessons, is a wonder!"

"I ain't much of a philosopher," said old Jim, "but it's always been my
notion that most wimmen _don't_ see what's goin' on around 'em. They
think their own troubles is worse'n anybody's an' 're so taken up
whinin' over 'em that their view is somewhat obstructed. Take the
clear-headed person that _can_ see, an' they ain't a-goin' to run into
any matrimonial fire, no more'n I'm goin' to head my horse over a
cut-bank. They're goin' straight after the happiness they know exists,
an' they ain't goin' to make no mistake about it neither, if they've got
any judgment, whatever."

"What made my mother marry my father?" asked the girl, lifting up her
head and facing old Jim squarely. "That's the worst specimen of
ill-assorted marriages I know of."

Jim McCullen looked perplexed for an instant.

"I don't think that was in the beginning," he replied thoughtfully, "but
your mother got to hankerin' after her city life, her balls an' theaters
an' the like o' that. After she got a fall from her horse an' couldn't
ride no more she didn't seem to take interest in anything at the ranch,
an' kept gettin' more nervous all the time. I reckon her health had
something to do with it, an' then she got weaned from the ranch, bein'
away so much. It wasn't her life any more."

"And now even her visits there are torture to her," said Hope bitterly.
"She is drunk with the deadly wine of frivolous uselessness--society!"
Then sadly, "What a wealth of happiness she might have possessed had
she chosen wisely!"

"But she was like a ship without a rudder; she didn't have no one to
guide her, an' now she thinks she's happy, I reckon," remarked McCullen,
adding, after a pause, "If she thinks at all!"

"And poor Clarice was a baby when _she_ married," mused the girl.

"And that Cresmond woman always was a blame fool," concluded Jim. "So
there's hope for you yet, don't you reckon there is? That reminds me,
here's a letter from O'Hara. There's a nice fellow for you, Hopie."

"Yes, he's a good boy, Larry is," she remarked absently, taking the
letter he handed to her.

"Why, he says he is coming over here to stay awhile with Sydney, and he
hopes I won't be----" She smiled a little and tucked the letter in her
belt. "That'll keep," she said. "Come on, I'm going over to camp with
you, Jim."




CHAPTER XIX


"Your horse don't look very tired," remarked the girl as they rode
easily up the gulch toward Carter's camp. "When did you start?"

"Left 'bout noon," replied McCullen. "No, he ain't tired; ain't even
warm, be you, old man? Just jogged along easy all the way an' took my
time. No great rush, anyhow. Cattle 're gittin' pretty well located up
here now--good feed, fresh water, an' everything to attract 'em to the
place. Never saw any stock look better'n that little bunch o' steers is
lookin'. Market's way up now, an' they ought to be shipped pretty soon."

"Why _don't_ you ship them, then?" asked Hope, leaning forward to brush
a hornet from her horse's head.

"Oh, you see," said the man lamely, "them cattle ain't in such all-fired
good fix but what they might be better, an' I reckon your cousin ain't
in any hurry to ship, nohow. Pretty good place to camp up here in
summer. Cool--my, but it was blasted hot down at the ranch this mornin',
an' the misquitoes like to eat me up! No misquitoes up here to bother,
good water, good fishin', good company,--an' who under the sun would
want to quit such a camp?"

"I'm willing," said the girl, looking at him with fathomless eyes, "I'm
perfectly willing for him to camp here all summer. It's quite convenient
to have you all so near. Of course I'm getting used to the grub down
there--some, by this time. Don't think I do not appreciate your being
here, dear old Jim! But you know I understand, just the same, why you
are here! And I think," she added softly, "I couldn't have stood it if
he hadn't showed that he cared for me just so."

"Cared!" exclaimed the old fellow. "Cared _for you_! Why, Hopie, your
father worships the ground you walk on! He's a great, good-hearted man,
the best in the world, and you mustn't have no hard feelin's agin' him
for any little weaknesses, because the good in him is more'n the good in
most men. There ain't no one that's perfect, but he's better'n most of
us, I reckon. An' he loves you, an' is so proud of you, Hopie!"

"Oh, I know it, I know it!" exclaimed the girl passionately.

"An' your mother's goin' East next month," concluded McCullen. "She's
very anxious to get away."

"My poor father!" said Hope softly. Then more brightly: "I suppose
Sydney's out with the cattle."

"Them cattle 're gettin' pretty well located," replied McCullen. "Don't
need much herdin'. No, I seen him there at Harris' as I come along. He
said he was goin' to take you an' that little flaxen-haired girl out
ridin', but concluded, as long as you was busy at the school-house, that
he'd just take the little one--providin' she'd go. He was arguin' the
question with her when I rode by, an' I reckon he's there talkin' to her
yet, er else givin' her a ridin' lesson. He'll make a good horsewoman
out o' her yet, if her heart ain't buried too deep up there under the
rocks."

"Oh, Jim!" rebuked the girl. "It's _dreadful_ to talk like that, and her
poor heart is just _crushed_! It's pitiful!"

"I reckon that's just what Sydney thinks about it," replied Jim, his
eyes twinkling. "You ain't goin' to blame him for bein' sympathetic, be
you, Hopie?"

She laughed, but nervously.

"Louisa's the sweetest thing I ever saw, Jim! She's promised to stay and
go back to the ranch with me in the fall when school is over. Isn't it
nice to have a sister like that? But goodness, she wouldn't look at
Syd--not in ten years!"

She was so positive in this assertion that it left Jim without an
argument. She slowed down her horse to a walk, and he watched her take
O'Hara's letter from her belt and read the lengthy epistle from
beginning to end. Not a change of expression crossed the usual calm of
her face. But for a strange force of beauty and power, by which she
impressed all with whom she came in contact, her lack of expression
would have been a defect. This peculiar characteristic was an added
charm to her strange personality. She was rarely understood by her best
friends, who generally occupied themselves by wondering what she was
going to do next.

It may be that old Jim McCullen, calmly contemplating her from his side
of the narrow trail, wondered too, but he had the advantage of most
people, for he knew that whatever she did do would be the nearest thing
to her hand. There was nothing variable or fitful about Hope.

She folded her letter and tucked it back in her belt, her only comment
being, as she spurred her horse into a faster gait: "Larry says he is
coming over here one of these days."

They rode past the camp and on to the flat beyond, where grazed Sydney's
two hundred head of steers. These they rode around, while Jim reviewed
the news of the ranch and round-up, in which the girl found some
interest, asking numerous questions about the recent shipment of cattle,
the tone of the market, the prospect for hay, the number of cattle
turned on the range, and many things pertaining to the work of the
ranch, but never a question concerning the idle New Yorkers who made up
her mother's annual house-party. In them she took, as usual, no
interest.

She finally left her old friend and turned her horse's head back toward
Harris' still as much perturbed in heart as when McCullen knocked at her
school-house door. She tormented herself with unanswerable questions,
arriving always at the same conclusion--that after all it only seemed
reasonable to suppose Livingston should be married. It explained his
conduct toward her perfectly. She wondered what the woman, Helene, had
done to deserve such unforgiveness from one who, above all men, was the
most tender and thoughtful. She concluded that it must have been
something dreadful, and, oddly for her, began to feel sorry for him. She
saw him when she reached the top of the divide, riding half a mile away
toward his ranch buildings. Then a certain feeling of ownership, of
pride, took possession of her, crowding everything before it. How well
he sat his horse, in his English fashion, she thought. What a physique,
what grace of strength! Then he disappeared from her sight as his horse
plunged into the brush of the creek-bottom, and Hope, drawing a long
breath, spurred up her own horse until she was safely out of sight of
ranch and ranch-buildings. A bend in the road brought her face to face
with Long Bill and Shorty Smith.

"Hello," said Shorty Smith, drawing rein beside her. "I was a lookin'
for you."

"Really," said the girl, stopping beside him and calmly contemplating
both men.

"Yep," nodded Long Bill politely, "we was huntin' fer you, Miss
Hathaway."

"You see it's like this," explained Shorty Smith; "the old man, he ain't
a-doin' very well. I reckon it's his age. That there wound of his'n
won't heal, so we thought mebby you had some arnica salve er something
sort o' soothin' to dope him with."

"I haven't the salve, but I might go over there myself if you want an
anodyne," replied Hope, unsmiling at the men's blank faces.

"I'm goin' to ride to town to-morrow and I reckoned if you didn't have
no salve you could send in for it."

"Oh, I see!" Hope's exclamation came involuntarily. "What do you want to
get for him and how much money do you want for it?"

"Well, you see, he needs considerable. Ain't got nothin' comfortable
over there; nothin' to eat, wear--nothin' at all."

"All right," replied the girl in her cool, even tone. "I'll see that he
is supplied with everything, but will attend to the matter myself.
Good-evening!" She rode past them rapidly, and they, outwitted in their
little scheme for whisky-money, rode on their way toward old Peter's
basin.

Sydney's horse stood outside of Harris'. He left a group of men who were
waiting the call for supper, and came out in the road to meet the girl
when she rode up.

"I have been waiting for you," he said.

"And I have been over to camp and around the cattle with Jim," she
replied.

"Then come on and ride back up the road with me a ways, I want to see
you," said Carter, picking up the bridle reins from the ground.

"But Louisa----" she demurred.

"Louisa's all right," he answered. "I've had her out for a ride, and now
she's gone in the house with that breed girl--Mary, I think she called
her. So you see she's in excellent hands."

Hope turned her horse about and rode away with him silently.

"I want to talk with you, anyway," he said, when they had gone a short
distance. "I haven't had a chance in a dog's age, you're always so
hemmed in lately."

"Well, what is it?" she questioned.

"There's some rumors going around that I don't exactly understand, Hope.
Have you been doing anything since you've been up here to raise a
commotion among these breeds?"

She turned to him with a shrug of contempt.

"You'll have to tell me what you're driving at before I can enlighten
you," she replied.

"Wait a minute," he said, "I want to light a cigarette." This
accomplished, he continued: "I saw one of the boys from Bill Henry's
outfit yesterday and he told me that he was afraid you were getting
mixed up in some row up here."

"_Who_ said so?" she demanded.

"Well, it was Peterson. You know he'll say what he's got to say, if he
dies for it." He waited a moment.

"If it was Peterson, go on. He's a friend, if he is a fool. What did he
have to say about me?" She flecked some dust from her skirt with the end
of her reins.

Sydney watched her carefully.

"He didn't say anything, exactly, about you," he replied. "That's what
I'm going to try to find out. He said there had been some kind of a
rumpus up here when you first came--that shooting at Livingston's
corral, you remember, and that it was rumored there had been some
sharp-shooting done, and you had been mixed up in it."

"Who told Peterson?" demanded the girl.

"Well, it seems that McCullen laid Long Bill out one evening over at
Bill Henry's wagon, for something or other, and this old squaw back
here, old Mother White Blanket, happened along in time to view the
fallen hero, who, it seems, is her son-in-law. She immediately fell into
a rage and denounced a certain school-ma'am as a deep-dyed villain."

"Villainess," corrected Hope serenely.

"Yes, I believe that was it," continued Sydney. "Anyway, she rated you
roundly and said you had been at the bottom of all the trouble, that you
had shot Long Bill through the hand, wounded several others, and
mentioned the herder who was killed."

"She lied!" said the girl with sudden whiteness of face. "That was a
cold-blooded lie about the herder!"

"I know that!" assured her cousin. "You don't suppose I ever thought
for a minute you were mixed up in it, Hopie, do you? I only wanted to
know how it happened that all these people are set against you."

"Because they know I'm on to their deviltry," she replied savagely. "I'd
like to have that old squaw right here between my hands, _so_, and hear
her bones crackle. How dare they say _I_ shot Louisa's poor, poor
sweetheart! Oh, I could exterminate the whole tribe!"

"But that wouldn't be lawful, Hopie," remarked Carter.

She turned to him with a half smile, resting one hand confidingly upon
his arm.

"Syd, dear, I don't care a bit about the whole concern, really, but
please don't mention it to anyone, will you?"

"You mean not to tell Livingston," he smiled.

"I mean not _anyone_. I shouldn't want my father to hear such talk.
Neither would you. What wouldn't he do!"

"Of course not," he agreed. "You'd get special summons, immediately, if
not sooner. But there's something more I wanted to ask you about. How
was it you happened to shoot old Peter?"

"How did you know?" she asked quickly.

"Now I promised I wouldn't mention the matter," he replied.

She studied for a moment.

"There's only one way you could have heard it," she finally decided in
some anger. "That person had no right to tell you."

"It was told with the best intentions, and for your own good, Hope, so
that I could look after you more carefully in the future."

"Look after me!" she retorted. "Well, I guess he found out there was one
time I could look out for myself, didn't he?"

"He seemed to think that more a miracle or an accident than anything
else, until I told him something about how quick you were with a gun. He
told me the old man was crazy, and had pulled his gun on you, but that
you had in some remarkable manner shot it out of his hand, shattering
the old fellow's arm. I assured him that I would see that the proper
authorities took care of old Peter, as soon as he had recovered
sufficiently. Now what'll we do with him, Hope?" She did not reply. Then
he continued: "I knew in a minute that you'd kept the real facts of the
case from Livingston. But you're not going to keep them from me."

"Now that you know as much as you do, I suppose I've got to tell you or
you'll be getting yourself into trouble, too," she replied. Then
impulsively, "Sydney, they're a lot of cattle thieves!"

"Why, of course! What did you expect?" he laughed.

"And I actually _caught_ them in the very act of branding calves that
didn't belong to them!"

The young man's face paled perceptibly.

"You didn't do anything as reckless as that, Hope!" he cried in
consternation. "It's a wonder they didn't kill you outright in
self-protection! Didn't you know that you have to be blind to those
things unless you're backed up by some good men!"

"You talk like a coward!" she exclaimed.

"Not much! You know I'm not that," he replied. "But I talk sense. Now,
if they know that you have positive proof of this, you'd better watch
them!"

"They all need watching up here. I believe they're all just the same.
And, Syd, I wanted to know the truth for myself, I wanted to _see_."
Then she reviewed to him just what had happened at old Peter's.

"I'll have them locked up at once," said Carter decisively. "That's just
where they belong."

"You won't do anything of the kind, Syd--not at present, anyway, for I
refuse to be witness against them."

"You're foolish, then," he replied, "for they're liable to do
something."

"If they're quicker than I am, all right," she replied fearlessly. "But
they are afraid of me now, and I've got them _just where I want them_."

He tried to reason with her, but in vain. She was obstinate in her
refusal to have the men arrested, and though Sydney studied the matter
carefully, he could find no plausible excuse for this foolish decision.

As Hope rode back once more toward Harris' the face of Shorty Smith,
insinuatingly leering, as she had seen it at the trout stream, came
again to torment her. She leaned forward in her saddle, covering her
face with her hands, and felt in her whole being the reason of her
decision.




CHAPTER XX


Larry O'Hara rode up to Sydney's camp late one afternoon, some two or
three weeks later, and finding the place deserted went in the cook-tent
and made himself at home. It had been a long, hot, dusty ride from
Hathaway's home-ranch. He had experienced some difficulty in finding the
place, and, having at length reached it, proceeded with his natural
adaptitude to settle himself for a prolonged stay.

He was a great, handsome, prepossessing young fellow, overflowing with
high spirits and good-nature. Though a natural born American, he was
still a typical Irishman, retaining much of the brogue of his Irish
parents, which, being more of an attraction in him than otherwise, he
never took the trouble to overcome. All the girls were in love with
Larry O'Hara, and he, in his great generosity of heart, knew it, and
loved them in return.

His affection for Hope Hathaway was something altogether different, and
dated two or three years back when he first saw her skimming across the
prairie on an apparently unmanageable horse. He proceeded to do the
gallant act of rescuing a lady. For miles he ran the old cow-pony that
had been assigned him, in hot pursuit, and when he had from sheer
exhaustion almost dropped to the ground she suddenly turned her horse
about and laughed in his face. It was an awkward situation. The
perspiration streamed from his forehead, his breath came in gasps. She
continued laughing. He mopped his face furiously, got control of his
breath, and exclaimed in deep emotion:

"Sure and is ridicule all I get when I have followed you for ten miles
on this baist of a horse, to offer you a proposition of marriage?"

Their friendship dated from that moment, and though Larry had renewed
his proposition of marriage every time he had seen her, yet there had
never been a break in their comradeship.

He looked about the well-appointed camp with a sigh of contentment. This
was something like living, he thought. His enforced confinement at the
ranch had been slow torture to him. He missed the presence of Hope and
Sydney, for to him they were the very spirit of the place, and he was
filled with anxiety to get away from it and join them.

After washing the dust from his face and hands he went through the
cook's mess-box, then, having nothing else to do, laid down for a nap on
one of the bunks in the second tent and was soon sleeping peacefully.

He never knew just how long he slept, though he declared he had not
closed his eyes, when a whispered conversation outside the tent brought
him to his feet with a start. It was suspicious to say the least, and he
tore madly at his roll of belongings in search of his revolver, which he
found in his hip-pocket, after he had scattered his clothes from one end
of the tent to the other.

It was not yet dark. The whispers came now from the opposite tent.
O'Hara's fighting blood was up. He gloried in the situation. Here was
his opportunity to hold up some thieving rascals. It was almost as good
as being a real desperado. It flashed upon him that they might be the
real article, but he would not turn coward. He would show them what one
man could do!

He peered cautiously out of the tent. Two horses with rough-looking
saddles stood at the edge of the brush not far away. Larry O'Hara would
not be afraid of two men.

He moved cautiously up to the front of the cook-tent, and throwing open
the flap called out in thundering tones: "Throw up your hands, ye
thieving scoundrels, or I'll have your loives!"

A pair of arms shot up near him like a flash, while a choking sound came
from the farther side of the mess-box. Two startled, pie-be-grimed boys
gazed in amazement into the barrel of Larry's gun, which he suddenly
lowered, overcome with surprise as great as their own.

"May heaven preserve us!" he cried. "I thought you were murdering
thieves! But if it's only supper you're after, I'll take a hand in it
meself!"

The soft-voiced twin recovered first.

"Say, where'd you come from? I thought that was the cook sleepin' in
there an' we wasn't goin' to disturb him to get our supper. What're
_you_ doin' 'round here, anyhow?"

"I'm a special officer of the law, on the lookout for some dangerous
criminals," replied Larry. "But I see I've made a great mistake this
time. It's not kids I'm after! I'll just put this weapon back in my
pocket to show that I'm friendly inclined. And now let's have something
to eat. You boys must know the ins and outs of this place pretty well,
for I couldn't find pie here when I came, or anything that looked loike
pie. Where'd you make the raise?"

The boys began to breathe easier, although an "officer of the law" was
something of which they stood in mortal terror. Yet this particular
"officer" seemed quite a jovial sort of a fellow, and they soon reached
the conclusion that he would be a good one to "stand in" with. The
soft-voiced twin sighed easily, and settled himself into a familiar
position at the table, remarking as he did so:

"Oh, we're to home here! This camp belongs to a friend of ourn." He
pulled the pie toward him. "Here, Dave," he said to the other, who had
also recovered from his surprise, "throw me a knife from over there. I
reckon I ain't a-goin' to eat this here pie with my fingers! An' get out
some plates for him an' you. No use waitin' for the cook to come in an'
get our supper. Ain't no tellin' where he's gone."

"You're a pretty cool kid," remarked O'Hara, helping himself to the pie.
"I'll take a piece of pie with you for company's sake, though I'm
inclined to wait for the cook of this establishment. A good, warm meal
is more to my liking. Where do you fellows live?"

"Over here a ways," replied Dan cautiously.

"Know of any bad men that wants arresting?" continued O'Hara. "I'm in
the business at present."

"I reckon I do," replied the boy, lowering his voice to a soft, sweet
tone. "There's a mighty dangerous character I can put you onto if you'll
swear you'll never give me away."

"I'll never breathe a word of it," declared O'Hara; "just point out your
man to me; I'll fix him for you!"

"What'll you do to him?" asked Dan, in great earnestness. O'Hara
laughed.

"I'll do just whativer you say," he replied. "What's his crime?"

"Well, I'll tell you," said the boy deliberately, while Dave listened in
open-mouthed wonderment. "He's a bad character, a tough one! He gits
drunker'n a fool and thinks he runs the earth, an' he licks his children
if they happen to open their heads! I never seen him steal no horses, er
kill anyone, but he's a bad man, just the same, an' needs lockin' up for
'bout six months!" Dave, finally comprehending his twin, jumped up and
down, waving his arms wildly above his head.

"You bet you! Lock him up, that's the checker! Lock the old man in jail,
an' we can do just as we want to!" he exclaimed.

"But you know," said O'Hara impressively, his eyes twinkling with
suppressed merriment, "it's like this. There's a law that says if a
man--a _family_ man--be sent to jail for anything less than cold-blooded
murder, his intire family must go with him to look after him. Didn't you
ever hear of that new law? Now that would be a bad thing for his boys,
poor things! It would be worse than the beating they get. But you just
give Larry O'Hara the tip, and the whole family'll get sent up!"

"Not much you don't!" roared Dave to his twin, who for the instant
seemed dumfounded by this piece of news from the "officer of the law."

"I reckon," said the soft-voiced schemer after a quiet pause, "his boys
'ud rather take the lickin's than get sent up, so you might as well let
him alone. You're sure there ain't no mistake 'bout that? Don't seem
like that's quite right."

"Sure!" replied Larry, enjoying the situation to its full extent.

"Well, I ain't," decided the boy finally. "I'm goin' to ask the teacher.
Mebby you're loadin' us. You bet she'll know!"

Larry O'Hara became suddenly awake to a new interest. "Where is
she--your teacher?" he inquired.

"I dunno," answered the boy. "Mebby home."

At this juncture the flap of the tent was pushed open and in bustled the
little English cook.

All three of the occupants started guiltily, while William looked from
his visitors to the remnants of pie upon the table with some
astonishment.

"Well, Hi'll be blowed!" he ejaculated. Then noticing that O'Hara was
not an ordinary specimen of Westerner, he changed his expression and
began wagging his head, offering excuses for his tardiness.

"I had orders to get a warm bite at eight o'clock, so I went out 'untin'
a bit on my own account. Did you come far, sir?"

"All the way from Hathaway's ranch," replied Larry. "And the way I took,
it couldn't have been a rod less than a hundred moiles. Sure, every bone
in me body is complaining!"

"Too bad, that," condoled William. "Hit's no easy road to find. I missed
hit once, myself. I think I seen you about the ranch, didn't I? What's
yer name?"

"I'm O'Hara," he replied. "If you haven't seen me, you've heard about
me, which amounts to the same thing. I'm glad to see you, my good man,
for I began to suspect that everyone had deserted camp. I was just going
to question these young natives here, as to the whereabouts of the
owners of this ranch, when you came in."

The twins were sidling toward the front of the tent with a view to hasty
retreat when the cook fixed his sharp little eyes upon them.

"Ain't I good enough to yous but you must come an' clean out all my
pastry when my back is turned? Hi'll overlook hit this time, if you get
out an' chop me some wood. 'Urry up now an' get to work! for they'll all
be along directly!" The boys made their escape from the tent, while the
cook continued: "They all went out 'untin' after some antelope, way up
there on the big mountain. They'll be in after a bit for a bite to heat,
so if you'll excuse me, Hi'll start things goin'."

The little cook put on his apron and hustled about, while O'Hara went
out and watched the boys break up some sticks of wood which they brought
from the nearby brush.

"Here, give me the job," the young man finally remarked. "It belongs to
me by rights for keeping you talking so long. If it hadn't been for me
you'd got away without being seen. Here, hand over your ax, and get
along home with you!"

"Say, you're all right, if you do belong to the law," said Dave, gladly
giving up the ax. They speedily made their escape, and none too soon,
for as they disappeared a group of riders came in sight on the opposite
side of the brush and soon surrounded the wood-chopper with hearty words
of welcome.




CHAPTER XXI


"My dear boy, I'm glad to see you!" called Sydney.

"Larry O'Hara chopping wood! Impossible!" declared Hope, as Carter rode
on past her. "It's an illusion--a vanishing vision. Our eyes deceive
us!"

"But it is a young man there," said Louisa. "A big one like Mr.
Livingston, not so slim like Sydney--your cousin."

"True enough," laughed Hope. "But it is the occupation--the ax, Louisa,
dear. I never knew Larry to do a stroke of work!"

"Ach, but he is handsome!" whispered Louisa.

"Don't let him know you think so," returned Hope. "He's spoiled badly
enough now." She turned to the man who rode on her opposite side. "He's
from the ranch--one of the guests from New York. He's the _dearest_
character!" After which exclamation she rode ahead and greeted the
newcomer.

"It never rains but it pours," said O'Hara, as he entered the tent with
Hope and Louisa, while Sydney and Livingston remained to take care of
the horses. "I thought awhile ago that I was stranded in a wilderness,
and here I am surrounded by beautiful ladies and foine gentlemen!"

"Right in your natural element," commented Hope. "That's why I couldn't
believe my eyes when I saw you out there alone with the ax--Larry O'Hara
chopping fire-wood!"

"Now, what's there funny about that?" asked Larry.

"I can't explain just now," laughed the girl. "But tell me, did you have
any trouble getting over here? Jim started for the ranch this afternoon.
Didn't you meet him on the road?"

"Not one living soul," replied Larry. "For I took a road nobody ever
traveled before."

"And got lost," said Hope.

"Yes, about four hundred toimes!"

"And yet you live to tell the tale! I'm awfully glad to see you, Larry!
Let's have a light in here, William, it's getting dark," she said.

The cook hustled about, and soon two lanterns, suspended from each end
of the ridge pole, flooded the tent with light.

"Now I can see you," exclaimed O'Hara to Hope, who had taken a seat upon
a box beside Louisa. "You're looking foine! The mountains must agree
with you--and your friend also," he added.

"Louisa is always fine! Are you not?" asked Hope.

Louisa laughed in her quiet little way. "The young man is very polite!"

Sydney opened the flap of the tent and looked in, then turned back again
for an instant.

"That'll be all right there, Livingston. There won't a thing touch it up
that tree! Come along in and get some chuck!"

"All right!" came the reply from the edge of the brush. Then Carter came
inside and drew up a seat beside the two girls.

"What's that you said, Miss Louisa?" he asked. "I didn't quite catch it.
You surely weren't accusing Larry of _politeness_!"

The girl bit her little white teeth into the red of her lower lip. Her
cheeks flushed and the dimples came and went in the delicate coloring.

"Was it wrong to say?" she asked hesitatingly.

"Not if it was true," he replied. "It's never wrong to tell the truth,
even in Montana."

"Oh, Syd, don't plague her! Larry included her in a little flattery--a
compliment; and she merely remarked upon his extreme politeness."

"And I am completely squelched," said O'Hara despairingly.

"Then you shouldn't try to flatter two people at once," declared Hope.

"American girls aren't so honest," said Carter, looking soberly into
Louisa's blue eyes.

She regained her composure with a little toss of her head.

"An American girl is my best friend--you shall say nodings about _dem_!
Ah, here comes Mr. Livingston mit de beautiful horns which he gif to
me!" she cried, clapping her hands.

"They're beauties, aren't they?" said Livingston, holding up the antlers
to view. "I'll get some of the Indians around here to fix them up for
you." He took them outside again, then came in and joined the others
around the camp table.

"Mr. Livingston was the lucky one to-day," said Hope to O'Hara; "but we
had a great hunt."

"I am not at all sure that I got him," said Livingston, seating himself
beside her. "I am positive another shot was fired at the same time, but
I looked around and saw no one. You came up a few moments afterward,
Miss Hathaway, and I have had a sort of rankling suspicion ever since
that there was some mystery about it."

"Then clear your mind of it at once," replied the girl. "I'll admit
that I fired a shot at the same instant you did, but I was on the
opposite side of the brush from where you were, and didn't see the
antelope at all. What I aimed at was a large black speck in the sky
above me, and this is my trophy." She drew from her belt a glossy, dark
eagle's feather, and handed it to him.

"May I have this?" he asked, taking it from her.

"Why, certainly," she answered carelessly.

O'Hara had been looking at Livingston closely, as though extremely
perplexed by his appearance. Suddenly he gave a deep laugh, jumped up
from his seat and began shaking him warmly by the hand.

"Well, if this isn't----"

"_Edward Livingston_," interrupted the other briefly.

"But who'd ever dream of seeing _you_ here in this country!" continued
O'Hara. "It was too dark to see you distinctly when you rode up, or I'd
have known you at once. I'm glad to see you; indeed, I am, sir!"

"How romantic!" exclaimed Hope. "Where did you ever meet Larry, Mr.
Livingston?"

"I had the privilege of meeting Mr. O'Hara at the home of an
acquaintance near London two or three years ago. I am very glad to have
the pleasure again." O'Hara was about to say something in reply to this,
but thought better of it, and remained silent, while Livingston
continued: "I never imagined that I should meet my Irish-American friend
in this far country, though you Americans do have a way of appearing in
the most unexpected places. This America is a great country. I like
it--in fact, well enough that I have now become one of its citizens."

"But you have not left England for good!" exclaimed O'Hara.

"For good, and for all time," replied Livingston, the youthful
expression of his face settling into maturer lines of sadness. "I have
not one tie left. My friend, Carter here, will tell you that I have
settled down in these mountains as a respectable sheep-man--respectable,
if not dearly beloved. Miss Hathaway does not believe there can be
anything respectable about the sheep business, but I have promised to
convert her. Is that not so?" he asked, turning to her.

"He has promised to give me a pet lamb to take back to the ranch," she
said, laughing. "I shall put a collar on its neck and lead it by a blue
ribbon! At least it will be as good an ornament as Clarice Van
Rensselaer's poodle. Horrible little thing!"

"Now just imagine the beautiful Mrs. Larry O'Hara trailing that kind of
a baist about the streets of New York! I move that the animal be
rejected with thanks!" exclaimed Larry. Livingston looked at him in
quiet amazement, then at Hope and Sydney to see how they took his
audacity.

"Don't worry, Larry, dear," replied Hope. "The pet lamb hasn't been
accepted yet--or you, either! I shall probably choose the pet lamb, but
rely on my good judgment, that's a nice boy, and don't let such a little
matter bother you!"

Larry heaved an unnaturally deep sigh, at which little Louisa laughed,
and Sydney patted him upon the shoulder, exclaiming:

"Cheer up! You have an even chance with the lamb. You don't need to be
afraid of such a rival!"

"But she says herself that the animal's chances are the best," said
Larry dismally. Then with a sudden inspiration: "How much'll you take
for that baist? I'll buy him of you--_Mr._ Livingston!"

"Now's your chance to make some money!" cried Sydney.

Livingston quickly entered the mood of the moment.

"Miss Hathaway has an option on the lamb," he said, looking at her. "If
she wants to throw it up I shall be glad to sell it to you."

"She wants her supper mostly now," said Hope. "Come on, let's eat, for
we must get back. See all the fine things William has prepared for us!"

After the meal, when the girls rose to depart, Larry insisted upon
accompanying them home.

"I am going along, too," laughed Sydney, "so I'll see that he gets back
to camp all right! You might as well let him go, Hope."

"Well, if he is so foolish, after his hard day's ride," she said, with a
shrug of the shoulders. "But get him a fresh horse, Sydney. At least we
can spare the poor tired animal!"

Sydney and O'Hara both went a short distance away to get the
saddle-horse which was feeding quietly on the hillside. Hope led her
horse down to the water and while it was drinking Livingston came and
stood beside her.

For a moment they remained there quiet, side by side, then the man
spoke:

"It is of such as this that life's sweetest moments are made. It seems
almost a sacrilege to break the spell, but I cannot always be silent.
You know I love you, Hope!"

"Yes," she replied carelessly, "I believe you told me so once before."
For an instant he did not speak. "It was here at the camp, another
evening like this, wasn't it?" she continued, in quite a matter-of-fact
tone.

"I will not believe that you have forgotten it," he exclaimed softly.
"It may have sounded foolish to you to hear the words, but I could not
help saying them!" He stood so close to her that he could feel her warm
breath. "It may be wrong to stand here with you now, alone. How quiet it
is! You and I together in a little world of our own! How I love you, my
girl, _love you_! I may not have the right to this much happiness, but
there is no moral law that man or God has made to prevent a man from
saying to the woman he loves, 'I love you!' Are you--do you care that I
have said it?"

"You must not--tell me again," she said, in a voice so forced that it
seemed to belong to some other person. Then she turned abruptly and led
her horse past him, up the bank of the creek, to Louisa waiting before
the tent.




CHAPTER XXII


In the cool of evening, between dark and moonrise, the time when night
is blackest, and shadows hang like a pall over mountain top and crag, a
small group of men might have been seen lounging before old Mother White
Blanket's tepee, absorbing the genial warmth that came from her
camp-fire, over which the old squaw hovered close.

In the background, away from the group, yet still with the light of the
fire shining full upon him, stood the soft-voiced twin. Suddenly the
hawk-like eyes of his grandmother swept the darkness and fastened
themselves upon his inquisitive face. For an instant they pierced him
through, then the shrill voice rang out:

"So! It's only the sneak-dog that dare not come near! You get out and
hunt your bed!"

"I ain't doin' nothin'!" exclaimed the boy.

"No! An' you'll live doin' nothin', an' die doin' nothin', with a rope
about your neck, _so_!" She made a quick motion across her throat, and
gurgled heinously, letting her blanket fall low upon her skinny, calico
covered shoulders, revealing a long, gaunt throat and stiff wisps of
black, unkempt hair.

"You don't need to think you can scare _me_," said the boy, moving
boldly forward, impelled by fear. "I ain't sneakin' 'round here,
neither! You'd better be a little politer er I'll tell the old man on
you when he gets sober again!"

"Hear him!" roared Shorty Smith. "Politer! I reckon the school-ma'am's
instillin' some mighty high-flutin' notions into your head, ain't she?
Politer! Just listen to that onct, will yous! Say, don't no one dare
breathe loud when _Mister_ Daniel Harris, _esquire_, comes round!"

"You let your betters alone," rebuked the old woman, shaking a stick at
Shorty, preliminary to throwing it upon the fire. "My grandson's got
more in his head than all of you!" Then nodding at the boy who,
emboldened, had come up to the fire: "Say what's on your tongue an' git
off to bed with you!"

The breed boy shook his head. "I ain't got nothin' to tell," he said.
"Hain't been nowhere except over to Carter's camp awhile. Dave and me
pretty near got nabbed by a special officer that's over there."

Shorty Smith raised himself up on his elbow.

"A special _what_!" he demanded, while a sort of stillness swept the
circle.

"A special officer of the _law_," replied the boy, with cool importance.
"Dave an' me had supper with him. He's a pretty good sort of a feller."

"Nice company you've been in," observed Shorty.

"Your grandmother always said you'd come to some bad end," drawled Long
Bill. An uneasy laugh went around, then absolute silence prevailed for
several minutes. The old squaw seemed to be muttering under her breath.
Finally she shifted her savage gaze from the outer blackness to the
faces about her camp-fire.

"Turn cowards for one man!" she exclaimed scornfully.

"Well, Harris is in there dead drunk, and what're we goin' to do without
him, anyhow?" exclaimed Long Bill.

"He might not approve," supplemented Shorty Smith.

"That's right; I ain't wantin' no such responsibility on my shoulders,
_just now_," declared the large fellow.

"We'll postpone matters," decided Shorty. "I ain't after such
responsibility myself, you can bet your life!"

The others agreed by words and grunts. Suddenly the old woman rose to
her feet, grasping her dingy blanket together in front with one scrawny
hand, while she outstretched the other, pointing into the night.

"Git out!" she snarled scornfully. "Git to your beds, dogs!"

The men laughed again uneasily.

"Come on, boys," said Shorty Smith. "We'll go an' see if the old man's
left a drop in his jug." He moved towards the house, followed by the
others. The soft-voiced twin still retained his position by the
camp-fire.

"You git too!" snarled his grandmother.

"I ain't no dog," replied the boy. The squaw grunted. "You told the dogs
to go, not me! They won't find any demijohn, neither. I cached it for
_you_!"

"Good boy," said his grandmother, patting him upon the head. "Go git
it!"

When Hope and her companions returned that evening a couple of aged
Indians hovered over the dying embers of old White Blanket's camp-fire,
sociably drinking from a rusty tin cup what the riders naturally
supposed to be tea. The soft-voiced twin, already curled up asleep
beside his brothers, could have told them different, for had he not won
the old woman's passing favor by his generous act? So he slept well.

So did the "old man" sleep well that night--a heavy drunken stupor. He
had returned from town that afternoon in his usual condition, as
wild-eyed as the half-broken horses that he drove, and for awhile made
things lively about the place. At such times he ruled with a high and
mighty hand, and even the little babies crept out of his way as he
approached. He roused up some of the idle breeds and started a poker
game, which soon broke up, owing to a financial deficiency among them.
Then he roped a wild-looking stallion and rode off at a mad gait,
without any apparent object, toward a peacefully feeding bunch of
cattle. He rode around it, driving the cows and calves into a huddled,
frightened group, then left them to recover their composure, riding,
still as madly as ever, back to the stables. But the whisky finally got
in its work, and Joe Harris, to the great relief of his Indian wife and
family, laid himself away in a corner of the kitchen, and peace again
reigned supreme.

Hope and Louisa very fortunately missed all the excitement.

The darkness was intense when they rode up to the ranch. Quiet pervaded
the place, and not a light shone from the house.

"These people must go to bed with the chickens," remarked O'Hara.

"Here's some matches, Hope," said Carter, standing beside her on the
ground when she had dismounted. "Never mind your horses, I'll take care
of them. Run right in. Such a place for you! Darker'n a stack of black
cats! I'll stand here by the house till I see a light in your room."

Just then a group of men, led by Shorty Smith, came out of the dark
passage between the kitchen and the other part of the house, and made
their way toward the stables. The ones in the rear did not see the
riders, and were muttering roughly among themselves. They had been
making another fruitless search for the cattle-man's whisky, and were
now going to bed.

"Come back here," said Sydney, drawing both girls toward the horses
which O'Hara was holding. They moved backward under his grasp and waited
until the men had passed.

"Hope, you'll either have to change your boarding place or go home,"
announced her cousin.

"I'll do neither," replied the girl decisively. "Don't be foolish, Syd,
because of a darkened house and a handful of harmless men! I'm not a
baby, either. You'll make Larry think I'm a very helpless sort of
person. Don't believe him, Larry! I'll admit that this isn't always a
safe country for men, but there is no place on earth where a woman is
surer of protection than among these same wild, dare-devil characters. I
know what I'm talking about. Home? Well, I guess not! Come on, Louisa.
See, she isn't afraid! Are you? Good-night, both of you!"

"Goot-night," called the German girl.

"It's just as she says," explained Carter, as he and O'Hara rode
homeward. "It is perfectly safe for a girl out here, in spite of the
tough appearances of things--far safer than in the streets of New York
or Chicago. There isn't a man in the country that would dare speak
disrespectfully to a girl. Horse-stealing wouldn't be an instance
compared with what he'd get for that. He'd meet his end so quick he
wouldn't have time to say his prayers! That's the way we do things in
this country, you know."

"It's hard to understand this, judging from appearances," said O'Hara.
"I'm not exactly a coward myself, but I must own it gave me a chill all
down my spine when those tough-looking specimens began to pour out from
that crack between the buildings. I'd think it would make a girl feel
nervous."

"But not Hope," replied Carter. "She's used to it; besides she's not
like other girls. She's as fearless as a lion. You can't scare _her_. If
she was a little more timid I wouldn't think about worrying over her,
but she's so blame self-reliant! She knows she's as quick as chain
lightning, and she's chockful of confidence. For my own part, I wish
she'd never learned to shoot a gun."

"It strikes me she's pretty able to take care of herself," said O'Hara.
"If I were you I wouldn't worry over it."

"Well, I want to get her back to the ranch, and I'm going to, too!"
said Carter. Then to O'Hara's look of wonder, "I might as well be in
Halifax as any real good I can be to her here--in case anything should
come up. You see, there's been trouble brewing for months. All these men
around here are down on Livingston, because he's running sheep on the
range they had begun to think was their own exclusive property. He's as
much right to run sheep on government land as they have to run cattle,
though sheep are a plumb nuisance in a cow country. These ranchers
around here haven't any use for his sheep at all, and have been picking
at him ever since he came up here."

He then went on to tell what he knew about the shooting at Livingston's
corral.

"I'm pretty certain now that Hope was mixed up in it, though Livingston
is as ignorant as can be in regard to the matter. He's too much a
stranger to the ways of the country to learn everything in a minute. It
was funny about you knowing him, wasn't it? He's a fine man, all right,
and I hope this outfit won't bluff him out of the country. Harris is at
the bottom of it. If it wasn't for him there wouldn't be any trouble.
Now it's my opinion that Hope's trying to stand off the whole outfit for
Livingston's sake, and doesn't want him to know it."

O'Hara was silent for a moment, then replied:

"I'm not the fellow to make a fuss because a better man than me turns
up. I knew in a minute he was dead in love with her."

Then he told something to Carter in confidence which caused him to pull
his horse up suddenly in the trail and exclaim: "You don't say!"




CHAPTER XXIII


"It is a long road," observed Mrs. Van Rensselaer. "I had no idea it was
so far. So these are the foot-hills of the mountains. Is this Harris
place very much farther?"

"'Bout five mile straight up in the mountains," replied her companion.

"Then," said the lady decisively, "I am going to stop here at this
spring, get a drink, and rest awhile; I'm about half dead!"

Jim McCullen made no reply, but good-naturedly headed his horse toward a
tiny stream that trickled down a coulee near by. Mrs. Van Rensselaer
followed, heaving a tired sigh of relief, as she slipped down upon the
moist, flower-dotted meadows beside the stream.

"Oh, this is an awful undertaking," she declared, wetting her
handkerchief in the water and carefully wiping her forehead.

"I thought you was pretty brave to venture it," replied old Jim, from a
short distance below, where he was watering the horses. "It's a hot day
and a dry wind. I told you just how it'd be."

"I suppose it is some comfort to you to refer to that fact, but it
doesn't make me any the less tired or cross. Yes, I'm cross, Mr.
McCullen. It has been downright rude of Hope to stay away like this all
summer. Of course it's possible she may have her reasons for that, but
_I_ never put in such a pokey time before in all my life! I couldn't go
back to New York without seeing her, and then Sydney told me that if I
went up there I might be able to coax her to leave the place. But she's
been there so long now--a couple of months, isn't it?--that I can't see
what difference it would make if she stayed a little longer. I did want
to see her, though, before I went home, so I decided I'd undertake this
journey. What about this protegee of hers--this German girl she's taken
to raise? Sydney said she was a pretty little thing with hair the color
of mine," shaking back her fluff of fair hair, "and eyes like a 'deep
blue lake.' That's all I could get out of him--'eyes like a deep blue
lake!' That settles it! When a fellow begins to rhapsody over eyes like
a deep blue lake, it's a good sign he's cast his anchor right there.
Well, it'll be a good thing for Sydney."

"She's a right smart young lady," remarked McCullen. "Hope thinks a
sight of her. She can ride a little, but she ain't goin' to learn to
shoot worth a cent. Hand ain't steady 'nough. They ain't many wimmen in
the world can shoot like Hope, though! She beats 'em all!"

"You ought to be awfully proud to think you taught her."

"Proud!" said old Jim, his voice deep with emotion; "I reckon I'm proud
of her in every way--not just because she can shoot. They ain't no one
like her! I couldn't think no more of her if she was my own, ma'am."

"It must be nice to feel that way toward someone," mused the lady, from
the grass. "She thinks everything of you, too. It seems natural for some
people to take a kindly, loving interest in almost everyone. There are
only two people I have ever known toward whom I have felt in anything
approaching that manner. Hope and Larry O'Hara. I have often fancied
they would make an ideal couple." Jim McCullen shook his head
doubtfully, but Mrs. Van Rensselaer, unnoticing, continued: "And even
Larry deserted the ranch. He's been gone for two weeks. It's about time
I came to look everyone up!" She pinned back the fluffy hair from her
face, adjusted her hat, unclasped a tiny mirror and powder puff from her
wrist, and carefully dusted every portion of her pretty face.

McCullen, who had witnessed the operation several times before along the
road that day, ceased to stare in wonderment, and very politely looked
across the rolling hills in the opposite direction. It never occurred to
Clarice Van Rensselaer that anyone could have found amusement in the
proceedings. In fact, she never thought of it at all, but dabbed the
powder puff quite mechanically from force of habit.

After laughing to himself and giving her time enough to complete her
toilet, he led her horse up, remarking:

"We'd better be movin', er like enough we won't get there till after
dark."

Mrs. Van Rensselaer sighed, regained her feet, and suffered herself to
be helped to the saddle.

"I reckon you won't find O'Hara up there," remarked Jim McCullen some
time later. "Two evenings ago he rode over on Fox Creek, there on the
reservation, where them soldiers are out practicin'. Lieutenant Harvey
come over to camp an' he rode back with him, bein's he was acquainted.
It ain't more'n eight mile from camp. Mebby you could ride over there if
you wanted." This suggestion was offered with the faintest smile beneath
his gray mustache. "It's a mighty fine chance to see them soldiers
drillin' 'round the hills, playin' at sham battles and the like."

"It would probably be a pleasing sight to see them," replied Clarice Van
Rensselaer, "but I prefer an easy chair with plenty of cushions
instead."

"I don't like to discourage you, but I don't reckon you'll find many
cushions where you're goin'," said old Jim.

"How much farther is it?" demanded the lady.

"Oh, not very fur, 'bout three mile, er a little further," replied her
companion; thereupon Mrs. Van Rensselaer rode on for some time in
scornful, silent resignation.

When they reached the Harris ranch they found groups of men lounging
about everywhere.

It looked as though most of the inhabitants of the mountains had
congregated there on this especial evening. Mrs. Van Rensselaer gasped
in astonishment, and even McCullen, used as he was to seeing men
gathered about the place, looked surprised and wondered what had been
going on to bring such a crowd.

Mrs. Van Rensselaer gathered her skirts closely about her, as if in fear
they would brush against some of the rough-looking men that moved back
from the path as McCullen led her to the house. A couple of pigs chased
by a yellow pup ran past her, then an Indian woman opened wide the main
entrance of the abode and shooed out some squawking chickens, which flew
straight at the visitor. Mrs. Van Rensselaer hesitated in dismay, and
turned a white, startled face to McCullen.

"This ain't nothin' at all," he assured her. "Go right on in. I reckon
we'll find Miss Hope to home."

She drew back still farther. "You go first," she implored fearfully.

McCullen smiled, and picked his way into the house, followed closely by
his companion, who clung to his coat.

Reaching the interior he seated Mrs. Van Rensselaer upon a bench, and
went in search of the Indian woman, who had disappeared at the first
sight of the visitors.

"She's out," he announced, returning after a moment. "They say she and
the little German girl went out on their horses some time ago. I suppose
you'll have to wait here till she gets back. You ain't afraid, be you?"

"Do you mean that I'll have to wait here _alone_?" she inquired,
frightened.

"I'll stay around fer a spell," said McCullen kindly. "There ain't
nothing to get nervous about." He opened the door of an adjoining room
and beckoned to a breed girl, who was lulling a child to sleep in an
Indian hammock. "Come in and keep this lady company. She's come to see
Miss Hathaway," he said. The girl entered the room shyly--reluctantly.
Jim McCullen pulled his hat over his eyes and turned to the door. "I'll
look about a bit an' see if she's comin'," he said, then went out of the
house.

The girl was shy, and stood awkwardly in the doorway with downcast eyes,
not daring to look up at the visitor. Clarice fancied herself too tired
to talk, so sat on the bench and leaned back against the white-washed
logs. Quiet pervaded until a pig poked open the door and looked
inquisitively into the room.

"Oh, drive that animal out!" exclaimed Clarice, "he's coming straight at
me!"

The girl gave the pig a poke that sent it grunting away, then closed the
door and placed a box before it to keep it shut.

"Will you kindly take me to Miss Hathaway's apartment?" asked Mrs. Van
Rensselaer.

The breed girl looked bewildered. "_To where?_" she asked.

"To her room," requested the lady, less politely. "I suppose she has a
room in this place, has she not? I should like to rest for a few
moments."

"It's right there," said the girl shortly, pointing at a door.

"Right there!" exclaimed Mrs. Van Rensselaer crossly. "Why didn't you
tell me so before?"

Clarice opened the door and gasped in wonder. A vision of Hope's room at
the ranch, with all its dainty accessories, came before her, and she
thought of the girl's love of luxury and comfort. Everything was clean
here, she assured herself with another glance around--spotlessly clean
and neat, which could not be said of the room she had just left. There
was a bed, a chair, a box and some boards covered with cheese-cloth,
that served as a dressing table. Not a picture adorned the wall or an
ornament of any description was to be seen.

Mrs. Van Rensselaer walked all around the little room to satisfy herself
that she had missed nothing. Some newspapers were fastened to the wall
upon one side, and over them hung a few garments, which in turn were
carefully covered by a thin shawl, with a view, no doubt, to keep out
the dust. That was probably an idea of the German girl's, thought
Clarice, and rightly, too, for to Louisa also was due the well scrubbed
boards of the floor, the shining window panes, and the general neatness
which pervaded the poor chamber.

Mrs. Van Rensselaer seated herself upon a box and gazed long and
earnestly at her reflection in a small hand mirror which hung over the
dressing table.

"You haven't the features of a fool," she remarked to herself, "but
you've added two new wrinkles by this tom-foolery to-day, and you ought
to be satisfied by this time that you're not fit to take care of
yourself! But I suppose it's satisfying to know you're doing missionary
work. Missionary work, indeed, for a girl who hasn't as much sense for
staying in this place as you have for coming! By the time you get home
you'll have two more wrinkles, and it'll take a month to get back your
good looks again! Well, you always were foolish!"

So saying she turned away from the mirror and looked longingly at the
bed. Just then her eyes became fastened, wide and terrified, upon the
head of a small gray animal protruding from the corner of the floor
behind the bed. She watched it, spell-bound by fear, as it drew its fat
body through a hole in the floor and ran across the room. Suddenly with
a terrible shriek she threw herself upon the bed. The pack-rat ran back
to its hole and made its exit without loss of time, but Clarice sobbed
aloud in hysterical fear. Suddenly the door was thrown open, and a
weather-browned, dark-haired girl knelt beside the bed and took the
frightened woman in her arms.




CHAPTER XXIV


"Clarice, dear," said Hope, "what _is_ the matter?"

"Oh," sobbed Mrs. Van Rensselaer, "_did_ you see it--_did you see it_? A
terrible thing! A terrible thing!"

"But _what_?" asked the girl wonderingly, "what could have frightened
you so, _here_?"

Clarice, still hysterical, only sobbed and was quite incoherent in her
explanation. Hope looked stern, as though facing an unpleasant problem
which baffled her for the time. Louisa had entered the room and stood
quietly to one side, looking in much surprise from one to the other. For
a moment Mrs. Van Rensselaer's sobs ceased.

The German girl touched Hope gently upon the shoulder.

"I tink it vas King Solomon," she said.

"Why, that was just it," said Hope. "You must have seen King Solomon,
Clarice. It was only King Solomon; don't be afraid. I thought we had the
hole well plugged up, but he must have made another one."

"You forget," interrupted Louisa, laughing softly.

"Oh, that's so!" exclaimed Hope. "We took the soap out and used it this
morning because we didn't have any other."

"And who's King Solomon, and what's that to do with soap?" demanded
Clarice, raising herself upon her elbow to the edge of the bed with a
faint show of interest.

"King Solomon," explained Hope soberly, "is a friend who comes to visit
us occasionally, and generally packs off what happens to be in sight. We
named him King Solomon--not because of his solemn demeanor, but for
reason of his taking ways, and propensity toward feminine apparel."

"What are you talking about, Hope? I do believe this terrible place has
gone to your head! What makes all the noise in that other room?"

Mrs. Van Rensselaer seemed extremely nervous.

"That's the men coming in to their supper," replied Hope. "I think you
must have been nervous before you saw the rat. I'm sorry I wasn't here
when you came, Clarice!"

"And so that horrible thing I saw was a rat!"

"Yes, just a common everyday wood-rat, for obvious reasons sometimes
called a pack-rat. But how did you happen to come up here, Clarice?"

"If I had known how far it was, and what a dreadful place I should find,
I am afraid my great desire to see you couldn't have induced me to
attempt it. How _can_ you stay here? I wish you'd go home, Hope!"

"Is that what you came to tell me?" asked the girl quietly. "If so, you
might just as well get on your horse and go back. I wrote you not to
come. You might have taken my advice--it would have been a heap better.
You're not cut out for this sort of place. I don't know what in the
world I'm going to do with you to-night! I'll send you back to-morrow,
that's one thing sure. One of us will have to sleep on the floor, or
else we'll be obliged to sleep three in a bed."

"Oh, I'll make me a bed on the floor," offered Louisa quickly.

"You won't do anything of the kind--the idea!" exclaimed Mrs. Van
Rensselaer, aghast. "Supposing that thing--that _rat_ should come!"

"We'll put the soap back in the hole again," replied Hope. "And King
Solomon will have to keep out. Before Louisa came I used to let him come
in just for company's sake, but the poor fellow is a hopeless case.
Clarice, I wish you hadn't come!"

"I wish so, too, if that will help you any," replied Mrs. Van
Rensselaer, lifting her pretty face dejectedly from her hands and
looking about the room in a woe-begone manner. "I'm awfully tired, Hope,
and hungry, but I couldn't eat _here_ if I starved to death! Is that
room in there _always_ so grimy and dirty? and what makes that terrible
_odor_ about the place?"

"I think you'd better go back to the ranch to-night," suggested Hope.

Clarice moaned in deep discouragement: "Oh, if you knew how tired I am!
But I can't stand it _here_--_I can't do it_! Let me get out in the
fresh air, away from the odor of those pigs and chickens and _rats_, and
sit down on the side of a mountain--anywhere, so that I can breathe
again!" After a moment's pause she suddenly exclaimed: "Hope, there's
something biting me! What in the world is it? I tell you there's an
insect on me!"

"Fleas," said Hope briefly. "The place is full of them. They don't bite
me, and they don't bother Louisa much either. Poor Clarice, what trouble
you have got yourself into! I can't send you back to-night, that's one
sure thing, you're too tired." She pondered a moment, deeply perplexed,
then all at once a solution came to her. Her eyes brightened and she
laughed.

"I have it!" she cried. "I'll send one of the boys after Mr.
Livingston's buggy and drive you over to Sydney's. They've got an extra
tent and a stack of blankets. William will get you a fine supper, and
you can be as snug as a bug in a rug."

"Hope, you're the dearest girl that ever lived!" cried Clarice. "I just
dote on camping out in a nice clean tent!" But Hope had hurried away to
find the twins before the sentence was finished. When she returned, a
few minutes later, Clarice exclaimed:

"But you don't intend to send me over there _alone_, do you? You girls
will go and stay with me? Come, you must! I'll not think of going alone.
We'll have a regular camping-out party and I'll chaperon you."

"Old Father Jim and Sydney are chaperons enough," said the girl. "But
we'll go along, since you happen to be our guest."

This decided upon, she made Mrs. Van Rensselaer lie down upon the bed,
bathed her pretty, tired face with cool water, and commanded her to
rest until the twins returned with the conveyance.

Louisa clapped her hands in joy at the happy prospect of camping in a
tent. She declared in her pretty broken English that it had been her one
great desire ever since she had been in the country. Then she became
sober again. Had not her Fritz spent months at a time in one of those
small, white-walled tents?

Hope viewed the project with complete indifference. It mattered little
to her where she spent the night, so that she got her allotted hours of
good, sound sleep. At first she was greatly perplexed as to how she was
going to make Clarice comfortable, but now that the matter had adjusted
itself so agreeably she became at once in the lightest of spirits, the
effects of which were quickly felt by both Mrs. Van Rensselaer and
little Louisa.

By the time the roll of wheels was heard, announcing the arrival of
Edward Livingston's conveyance, Clarice was fairly rested, and in a
much more amiable mood than previously.

"The only thing that's the matter with me now is that I'm hungry," she
said.

"We'll soon fix that, too," replied Hope brightly. "The boys are back
with Mr. Livingston's team and it won't take us long to drive over to
camp. Get on your things, Clarice." She threw her own jacket over her
arm and, picking up her hat, hurriedly left the room. "I'll be back in a
moment for you," she said from the door. "Keep her company, Louisa, and
don't let King Solomon in!"

At the entrance of the house she met the soft-voiced twin just coming in
search of her.

"He's out there hisself with his outfit," he said disgustedly. "Thought
it wasn't safe fer me to drive his blame horses, I reckon!"

She looked out and saw Livingston standing beside his team in the road.
He was waiting for her. When she approached, his fine eyes brightened,
but hers were gloomy--indifferent.

"Come," he said, laughing, holding out his hand to her. "You did not
think I would miss such an opportunity to get to see you! I haven't
pleased you, but this time I thought to please myself."

"I was in such a predicament," she cried, ignoring his hand, but
forgetting her momentary displeasure. "A guest from the ranch, and no
place to put her. Then I thought of Sydney's, and that new tent, so
we're all going over there. I sent for your buggy, because Mrs. Van
Rensselaer has ridden a long ways, is all tired out--but I didn't mean
to put _you_ to so much trouble."

"Is it a _trouble_ to see you?" he asked. "If it is, I want a great deal
of just that kind of trouble."

"I'll go in and get her," she said quickly. "If you will drive her over
there, Louisa and I can go horseback."

He assented in few words, happy to do her bidding.

She started toward the house, then turned back absent-mindedly, as
though she had forgotten something that she was striving to recall.
Finally she gave a little short laugh, and held out her hand. "You are
very kind," she said, looking at him squarely.

He did not reply, but held the proffered hand, drinking in the language
of her eyes. She withdrew it slowly, as if loath to take it from his
warm clasp, then flashing him one of her brilliant smiles turned once
more and went quickly back to the house.

"You will ride over with Mr. Livingston, Clarice," she announced. "He
wouldn't trust the twins with his team."

"And who's _Mr. Livingston_, Hope," inquired Mrs. Van Rensselaer,
adjusting her veil carefully before the small mirror. "I didn't suppose
you had a _Mr._ anybody up here in this terrible country! Why the
prefix?"

"He's a white man," replied the girl, pulling down her hat to hide the
flush that crept into her face. "An Englishman, Edward Livingston."

"An Englishman," mused Clarice, pulling on her gloves. "But what makes
you _Mister_ him, Hope? _Livingston_--wonder if he's any relation to
Lord Livingston? _Edward_ Livingston, did you say?"

"Oh, such a _nice_ man!" exclaimed Louisa, clasping her hands in
rapture. "He is my goot, kind friend."

"And Hope's too, isn't he?" laughed Mrs. Van Rensselaer, at which remark
Hope advised her to hurry up.

"But my dear, I _am_ hurrying just as fast as I can," she exclaimed. "I
assure you I am as anxious to get away from here as you are to have me.
I don't see how you've ever stood it, Hope! The attraction must be very
strong. Come, own up, is it this _Mister_ Livingston? Why, I believe you
are blushing. You're so black, though, I can't be certain. But it's a
good name--Livingston. Come on; I'm ready to see this _Mister Edward
Livingston_!"

The three passed out of the room and through the large living room
beyond, on out of doors. The men had eaten their supper and gone out to
the stables, where they congregated in numerous groups--quiet groups,
that any other time would have seemed suspicious to Hope.

Mrs. Van Rensselaer was led safely past the pigs and dogs without
accident, but at the corner of the house she drew back, filled with
surprise, and forgetful of all danger.

"Hope, I do believe that _is_ Lord Livingston," she whispered. "I knew
he was out in this country somewhere. Yes, I'm sure it is he. His wife
lives in New York now," she rattled on; "but I don't know her except by
sight. She goes in kind of a swift set, anyway, but he belongs to one of
the best families in England. Isn't it surprising to run across him like
this? I'll go up to him and say--why, how do you do, Lord----"

"Come on," said Hope, interrupting and taking her by the arm. "Lord or
no lord, you'll never get any supper if you don't hurry up!" Her face
had gone from red to white. She took Clarice by the arm and led her up
to the buggy. "This is Mrs. Van Rensselaer, Mr. Livingston," she said
quickly, before that lady could speak, then turned abruptly about and
went to the stable for the saddle-horses.

Livingston helped Mrs. Van Rensselaer into the buggy, while Louisa ran
after Hope, quickly overtaking her.

"She says he hass a vife. I don't belief her!" she exclaimed
indignantly, linking her arm through Hope's. "Don't you belief her
eider!"

"I must believe it, little Louisa, because it is true!" said Hope. "But
if it were _not_ true, if it were _not_ true, I think I should be mad
with happiness at this moment!"




CHAPTER XXV


In a short time the horses were saddled and the two girls dashed past
the stable buildings and the rough assortment of men who stood silently
about, past their watchful, alert eyes, on after the buggy, which had
now become a mere speck high up on the mountain road. As they raced by
the house and tepees the boy, Ned, cautiously raised his small body from
behind a pile of logs which edged the road and beckoned to them
frantically. Hope's quick eye saw him, but only as the flash of a moving
picture across her mind, leaving no impression and instantly forgotten.
But later, when she had entered the cook-tent at Sydney's camp and
seated herself among the small company, the memory of the passing vision
came back, annoying, troubling her. She scented danger more than she
felt it. A sense of uneasiness possessed her. She condemned herself
roundly for the wild thoughts that had carried her away from herself,
and would have given much at that moment to have known what the breed
boy had wanted to commune to her.

Clarice was chatting volubly to Livingston. Sydney leaned upon the
table, listening attentively. Outside, old Jim McCullen was staking out
the saddle-horses, while about the stove and mess-box William, the cook,
flitted in great importance. Sydney jumped up from the table when the
two girls entered and arranged some extra seats for them, then took one
himself beside Louisa, who flushed prettily at his attentions.

"We beat you by fifteen minutes!" exclaimed Mrs. Van Rensselaer,
breaking off from her conversation abruptly. "But we just came along
spinning. And I must tell you that I'm perfectly happy now, and don't
regret coming one bit! Just think, isn't this luck--Mr. Livingston has
promised to take me back to the ranch to-morrow, or whenever I decide to
return! And you should see what a splendid dinner we are going to have!
After all, I'm coming out the best in the deal--in spite of Jim's
'didn't I tell you,' and Hope's 'what made you come.' This is a regular
taste of the real West--wild and rugged! You don't get it at the
ranch--luxurious quarters, Chinese servants everywhere, even the people
especially imported. You might as well be in New York for everything
except the climate. This is great--this little gulch here and these
fresh, sweet tents; but horrors, that place back there! Isn't there any
way to go around it when we go back to the ranch, Mr. Livingston? I
don't want even to catch sight of it. I never saw such a lot of looking
men in all my life!"

They all laughed at the look of abject horror which she put upon her
face--all with the exception of Hope, who sat silently in the shadow of
Louisa and Sydney.

"We've been to supper," said Sydney, turning around to his cousin, "so
this is an extra one for the special benefit of our guests. You'd better
appreciate it, for it's going to be a jim-dandy one. Livingston's been
to supper, too, so this is just for the ladies."

"You're a good boy," murmured the girl, taking off her hat and pushing
back the mass of dark hair from her forehead. "We'll soon show you our
appreciation."

"I guess we'd better light up, it's getting dark a little earlier
nowadays," he said, leaving Louisa's side to light the lanterns, which
soon flooded the tent with soft radiance.

"I like the twilight," said Clarice to Livingston. "But then I like lots
of light, too. Some people can talk best in the dark, but I have to see
to talk."

"It's only eight o'clock," continued Sydney, from where he had left off.
"Last month it was daylight at ten. It beats all how time flies,
anyway!" He hung an extra lantern, lighted for the momentous occasion,
right where the rays fell full upon Hope's face. From the far end of the
tent Livingston watched her. He sought her eyes as usual. They were
everywhere, anywhere, but did not meet his. Lately a new star had risen
for him--a star of hope. O'Hara had told him, quite unsolicited, that
there was no attachment between Hope and her cousin, much less an
engagement, and suddenly a new world had opened for him.

"I don't see why you are lighting the lanterns now. It isn't dark at
all," said the girl, rising suddenly from her seat. "From the top of the
ridge out there you can see the sunset, I know."

"Did you ever see a sunset as beautiful as the sunrise?" asked
Livingston.

She stopped and pondered an instant, then glanced at him quickly, and as
quickly away.

"No, I have not," she replied. "A sunrise is a baptism. It is like being
born into a new world. There is nothing so beautiful, so grand, so
promising, as the vision of a new day's sun. And to stand in the cool
morning air with the dew beneath your feet and _feel_ all the promise of
that vast, golden glory--to feel it----" She stopped suddenly, lifting
her eyes to his for one brief instant. "There is no moment in life when
one is so near to God."

"Admitting the sublimity and grandeur of the time," said Clarice. "Yet
who ever heard of an enamored swain offering his heart at the feet of
his fair lady at such an unearthly hour? It's preposterous!"

"In such a case he'd probably be sitting up too late the night before,"
said Carter. "But it's a pretty idea, just the same," he declared,
looking at Louisa.

"I think a sunset is prettier," insisted Clarice. "I've never been able
to rub the sleep out of my eyes to appreciate the sunrise as Hope
describes it. But I think she is an exception."

"Would there were more then," said Livingston fervently.

His earnestness seemed to amuse Clarice, for she turned to him and
laughed. Hope swung about quickly, stung for the instant.

"It is sacred," she cried softly, then opening the tent-flap with a
quick movement she stepped out into the evening.

Jim McCullen was putting up a new tent down near the edge of the stream
for the accommodation of the ladies. The girl went over to where he was
at work and assisted him by steadying one pole while he fastened the
canvas in position.

"How's the ranch, Jim?" she asked. "Mrs. Van Rensselaer hasn't had time
to tell me yet."

"Well, it's about the same as ever," replied McCullen slowly. "I reckon
your father's gettin' pretty lonesome without you. Feels like a lost
horse by now. That there little Rosebush--Rosehill, he and them
Cresmonds have gone back East to get ready fer the great weddin' they're
talkin' about. Them folks seem to think it's a mighty fine thing to
catch a lord er an earl. But it always seemed to me that the Almighty
left out a whole pile in order to give some o' them fellers a title.
Forgot Rosehill's brains entirely, an' he ain't no bigger'n a minute,
neither."

"I guess you're right, about him," said Hope, kneeling beside McCullen
as he fashioned a stake pin more to his liking. "I hope that outfit
won't come out here another year; I don't like them very well. It's
nice and sweet out here on the grass, isn't it? I don't mind staying
here at all to-night. I don't see what makes me feel so sleepy and
drowsy though, but I do--sort of tired, as though I wanted to get away
and go to bed. I haven't ridden far to-day either--only a few miles
after school. Jim, I wish I were back to-night at the ranch--I wish I
could go and say good-night to my father, and go away to my own room."

McCullen looked up from the peg he was driving, and remarked: "I'll
warrent you'll have as good a night's sleep out here in this tent as you
would at home on the ranch. Plenty o' fresh air an' no misquitoes to
bother. But I reckon your father'd like to see you just the same
to-night."

"But he doesn't want me to go home until I've finished this school up
here. I'm earning fifty dollars a month. How much are you?"

"A hundred," replied McCullen. "But, look a-here, your father _said_
that, but he'd be mighty glad to have you drop in on him one o' these
times. He's the sorriest father you ever seen!"

"But I shall stay, Jim, just as long as there is school here," said Hope
decidedly. "So don't _you_ try to get me to go home. Everyone else is.
Sydney all the time, then Larry O'Hara. I'm glad he's gone over to camp
with the soldiers. They're farther away than I thought. Louisa and I
rode over in that direction after school, but only got to the top of the
tall butte over there. We could see them where they were camped on Fox
Creek, but it was too far to go, so we went back to Harris'. Larry was
all the time urging me to go home while he was here--and now Clarice has
come. But I won't go, Jim, until the school ends."

"Well, you just make the best of it," replied McCullen. "I like your
grit. I'm a-goin' to stay right here so's to be near you whatever
happens."

"Jim," said the girl suddenly, "were you ever nervous?"

"I reckon I've been, a few times," replied McCullen. "Why, you ain't
_nervous_, be you, Hopie? There ain't nothin' goin' to bother you out
here to-night. Mebby you ain't feelin' well."

She smiled at his consternation. "No, I don't think I'm nervous, Jim;
just a little restless, that's all."

"I expect that woman's comin' has sort o' upset you. I didn't want to
bring her, but she managed to overrule all o' my objections."

He finished driving the last peg, which made the tent secure against the
strongest wind, then straightened himself up with his hands upon the
small of his back as though the movement was a difficult one.

"Well, I reckon I'll bring in the beddin', an' you can fix it up to suit
yourself," he said, looking down at the girl, who had seated herself on
the grass before the tent.

"Listen," she whispered, holding up a warning hand, "I hear
horsebackers."

"Sure enough," he replied after a moment's silence. "I reckon it's them
breed boys o' yourn. Hungriest outfit I ever seen!"

"Yes," she said, rising suddenly to her feet and peering into the
gathering dusk, "that's who it is. Go get the blankets, Jim."

"Where're you goin'!" asked McCullen, as she moved quickly away down the
bank of the creek toward the dark brush of the bottom.

"To tell them school's out," she replied with a short laugh, then
disappeared from his sight.

"I reckon she's afraid them boys'll annoy that Van Rensselaer woman.
You'd think she'd never seen an Injun before, from the fuss she made
back there at Harris'," soliloquized McCullen as he brought a great
armful of blankets and deposited them inside the new tent.

But Hope was not thinking of Mrs. Van Rensselaer as she stood in the
narrow brush trail holding the bridle of an impatient Indian pinto,
while the soft-voiced twin looked at her through the semi-darkness.

"There's a bright moon to-night till three in the mornin', then it's as
dark as pitch," he was saying.

"Who figured out all that?" demanded the girl.

The breed boy moved uneasily in his saddle. "I reckon Shorty Smith er
some o' 'em did," he replied.

"And they're going to meet in the sheep-shed at the foot of the big
hill," she said deliberately.

"Yes," replied Dan reluctantly, "the one just inside the pasture fence
over there on this side. It's the nearest place to meet."

"How many men?" demanded Hope.

"'Bout a dozen, I reckon," replied the twin. "Mebby not so many." He
leaned forward until his face was close beside the girl's. "Say," he
whispered nervously, "if they ever found out I put you onto this, they'd
finish me mighty quick."

"Are they aware you know about it?" she asked quickly. "Do they know?"

"You can't never tell," replied the boy deliberately, sweetly.

The bushes rattled and another horse pushed its way alongside the
pinto.

"If we only had that Gatlin' gun now we'd be all right," exclaimed the
other twin enthusiastically, as his horse nosed its way in beside them.
"But if we get behind the big rock we'll scare 'em to death, so's they
won't have the nerve to do nothin'!"

"But what are they going to do?" demanded Hope impatiently. "You seem to
know nothing except that they're going to meet there for some
devilishness."

"Goin' to make a raid on the shed, I reckon," replied Dave. The
soft-voiced twin was silent.

"And you think we can stand off a dozen men?" she demanded.

"They can't do a thing to us from the big rock, anyway, an' we can watch
the fun an' pick off everyone that leaves the shed. We can do that
much," said the soft-voiced twin eagerly.

"How you thirst for blood! They deserve death, every one--_the dogs_!
But I can't do it! There must be some other way! He must be warned, and
his men too, and the thing averted. Before, it just happened so--this
time we have a chance and warning."

"It 'ud never do to tell him," exclaimed the soft-voiced twin nervously.
"He'd put his own head right into the noose!"

"Never!" she cried. "You don't know what courage he has!"

The soft-voiced twin continued to demur. Suddenly she held up her hand
to him commandingly. "Not another word! I'll manage this thing myself!
It's for me to command, and you obey orders. Remember, you're my
scouts--my _brave scouts_. Surely you want me to be proud of you!"

"You bet!" exclaimed Dave.

"Then do as I say," she commanded in a voice softly alluring, coaxing.
"Go home, find out what you can, and bring me word here in an hour. If
you are not back here then I will go down there and face them all,
myself--_alone_."

"You wouldn't," whispered the soft-voiced twin excitedly.

"I _would_!" replied the girl. "Now go--and remember I'll expect you
back in one hour. If you fail me, I'll go down there and face those
devils single-handed! I could wipe the earth with forty such dogs!"

The breed boys turned away in silent, stolid, Indian fashion, and the
bare-headed girl stood in the still gloom of the willow-brush listening
to the sound of their horses' quick hoof-beats until the last dull thud
had died in the distance.

"Chuck-away!" called a voice from the creek bank.

"Coming!" answered the girl, turning about with a start and running back
along the path.

At the bank she stopped, unnerved with a rush of thoughts,
overwhelming--terrifying. She knelt down in the long grass, clasped her
hands over her heart as if to tear it from her, and raised for an
instant a strained, white face to the starlit canopy of heaven.

"The brave can die but once," her heart repeated wildly. "But I am a
coward--I cannot bear it! Oh, God,--if you are the great, good
God,--spare him from all harm, from suffering and death! Spare him now!
See, I offer myself instead--freely, gladly! Take me, but spare him!"

A dimly outlined face from the bank above looked down at her, followed
by a soft, mellow laugh.

"The bank is so steep," said Livingston softly. "Here, give me your hand
and I will pull you up."

She took a quick step upward, then stopped just below him and looked at
him intently.

"God in heaven," she said wildly to herself, "I swear they shall not
harm a hair of your head! I'll tear the heart out of every man of them
that comes near you! I'll kill them all, the hounds, the sneaks, the low
vermin!"

She looked at him an instant so, then laughed--an odd, mirthless,
reverberant laugh, that echoed on the hills above.

"Come, let me help you," he urged gently, reaching down his hand to her.
She laughed again, this time softly, more naturally.

"My _lord_," she said with grave emphasis, "you honor me! I am
overwhelmed for the instant. Forgive my rudeness!"

"You have heard," he exclaimed regretfully. "Your friend has told you--I
am so sorry! But then it really doesn't make any difference--only I
thought you might like me better if you didn't know it."

"Oh, my lord," she laughed mockingly. "I must needs _adore_ you now!"

"Stop your fooling," he exclaimed impatiently. "And give me your hand
and I'll pull you up here."

With a sudden movement he stepped down toward her, grasping her hand
firmly, drawing her up beside him on the bank. She looked at him in some
surprise.

"I always had an idea," she said, "that you were a very mild-mannered
young man."

"But you've given me a title that I didn't want--you've put me out of
humor, and now you must take the consequences," he said.

"I tried to make you angry. Why aren't you?" said Hope seriously.

"Angry with you!" he exclaimed softly. "With you, my girl! Look at me
closely--in my eyes and see the reason!" He stood beside her. His hand
grasped hers, his powerful magnetism drew her until her cheeks flamed,
but not the flicker of downcast eyelids betrayed more than the faintest,
friendliest indifference.

"Come on," she said, turning abruptly toward the tent, "I'm starved for
my supper!"




CHAPTER XXVI


"You bad girl," cried Clarice Van Rensselaer from the table, "why did
you run away? See this nice dinner spoiling for you! I've regained my
good nature, which is lucky for you, but you'll have to give an account
of yourself. Actually, I had to send Mr. Livingston to look you up!" She
glanced with a well-bred look of quizzical amusement from Hope's
brilliant, flushed face to the man who accompanied her. "Well, you see
that I for one didn't wait for you," she concluded; "couldn't! I don't
think I ever was so hungry before in my whole life. Everything tastes
_perfectly_ delicious!"

"William has outdone himself this time," remarked Sydney, as the girl
drew up an empty box and seated herself at the table, taking a little
food upon her plate and making a pretense of eating. Everything tasted
like wood. She could scarcely swallow. It finally occurred to her that
she must be acting very unlike herself. She made a violent effort to
appear natural, succeeding fairly well.

"You haven't given account of yourself, yet," said Mrs. Van Rensselaer,
glancing from her end of the table to where Hope sat, still in silence.

"Don't ask me," said the girl. "My excuse would sound too trivial to
you, Clarice. Perhaps I wanted to watch the first stars of evening."

"Or follow a frog to its nest in the weeds," supplemented Sydney, "or
catch grass-hoppers that had gone to roost, or listen to the night-song
of the cat bird in the brush or--or what, Hopie? Maybe you were writing
poems in your mind, or preparing new lessons for school to-morrow."

"Yes, that's just it," she replied. "I was preparing new lessons--for
to-morrow!"

"How funny!" laughed Mrs. Van Rensselaer. "I had forgotten you were a
full-fledged school-teacher. Of course, I suppose you do have to think
about your teaching some. Goodness, I wouldn't like it at all! It must
be an awful task to bother with a lot of rough, dirty children! How many
pupils have you?"

"Seventeen enrolled--but only seven or eight who attend," replied Hope
briefly.

"Mercy, I thought you must have at least fifty, from all I saw back
there!" gasped Mrs. Van Rensselaer. "Well, I shouldn't think it would be
much trouble to prepare lessons for that amount."

"_That many_," corrected Hope. "We don't measure them by the pound."

"No, we size them up by the cord," laughed Sydney; "but we don't handle
'em, because they're like that much dynamite."

"Dangerous pieces of humanity," said Livingston, smiling.

"Hope can handle them all right," declared Mrs. Van Rensselaer. "She can
handle anyone, for that matter. She's got more tact and diplomacy than
any politician. Trust her to manage seven or eight children! Why, if
she can't manage a person any other way, she'll actually _bully_ him.
She can make you believe black is white every time."

"Fraeulein is so goot!" murmured Louisa, in rapture.

"Thank you," replied Hope gratefully. "You see Louisa knows me _last_,
Clarice, and her remark should show you that I have changed for the
better."

"I always told you there was chance for improvements, didn't I, Hopie?"
laughed Sydney.

"Yes, you have said something about there being _room_ for improvement,
but I always supposed you judged me to be a hopeless case. I'm glad
though you think there's a _chance_! I always did want to improve!" As
she spoke she pushed back the box upon which she had been sitting,
turning it over to make it lower, and seated herself near the corner of
the tent, where she was shaded from the direct rays of the lantern's
light.

More than a half hour had already passed, she thought nervously. Then
she began to count the minutes before her messengers should return. The
time seemed endless since she had decided to wait for more particulars
before informing Livingston of what was about to take place. The twins
had learned of it only that afternoon, and they, though filled with the
foreboding of a desperate plot, could tell nothing positive about the
actual plans. These she hoped they would be able to ascertain. She
believed that the soft-voiced twin knew more than he was willing to
divulge when he advised her so emphatically against informing Livingston
of the plot. This, combined with a certain anxiety of her own, which she
was unable to define, filled her with vague uneasiness and decided her
instantly to do nothing until the boys returned with more particulars.

"You don't mean to say you've finished your supper, Hope," exclaimed
Mrs. Van Rensselaer, as the girl settled herself comfortably in the dark
corner. "_I_ never was so hungry before in all my life!" She turned to
Jim McCullen, who put his head inside the tent: "You see, Mr. McCullen,
that good, hard, patient endeavor brings its own reward! I wouldn't miss
this for worlds!"

"I'm very glad to hear it, ma'am," replied old Jim politely. "Reckon
you'll sleep pretty well out there to-night, no misquitoes er nothin' to
bother you. The tent's all ready fer you folks any time. Plenty o'
blankets an' it'll be a warmer night'n usual. Well, so long!"

"Why, he's going away!" said Hope in surprise, as a horse loped down the
creek bank and on through the brush trail. An impulse to run out and
call him back seized her. Sydney's slow reply caused a delay, the
impulse to do so wavered, and in another moment it was too late; yet she
felt somehow that she had made a mistake.

"Yes," replied Carter, after listening to Mrs. Van Rensselaer's chatter
for a moment, "he's going over to the round-up. It's camped about ten or
fifteen miles, down at the foot of the mountains. It's as light as day
out and much pleasanter riding in the cool of evening. He'll be back
early in the morning. Had some mail from the ranch to take over to the
boys."

"The poor fellows on the round-up all summer! I bet they're glad to get
their mail," murmured Clarice.

"What they get don't hurt them any," remarked Sydney. "Range riding
isn't conducive to letter writing, and it doesn't take long before a
cow-puncher is about forgotten by his home people, and his mail consists
of an occasional newspaper, sent by someone who happens to remember him,
and the regular home letter from his old mother, who never forgets. By
the way, here's a lot of mail for O'Hara. Have to ride over with it
unless he turns up pretty soon."

"Dear Larry!" said Clarice. "What made him leave just when I came up
here? I'd love to see him! He's such a jolly good fellow. You didn't
send him away on some wild-goose chase, did you, Hope?"

The girl shaded her eyes with her hand and answered languidly: "No,
there wasn't enough excitement here, so he went over to the military
reservation. They are out on drill over near here--Colonel Walsh, and a
lot of West Point fellows Larry knows, and so he pulled stakes, just
quit our company entirely, and turned old Watch Eye toward Fox Creek."

She drawled her words out slowly as if to fill in time. Livingston,
whose eyes constantly sought her face, thought she must be very tired,
and rose suddenly to take his leave. She was upon her feet in a flash.

"Sit right down!" she demanded nervously. "Surely you wouldn't think of
leaving us so early; why, we'd all get stupid and go to bed immediately,
and Clarice wouldn't enjoy herself at all!" She laid her hand upon his
sleeve entreatingly. "_Stay!_" she urged softly.

"As you say," he replied. "It is a pleasure to remain, but you must tell
me when I am to go. I thought perhaps you were tired."

She drew her hand away with a sudden movement. He seated himself beside
Mrs. Van Rensselaer, who began immediately to congratulate him upon his
good sense in remaining.

"But it was compulsory," he returned. "I didn't dare disobey orders."

"I should say not," agreed Clarice, laughing merrily, "we always mind
Hope. Everybody does."

"She always knows the right," said little Louisa, looking lovingly at
her friend.

"Why, of course," agreed Mrs. Van Rensselaer, "that's taken for
granted."

Hope was again in her corner, silent, intent. Livingston could only
conclude that she was tired. The rest of them took no special notice of
her, nor did they hear the distant splashing of water which brought into
activity all the blood in her body and fired each nerve. Clarice was
giving an elaborate account of her day's experience, consequently no
attention was paid to the girl's abrupt departure. She smiled at Louisa
as she passed quietly out and made some remark about her horse, which
gave the impression that she might have forgotten something. At least
Livingston and Louisa received that impression; as for the others they
were busy, and besides Hope was Hope, who always followed her own free
fancy.

The girl fairly flew along the trail that skirted the creek until she
grasped the bridle of a small Indian pony that was nosing its way
cautiously toward her.

"Oh, it's you!" exclaimed its small rider in a relieved tone, as he
slipped to the ground and stood in the path beside the girl. "I was
mighty scared it might be somebody else." Hope raised the boy's face so
that the moon shone full upon it.

"Ned!" she exclaimed under her breath. "Why are you here? Where are the
boys?"

"The old man's got 'em locked up in the granary," he announced. Then
seeing the look of alarm that flashed into her face, added assuringly:
"But that's all right, _I'm_ here! They told me to tell you they'd get
out somehow 'fore mornin'. I cached their horses in the brush for 'em,
and they're diggin' themselves out underneath the barn. Here," he said,
handing something to her. "I got your rifle out o' your room an' hid it
under the house soon's ever you left, an' all these cartridges. I just
knew the old man 'ud go an' look fer it."

"Oh!" exclaimed the girl, suddenly gathering child, gun, and all into
her arms. "What a little _man_ you are."

"Yep," said the boy, disengaging himself; "an' I've got a lot to tell
you!"

"And you're _sure_ about this," questioned Hope, after the boy had told
a story so complete in detail as to fairly unnerve her. "You're
_perfectly_ sure that these men are going to meet at the shed--the big
shed close to Fritz's grave, there below the ledge of rocks?"

"Sure's anything," replied the boy convincingly. "There'll be seven er
eight from our place, some from Old Peter's an' some from up the creek."

Hope shivered as though it had been a winter's night.

"What _shall_ we do! What _shall_ we do!" she repeated almost
frantically.

"Why, _fight 'em_, of course!" exclaimed the boy. "Dave an' Dan'll get
out by then, an' we'll all lay up there behind them rocks an' just
pepper 'em! There's 'bout a million peek-holes in that wall o' rocks,
an' they can't never hit us. Pooh, I ain't afraid o' twenty men! We'll
make 'em think all the soldiers from the post is behind there!"

"The soldiers!" exclaimed the girl, filled suddenly with a new life,
"and they _shall be there_! _They shall be there!_"




CHAPTER XXVII


"You must think me rude," apologized Hope, entering the tent as quickly
as she had left it, and seating herself directly beside Livingston. "I
surely didn't intend to be gone so long."

"So _long_!" exclaimed Mrs. Van Rensselaer. "Why, I hadn't missed you!
Where in the world have you been?"

"Oh, _now_ I'll not tell you!" laughed the girl, while her face flushed
deeply.

"But you were missed," said Livingston. "You've been gone just ten
minutes."

She looked at him and smiled at her own mistake. It seemed to her that
she had been gone an hour. He was dazzled by the unusual brilliancy of
her face, the strange light in her eyes. The smile, he thought, was for
himself. "Did the moonlight transform you?" he asked. She only laughed
in reply. Her heart was bounding in very joy of life now that she saw
her way clear through the grave difficulty that had confronted her. A
great tragedy would be averted, a lot of unscrupulous men brought to
justice, and more than this--the boy beside her was safe. What mattered
it to her at this moment that he possessed somewhere in the universe a
wife, which irrevocably separated her from him by every social law and
moral rule? This was nothing to her now in view of the great sense of
his personal safety that lifted such a weight of fear from her heart.
Nothing mattered much since he was safe. How desperate the chance had
seemed, and now how easily the danger averted!

Livingston knew little of the thoughts that played wildly in her brain
while she, to all intents, was listening with eager, brilliant face to
Clarice's light chatter. But Mrs. Van Rensselaer was tired. Her chatter
began to fag. Outside the shadows settled down about the tents, until
the moon rose above the mountain like a great ball of fire, casting over
everything the soft radiance of its white light. The night was almost
as bright as day. Livingston reluctantly said good-night, and went out
with Sydney to get his horse, which was staked some little distance
away. When they returned to saddle up a movement on the opposite side of
the brush attracted Sydney's attention, and borrowing the horse he rode
over to investigate. Livingston, wondering vaguely what had taken him
away so abruptly, seated himself upon the tongue of the camp wagon and
listened to the soft tones of women's voices from the white tent near
the bank. Quite without warning a hand was laid upon his shoulder.
"Where did Syd go?" asked Hope.

"Over there," replied Livingston, rising quickly beside her, and
pointing across the brush. "He took my horse to drive out some cattle, I
think, and so I am waiting. I thought you had retired. Did you come to
say good-night to me?"

"Yes," said the girl softly, "what of it?"

"Everything! That you should care that much--that you----"

"But I wouldn't need to care--so _very_ much--to come to bid you
good-night--would I?" she interrupted.

"No--perhaps; but you _do_ care! I seem to feel that you care for
me--Hope!"

"No! I don't care for you a bit! Not at all--I mean----You haven't any
right to talk to me like that! Certainly, I don't care for you, Mr.
Livingston. Oh, I didn't mean to hurt you! I mean----This is no time for
such things!"

"Hope!"

"Wait, listen! They will hear. See, Syd is coming!" She stepped back
from him, pointing.

"What of it! You shall tell me! Look at me!" he commanded. "Do you know
what you are making me believe--what you are telling me?"

"Nothing!" she insisted. "I am telling you nothing--only--_wait_!" She
spoke hurriedly, catching her breath. "Before day-break I will be on
that hill over there between your ranch and here--there above Fritz's
grave, to watch the dawn of day--and the sunrise and----"

"And I will be waiting for you! God bless you, dear." He kissed the
brown hand, which was snatched hurriedly from his clasp just as Sydney
rode up beside them.

"You mustn't believe _anything_," she gasped under her breath.

"_Everything!_" he insisted.

"Your horse is loose, pard," said Sydney, "I thought I caught sight of
it over there, but couldn't see anything of it when I rode over. You're
afoot! Now what are you going to do about it?"

"Walk," replied the girl, darting a quick look at Livingston. "Half a
mile is _nothing_."

"Half a mile," laughed her cousin. "You mean two miles and a half, don't
you?"

"Oh, the horse isn't far! We'll find it the first thing in the morning.
Good-night, you two! It's time school-teachers were in bed--and everyone
else. Good-night!" She turned around and waved her hand at them just
before the flap of the white tent closed upon her.

Clarice yawned dismally. "Will you never settle down, Hope? Isn't this
lovely and comfortable? So cool after the hot, fatiguing day, I just
love it! Whom were you talking to--Livingston? What a shame he's
married! He's such a dear boy, why, I'd almost be tempted, _if_ he
wasn't married----But pshaw! Lady Helene Livingston is one of those
frizzy-haired blondes that suggest curl papers and peroxide, and she
affects velvet dresses, black or purple--but always _velvet_--and a
feather! I've seen her loads of times, but she doesn't go in our set,
because she's taken up with those Grandons. You know Harriet married an
English peer, with a title, _nobody_ over there recognizes. She was such
a pretty girl that she might have done something for her family, but I
don't think the poor man fared as well as he expected, for it's well
known that old Grandon hasn't a half a million in his own name. But
Harriet lives well, and entertains a lot of English people nobody else
cares to have. Lady Helene Livingston is pretty enough in spite of her
velvet and feathers to get on anywhere, if only she didn't follow in
the train of Harriet's crowd. I wonder how it happens that she never
comes out here?"

"The curl papers and velvet may have something to do with that," said
Hope, settling down beside Louisa, on the opposite side of the tent,
with a motion as weary as if the only thought she possessed was to
secure a good night's sleep. "Velvet and feathers," she yawned.
"Clarice, do you know that it's nearly eleven o'clock?"

"Really!" exclaimed Mrs. Van Rensselaer. "I'd never have thought it. See
how bright it is in here--almost like day."

"Full moon," observed Hope. "It will be light like this until almost
morning, and then darkness for a little while before daylight."

"How well you understand such things, Hope! I should think it would be
very difficult to keep track of the moon."

"Yes," yawned the girl, "it is. We'd better go to sleep, Clarice,
because as soon as the sun is up it will be too warm to stay in here,
so you won't get your morning nap. That's the worst of a tent."

"What a shame!" sighed Mrs. Van Rensselaer. Then after ten minutes of
silence: "Hope, I want you to go back to New York with me next week.
Now, no joking, dear, I mean it."

"No," replied Hope. "It's too roasting hot there at this season. I
couldn't think of it, Clarice."

"But we're going by way of the Lakes, and take in a lot of those cool
summer resorts. Then I must get to Newport for the last of the season,
and after that, you know, it will be decent weather in New York, and we
can have no end of good times. Come now, Hope, just make up your mind to
go!"

"You forget, I must teach my school for several weeks yet, so that
settles it. Good-night, Clarice! Go to sleep like a good girl."

"What does this little school amount to, to you?" insisted Mrs. Van
Rensselaer. "Not a thing, and you know it! You just don't want to go
with us. Come on, please do go, that's a dear girlie!"

"Impossible, Clarice," replied Hope. "There are many good reasons why I
really couldn't. This school up here, and my little Louisa, and, anyway,
I don't want to go. Aren't you very tired and sleepy, Clarice?" She
thought Mrs. Van Rensselaer bid fair to remain awake all night, and was
devising various schemes in her mind for getting away from her. But Mrs.
Van Rensselaer had an object in view, and disliked exceedingly to give
it up.

"I really don't think you ought to stay up here, Hope. To be candid, I
don't just like your position. Of course, in this country,
conventionalities don't count for much, but honestly I think this
Livingston is caring for you."

"What in the world put such an idea into your head?" asked the girl,
flushing beneath her cover of blankets.

"Hope!" reproved Mrs. Van Rensselaer. "You know it, and I know it, so
what's the use of denying it? But, of course, if you think it's
right----Really, I have nothing further to say except that I wish you
would return with me, and bring your little Louisa along."

The girl was silent for a moment, forgetting her anxiety to get away, in
thoughts Clarice had suggested.

"Has he any family?" she suddenly asked. "I mean--_children_, Clarice."

"I don't think so. But what difference would that make?"

"No difference in reality--but a heap of difference in my thoughts. If
he had a family,--children,--it would seem more natural to think of him
as being a married man, a family man. As it is, I will remember him as a
true-hearted, free young Englishman."

"I think, Hopie, his being married has spoiled a very pretty romance. I
wish it might have been different, dear!"

"You are too sleepy to know what you think. Go to sleep and dream that I
shall join you in New York as soon as the school is ended."




CHAPTER XXVIII


It seemed an interminable time to Hope, although it was in reality less
than an hour, before the breathing of the two sleepers assured her that
she could leave the tent in safety.

When she stood outside, at the edge of the cut-bank, casting a quick
glance over the tents behind, it seemed to her that the moonlight was
brighter than ever. It was like a soft hazy day. She made her way toward
a dark object on the opposite side of the brush, the same that had
attracted Sydney an hour before. This time the small object did not
conceal itself, but stood boldly forth.

"I thought you wasn't never comin'," said the boy softly. "It must be
'bout mornin' by now. Seems all night! We'll haf to ride like blazes if
we get there now in time! They're over here," he said, leading the way
along a winding trail around the side of a wooded hill.

"You're a good boy," said the girl.

"You bet I had the awfulest time gettin' away with your saddle! Every
time I'd get up near it that blame cook'd pop his head out of the tent.
I like to never got it a tall!"

"But you did get it," said Hope. "I saw that it wasn't there."

"Yep, an' the blanket an' bridle. I've got 'em all cached up here in the
trees--horses an' everything, an' your horse is saddled. Somebody rode
up while I was waitin' down there on the bank for you, an' I just had to
lay low, I tell you!"

"Come, hurry!" whispered the girl. "We've got to kill our horses
to-night!"

"Oh, I've got Dave's pinto, so I don't care," replied the child. Then
after an instant's pause in which they reached their horses: "You
couldn't kill this pinto, nohow!"

Perhaps, thought Hope, it would not kill her horse either. She trusted
not, for she loved the animal dearly. But it would be a ride for their
very lives if the soldiers were to reach there in time to avert the
mischief.

It was a ride for their lives. Ten miles at night over a rough country,
through tangled underbrush, and deep matted grass, across stony creek
bottoms and rocky hills, ever onward toward Fox Creek at the speed of
the wind.

Time and again the horses stumbled to their knees, but the riders might
have been a part of them, so securely did they keep their seats. The
pinto began to lag, at which the girl stopped for an instant, rode
behind, and lashed it furiously with her strong quirt. Then for a time
it kept up with the thoroughbred, but could not long continue the speed.

Upon a high knoll the girl reined up, horse and rider waiting,
motionless as a carved statue, for the pinto, whose easy, graceful
running gait had changed to short rabbit-like leaps.

"Wish I had another string o' horses!" gasped the child, as he at length
gained the top of the hill. The girl pointed down the dwindling
foot-hills to something small and white in the distance.

"See, there are the tents--a mile away. The soldiers--two troops of
them--out on a pleasure trip. I will go on--you take your time, and go
back with the men."

"I want to go with _you_," declared the boy, half crying.

"No," said the girl coaxingly. "You must be their guide, and lead them
to the ledge of rocks by the sheep-shed. Think how fine it will be to be
a _real_ soldier." Then appalled by a new thought: "Oh, but if you
should get tired and _couldn't_ lead them there, how would they ever
find the place? _What shall I do!_ I can't wait for them--I must go back
ahead. _If_ he shouldn't be there! If something should have warned or
detained him! _What will I do!_"

"Oh, shoot it all, _I'll_ take 'em there all right!" exclaimed the boy,
in a very big voice. "Don't you worry. I ain't a bit tired, an' I ain't
a-goin' to be, neither!"

Hope reached over and clasped the child in her arms, a sob coming with
her breath.

"_My little man!_" she said softly. Then instructing him to follow her,
spurred up her horse to a fresh attempt, and so mad was her ride that
she scarcely breathed until she dropped to the ground beside a sentinel
who commanded her to halt.

How she roused the camp in the middle of the night was a story Larry
O'Hara often delighted to relate. It was Larry who really came to the
rescue, who shouldered the responsibility of the action, and led the
troops when finally equipped to the scene of the disturbance.

And Hope rode back alone--rode so rapidly that her horse stopped,
exhausted, at the foot of the big hill where she had planned the
rendezvous with Livingston. There she left the noble animal and climbed
up toward the summit, sometimes on her hands and knees, so tired had she
become. And the moon still shone brightly along the horizon of the
heavens. An hour of brilliancy, she thought, then darkness before the
dawn. When she had dragged herself up the mountain side, hope and fear
alternately filling her heart, and hastening her footsteps, a sudden
weakness came over her as she saw on the summit the stalwart figure of
Livingston. Then it seemed to her that the night had been a mere dream,
or at least ridiculous. How could such a strong, brave-looking man
require a girl's assistance? It was preposterous! She seemed to shrink
into herself, in a little cuddled heap among the rocks.

Then a clear whistle sounded on the still air. She knew it was for her.
How like a boy, she thought. She tried to answer it, but could not make
a sound.

Finally she rose from the rocks and approached him--not the Hope he had
expected, but a frightened, trembling girl.

He went to meet her, after the manner of a boy, and clasped the hands
she gave him in his own, then kissed each one, and gravely led her to
the summit upon which he had been standing.

"This rock is like a great throne," he said, "where we are going to wait
our crown of happiness that is to come with the rising of the sun. Is it
not so? See, you shall sit upon the throne and I here at your feet. How
you are trembling, dear! And those heavy guns, why did you bring them?"

"To protect myself, perhaps, from one who is inclined to be over-bold,"
she replied, with a little nervous laugh as she settled herself
comfortably on the throne-like rock.

"Hope!" he reproved. A red flush dyed the girl's face.

"And are you not the man?" she inquired.

"Tell me then," he said quietly, "who has a better right!"

She drew back into the very recess of the throne, away from his eyes, so
convincingly near to hers.

"It's a long climb up this steep mountain," she remarked weariedly.

"And you are tired! I can see it now. But it was good of you to come to
meet me here like this, Hope--_sweetheart_!"

"No, no! you must not talk like that!" cried the girl.

"You know I cannot help it when I am with you. I must tell you over and
over that I love you--_love you_, Hope! Why not, when my heart sings it
all the time? And have you not given me the _right_, dear?"

"Wait! Not now," she said more softly. "Talk about something
else--_anything_," she gasped.

"And must I humor you, my queen," he said. "Look down and let me read in
your eyes what I want to find there--then I will talk about anything,
everything, until you want to hear what is in my heart!"

"Only daylight can reveal what is in my eyes," she replied. "The light
of the moon is unreal, deceiving. Tell me how long you have been here,
and where did you leave your horse?"

"You are evading me for some reason. If I did not believe it to be
impossible, I should say that I am nervous--and that you are nervous.
Can you not be yourself to me now--at this time? Why did you want me to
meet you here?"

"You say you love me. Then aren't you content to just sit here in
silence beside me?"

"Pardon me, dear, but my love is almost too great for silence. You will
admit that." Then with a touch of amusement in his voice: "Tell me, are
you angry with me that I should speak so plainly to you?"

"No, no! Of course not--only talk about something else just now. How
long have you been here?"

"An eternity," he replied. "Or perhaps longer. I'm not sure. When I left
you there at the camp I went directly back to the ranch. The men were
all in bed. I went in and got my rifle and started over here. You see we
are both armed!" he laughed, taking a Winchester from behind the throne
of rocks. She took it from him and examined it minutely.

"A good gun," she remarked, handing it back.

"Then I started over here," he continued, "but had a brief interruption
on the road in the shape of the old squaw that lives down in your
community--old Mother White Blanket. She held me up in the
road--positively held my horse so that I couldn't move while she told a
story that would have brought tears to my eyes if I could have
understood a word she said, and if my mind hadn't been so full of the
most gloriously beautiful girl in the world.

"Finally I had sense enough to give her some money, and after repeating
'yes' innumerable times to her broken questions she finally gave me
permission to proceed on my way. I left my horse down at the
sheep-shed."

"Couldn't you understand anything she said to you?" questioned Hope
eagerly.

"Not much," he admitted, and Hope, with a relieved little air, which he
noticed, sank back among the rocks again.

A silence fell over them for a time, then Livingston raised his head and
looked at the girl intently.

"I think she was trying to tell me something," he said slowly. "She said
it was a warning; but I paid no attention to her delirium. I believe she
tried to impress upon me that I was in danger. But I was insanely
anxious to meet you. She said something that I had heard before, that
you and the twins had driven away the men who attacked and killed poor
Fritz that night. And this much more I think I understand now, that the
'old man,' whoever she meant, had given her a beating, that the twins
were shut up in the stable or somewhere, and that you were a good girl
because you had given her all your school money. That much is clear to
me now. And also that she was very anxious that I should get out of the
country immediately--which seems to be the sentiment of the majority of
the people out here. The old woman is no doubt insane."

"Oh, yes," agreed the girl, "there's not a doubt but that she's plumb
locoed! I'm glad you didn't allow anything she said to trouble your
mind. She's a regular old beggar. The money was probably what she was
after. You can't believe a word she says!"

"Yet she spoke convincingly," mused Livingston. "If I hadn't been so
absorbed in the meeting I would have taken more heed of what she said.
As it was, I passed her off as a little out of her mind. Of course, I
knew you had no hand in that shooting at the corral, had you, Hope?" he
asked in a somewhat anxious voice.

"A ridiculous idea for that old squaw to get in her head," replied the
girl, leaning in a weary fashion back upon the rock.

Whatever suspicion Livingston had entertained vanished for the moment.

"I am glad," he said. "I don't know exactly why, but I am glad that it
isn't so. I shouldn't like to think that you had done such a thing--for
me."

"The moon takes a long time to set, don't you think?" she remarked. "It
must be almost time for daylight."

"Are you anxious?" he inquired pointedly. She sat erect in dignified
silence and did not reply.

"How much longer must you be humored, dear?" he asked, taking both of
her hands within his own, and drawing her toward him. "I do not believe
that the moonlight will tell lies. Look at me!"

She leaped away from him with all her young strength, and stood upon the
throne of rocks, scornfully erect.

"How bad you are--how wicked to talk to me so, to even think that I
would care for you one minute! Surely you must realize that I know your
past, _Lord_ Livingston! _Your past!_" she flashed.

"You know my past, and yet you can condemn me," he said, pain and
wonderment in his quiet voice. "Perhaps you are right. I haven't always
been perfect. But I am not bad--Hope! Not _that_! I am a man--I try to
be, before God. Surely you do not mean what you say, my girl--_Hope_!"

"You know just what I mean," said Hope, in a voice strained and harsh.
"And you know it would be absolutely _impossible_ for me to love you!"

"Then there is nothing more to be said," replied Livingston, turning
away from her. "We will not wait for the sunrise. I will go now." He
walked from her with long strides.

"Wait," she cried in absolute terror. "_Wait!_ Oh, you wouldn't be so
rude as to leave me here--_alone_!" He stopped short, his back still
toward her. "Please come back!" she begged, approaching him, "I should
die of fright!" Somehow she reminded herself of Clarice. "Surely you
will walk back to camp with me!"

"Yes, certainly, pardon me," he replied huskily.

As they turned, a horse came slowly toward them. Hope gave a little
nervous exclamation.

"Your horse," said Livingston, reaching for the bridle. "I thought you
walked."

"No--yes," replied the girl. "I walked up the hill. The horse must have
followed. We will walk down and lead it. It's too steep to ride down."

But Livingston had stopped short beside the animal, his head bowed,
almost upon the saddle.

"Come, shall we go?" asked the girl nervously.

Suddenly the man turned to her, sternness expressed in every line of his
figure.

"Where have you been?" he commanded.

"For a ride," she replied, feeling for the first time in her life the
desire to scream.

"_For a ride!_ Yes, it must have been a ride! Your horse is nearly
dead--listen to his breathing! Crusted with foam from head to foot and
still dripping. You have been----"

"For the soldiers. To protect your ranch from the devils who would kill
you and get rid of your sheep--this very hour!"

"And you have lured me here, away from danger--away from the side of my
men, away from my _duty_, with all a woman's cowardice! _But what of
them!_ You have called me bad! That may be, but I am not bad enough to
be grateful to you for doing this, that you may, perhaps, have intended
for a kindness! Anything would have been kinder to me than what you have
done to-night."

"Where are you going?" she cried from the rocks where she had thrown
herself. But he was running, with all his speed, down the mountain
side.




CHAPTER XXIX


Then she knew that he was going straight into the very jaws of death. If
it had been a trap set for him it could not have been any surer. In a
sheep-shed far below, close to the reef of rocks above Fritz's grave, a
score of men were waiting, and he was rushing toward them, down the
mountain side, lighted by the white moonlight. And what was she doing,
groveling there among the rocks? Like a flash she was after him, but at
a speed much less than his had been.

Before she was halfway down three shots rang out. The girl clutched her
heart and listened, but not a sound could be heard save the long echoes
in the valley, which sounded like a dying breath.

On she sped from rock to rock, keeping ever out of sight of the shed,
her senses keenly alive to the one object in view--a bit of white far
below. It might have been a bunch of flowers along the hillside, but
white flowers never grew there--a heap of bones, then, she thought. She
made a zigzag line along the jagged ridge of rocks, closer and closer to
the white object below. She wondered if he lay on his face or his back.
How calm she was in the shock and terror of her grief! The light of the
moon was growing dim, she had reached the very tip of the rocks, the
white object was not twenty feet away, but out in the open in perfect
view of the sheep-shed and the score of men it hid. Another shot broke
the stillness. The white object moved, and then a moan followed, so low
that none but the ears of the frenzied girl could have heard. Like an
enraged lioness she sprang out into the open and dragged the heavy body
up toward the shelter of rocks. Several bullets rang about her, but the
increasing darkness made her an uncertain target. A couple of men
ventured outside the sheep-shed, encouraged by the stillness. The girl
laughed savagely, as if in glee, and pulled the man's body close to the
side of rocks, covering it with her own.

"Come on," she cried to herself. "Come on, show yourselves! I shall have
you all! For every pang you have made him suffer, you shall have twenty,
and for his death you shall have a lingering one! Come on, come on!"
Three stood outside. The addition pleased her. She laughed. Taking
deliberate aim she fired again and again. Three wounded, frightened men
crawled into the shelter of the shed. Then a score of bullets splashed
against the rocks about her. She lifted the warm bleeding body closer
under the rocks, drawing her own over it to protect it from all harm and
talking frantically the while.

"The hounds, the hounds! They murdered you right in my sight, dear, and
I will tear out their hearts with my hands! See, they are hiding
themselves again! I can wait, yes, I can wait! _My love, my love!_ For
everything they have made you suffer! Oh, you can't be _dead_, dear! You
can't be dead! Open your eyes and let me tell you just once I love you!
Only once, dear!" She put her mouth close to his ear. "_I love you, love
you, love you!_ Only hear me once and know, dear! Know how I love you!
Why didn't I tell you? I don't care if you are married a thousand times,
a _million_ times! I love you with all my life--my soul! See, he's
trying to get away! But he'll never reach his horse! See! A hole right
through his knee! Death is too good for them, dear. My love, speak to me
just once--only know that I love you, that I am mad with love for you!
Tell me that you feel my face against yours--and my kisses! See, they're
crawling out like flies! and making for their horses--and now they're
crawling back again so that I cannot get them. Oh, God, let me get them
_all_! My love, my love, how I love you, and _never told you so_!"

With the first hint of dawn another volley came from the opposite side,
and out of the gloom a rush of cavalry closed in about the sheep-shed,
and ten men, most of them suffering from slight wounds, were taken
captive. The man lying against the reef of rocks partially opened his
eyes as Hope, with one last kiss upon his face, rose to meet a small
group of riders.

"I say, Hope, it's a blasted shame we didn't get here in time to save
him!" exclaimed O'Hara, with grief in his voice. "I'll just send the
doctor over here at once."

While the surgeon bent over Livingston the girl stood close by, against
the rocks, quiet as the stone itself.

"A bad shoulder wound," he commented at length. "A little of your flask,
O'Hara, and he'll be all right. Why, he's quite conscious! How do you
feel? You're all right, my boy! A shattered shoulder isn't going to
bother you any, is it? Not much!"

The girl moved closer.

"Is he alive and conscious? Will he live?" she asked.

"He's all right, madam," replied the surgeon. As he spoke Livingston
turned his face toward her, his eyes alight with all the love-light of
his heart--answering every prayer she had breathed upon him. Her own
answered his. Then she drew back, farther and farther away, until she
stood outside the group of riders. O'Hara tried to detain her as she
passed him.

"Why, you're wounded yourself, girl!" he exclaimed.

She looked at her sleeve, and the wet stream of blood upon her dress,
and laughed. It was true, but she had not felt the wound.

"Not at all, Larry," she replied. "The blood came from _him_," and she
pointed back to the rocks. She started on, but turned back. "Tell me,"
she said, "what became of little Ned."

"I sent him home," replied Larry. "The poor little chap was about all
in. We met his uncle, Long Bill, riding like blazes for the doctor. It
seems that those young divils of twins shot old Harris some time during
the night, which stopped that faction from joining these fellows here as
they had planned. A pretty lucky shot, I'm thinking! They ought to have
a gold medal for it, bless their souls, but they'll both dangle from the
end of a rope before they're forty, the devils, or I'll miss my guess!"

Larry looked around to speak to an officer, and before he could realize
it Hope had disappeared, climbing back toward the summit of the hill
where she had left her horse.

In the gulch on the opposite side she fell exhausted into the very arms
of old Jim McCullen, who had returned in time to hear the shooting, and
was hastening toward the scene.

"My poor little Hopie!" he cried, carrying her to the stream, where the
alarmed party from the camp found them a few minutes later.

"You will drown her, Mr. McCullen!" exclaimed Clarice Van Rensselaer,
rushing up quite white and breathless. "The poor darling, I just _knew_
she'd get into trouble with all those dreadful Indians! Someone give me
some whisky, _quick_! That's right, Sydney, _make_ her swallow it! Here,
give it to me! _There!_"

Louisa, stricken with grief, pointed to the damp, stiffened sleeve of
the girl's shirt-waist. "See," she sobbed, "they have shot her, too,
like my Fritz!"

Of them all, Mrs. Van Rensselaer was the most contained, and showed
remarkable coolness and nerve in the way she ripped off the sleeve and
bathed the wound, which was hardly more than a deep scratch, yet had
caused considerable loss of blood.

"It's exhaustion, pure and simple," said Jim McCullen. Then he and
Sydney drew away a short distance, and examined the horse.

Hope finally looked up into the anxious faces above her.

"I think, Clarice," she said, "I'll go back to New York with you."




CHAPTER XXX


Hope, a vision in white, leaned back resignedly in the soft embrace of
the carriage cushions.

"I thought," she said, "you never visited the Grandons, Clarice,
particularly since Harriet made her alliance with the titleless duke."
Mrs. Van Rensselaer smiled behind the laces of her muff. "I didn't
suppose you were going there this afternoon," continued the girl, with a
sweeping look along the solidly built street. "How does it happen?"

"Well, you see," replied Clarice, "_Larry_ wished it; and you know his
wish is law to me--_until_ we're married. That's only right and as it
should be--the _dear boy_!" Then impulsively: "I don't know how I've
ever lived without him, Hope! Positively, he is the _dearest_ thing that
ever lived!"

"And you'll both be tremendously happy, I know. Both of you young and
gay, and in love with life and its frivolities--both the center of your
set, and both rattle-brained enough to want to keep that center and
throw away your lives in the whirling, rapid stream of society."

"You shouldn't ridicule this life, Hope. Don't you know we are the very
pulse of the world! I had an idea you were taking to it pretty well. You
are certainly making a tremendous hit. Even mamma smiles upon you in the
most affectionate manner, and is proud for once of her offspring. You
are simply gorgeous, Hope--a perfect _queen_!"

The girl's eyes darkened, her face flushed. "A _queen_," she retorted.
"A queen! Clarice, did you ever sit upon a throne and feel the world
slipping out from under you? A woman is never a queen, except to the
_one_ man. But you are mistaken, Clarice. I simply cannot adapt myself
to this life. If it wasn't for the continual monotony of it all--the
never changing display of good points and fine clothes--where even one's
own prayers are gilded and framed in consciousness and vanity--and
these streets--the reflection of it all--these blocks and blocks always
the same, like the people they cover--presenting always the same
money-stamped faces--oh, it is this sameness that stifles me! It is all
grand and wonderful, but it isn't _life_." She paused, then smiled at
Clarice's perplexed face. "Leave me at mamma's when you return, for I've
got stacks of things to do, and I want the evening all to myself--Louisa
and I, you know. And we'll say, Clarice, that I perfectly love dear old
New York."

"Oh, I don't mind, dear, not at all! I know you are no more fitted in
your heart for this life than I am for the life out there with those
_dreadful_ Indians. But you've certainly been acting superb these last
two months!"

"You are such a _dear_, Clarice," said Hope impulsively, stroking her
gloved hand. "I have you and Louisa, and, of course, I am perfectly
happy! I tell myself so a thousand times a day. My poor little Louisa!
_She's_ about the happiest girl I ever saw in all my life, but she
doesn't know it. Here she is worrying her head off because Sydney is
pressing his suit too strongly and won't take 'no' for an answer, and
she thinks she ought to be faithful to poor Fritz, her cousin, who is
really only a sweet, sad memory to her now, while all the time she is
crazy in love with Syd. Isn't it a fright? But Sydney is way out in
Montana, and his letters serve only as little pricks to her poor
conscience. Her replies are left mostly to me, so that is what I must do
to-night."

"But your mother entertains this evening. Had you forgotten?" reminded
Mrs. Van Rensselaer. "So how are you going to get away?"

"I suppose I will have to come down for awhile, but I simply will not
remain long."

"Well, I will see you then. Larry and I are going to drop in for a
little while in the early evening."

When they drove away from the Grandons' a half hour later Clarice
searched the girl's quiet face for some expression of her thoughts, but
found none.

"So you have seen the Lady Livingston at last, Hope! What do you think
of her?"

The girl shrugged her shoulders and looked into the street. "Your
description tallied very well," she replied.

That evening Hope met the blond Lady Helene at her mother's musicale.
This time it was Clarice, again, who brought the meeting about.

Mrs. Van Rensselaer was in her gayest, most voluble mood.

"I'm _so_ anxious to have you two get acquainted," she said. "Dear Lady
Helene, this is _Hope_--Miss Hathaway, and she can tell you everything
you want to know about the West. Do, Hope, entertain her for a few
moments until I find Larry." This the girl did in her gracious way, but
adroitly kept the conversation away from the West.

After a few moments Clarice returned without Larry. A shadow of
disappointment crossed her face as she joined the conversation.

"I thought you were going to talk about the West, Hope," she laughed,
"and here you are talking _New York_--nothing but New York!"

"New York is always an entertaining topic," said Lady Helene. "I do not
seem to fancy the West particularly. You know Lord Livingston has
recently been hurt out there, and so I do not enjoy a very kindly
feeling toward that country. The poor boy! I have been so worried about
him! Really, don't you know, I haven't had a good night's sleep since I
heard of his injury! Yes, you know, it's a wonder he wasn't _scalped_!
It's just fearful, really! He is so much to me, you know. Ever since my
poor husband died and the title and estates fell to Edward, I have felt
a _great_ responsibility for him. He is so much younger than my husband,
Lord Henry, and so, well, really, sort of wild, don't you know." Here
Lady Helene smiled and wiped one eye with a filmy bit of lace. Perhaps
she was saddened by thoughts of the havoc she had wrought in the life of
the late lord, and his fortunes.

Hope sat motionless, suddenly paralyzed. "Do you mean," she asked, in
short gasps, "that Edward--Lord Livingston is not your _husband_?"

"Mercy, no," replied Lady Helene, "my husband's brother! Indeed, Edward
is not married! I doubt very much if he ever will be. I hope if he does,
that it will be to someone at home, in his own class, don't you know!
Really, he is a great responsibility to me, Mrs. Van Rensselaer! Why,
where did Miss Hathaway go? She seems to be such a bright, dashing young
woman. Really, one meets few American girls so royally beautiful! Yes,
as I was saying, Edward is a terrible responsibility to me. Even now I
am obliged to hurry away because he has just arrived here in town, and I
must meet him at his hotel. That is the worst of not having a house of
your own! To think of poor, dear Edward stopping at a _hotel_!"

"Which one?" gasped Clarice. Receiving the information, she abruptly
excused herself from Lady Helene, who immediately decided that some
Americans had very poor manners.

While Clarice drove rapidly toward Livingston's hotel, Hope, in eager
haste, was literally throwing things in a trunk that had been pulled
into the center of the room. Little Louisa, no less excited and eager,
assisted.

"To think, my Louisa," laughed the girl, "that we are going back to our
West--_home_--again, away from all this fuss and foolishness! Oh, don't
be so particular, dear. Throw them in any way, just so they get in! Our
train leaves at twelve, and I have telephoned for tickets, state-room
and everything. Isn't it _grand_? Mamma will be furious! But dear old
Dad, won't he be glad! He's so lonesome for me, Louisa. He says he can
hardly exist there without me! And Jim, and Sydney, and--everyone! Oh, I
am wild for my horses and the prairie again! And you've got to be nice
to Syd! Yes, dear, it's your _duty_. Can't you see it? If you don't, the
poor boy will go to the bad _altogether_, and something _dreadful_ will
happen to him! And it will be all your fault!" Which statement sent
Louisa into a paroxysm of tears, not altogether sorrowful.

"You will spoil dose _beautiful_ clothes!" she finally exclaimed,
looking in dismay through her tears at the reckless packer.

"It makes no difference," laughed Hope. "What are _clothes_! We will
have the rest sent on after us. I suppose we've forgotten half what we
really need, but that doesn't matter, either, does it, my Louisa?"

Louisa dried her tears and assisted until the trunk was packed and
strapped. Then they took hold of hands and danced like children around
it. Suddenly Hope stopped, her face growing white and fearful.

"_If he shouldn't forgive me!_" she exclaimed softly.

"Ah, but he lofs you!" said Louisa.

At that moment Mrs. Van Rensselaer opened the door and looked in.

"My dear," she began, then stopped in amazement. "What in the
world----Why, you are going away!"

"Yes," replied Hope, putting her head down upon Clarice's soft evening
wrap. "I am going back to----"

"But he has come to you, dear, and he is waiting right here in the
hall!"

"No, no!" breathed the girl.

"But he _is_!" exclaimed Clarice, gently pushing the girl, still in all
her white evening glory of gown, into the great hall. "And he carries
his arm in a sling, so _do_ be careful!" she admonished, closing the
door upon her.

From below came the indistinct murmur of many voices. Under the red
glare of the lamp at the head of the broad staircase Livingston and Hope
met in a happiness too great for words.

"Louisa," said Clarice Van Rensselaer, from her seat upon the trunk, "I
hope you see it your duty to make a man of Sydney."

"_A man_," replied Louisa indignantly, "he is already de greatest man in
all de whole world, and _I lof him_!"


FINIS.


       *       *       *       *       *


TRANSCRIBER NOTES:

Punctuation corrected without note.

page 48: "through" changed to "though" (as though talking to herself).

page 95: "bloodthristy" changed to "bloodthirsty" (more bloodthirsty
than she suspected).

page 123: "protuded" changed to "protruded" (teeth protruded from her
thin lips).

page 303: "upon" removed from text as redundant (patting him upon the
head).

page 369: "close" changed to "closed" (just before the flap of the white
tent closed upon her).







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Hope Hathaway, by Frances Parker

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOPE HATHAWAY ***

***** This file should be named 36629.txt or 36629.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/6/2/36629/

Produced by Peter Vachuska, Pat McCoy, Stephen Hope and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
