Project Gutenberg's The Principles Of Secularism, by George Jacob Holyoake

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Principles Of Secularism

Author: George Jacob Holyoake

Release Date: July 20, 2011 [EBook #36797]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PRINCIPLES OF SECULARISM ***




Produced by David Widger






THE PRINCIPLES OF SECULARISM

By George Jacob Holyoake

"Do the duty nearest hand,"--Goethe.

[third edition, revised.]

LONDON: BOOK STORE, 282, STRAND;

Austin. & Co., 17, Johnson's court, Fleet Street. 1871.




CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTORY

     "If you think it right to differ from the times, and to make
     a stand for any valuable point of morals, do it, however
     rustic, however antiquated, however pedantic it may appear;
     do it, not for insolence, but seriously--as a man who wore a
     soul of his own in his bosom, and did not wait till it was
     breathed into him by the breath of fashion."--The Rev. Sidney
     Smith, Canon of St Paul's.

IN a passage of characteristic sagacity, Dr. J. H. Newman has depicted
the partisan aimlessness more descriptive of the period when this little
book first appeared, sixteen years ago, than it is now. But it will be
long before its relevance and instruction have passed away. I therefore
take the liberty of still quoting his words:--

"When persons for the first time look upon the world of politics
or religion, all that they find there meets their mind's eye, as a
landscape addresses itself for the first time to a person who has just
gained his bodily sight. One thing is as far off as another; there is
no perspective. The connection of fact with fact, truth with truth, the
bearing of fact upon truth, and truth upon fact, what leads to what,
what are points primary and what secondary, all this they have yet to
learn. It is all a new science to them, and they do not even know their
ignorance of it. Moreover, the world of to-day has no connection in
their minds with the world of yesterday; time is not a stream, but
stands before them round and full, like the moon. They do not know what
happened ten years ago, much less the annals of a century: the past does
not live to them in the present; they do not understand the worth of
contested points; names have no associations for them, and persons
kindle no recollections. They hear of men, and things, and projects, and
struggles, and principles; but everything comes and goes like the wind;
nothing makes an impression, nothing penetrates, nothing has its place
in their minds. They locate nothing: they have no system. They hear
and they forget; or they just recollect what they have once heard, they
cannot tell where. Thus they have no consistency in their arguments;
that is, they argue one way to-day, and not exactly the other way
to-morrow, but indirectly the other way at random. Their lines of
argument diverge; nothing comes to a point; there is no one centre
in which their mind sits, on which their judgment of men and things
proceeds. This is the state of many men all through life; and miserable
politicians or Churchmen they make, unless by good luck they are in safe
hands, and ruled by others, or are pledged to a course. Else they are at
the mercy of the wind and waves; and without being Radical, Whig, Tory,
or Conservative, High Church or Low Church, they do Whig acts, Tory
acts, Catholic acts, and Heretical acts, as the fit takes them, or as
events or parties drive them. And sometimes when their self importance
is hurt, they take refuge in the idea that all this is a proof that they
are unfettered, moderate, dispassionate, that they observe the mean,
that they are no 'party men;' when they are, in fact, the most helpless
of slaves; for our strength in this world is, to be the subjects of the
reason and our liberty, to be captives of the truth."*

How the organization of ideas has fared with higher class societies
others can tell: the working class have been left so much in want of
initiative direction that almost everything has to be done among
them, and an imperfect and brief attempt to direct those interested
in Freethought may meet with some acceptance. To clamour for objects
without being able to connect them with principles; to smart under
contumely without knowing how to protect themselves; to bear some
lofty name without understanding the manner in which character should
correspond to profession--this is the amount of the popular attainment.

    * "Loss and Gain." ascribed to the Rev. Father Newman.

In this new Edition I find little to alter and less to add. In a passage
on page 27, the distinction between Secular instruction and Secularism
is explained, in these words:--"Secular education is by some confounded
with Secularism, whereas the distinction between them is very
wide. Secular education simply means imparting Secular knowledge
separately--by itself, without admixture of Theology with it. The
advocate of Secular education may be, and generally is, also an advocate
of religion; but he would teach religion at another time and treat it as
a distinct subject, too sacred for coercive admixture into the hard
and vexatious routine of a school. He would confine the inculcation of
religion to fitting seasons and chosen instruments. He holds also that
one subject at a time is mental economy in learning. Secular education
is the policy of a school--Secularism is the policy of life to those who
do not accept Theology."

Very few persons admitted that these distinctions existed when
this passage was written in 1854. This year, 1870, they have been
substantially admitted by the Legislature in concession made in the
National Education. Bill. It only remains to add that the whole text has
been revised and re-arranged in an order which seems more consecutive.
The portion on Secular Organizations has been abridged, in part
re-written, explaining particulars as to the Secular Guild.

A distinctive summary of Secular principles may be read under the
article "Secularism," in Chambers's Cyclopaedia.




CHAPTER II. THE TERM SECULARISM.

     "The adoption of the term Secularism is justified by its
     including a large number of persons who are not Atheists,
     and uniting them for action which has Secularism for its
     object, and not Atheism. On this ground, and because, by the
     adoption of a new term, a vast amount of impediment from
     prejudice is got rid of, the use of the name Secularism is
     found advantageous."--Harriet Martineau. _Boston
     Liberator_.--Letter to Lloyd Garrison, November, 1853.

EVERY one observant of public controversy in England, is aware of its
improved tone of late years. This improved tone is part of a wider
progress, 'Increase of wealth has led to improvement of taste, and the
diffusion of knowledge to refinement of sentiment. The mass are better
dressed, better mannered, better spoken than formerly. A coffee-room
discussion, conducted by mechanics, is now a more decorous exhibition
than a debate in Parliament was in the days of Canning.* Boisterousness
at the tables of the rich, and insolence in the language of the poor,
are fast disappearing. "Good society" is now that society in which
people practise the art of being genial, without being familiar, and in
which an evincible courtesey of speech is no longer regarded as timidity
or effeminacy, but rather as proof of a disciplined spirit, which
chooses to avoid all offence, the better to maintain the right
peremptorily punishing wanton insult. Theologians, more inveterate
in speech than politicians, now observe a respectfulness to opponents
before unknown. That diversity of opinion once ascribed to "badness of
heart" is now, with more discrimination, referred to defect or diversity
of understanding--a change which, discarding invective, recognizes
instruction as the agent of uniformity.

     * From whose lips the House of Commons cheered a   reference
     to a political adversary as "the revered and ruptured
     Ogden."

Amid all this newness of conception it must be obvious that many old
terms of theological controversy are obsolete. The idea of an "Atheist"
as one warring against moral restraints--of an "Infidel" as one
treacherous to the truth--of a "Freethinker" as a "loose thinker,"*
arose in the darkness of past times, when men fought by the flickering
light of their hatreds--times which tradition has peopled with monsters
of divinity as well as of nature. But the glaring colours in which the
party names invented by past priests were dyed, no longer harmonize with
the quieter taste of the present day. The more sober spirit of
modern controversy has, therefore, need of new terms, and if the term
"Secularism" was merely a neutral substitute for "Freethinking," there
would be reason for its adoption. Dissenters might as well continue
the designation of "Schismatics," or Political Reformers that of
"Anarchists," as that the students of Positive Philosophy should
continue the designation "Atheism," "Infidelism," or any similar term by
which their opponents have contrived to brand their opinions. It is
as though a merchant vessel should consent to carry a pirate flag.
Freethinker is, however, getting an acceptable term. Upon the platform,
Christian disputants frequently claim it, and resent the exclusive
assumption of it by others. These new claimants say, "We are as
much Freethinkers as yourselves," so that it is necessary to define
Freethinking. It is fearless thinking, based upon impartial inquiry,
searching on both sides, not regarding doubt as a crime, or opposite
conclusions as a species of moral poison. Those who inquire with
sinister, pre-possessions will never inquire fairly. The Freethinker
fears not to follow a conclusion to the utmost limits of truth,
whether it coincides with the Bible or contradicts it. If therefore any
pronounce the term "Secularism" "a concealment or a disguise," they
can do so legitimately only after detecting some false meaning it is
intended to convey, and not on the mere ground of its being a change
of name, since nothing can more completely "conceal and disguise"
the purposes of Freethought than the old names imposed upon it by its
adversaries, which associate with guilt its conscientious conclusions
and impute to it as outrages, its acts of self-defence.

     * As the Reverend Canon Kingsley has perversely rendered it.

Besides the term Secularism, there was another term which seemed to
promise also distinctiveness of meaning--namely, Cosmism, under which
adherents would have taken the designation of Cosmists. Rut this name
scientific men would have understood in a purely physical sense,
after the great example of Humboldt, and the public would not all have
understood it--besides, it was open to easy perversion in one of
its declinations. Next to this, as a name, stands that of
Realism--intrinsically good. A Society of Realists would have been
intelligible, but many would have supposed it to be some revival of the
old Realists. Moralism, a sound name in itself, is under Evangelical
condemnation as "mere morality." Naturalism would seem an obvious name,
were it not that we should be confounded with Naturalists, to say
no more. Some name must be taken, as was the case with the
Theophilan-thropists of Paris. Many of them would rather not have
assumed any denomination, but they yielded to the reasonable argument,
that if they did not choose one for themselves, the public would bestow
upon them one which would be less to their liking. Those who took the
name of Philantropes found it exposed them to a pun, which greatly
damaged them: _Philantropes_ was turned into _filoux en troupe_.

Historical characteristics, however, seemed to point to a term which
expressed the Secular element in life; a term deeply engrafted in
literature; of irreproachable associations; a term found and respected
in the dictionaries of opponents, and to which, therefore, they might
dispute our right, but which they could not damage. Instead, therefore,
of finding ourselves self-branded or caricatured by this designation,
we have found opponents claiming it, and disputing with us for its
possession.




CHAPTER III. PRINCIPLES OF SECULARISM DEFINED


I.

SECULARISM is the study of promoting human welfare by material means;
measuring human welfare by the utilitarian rule, and making the service
of others a duty of life. Secularism relates to the present existence of
man, and to action, the issues of which can be tested by the experience
of this life--having for its objects the development of the physical,
moral, and intellectual nature of man to the highest perceivable point,
as the immediate duty of society: inculcating the practical sufficiency
of natural morality apart from Atheism, Theism, or Christianity:
engaging its adherents in the promotion of human improvement by material
means, and making these agreements the ground of common unity for all
who would regulate life by reason and ennoble it by service. The Secular
is sacred in its influence on life, for by purity of material conditions
the loftiest natures are best sustained, and the lower the most surely
elevated. Secularism is a series of principles intended for the guidance
of those who find Theology indefinite, or inadequate, or deem it
unreliable. It replaces theology, which mainly regards life as a sinful
necessity, as a scene of tribulation through which we pass to a better
world. Secularism rejoices in this life, and regards it as the sphere
of those duties which educate men to fitness for any future and better
life, should such transpire.


II.

A Secularist guides himself by maxims of Positivism, seeking to
discern what is in Nature--what _ought_ to be in morals--selecting
the _affirmative_ in exposition, concerning himself with the real, the
right, and the constructive. Positive principles are principles which
are provable. "A positive precept," says Bishop Butler, "is a precept
the reason of which we see." Positivism is policy of material progress.


III.

Science is the available Providence of life. The problem to be solved
by a science of Society, is to find that situation in which it shall be
impossible for a man to be depraved or poor. Mankind are saved by being
served. Spiritual sympathy is a lesser mercy than that forethought which
anticipates and extirpates the causes of suffering. Deliverance from
sorrow or injustice is before consolation--doing well is higher than
meaning well--work is worship to those who accept Theism, and duty to
those who do not.


IV.

Sincerity, though not errorless, involves the least chance of error,
and is without moral guilt. Sincerity is well-informed, conscientious
conviction, arrived at by intelligent examination, animating those who
possess that conviction to carry it into practice from a sense of
duty. Virtue in relation to opinion consists neither in conformity nor
non-conformity, but in sincere beliefs, and in living up to them.


V.

Conscience is higher than Consequence.*

     *Vide Mr. Holdreth's Papers.


VI.

All pursuit of good objects with pure intent is religiousness in the
best sense in which this term appears to be used. A "good object" is an
object consistent with truth, honour, justice, love. A pure "intent"
is the intent of serving humanity. Immediate service of humanity is
not intended to mean instant gratification, but "immediate" in
contradistinction to the interest of another life. The distinctive
peculiarity of the Secularist is, that he seeks that good which is
dictated by Nature, which is attainable by material means, and which is
of immediate service to humanity--a religiousness to which the idea of
God is not essential, nor the denial of the idea necessary.


VII.

Nearly all inferior natures are susceptible of moral and physical
improvability; this improvability can be indefinitely secured by
supplying proper material conditions; these conditions may one day be
supplied by a system of wise and fraternal co-operation, which primarily
entrenches itself in common prudence, which enacts service according to
industrial capacity, and distributes wealth according to rational needs.
Secular principles involve for mankind a future, where there shall
exist unity of condition with infinite diversity of intellect, where
the subsistence of ignorance and selfishness shall leave men equal, and
universal purity enable all things--noble society, the treasures of art,
and the riches of the world--rto be had in common.


VIII.

Since it is not capable of demonstration whether the inequalties of
human condition will be compensated for in another life--it is the
business of intelligence to rectify them in this world. The speculative
worship of superior beings, who cannot need it, seems a lesser duty than
the patient service of known _inferior_ natures, and the mitigation
of harsh destiny, so that the ignorant may be enlightened and the low
elevated.




CHAPTER IV. LAWS OF SECULAR CONTROVERSY


I. Rights of Reason.

As a means of developing and establishing Secular principles, and as
security that the principles of Nature and the habit of reason may
prevail, Secularism uses itself, and maintains for others, as rights of
reason:--

The Free Search for Truth, without which its full attainment is
impossible.

The Free Utterance of the result, without which the increase of Truth is
limited.

The Free Criticism of alleged Truth, without which its identity must
remain uncertain.

The Fair Action of Conviction thus attained, without which conscience
will be impotent on practice.


II. Standard of Appeal.

"Secularism accepts no authority but that of Nature, adopts no methods
but those of science and philosophy, and respects in practice no rule
but that of the conscience, illustrated by the common sense of mankind.
It values the lessons of the past, and looks to tradition as presenting
a storehouse of raw materials to thought, and in many cases results of
high wisdom for our reverence; but it utterly disowns tradition as a
ground of belief, whether miracles and supernaturalism be claimed or not
claimed on its side. No sacred scripture or ancient church can be made a
basis of belief, for the obvious reason that their claims always need
to be proved, and cannot without absurdity be assumed. The association
leaves to its individual members to yield whatever respect their own
good sense judges to be due to the opinions of great men, living or
dead, spoken or written, as also to the practice of ancient communities,
national or ecclesiastical. But it disowns all appeal to such
authorities as final tests of truth."*

     * "Programme   of Freethought   Societies,"   by   F.   W.
     Newman. (Reasoner, No. 388.)


III. Sphere of Controversy.

Since the principles of Secularism rest on grounds apart from Theism,
Atheism, or Chris-tianism, it is not logically necessary for Secularists
to debate the truth of these subjects. In controversy, Secularism
concerns itself with the assertion and maintenance of its own
affirmative propositions, combating only views of Theology and
Christianity so far as they interfere with, discourage, or disparage
Secular action, which may be done without digressing into the discussion
of the truth of Theism or divine origin of the Bible.


IV. Personal Controversy.

A Secularist will avoid indiscriminate disparagement of bodies or
antagonism of persons, and will place before himself simply the
instruction and service of an opponent, whose sincerity he will not
question, whose motives he will not impugn, always holding that a man
whom it is not worth while confuting courteously, is not worth while
confuting at all. Such disparagements as are included in the explicit
condemnation of erroneous principles are, we believe, all that
the public defence of opinion requires, and are the only kind of
disparagement a Secularist proposes to employ.


V. Justification of Controversy.

The universal fair and open discussion of opinion is the highest
guarantee of public truth--only that theory which is submitted to
that ordeal is to be regarded, since only that which endures it can be
trusted. Secularism encourages men to trust reason throughout, and to
trust nothing that reason does not establish--to examine all things
hopeful, respect all things probable, but rely upon nothing without
precaution which does not come within the range of science and
experience.




CHAPTER V. MAXIMS OF ASSOCIATION


I.

IT is the duty of every man to regulate his personal and family
interests so as to admit of some exertions for the improvement of
society. It is only by serving those beyond ourselves that we can secure
for ourselves protection, sympathy, or honour. The neglect of home for
public affairs endangers philanthropy, by making it the enemy of the
household. To suffer, on the other hand, the interests of the family to
degenerate into mere selfism, is a dangerous example to rulers.


II.

"No man or woman is accountable to others for any conduct by which
others are not injured or damaged."*

     * D.   in the LEADER,  1850, who, as a correspondent, first
     expressed this aphorism thus.


III.

Social freedom consists in being subject to just rule and to none other.


IV.

Service and endurance are the chief personal duties of man.


V.

Secularism holds it to be the duty of every man to reserve a portion of
his means and energies for the public service, and so to cultivate and
cherish his powers, mental and physical, as to have them ever ready
to perform service, as efficient as possible, to the well-being of
humanity. No weakness, no passion, no wavering, should be found among
those who are battling for the cause of human welfare, which such errors
may fatally injure. Self-control, self-culture, self-sacrifice, are
all essential to those who would serve that cause, and would not bring
discredit upon their comrades in that service.*

     * Mr. L. H. Holdreth, Religion of Duty.


VI.

To promote in good faith and good temper the immediate and material
welfare of humanity, in accordance with the laws of Nature, is the
study and duty of a Secularist, and this is the unity of principle which
prevails amid whatever diversity of opinion may subsist in a Secular
Society, the bond of union being the common convictions of the duty of
advancing the Secular good of this life, of the authority of natural
morality, and of the utility of material effort in the work of human
improvement. In other words, Secularist union implies the concerted
action of all who believe it right to promote the Secular good of this
life, to teach morality, founded upon the laws of Nature, and to
seek human improvement by material methods, irrespective of any other
opinions held, and irrespective of any diversity of reasons for holding
these.




CHAPTER VI. THE SECULAR GUILD

SEVERAL expositors of Secular principles, able to act together, have for
many years endeavoured by counsel, by aid, and by publication to promote
Secular organization. At one time they conducted a Secular Institute in
Fleet Street, London--in 1854. The object was to form Secular Societies
for teaching the positive results of Freethought. In the first edition
of this work it was held to be desirable that there should be a centre
of reference for all inquirers upon Secular principles at home and
abroad. Attention should be guaranteed to distant correspondents and
visitors, so that means of communication and publication of all advanced
opinions in sociology, theology, and politics might exist, and be able
to command publicity, when expressed dispassionately, impersonally, and
with ordinary good taste.

It has been generally admitted that the operations at that time
conducted, helped to impart a new character to Free-thought advocacy,
and many of its recommendations have since been copied by associations
subsequently formed. The promoters of Secularism alluded to, have
not ceased in the _Reasoner_ and other publications, by lectures, by
statements, by articles, by pamphlets to urge a definite and consistent
representation of Secular and Freethought principles: as many mistake
merely mechanical association for the organization of ideas.

The promoters in question have since adopted the form of action of a
Secular Guild, and continue the _Reasoner_ (of which there is now issued
a "Review Series") as their organ. The objects of a Council of the
Guild is to promote, as far as means may permit, or counsel prevail,
organization of ideas:--

1.--To train Advocates of Secular principles,

2.--To advise an impersonal policy of advocacy, which seeking to carry
its ends by force of exposition, rather than of denunciation, shall
command the attention and respect of those who influence public affairs.

3.--To promote solution of political, social, and educational questions
on Secular and unsectarian grounds.

4.--To point out new Books of Secular relevance, and where possible, to
accredit Advocates of Secularism that the public may have some guidance,
and the party be no longer liable to be judged by whoever may appear to
write or speak on the subject.

5.--To assist in the protection and defence of those injured, or
attempted to be injured on account of Freethought or Secularist opinion.


6.--To provide for the administration of property bequeathed for Secular
purposes, of which so much has been lost through the injustice of the
law, and machinations of persons opposed to Liberal views.

7.--When a member has been honourably counted on the side of Secularism,
has been a Subscriber or a Worker for a term of years, the Guild,
keeping a record of such Service, proposes to give a Certificate of it
which among Friends of Freethought may be a passport to recognition and
esteem. To constitute some such Freemasonry in Freethought, may elevate
association in England. A certificate of Illuminism or of Carbonarism in
Italy was once handed down from father to son as an heirloom of honour,
while in England you have to supplicate men to join a society of
progression, instead of membership being a distinction which men shall
covet At present a man who has given the best years of his life to the
public service is liable (if from any necessity he ceases to act) to
be counted a renegade by men who have never rendered twelve months*
consecutive or costly service themselves. There ought to be a fixed
term of Service, which, if honourably and effectively rendered, should
entitle a man to be considered free, as a soldier after leaving the
army, and his certificate of having belonged to the Order of Secularism
should entitle him to distinction and to authority when his opinion was
sought, and to exemption from all but voluntary service. At present the
soldiers of Progress, when no longer able to serve, are dismissed from
the public eye, like the race-horse to the cab stand, to obscurity and
neglect. This needs correction before men can be counted upon in the
battle of Truth. A man is to be estimated according to the aims of the
party to which he is allied. He is to be esteemed in consequence of
sacrifices of time, and discipline of conduct, which he contributes to
the service and reputation of his cause.

     * This has been done to some extent in the discussion of the
     National Education question. The Proposer of the Guild
     contributed what Ije could to this end by reading the paper
     published in the proceedings of the Conference of the
     Birmingham Education League, by letters like that to the
     _Daily News_, commented upon by the Bishop of Peterborough,
     at Leicester [see official publications of the Manchester
     National Education Union,] by discussions as those with the
     Revs. Pringle and Baldwin, at Norwich, and with Mr. Chas.
     Bradlaugh, at the Old Street Hall of Science, London; and by
     Lectures during the time the question of National Education
     has been before Parliament

In foreign countries many persons reside interested in Secularism; in
Great Britain indeed many friends reside where no Secular Society is
formed; and in these cases membership of the Guild would be advantageous
to them, affording means of introduction to publicists of similar views:
and even in instances of towns where Secular Societies do exist, persons
in direct relation to the Secular Guild would be able to furnish
Secular direction where the tradition and usage of a Secular Society are
unknown, or unfamiliar.




CHAPTER VII. ORGANIZATION INDICATED.

As the aim of the Guild is not to fetter independent thought, but to
concert practical action, it is mainly required of each member that he
undertakes to perform, in good faith, the duties which he shall consent
to have assigned to him; and generally so to comport himself that his
principles shall not be likely to suffer, if judged by his conduct.
He will be expected to treat every colleague as equal with himself in
veracity, in honour, and in loyalty to his cause. And every form of
speech which casts a doubt upon the truth, or imputes, or assumes a want
of honour on the part of any member, will be deemed a breach of order.
If any member intends such an accusation of another, it must be made the
matter of a formal charge, after leave obtained to prefer it.

What it is desirable to know about new members is this:--

Do they, in their conception of Secularism, see in it that which seeks
not the sensual but the good, and a good which the conscience can be
engaged in pursuing and promoting; a Moralism in accordance with the
laws of Nature and capable of intrinsic proof: a Materialism which is
definite without dogmatism or grossness; and a unity on the ground of
these common agreements, for convictions which imply no apostolate are
neither earnest nor generous. No one ought to be encouraged to take
sides with Secularism, unless his conscience is satisfied of the moral
rightfulness of its principles and duties both for life and death.

It is not desirable to accept persons of that class who decry
parties--who boast of being of no party--who preach up isolation, and
lament the want of unity--who think party the madness of the many, for
the gain of the few. Seek rather the partisan who is wise enough to know
that the disparagement of party is the madness of the few, leading
to the utter impotence of the many. A party, in an associative and
defensible sense, is a class of persons taking sides upon some definite
question, and acting together for necessary ends, having principles,
aims, policy, authority, and discipline.*

     * In a school there is usually teaching, training,
     discipline, science, system, authorities, tradition, and
     development.--Times, 1846.

With respect to proposed members, it may be well to ascertain whether
neglect, or rudeness, or insult, or unfairness from colleagues, or
overwork being imposed upon him, or incapacity of others, would divert
him from his duty. These accidents or necessities might occur: but if a
society is to be strong it must be able to count upon its members,
and to be able to count upon them it must be known what they will bear
without insubordination; and what they will bear will depend upon the
frankness and completeness of information they receive as to the social
risks all run who unite to carry out any course of duty or public
service.

Always assuming that a candidate cares for the objects for which he
proposes to associate, and that it is worth while knowing whom it is
with whom you propose to work them out; answers to such inquiries as the
following would tend to impart a working knowledge and quality to the
society:--

Is he a person previously or recently acquainted with the principles he
is about to profess?

Does he understand what is meant by "taking sides" with a public party?
Would he be faithful to the special ideas of Secularism so long as
he felt them to be true? Would he make sacrifices to spread them
and vindicate them, or enable others to do so? Would he conceive of
Secularism as a cause to be served loyally, which he would support as
well as he was able, if unable to support it as well as he could wish?

Is he of decent, moral character, and tolerably reliable as to his
future conduct?

In presenting his views to others, would he be likely to render them in
an attractive spirit, or to make them disagreeable to others?

Is he of an impulsive nature, ardent for a time, and then apathetic
or reactionary--likely to antagonize to-morrow the persons he applauds
to-day?

Is he a person who would commit the fault of provoking persecution?
Would ridicule or persecution chill him if it occurred? Is he a man to
stand by an obscure and friendless cause--or are notoriety, success,
applause, and the company of others, indispensable to his fidelity?

Is he a man of any mark of esteem among his friends--a man whose promise
is sure, whose word has weight?

Is his idea of obedience, obedience simply to his own will? Would he
acquiesce in the authority of the laws of the Society, or the decision
of the Society where the laws were silent? Would he acknowledge in
democracy the despotism of principles self-consented to--or as an
arena for the assertion of Individualism before winning the consent of
colleagues to the discussion of special views?

The membership sought may be granted, provided the actual knowledge of
Secular principles be satisfactory, and evident earnestness to practise
them be apparent. The purport of the whole of the questions is to enable
a clear opinion to be formed as to what is to be expected of the new
member--how far he is likely to be reliable--how long he is likely to
remain with us--under what circumstances he is likely to fail us--what
work may be assigned him--what confidences he may be entrusted with, and
in what terms he should be introduced to colleagues, and spoken of to
others.

The Membership here described would and should be no restricted and
exclusive society, where only one pattern of efficiency prevails; but
a society where all diversities of capacity, energy, and worth, may
be found, so far as it is honest and trustworthy. A Society, like
the State, requires the existence of the people, as well as public
officers--men who* can act, as well as men who can think and direct
Many men who lack refinement, and even discretion, possess courage and
energy, and will go out on the inevitable "forlorn hopes" of progress;
which the merely prudent avoid, and from which the cultivated too often
shrink. Our work requires all orders of men, but efficiency requires
that we know which is which that none may be employed in the dark.

In every public organization there are persons who promote and aid
unconnected with the Society.

Active members are those who engage to perform specific duties; such as
reporting lectures, sermons, and public meetings, so far as they refer
to Secularism.*

     * In reporting, each member should be careful to understate
     rather than overstate facts, distinguishing carefully what
     is matter of knowledge from rumour, conjecture, or opinion.

To give notice of meetings and sermons about to be held or delivered for
or against Secularism.

To note and report passages in books, newspapers, magazines, and reviews
referring to Secularism.

Each active member should possess some working efficiency, or be willing
to acquire it. To be able to explain his views by tongue or pen with
simple directness, to observe carefully, to report judiciously, to
reason dispassionately, to put the best construction on every act that
needs interpretation, are desirable accomplishments in a Propagandist.

In all public proceedings of the Society, written speeches should be
preferred from the young, because such speeches admit of preconsidered
brevity, consecutiveness, and purpose, and exist for reference. In
the deliberations and discussions of any Society, it might usefully be
deemed a qualification to make a contribution to the subject in speeches
brief and direct.

Non-reliableness in discharge of duties, or moral disqualification,
shall be a ground of annulling membership, which may be done after the
member objected to has had a fair opportunity of defending himself from
the specific disqualifications alleged against him and communicated to
him, and has failed therein.

The duties assigned to each member should be such as are within his
means, as respects power and opportunity; such, indeed, as interfere
neither with his social nor civil obligations; the intention being that
the membership of the Society shall not as a rule be incompatible with
the preservation of health, and the primary service due to family and
the State.*

     * As a general rule, it will be found that any one who
     sacrifices more than one-fifth of his time and means will
     become before long reactionary, and not only do nothing
     himself, but discourage others.

Any persons acquainted with the "Principles of Secularism" here given,
who shall generally agree therein, and associate under any name to
promote such objects, and to act in concert with all who seek similar
objects, and will receive and take into official consideration the
instructions of the Guild, and to make one subscription yearly among
its members and friends on behalf of its Propagandist Funds, shall be
recognized as a Branch of it.




CHAPTER VIII. THE PLACE OF SECULARISM

     "We do not, however, deny that, false as the whole theory
     [of Secularism] appears to us, it is capable of attracting
     the belief of large numbers of people, and of exercising
     considerable influence over their conduct; and we should
     admit that the influence so exercised is considerably better
     than no influence at all."--_Saturday Review_, July 2, 1859.

THIS first step is to win, from public opinion, a standing place for
Secularism. So long as people believe Secularism not to be wanted,
indeed impossible to be wanted--that it is error, wickedness, and
unmitigated evil, it will receive no attention, no respect, and make
no way. But show that it occupies a vacant place, supplies a want, is
a direction where no other party supplies any--and it at once appears
indispensable. It is proved to be a service to somebody, and from
that moment it is tolerated if not respected. It may be like war, or
medicine, or work, or law, disagreeable or unpalatable, but when seen
to be necessary, it will have recognition and support. We are sure this
case can be made out for Secularism. It is not only true, but it
is known; it is not only known, but it is notorious, that there are
thousands and tens of thousands of persons in every district of this and
most European countries, who are without the pale of Christianity. They
reject it, they disprove it, they dislike it, or they do not understand
it. Some have vices and passions which Christianity, as preached around
them, condemns. As Devils are said to do, they "believe and tremble,"
and so disown what they have not the virtue to practise. Faith does not
touch them, and reason is not tried--indeed reason is decried by the
evangelically religious, so that not being converted in one way, no
other way is open to them. Others are absorbed or insensate; they are
busy, or stupid, or defiant, and regard Christianity as a waste of time,
or as monotonous or offensive. It bores them or threatens them. They are
already dull, therefore it does not attract them--they have some rude
sense of independence and some feeling of courage, and they object
either to be snubbed into conformity or kicked into heaven. Another
and a yearly increasing portion of the people have, after patiently and
painfully thinking over Christianity, come to believe it to be untrue;
unfounded historically; wrong morally, and a discreditable imputation
upon God. It outrages their affections, it baffles their understandings.
It is double tongued. Its expounders are always multiplying, and the
more they increase the less they agree, and hence sceptics the more
abound. Disbelievers therefore exist; they augment: they can neither
be convinced, converted, nor conciliated, because they will yield no
allegiance to a system which has no hold on their conscience. It is, we
repeat, more than known, it is notorious that these persons live and die
in scepticism. These facts are the cry of the pulpit, the theme of the
platform, the burden of the religious tract. Now, is nothing to be done
with these people? You cannot exterminate them, the Church cannot direct
them. The Bible is no authority to them--the "will of God," as the
clergy call it, in their eyes is mere arbitrary, capricious, dog-matical
assumption; sometimes, indeed, wise precept, but oftener a cloak for
knavery or a pretext for despotism. To open the eyes of such persons to
the omnipresent teachings of Nature, to make reason an authority with
them, to inspire them with precepts which experience can verify--to
connect conscience with intelligence, right with interest, duty
with self-respect, and goodness with love, must surely be useful. If
Secularism accomplishes some such work, where Christianity confessedly
accomplishes nothing, it certainly has a place of its own. It is no
answer to it to claim that Christianity is higher, vnore complete,
better. The advocates of every old religion, say the same. Christianity
may be higher, more complete, better--for somebody else. But nothing can
be high, complete, or good, for those who do not see it, accept it, want
it, or act upon it. That is first which is fit--that is supreme which
is most productive of practical virtue. No comparison (which would be as
irrelevant as offensive) between Secularism and Christianity is set
up here. The question is--is Secularism useful, or may it be useful to
anybody? The question is not--does it contain _all_ truth? but does
it contain as much as may be serviceable to many minds, otherwise
uninfluenced for good? Arithmetic is useful though Algebra is more
compendious. Mensuration performs good offices in hands ignorant
of Euclid. There may be logic without Whately, and melody without
Beethoven; and there may be Secular ethics which shall be useful without
the pretension of Christianity.




CHAPTER IX. CHARACTERISTICS OF SECULARISM.


I.

SECULARISM means the moral duty of man in this life deduced from
considerations which pertain to this life alone. Secular education is by
some confounded with Secularism, whereas the distinction between them
is very wide. Secular education simply means imparting Secular knowledge
separately--by itself, without admixture of Theology with it. The
advocate of Secular education may be, and generally is, also an advocate
of religion; but he would teach religion at another time and treat it as
a distinct subject, too sacred for coercive admixture into the hard
and vexatious routine of a school. He would confine the inculcation of
religion to fitting seasons and chosen instruments. He holds also that
one subject at a time is mental economy in learning. Secular education
is the policy of a school--Secularism is a policy of life to those who
do not accept Theology. Secularity draws the line of separation between
the things of time and the things of eternity. That is Secular which
pertains to this world. The distinction may be seen in the fact that the
cardinal propositions of Theology are provable only in the next life,
and not in this. If I believe in a given creed it may turn out to be the
true one; but one must die to find that out. On this side of the grave
all is doubt; the truth of Biblical creeds is an affair of hope and
anxiety, while the truth of things Secular becomes apparent in time.
The advantages arising from the practice of veracity, justice, and
temperance can be ascertained from human experience. If we are told to
"fear God and keep His commandments," lest His judgments overtake us,
the indirect action of this doctrine on human character may make a
vicious timid man better in this life, supposing the interpretation
of the will of God, and the commandments selected to be enforced, are
moral; but such teaching is not Secular, because its main object is to
fit men for eternity. Pure Secular principles have for their object to
fit men for time, making the fulfilment of human duty here the standard
of fitness for any accruing future. _Secularism purposes to regulate
human affairs by considerations purely human_. Its principles are
founded upon Nature, and its object is to render man as perfect as
possible in this life. Its problem is this: Supposing no other life to
be before us, what is the wisest use of this? As the Rev. Thomas Binney
puts it, "I believe * * that even * * if there were really no God over
him, no heaven above, or eternity in prospect, things are so constituted
that man may turn the materials of his little life poem, if not always
into a grand epic, mostly into something of interest and beauty; and it
is worth his while doing so, even if there should be no sequel to the
piece." Chalmers, Archbishop Whately, and earlier distinguished divines
of the Church of England, the most conspicuous of whom is Bishop Butler,
have admitted the independent existence of morality, but we here cite
Mr. Binney's words because among Dissenters this truth is less readily
admitted. A true Secular life does not exclude any from supplementary
speculations. Not until we have fulfilled our duty to man, as far as we
can ascertain that duty, can we consistently pretend to comprehend
the more difficult relations of man to God. Our duties to humanity,
understood and discharged to the best of our ability, will in no way
unfit us to "reverently meditate on things far beyond us, on Power
unlimited, on space unfathomed, on time uncounted, on 'whence' we came,
and 'whither' we go."** The leading ideas of Secularism are humanism,
moralism, materialism, utilitarian unity; Humanism, the physical
perfection of this life--Moralism, founded on the laws of Nature, as
the guidance of this life--Materialism, as the means of Nature for the
Secular improvement of this life--Unity of thought and action upon these
practical grounds. Secularism teaches that the good of the present
life is the immediate concern of man, and that it should be his
first endeavour to raise it. Secularism inculcates a Morality founded
independently upon the laws of Nature. It seeks human improvement
through purity and suitableness of material conditions as being a method
at once moral, practical, universal, and sure.

     * "How to make the best of both worlds," p. 11.

     **  F. W. Newman.


II.

The province of Positivism is not speculation upon the origin, but study
of the laws of Nature--its policy is to destroy error by superseding it.
Auguste Comte quotes, as a cardinal maxim of scientific progress, the
words "nothing is destroyed until it is replaced," a proverbial form
of a wise saying of M. Necker that in political progress "nothing is
destroyed for which we do not find a substitute." Negations, useful in
their place, are iconoclastic--not constructive. Unless substitution
succeeds destruction--there can be no sustained progress. The Secularist
is known by setting up and maintaining affirmative propositions. He
replaces negations by affirmations, and substitutes demonstration for
denunciation. He asserts truths of Nature and humanity, and reverses
the position of the priest who appears as the sceptic, the denier, the
disbeliever in Nature and humanity. Statesmen, not otherwise eager for
improvement, will regard affirmative proposals. Lord Palmerston could
say--"Show me a good and I will realize it--not an abuse to correct."


III.

"All science," says M. Comte, "has prevision for its end, an axiom which
separates science from erudition, which relates to events of the past
without any regard to the future. No accumulation of facts can effect
prevision until the facts are made the basis of reasonings. A knowledge
of phenomena leads to prevision, and prevision to action;" or, in other
words, when we can foresee what will happen under given circumstances,
we can provide against it. It by no means follows that every Secularist
will be scientific, but to discern the value of science, to appreciate
and promote it, may be possible to most. Science requires high qualities
of accurate observation, close attention, careful experiment, caution,
patience, labour. Its value to mankind is inestimable. One physician
will do more to alleviate human suffering than ten priests. One physical
discovery will do more to advance civilization than a generation of
prayer-makers. "To get acquaintance with the usual course of Nature
(which Science alone can teach us), is a kind of knowledge which pays
very good interest."*

     * Athenaeum, No. 1,637, March 12, 1850.

The value of this knowledge becomes more apparent the longer we live.
There may be a general superintending Providence--there may be a Special
Providence, but the first does not interfere in human affairs, and the
interpositions of the second are no longer to be counted upon. The age
of Prayer for temporal deliverance has confessedly passed away.
But without disputing these points, it is clear that the only help
_available_ to man, the sole dependence upon which he can _calculate_,
is that of Science. Nothing can be more impotent than the fate of that
man who seeks social elevation by mere Faith. All human affairs are a
process, and he alone who acts upon this knowledge can hope to control
results. Loyola foresaw the necessity of men acting for human purposes,
as though there were no God. "Let us pray," said he, "as if we had no
help in ourselves; _let us labour as if there was no help for us in
heaven_." Society is a blunder, not a science, until it ensures good
sense and competence for the many. Why this process is tardy, is that
creedists get credit for hoping and meaning well. Creedists of good
intent, who make no improvement and attempt none, are very much in
the way of human betterance. The spiritualist regards the world
theoretically as a gross element, which he is rather to struggle against
than to work with. This makes human service a mortification instead
of pure passion. We would not deify the world, that is, set up the
sensualism of the body, as spiritualism is set up as the sensualism
of the soul. Secularism seeks the material purity of the present life,
which is at once the _means_ and _end_ of Secular endeavour. The most
reliable means of progress is the _improvement of material condition_,
and "purity" implies "improvement," for there can be no improvement
without it. The aim of all improvement is higher purity. All power,
art, civilization and progress are summed up in the result--purer life.
Strength, intellect, love are measured by it. Duty, study, temperance,
patience are but ministers to this. "There is that," says Ruskin, "to be
seen in every street and lane of every city, that to be found and
felt in every human heart and countenance, that to be loved in every
road-side weed and moss-grown wall, which, in the hands of faithful men,
may convey emotions of glory and sublimity continual and exalted."


IV.

It is necessary to point out that Sincerity does not imply
infallibility. "There is a truth, which could it be stamped on every
human mind, would exterminate all bigotry and persecution. I mean the
truth, that worth of character and true integrity, and, consequently,
God's acceptance, are not necessarily connected with any particular
set of opinions."* If you admit that Mark and Paul were honest, most
Christians take that to be an admission of the truth of all related
under their names. Yet if a man in defending his opinions, affirm his
own sincerity, Christians quickly see that is no proof of their truth,
and proceed to disprove them. Sincerity may account for a man holding
his opinions, but it does not account for the opinions themselves.
Nothing is more common than uninformed, misinformed, mistaken, or
self-deluded honesty. But sincere error, though dangerous enough, has
not the attribute of crime about it--personal intention of mischief.
"Because human nature is frail and fallible, the ground of our
acceptance with God, under the Gospel, is _sincerity_. A sincere desire
to know and do the will of God, is the only condition of obtaining the
Christian salvation. Every honest man will be saved."** But Sincerity,
if the reader recurs to our definition of it, includes a short
intellectual and moral education with respect to it. Those worthy of
the high descriptive "sincere," are those who have thought, inquired,
examined, are in earnest, have a sense of duty with regard to their
conviction, which is only satisfied by acting upon it. These processes
may not bring a man to the truth, but they bring him near to it. The
chances of error are reduced hereby as far as human care can reduce
them. Secularism holds that the Protestant right of private judgment
includes the moral innocency of that judgment, when conscientiously
formed, whether for or against received opinion; that though _all
sincere opinion is not equally true, nor equally useful, it is yet
equally without sin_; that it is not sameness of belief but sincerity of
belief which justifies conduct, whether regard be had to the esteem of
men or the approval of God. Sincerity, we repeat, is not infallibility.
The conscientious are often as mischievous as the false, but he who acts
according to the best of his belief is free from criminal intention.
The sincerity commended by the fortuitous, insipid, apathetic, inherited
consent, which so often passes for honesty, because too indolent or too
cowardly to inquire, and too stupid to doubt. The man who holds merely
ready-made opinions is not to be placed on the same level with him whose
convictions are derived from experience. True sincerity is an educated
and earnest sentiment. Secularist is an active sentiment seeking the
truth and acting upon it.

     * Dr. Price.

     ** John Foster's Tracts on Heresy,


V.

In the formation and judgment of opinions we must take into account the
consequences to mankind involved in their adoption. But when an opinion
seems true in itself and beneficial to society, the consequences in the
way of inconvenience to ourselves is not sufficient reason for refusing
to act upon it. If a particular time of enforcing it seem to be one when
it will be disregarded, or misunderstood, or put back, and the sacrifice
of ourselves on its behalf produce no adequate advantage to society, it
may be lawful to seek a better opportunity. We must, however, take
care that this view of the matter is not made a pretext of cowardice or
evasion of duty. And in no case is it justifiable to belie conscience or
profess a belief the contrary of that which we believe to be true. There
may in extreme cases be neutrality with regard to truth, but in no case
should there be complicity in falsehood. So much with respect to this
life. With respect to Deity or another life, we may in all cases rely
upon this, that in truth alone is safety. With God, conscience can have
no penal consequences. Conscience is the voice of honesty, and honesty,
with all its errors, a God of Truth will regard. "We have," says Blanco
White, "no revealed rule which will ascertain, with moral certainty,
which doctrines are right and which are wrong--that is, as they are
known to God."--"Salvation, therefore, cannot depend on orthodoxy;
it cannot consist in abstract doctrines, about which men of
equal abilities, virtue, and sincerity are, and always have been,
divided."--"No error on abstract doctrines can be heresy, in the sense
of a wrong belief which endangers the soul." "The Father of the Universe
accommodates not His judgments to the wretched wranglings of pedantic
theologians, but every one who seeks truth, _whether he findeth it or
not_, and worketh righteousness, will be accepted of Him."*

     * Bishop Watson's Theological Tracts.   Introductory.

Thomas Carlyle was the first English writer, having the ear of the
public, who declared in England that "sincere _doubt_ is as much
entitled to respect as sincere _belief_."


VI.

Going to a distant town to mitigate some calamity there, will illustrate
the principle of action prescribed by Secularism. One man will go on
this errand from pure sympathy with the unfortunate; this is goodness.
Another goes because his priest bids him; this is obedience. Another
goes because the twenty-fifth chapter of Matthew tells him that all such
persons will pass to the right hand of the Father; this is calculation.
Another goes because he believes God commands him; this is piety.
Another goes because he believes that the neglect of suffering will not
answer; this is utilitarianism. But another goes on the errand of mercy,
because it is an errand of mercy, because it is an immediate service
to humanity; and he goes to attempt material amelioration rather than
spiritual consolation; this is Secularism, which teaches that goodness
is sanctity, that Nature is guidance, that reason is authority, that
service is duty, and that Materialism is help.


VII.

The policy of Secular controversy is to distinguish and assert its own
affirmative propositions. It is the policy of Secularism not so much
to say to error "It is false," as to say of truth "This is true." Thus,
instead of leaving to the popular theology the prestige of exclusive
affirmation accorded to it by the world, although it is solely employed
in the incessant re-assertion of error, Secularism causes it to own
and publish its denial of positive principle; when the popular theology
proves itself to be but an organized negation of the moral guidance of
nature and its tendencies to progress. A Secularist sees clearly upon
what he relies as a Secularist. To him the teaching of Nature is as
clear as the teaching of the Bible: and since, if God exists, Nature
is certainly His work, While it is not so clear that the Bible is--the
teaching of Nature will be preferred and followed where the teaching of
the Bible appears to conflict with it. A Secular Society, contemplating
intellectual and moral progress, must provide for the freest expression
of opinion on all subjects which its members may deem conducive to their
common objects. Christianism, Theism, Materialism, and Atheism will be
regarded as open questions, subject to unreserved discussion. But these
occasions will be the opportunity of the members, not the business of
the society. All public proceedings accredited by the society should
relate to topics consistent with the common principles of Secularism.
"In necessary things, unity: in doubtful things, liberty: in all things,
charity."* The destruction of religious servitude may be attempted in
two ways. It may be denounced, which will irritate it, or it may be
superseded by the servitude of humanity. Attacking it by denunciation,
generally inflames and precipitates the persecution of the many upon the
few; when the weak are liable to be scattered, the cowardly to recant,
and the brave to perish.


VIII.

The essential rule upon which personal association can be permanent, or
controversy be maintained in the spirit in which truth can be
evolved, is that of never imputing evil motives nor putting the worst
construction on any act. Free Inquiry has no limits but truth, Free
Speech no limits but exactness, Policy (here the law of speech) no
limits but usefulness. Unfettered and uncompromising are they who pursue
free inquiry throughout--measured and impassable may those become, who
hold to a generous veracity. Far both from outrage or servility--too
proud to court and too strong to hate--are those who learn to discard
all arts but that of the austere service of others, exacting no
thanks and pausing at no curse. Wise words of counsel to Theological
controversialists have been addressed in a powerful quarter of public
opinion: "Religious controversy has already lost much of its bitterness.
Open abuse and exchange of foul names are exploded, and even the
indirect imputation of unworthy motives is falling-into disuse.
Another step will be made when theologians have learnt to extend their
intellectual as well as their moral sympathies, to feel that most truths
are double edged, and not to wage an unnecessary war against opinion
which, strange, incongruous, and unlovely as they may at first appear,
are built, perhaps, on as firm a foundation, and are held with equal
sincerity and good faith, as their own."** This is advice which both
sides should remember.

     * Maxim (much unused) of the Roman Catholic Church.

     ** Times Leader of November 8, 1855.


IX.

"No society can be in a healthy state in which eccentricity is a matter
of reproach." Conventionality is the tyranny of the average man, and
a despicable tyranny it is. The tyranny of genius is hard to be
borne--that of mediocrity is humiliating. That idea of freedom which
consists in the absence of all government is either mere lawlessness,
or refers to the distant period when each man having attained perfection
will be a law unto himself. Just rule is indispensable rule, and none
other. The fewer laws consistent with the public preservation the
better--there is, then, as Mr. Mill has shown in his "Liberty," the more
room for that ever-recurring originality which keeps intellect alive in
the world. Towards law kept within the limits of reason, obedience is
the first of virtues. "Order and Progress," says Comte, which we should
express thus:--Order, without which Progress is impossible; Progress,
without which Order, is Tyranny. The world is clogged with men of dead
principles. Principles that cannot be acted upon are probably
either obsolete or false. One certain way to improvement is to exact
consistency between profession and practice; and the way to bring this
about is to teach that the highest merit consists in having earnest
views and in endeavouring to realize them--and this whether the
convictions be contained within or without accredited creeds. There will
be no progress except within the stereotyped limits of creeds, unless
means are found to justify independent convictions to the conscience.
To the philosopher you have merely to show that a thing is true, to the
statesman, that it is useful, but to a Christian, that it is safe. The
grace of service lies in its patience. To promote the welfare of others,
irrespective of their gratitude or claims, is to reach the nature of
the Gods. It is a higher sentiment than is ascribed to the Deity of
the Bible. The abiding disposition to serve others is the end of all
philosophy. The vow of principle is always one of poverty and obedience,
and few are they who take it--and fewer who keep it. If hate obscure
for a period the path of duty, let us remember nothing should shake our
attachment to that supreme thought, which at once stills human anger and
educates human endeavour--the perception that "the sufferings and
errors of mankind arise out of want of knowledge rather than defect of
goodness."


X.

A leading object of Secularism is the promotion of the material purity
of the present life--"material purity," which includes personal as well
as external condition. The question of Spiritualism (without employing
it and without disparaging it) it regards as a distinct question, and
hence the methods by which Secularists attempt "improvement" will be
"material" as being the most reliable. The tacit or expressed aim of all
Freethinking, has ever been true thinking and pure thinking. It has been
a continued protest against the errors Theology has introduced, and the
vicious relations it has conserved and sanctified. It is necessary
to mark this, and it can be done by insisting and keeping distinctly
evident that the aim of Secularism is the purity of material influences.
This precludes the possibility of Secularism being charged either with
conscious grossness or intentional sin. Secularism concerns itself with
the work of to-day. "It is always yesterday or to-morrow, and never
to-day,"* is a fair description of life according to theologies.
Secularism, on the contrary, concerns itself with the things of
"to-day."

     To  know
     That which before us lies in daily life
     Is the prime wisdom.

          * Story of Boots, by Dickens.

The cardinal idea of the "popular Theology" is the necessity of
Revelation. It believes that the light of Nature is darkness, that
Reason affords no guidance, that the Scriptures are the true chart, the
sole chart, and the sufficient chart of man, and it regards all attempts
to delineate a chart of Nature as impious, as impracticable, and as a
covert attack upon the Biblical chart in possession of the churches.
Knowing no other guidance than that of the Bible, and disbelieving the
possibility of any other, theology denounces Doubt, which inspires it
with a sense of insecurity--it fears Inquiry, which may invalidate its
trust--and deprecates Criticism, which may expose it, if deficient.
Having nothing to gain, it is reluctant to incur risk--having all to
lose, it dreads to be disturbed-having no strength but in Faith, it
fears those who Reason--and less from ill-will than from the
tenderness of its position, it persecutes in self-defence. Such are the
restrictions and the logic of Theology.


XI.

On the other hand, Rationalism (which is the logic of Nature) is in
attitude and spirit quite the reverse. It observes that numbers are
unconvinced of the fact of Revelation, and feel the insufficiency, for
their guidance, of that offered to them. To them the pages of Nature
seem clearer than those of the Apostles. Reason, which existed before
all Religions and decides upon all--else the false can never be
distinguished from the true--seems self-dependent and capable of
furnishing personal direction. Hence Rationalism instructed by facts,
winning secrets by experiments, establishing principles by reflection,
is assured of a morality founded upon the laws of Nature. Without the
advantage of inductive science to assist discoveries, or the printing
press to record corroborations of them, the Pre-Christian world created
ethics, and Socrates and Epictetus, and Zoroaster and Confucius,
delivered precepts, to which this age accords a high place. Modern
Rationalists therefore sought, with their new advantages, to augment and
systematize these conquests. They tested the claims of the Church by the
truths of Nature. That Freethought which had won these truths applied
them to creeds, and criticism became its weapon of Propagandism. Its
consciousness of new truth stimulated its aggression on old error. The
pretensions of reason being denied as false, and rationalists themselves
persecuted as dangerous, they had no alternative but to criticise in
order to vindicate their own principles, and weaken the credit and power
of their opponents. To attack the misleading dogmas of Theology was to
the early Freethinkers well understood self-defence. In some hands
and under the provocations of vindictive bigotry, this work, no doubt,
became wholly antagonistic, but the main aspiration of the majority was
the determination of teaching the people "to be a law unto themselves."
They found prevailing a religion of unreasoning faith. They sought to
create a religion of intelligent conviction, whose uniformity consisted
in sincerity. Its believers did not all hold the same tenets, but they
all sought the same truth and pursued it with the same earnestness.
It was this inspiration which sustained Vanini, Hamont, Lewes, Kett,
Legate, and Wightman at the stake, and which armed Servetus to prefer
the fires of Calvin to the creed of Calvin, which supported Annet in
the pillory, and Woolston and Carlile in their imprisonments. It was
no capricious taste for negations which dictated these deliberate
sacrifices, but a sentiment purer than interest and stronger than
self-love--it was the generous passion for unfriended truth.


XII.

The intellectual, no less than the heroic characteristics of Freethought
have presented features of obvious unity. Tindal, Shaftesbury, Voltaire,
Paine, aad Bentham, all vindicated principles of Natural Morality.
Shelley struggled that a pure and lofty ideal of life should prevail,
and Byron had passionate words of reverence for the human character of
Christ.*

     * Thus we read, Canto xv. stanza xviii., of Don Juan:--

          Was it not so, great Locke? and greater Bacon?
          Great Socrates? And thou Diviner still
          Whose lot it is by man to be mistaken,
          And thy pure creed made sanctions of all ill?
          Redeeming world to be by bigots shaken,
          How was thy toil rewarded?

     To this stanza Lord Byron adds this note:--

          "As it is necessary in these times to avoid ambiguity,
          I say that I mean by "Diviner still" Christ.
          If ever God was man--or man God--he was both.
          I never arraigned his creed, but the use--or abuse--made of it."

The distrust of Prayer for temporal help was accompanied by trust in
Science, and all saw in material effort an available deliverance from
countless ills which the Church can merely deplore. Those who held that
a future life was "unproven," taught that attention to this life was of
primary importance, at least highly serviceable to humanity, even if a
future sphere be certain. All strove for Free Inquiry--Rationalism owed
its existence to it; all required Free Speech--Rationalism was diffused
by it; all vindicated Free Criticism--Rationalism established itself
with it; all demanded to act out their opinions--Rationalism was denuded
of conscience without this right. In all its mutations, and aberrations,
and conquests, Freethought has uniformly sought the truth, and shown
the courage to trust the truth. Freethought uses no persecution, for it
fears no opposition, for opposition is its opportunity. It is the cause
of Enterprise and Progress, of Reason and Duty--and now seeking the
definite and the practical, it selects for its guidance the principle
that "human affairs should be regulated by considerations purely
human."** These--the characteristics which the term Secularism was
designed to express--are therefore not inventions, not assumptions, but
the general agreements of the Freethought party, inherent, traditional,
and historic. That which is new, and of the nature of a development, is
the perception that the positivism of Freethought principles should
be extended, should be clearly distinguished and made the subject of
energetic assertion--that the Freethought party which has so loudly
demanded toleration for itself, should be able to exercise it towards
all earnest thinkers, and especially towards all coworkers--that those
who have protested against the isolation of human effort by sectarian
exclusiveness, should themselves set the example of offering, in good
faith, practical conditions of unity, not for the glory of sects, or
coteries, or schools, but for the immediate service of humanity.

     ** L. H. Holdreth.


XIII.

The Relation of Secularism to the future demands a few words. To seek
after the purity and perfection of the Present Life neither disproves
another Life beyond this, nor disqualifies man for it. "Nor is
Secularism opposed to the Future so far as that Future belongs to the
present world--to determine which we have definite science susceptible
of trial and verification. The conditions of a future life being
unknown, and there being no imaginable means of benefiting ourselves
and others in it except by aiming after present goodness, we shall
confessedly gain less towards the happiness of a future life by
speculation than by simply devoting ourselves to the energetic
improvement of this life."* Men have a right to look beyond this world,
but not to overlook it. Men, if they can, may connect themselves with
eternity, but they cannot disconnect themselves from humanity without
sacrificing duty. Secular knowledge relates to this life. Religious
knowledge to another life. Secular instruction teaches the duties to
man. Religious instruction the duties to God apart from man. Religious
knowledge relates to celestial creeds. Secular knowr-ledge relates to
human duties to be performed. The religious teacher instructs us how to
please God by creeds. The Secular teacher how to serve man by sympathy
and science.

     * F. W. Newman

Archbishop Whately tells the story of a lady at Bath, who, being
afraid to cross a tottering bridge lest it should ghre way under her,
fortunately bethought herself of the expedient of calling for a sedan
chair, and was carried over in that conveyance. Some of our critics
think that we shall resemble this ingenious lady. But those who fear
to trust themselves to the ancient and tottering Biblical bridge, will
hardly get into the sedan chair of obsolete orthodoxy, and add the
weight of _that_ to the danger. They prefer going round by the way of
reason and fearless private judgment.


XIV.

Secularism, we have said, concerns itself with four rights:--

1. The right to Think for one's self, which most Christians now admit,
at least in theory.

2. The right to Differ, without which the right to think is nothing
worth.

3. The right to Assert difference of opinion, without which the right to
differ is of no practical use.

4. The right to Debate all vital opinion, without which there is no
intellectual equality--no defence against the errors of the state or the
pulpit.

It is of no use that the Protestant concedes the right to think unless
he concedes the right to differ. We may as well be Catholic unless we
are free to dissent. Rome will concede our right to think for
ourselves, provided we agree with the Church when we have done; and when
Protestantism affects to award us the right of private judgment, and
requires us to agree with the thirty-nine Articles in the end--or when
Evangelical Ministers tell us we are free to think for ourselves, but
must believe in the Bible nevertheless, both parties reason on the
Papist principle; both mock us with a show of freedom, and impose the
reality of mental slavery upon us. It is mere irony to say "Search the
Scriptures," when the meaning is--you must accept the Scriptures whether
they seem true or not. Of the temper in which theological opinions
ought to be formed, we have the instruction of one as eminent as he
was capable. Jefferson remarks, "In considering this subject, divest
yourself of all bias, shake off all fears and servile prejudices, under
which weak minds crouch: fix reason in her seat firmly; question with
boldness, even the existence of God; because, if there be one, he must
approve the homage of reason more than that of blindfolded fear. Read
the Bible as you would Tacitus or Livy. Those facts in the Bible which
contradict the laws of Nature must be examined with care. The New
Testament is the history of a person called Jesus. Keep in your eye what
is related. They say he was begotten by God, but born of a virgin (how
reconcile this?); that he was crucified to death, and buried; that he
rose and ascended bodily into heaven: thus reversing the laws of Nature.
Do not be frightened from this inquiry by any fear, and if it ends in a
belief that the story is not true, or that there is not a God, you will
find other incitements to virtue and goodness. In fine, lay aside all
prejudices on both sides, neither believe nor reject anything because
others have rejected or disbelieved it Your reason is the only oracle
given you by heaven, and you are answerable, not for the rightness,
but for the uprightness of your opinion; and never mind evangelists,
or pseudo-evangelists, who pretend to inspiration."* It is in vain the
Christian quotes the Pauline injunction, "Prove all things; hold fast
that which is good," if we are to hold fast to his good, which may be
evil to us. For a man to prove all things needful, and hold fast to
that which he considers good, is the true maxim of freedom and progress.
Secularism, therefore, proclaims and justifies the right to Differ, and
the right to assert conscientious difference on the platform, through
the press, in civil institutions, in Parliament, in courts of law, where
it demands that the affirmation of those who reject Christianity shall
be as valid as the oath of those who accept it.

     * "Jefferson: Memoirs." Vol. II. Quoted by Sir G. Cockburn,
     in his "Confessions of Faith, by a Philosopher," pages 4 and
     5.


XV.

Yet some opponents have professed that Secular cannot be distinguished
from Christian rights. Is this so? The right to think for ourselves has
been emphatically and reiteratedly declared to be a Christian right:*
it "belongs essentially to Christianity." Now Christianity has no such
right. It has the right to think the Bible true, and nothing else.

     * "Six Chapters on Secularism," by Dr. Parker, Cavendish
     Pulpit, Manchester.

The Christian has no right to think Christianity untrue, however untrue
it may appear. He dare not think it false. He dare no more think it
false than the Catholic dare differ from the dictum of the Church, or
the Mahomedan differ from the text of the Koran, or the Hindoo differ
from the precepts of the Brahmin. Therefore, the Christian's right to
think for himself is simply a compulsion to believe. A right implies
relative freedom of action; but the Christian has no freedom. He has no
choice but to believe, or perish everlastingly. The Christian right to
think for himself is, therefore, not the same as the Secular right. We
mean by the right to think, what the term right always implies--freedom
and independence, and absence of all crime, or danger of penalty through
the honest exercise of thought and maintenance of honest conclusions,
whether in favour of or against Christianity. Our assertion is that
"Private judgment is free and guiltless." The Christian is good enough
to say, we have "a right to think, provided we think rightly." But what
does he mean by "rightly?" He means that we should think as he thinks.
This is his interpretation of "rightly." Whoever does not fall in with
his views, is generally, in his vocabulary, a dishonest perverter of
scripture. Now, if we really have the right to differ, we have the right
to differ from the Minister or from the Bible, if we see good reason
to do so, without being exposed to the censure of our neighbours, or
disapprobation of God. The question is not--does man give us the right
to think for ourselves? but, does God give it to us? If we must come
to a given opinion, our private judgment is unnecessary. Let us know at
once what we are to believe, that we may believe it at once, and secure
safety. If possible disbelief in Christianity will lead to eternal
perdition, the right of private judgment is a snare. We had better
be without that perilous privilege, and we come to regard the Roman
Catholic as penetrative when he paints private judgment as the
suggestion of Satan, and the Roman Catholic no less merciful than
consistent when he proscribes it altogether. We must feel astonishment
at him who declares the Secular right to be essentially a Christian
right, when it is quite a different thing, is understood in an entirely
different sense, and has an application unknown and unadmitted by
Christianity. This is not merely loose thinking, it is reckless
thinking.


XVI.

It has been asserted that the second right, "the right to differ," is
also a Christian right. "Christianity recognizes the claim to difference
of opinion. Christians are not careful to maintain uniformity at the
expense of private judgment." This is omitting a part of the truth.
Christians often permit difference of opinion upon details, but not upon
essentials, and this is the suppression made. The Christian may differ
on points of church discipline, but if he differ upon the essential
articles of his creed, the minister at once warns him that he is in
"danger of the judgment." Let any minister try it himself, and his
congregation will soon warn him to depart, and also warn him of that
higher Power, who will bid him depart "into outer darkness, where there
will be wailing and gnashing of teeth." With respect to the third right,
"the right of asserting difference of opinion," this is declared to
be not peculiar to Secularism; that "Christian churches, chapels,
literature and services, are so many confirmations of the statement that
Christians claim the right of speaking what they think, whether it be
affirmative or negative." Yes, so long as what they speak agrees with
the Bible. This is the Christian limit; yet this is the limit which
Secularism expressly passes and discards. It is the unfettered right
which makes Secularism to differ from Christianity, and to excel it.


XVII.

The right of private judgment, always in set terms conceded to us, means
nothing, unless it leads to a new understanding as to the terms in which
we are to be addressed. In the "Bible and the People," it is described
as "an insolence to ignore Christianity."* We do not understand this
language. It would be insolence to Deity to ignore a message which we
can recognize as coming from Him, but it may rather imply reverence
for God to reject the reports of many who speak in His name. Were we to
require Christians to read our books or think as we think, they would
resent the requirement as an impertinence; and we have yet to learn
"that it is less an impertinence when Christians make these demands of
us." If Christians are under no obligation to hold our opinions, neither
are we under obligation to hold theirs.

     * No. I. Vol. I., p. 8. Edited by the Rev. Brewin Grant.

By our own act, or at their solicitation, we may study "sacred"
writings, but at dictation, never! So long as Secularists obey the laws
enacted for the common security, so long as they perform the duties of
good citizens, it is nothing to Christians what opinions they hold.
We neither seek their counsel nor desire their sentiments--except
they concede them on terms of equality. The light by which we walk is
sufficient for us; and as at the last day, of which Christians speak,
we shall there have, according to their own showing, to answer for
ourselves, we prefer to think for ourselves; and since they do not
propose to take our responsibility, we decline to take their doctrines.
Where we are to be responsible, we will be free; and no man shall
dictate to us the opinions we shall hold. We shall probably know as well
as any Christian how to live with freedom and to die without fear. It
is in vain for Christians to tell us that Newton and Locke differed from
us. What is that to us unless Newton and Locke will answer for us? The
world may differ from a man, but what is the world to him, unless it
will take his place at the judgment-day? Who is Paul or Apollos, or
Matthew or Mark, that we should venture our eternal salvation on his
word, any more than on that of a Mahomedan prophet, or a Buddhist
priest? Where the danger is our own, the faith shall be our own.
Secularism is not an act conceived in the spirit of pride, or vanity, or
self-will, or eccentricity, or singularity, or stiff-neckedness. It is
simply well-understood self-defence. If men have the right of private
judgment, that right has set them free; and we own no law but reason, no
limits but the truth, and have no fear but that of guilt. We may say we
believe in honour, which is respecting the truth--in morality, which
is acting the truth--in love, which is serving the truth--and in
independence, which is defending the truth.


XVIII.



Confucius declared that the foundation of all religion was reverence and
obedience.* The Religious sentiment is the intentional reverence of
God. The Christian is ever persuaded that there is only one way of doing
this, and he arrogantly assumes that he has that way. Whereas the ways
are as diverse as human genius. Let those who deny that Secular Truth
meets the emotional part of their nature, settle what is the nature
of the emotions they desiderate. The miser wants money--the sensualist
wants the cook--the scholar wants knowledge--and the mother desires the
life, growth, and happiness of her child. But what can man want in a
rational sense which Nature and humanity may not supply? Do we not meet
the demand of the many when we show that Secularism is sufficient for
progress; that it is moral, and therefore sufficient for trust; that it
builds only upon the known, and is therefore reliable? It is the highest
and most unpresumptuous form of unconscious worship. It is practical
reverence without the arrogance of theoretical homage. We at least feel
confident of this, that the future, if it come, will not be miserable.
There _may_ be a future--this remains to awaken interest and perennial
curiosity. If Nature be conscious, it will still design the happiness
of man, which it now permits--this assurance remains, stilling fear and
teaching trust.

     * Sir John Bowring.


XIX.

In surveying the position of Christianism in Great Britain there
is found to exist a large outlying class, daily increasing, who for
conscientious reasons reject its cardinal tenets. Hence arises the
question:--Are good citizenship and virtuous life on Secular principles,
possible to these persons? Secularism answers, Yes. To these, excluded
by the letter of scripture, by the narrowness of churches, by the
intrinsic error and moral repulsiveness of doctrine, Secularism
addresses itself; to these it is the word of Recognition, of Concert
and Morality. It points them to an educated conscience as a security of
morals, to the study of Nature as a source of help, and seeks to win the
indifferent by appeals to the inherent goodness of human Nature and the
authority of reason, which Christianism cannot use and dare not trust.
If, however, the Secularist elects to walk by the light of Nature,
will he be able to see? Is the light of Nature a fitful lamp, or a brief
torch, which accident may upset, or a gust extinguish? On the contrary,
the light of Nature may burn steady, clear, and full, over the
entire field of human life. On this point we have the testimony of an
adversary, who was understood to address us, a testimony as remarkable
for its quality as for its felicity of expression:--"There is the
ethical mind, calm, level, and clear; chiefly intent on the good
ordering of this life; judging all things by their tendency to this end,
and impatient of every oscillation of our nature that swings beyond
it. There is nothing low or unworthy in the attachment which keeps this
spirit close to the present world, and watchful for*its affairs. It is
not a selfish feeling, but often one intensely social and humane, not
any mean fascination with mere material interests, but a devotion to
justice and right, and an assertion of the sacred authority of human
duties and affections. A man thus tempered deals chiefly with this
visible life and his comrades in it, because, as nearest to him, they
are better known. He plants his standard on the present, as on a vantage
ground, where he can survey his field, and manoeuvre all his force,
and compute the battle he is to fight. Whatever his bearings fervours
towards beyond his range, he has no insensibility to the claims that
fall within his acknowledged province, and that appeal to him in the
native speech of his humanity. He so reverences veracity, honour, and
good faith, as to expect them like the daylight, and hears of their
violation with a flush of scorn. His word is a rock, and he expects that
yours will not be a quicksand. If you are lax, you cannot hope for his
trust; but if you are in trouble, you easily move his pity. And the
sight of a real oppression, though the sufferer be no ornamental hero,
but black, unsightly, and disreputable, suffices perhaps to set him
to work for life, that he may expunge the disgrace from the records of
mankind. Such men as he constitute for our world its moral centre of
gravity; and whoever would compute the path of improvement that has
brought it thus far on its way, or trace its sweep into a brighter
future, must take account of their steady mass. The effect of this style
of thought and taste on the religion of its possessor, is not difficult
to trace. It may, no doubt, stop short of avowed and conscious religion
altogether; its basis being simply moral, and its scene temporal, its
conditions may be imagined as complete, without any acknowledgment of
higher relations."*

     * Professor Martineau, in Octagon Chapel, Norwich, 1856.


XX.

Nature is. That which is, is the primary subject of study. The study
of Nature reveals the laws of Nature. The laws of Nature furnish safe
guidance to humanity. Safe guidance is to help available in daily
life--to happiness, self-contained--to service, which knows how "to
labour and to wait." For authority, Nature refers us to Experience and
to Reason. For help, to Science, the nearest available help of man.
Science implies disciplined powers on the part of the people, and
concert in their use, to realize the security and sufficiency necessary
to happiness. Happiness depends on moral, no less than on physical
conditions. The moral condition is the full and fearless discharge of
Duty. Duty is devotion to the Right. Right is that which is morally
expedient. That is morally expedient which is conducive to the happiness
of the greatest numbers. The service of others is the practical form
of duty; and endurance in the service of others, the highest form of
happiness. It is pleasure, peace, security, and desert.


XXI.

We believe there is sufficient soundness in Secular principles to make
way in the world. All that is wanted is that advocates of them shall
have clear notions of the value of method in their work. To the novice
in advocacy policy seems a crime--at least, many so describe it. Unable
himself to see his way, the tyro fights at everything and everybody
equally; and too vain to own his failure, he declares that the right
way. Not knowing that progress is an art, and an art requiring the union
of many qualities, he denies all art, cries down policy, and erects
blundering into a virtue. Compare the way which Havelock reached
Lucknow, and the way in which Sir Colin Campbell performed the same
feat, and you see the difference between courage without, and
courage with strategy. It was because magnitudes existed, which were
inaccessible and incapable of direct measurement, that mathematics
arose. Finding direct measurement so often impossible, men were
compelled to find means of ascertaining magnitude and distance
indirectly. Hence mathematics became a scientific policy. Mathematics is
but policy of measurement--grammar but the policy of speech--logic
but the policy of reason--arithmetic but the policy of
calculation--temperance but the policy of health--trigonometry but the
policy of navigation--roads but the policy of transit--music but the
policy of controlling sound--art but the policy of beauty--law but the
policy of protection--discipline but the policy of strength--love but
the policy of affection. An enemy may object to our having a policy,
because it suits his purpose that we should be without one; but that a
friend should object to our having a policy is one of those incredible
infatuations which converts partisans into unconscious traitors. The
policy adopted may be a bad policy, and no policy at all is idiotcy. If
a policy be bad, criticise and amend it; but to denounce all policy
is to commit your cause to the providence of Bedlam. If, therefore,
throughout all intelligent control of Nature and humanity, policy is the
one supreme mark of wisdom, why should it be dishonourable to study the
policy of opinion? He who consistently objects to policy, would build
railway engines without safety valves, and dismiss them from stations
without drivers; he would abolish turnpike roads and streets, and leave
us to find our way at random; he would recommend that vessels be made
without helms, and sail without captains, that armies fight without
discipline, and artillery-men should fire before loading, and when
pointing their guns, should aim at nothing. In fine, a man without
policy, honestly and intelligently opposed to policy, would build his
house with the roof downwards, and plant his trees with their roots in
the air; he would kick his friend and hug his enemy; he would pay wages
to servants who would not work, govern without rule, speak without
thought, think without reason, act without purpose, be a knave by
accident, and a fool by design.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Principles Of Secularism, by
George Jacob Holyoake

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PRINCIPLES OF SECULARISM ***

***** This file should be named 36797.txt or 36797.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/7/9/36797/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
