The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story of Nefrekepta, by Gilbert Murray

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Story of Nefrekepta
       from a demotic papyrus

Author: Gilbert Murray

Release Date: July 28, 2011 [EBook #36887]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF NEFREKEPTA ***




Produced by James Wright and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Canada Team at http://www.pgdpcanada.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









                             The Story of

                             _NEFREKEPTA_

                        FROM A DEMOTIC PAPYRUS

                          Put into Verse by

                           _GILBERT MURRAY_


                                OXFORD
                       AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
                                MCMXI




                           Henry Frowde, M.A.
                Publisher to the University of Oxford
                     London, Edinburgh, New York
                        Toronto and Melbourne


                         PRINTED IN ENGLAND




                              PREFACE


The original of this tale is in Demotic Egyptian, in prose, on a
fragmentary papyrus dated 'the first month of winter, in the fifteenth
year' of some king unnamed. Palaeographical evidence suggests some date
about 100 B.C. My own education has been neglected in the matter of
Demotic, and I know the tale only from the literal translation which
accompanies the text in Dr. Griffith's _Stories of the High Priests of
Memphis_. In that form, however, it so fascinated me that I presently
found myself, to the neglect of more urgent duties, putting it into
English verse and filling up the gaps in the narrative. I have tried to
preserve the style and often the exact words of the original, as
rendered by Dr. Griffith, but in other respects temptations have been
great and I have not resisted them.

The names present some difficulties. In Demotic, if I understand aright,
the vowels are not written and the consonants often do not mean what
they seem to mean. The hero's name is spelt, roughly speaking,
N('y)-nfr-k'-Pth, the phantom lady's Ty-bwbwe; the priest's is written
Stne, but was probably pronounced, so Dr. Griffith tells me, S[)e]ton or
S[)e]tan.

While doing the verses I was constantly reminded of certain Egyptian
illuminations by Miss Florence Kingsford, now Mrs. Sydney Cockerell,
which I had seen some years ago, and she has been so kind as to provide
the book with a frontispiece and tail-piece.

Those who desire further information about Setne will find it in the
introduction to Dr. Griffith's learned and delightful book (Clarendon
Press, 1900).

G. M.




NEFREKEPTA




_Introduction_


SETNE KHAMUAS, son of RAMESES,
High Priest of PTAH, beneath his garden trees
  Dwelt with his wife and children; wise was he
In Books of power and ancient Masteries.

And much he pondered on a tale they told,
How NEFREKEPTA, dead in days of old,
  Held still the Book of HERMES which is THOTH
Hid in his tomb, and never loosed his hold.

And longing for that Book so pierced him through
He called to him his brother AN-HERRU,
  The son of MENKH-ART, saying: 'Brother mine,
Be with me in a deed I have to do.'

And he said: 'I am with thee till my doom
Find me.' And SETNE said: 'I seek the tomb
  Of NEFREKEPTA dead, and take the Book,
The Book of THOTH hid in its inmost room.'

That night they found the tomb, and AN-HERRU
Stayed at the door, but SETNE passing through
  On seven great doors and seven windings spake
His spells, and found the room; and all was true.

For there lay NEFREKEPTA in his pride,
The Book beneath his head; and at his side
  The ghosts sate of a woman and a boy,
Shadows beside the dead; and SETNE cried:

'Ye throned Shadows, whosoe'er ye be,
And thou, dead PHARAOH, tombed in majesty,
  All hail! I, SETNE, scribe and Priest of PTAH,
Command thy Book be rendered up to me,

The Book of THOTH which lies beneath thy head.'
Then never word nor sign came from the dead,
  But the two Shadows lifted up their arms
Lamenting, and the woman swift outspread

Her hand to save the Book, and cried: 'Aha!
SETNE KHAMUAS, is the will of RA
  Not yet fulfilled upon us? This is I,
AHURE of the race of MERNAB-PTAH.


_Ahure's Story_

Therefore give ear, and let the Book of Gold
Tempt thee no more, till all my tale be told.--
  It happened in the days of MERNAB-PTAH,
The long days, when the King was very old,

And had no son nor daughter; in their room
A son's son and a daughter's daughter, whom
  Thou seest, NEFREKEPTA the Good Scribe,
And me who watch beside him in this tomb.

And PHARAOH mused and spake: 'Go near and far,
Bring me the lordliest of my chiefs of war
  With all their daughters and their sons, to make
Feast on the third day; call me all that are.'

So PHARAOH spake; but lo, exceedingly
Did I love NEFREKEPTA and he me.
  And much I feared that PHARAOH at that feast
Would take some youth and maid of high degree,

A war-lord's daughter and a war-lord's son,
And fast bind NEFREKEPTA to the one,
  And me to the other; so his race would grow,
But we two meet no more beneath the sun.

Now PHARAOH'S ancient Steward loved me well,
And NEFREKEPTA too; and it befell,
  One day he watched me and the second day
He spoke: 'AHURE, surely I can spell

A story that is written in four eyes.
Thou lovest NEFREKEPTA and likewise
  He loveth thee.' And I cried out: 'O friend,
Speak unto PHARAOH quick, ere this day dies!

Pray that he give me to my cousin straight,
Nor seek to make us two live separate.'
  And he said: 'I will speak; for so the law
Commandeth, by long ages consecrate;

The King's sons wed the daughters of the King.'
Then all my heart was like a water-spring
  Leaping; and soon he went and soon returned
Sad, and reported of his counselling:

'I spake to PHARAOH, saying: "Lord, may life
Like RA'S be thine and glory in all strife!
  Is it not meet that NEFREKEPTA take
By ancient rule AHURE to his wife?

Let PHARAOH wed with PHARAOH; so shall pure
PHARAOH be born:--the rule doth still endure."
  And PHARAOH spoke not, but his brow grew dark
With trouble; and I said: "O King, for sure

Thou hast some grief; say what doth vex thy brow?"
And PHARAOH said: "None vexeth me but thou.
  I have but two, and if those two be wed
All PHARAOH'S fruit is hanging on one bough.

Nay, search and find me one great war-lord's son,
Another war-lord's daughter. With the one
  And other let these children twain be wed.
So PHARAOH'S line on many threads shall run."

Next day the hours passed and the feast was set
Before the King; and I was called ere yet
  The Lords came. And I stood before the King
Not as of old, my heart being desolate.

And PHARAOH spake: 'AHURE, was it thou
Didst send that message that hath made my brow
  Troubled, that with thy brother thou wouldst wed?'
And I said: 'Hath the King not made a vow,

A war-lord's daughter and a war-lord's son--
Behold us!--Let my brother take the one,
  And let the other take AHURE; so
Shall PHARAOH'S race be great beneath the sun.'

And there I laughed; and PHARAOH laughed again,
And called the Steward of the King's domain:
  'Steward, this night to NEFREKEPTA'S house
The maid AHURE take and all her train;

And all things beautiful go with her there.'
Thus I to NEFREKEPTA'S house did fare,
  And PHARAOH sent wrought silver and fine gold,
And PHARAOH'S servants stood about my chair.

And NEFREKEPTA took with me delight,
And feasted PHARAOH'S servants; and that night
  Was made our marriage, and we knew great joy,
And never, never, failed I in his sight;

For each his fellow loved exceedingly.
And when my time of bearing came to be
  I bore the son who lieth in this tomb,
MERAB; a name in the Kings' Book is he.


_The Book of Thoth_

And thus it fell, that of all things on earth
My brother NEFREKEPTA most of worth
  Did hold the wisdom that in Books is writ.
The tablets of the House of Death and Birth,

And all that on the temple walls is said,
And all the lore of the Kings' Tombs he read,
  And ever walked in Memphis on the Hill
Of Kings, and stored the wisdom of the dead.

Now one day was a high procession sent
To PTAH'S great house; and NEFREKEPTA went
  And walked therein; right slow he walked, and read
All that was writ on wall and pediment.

And, watching him, behold, an aged Priest
Laughed. And he said: 'God's mercy be increased!
  Why laughest thou at me?' And he: 'I laugh
At no man, not the greatest nor the least;

I laugh to think how thou shalt laugh anon,
When that which no man's eye hath looked upon,
  The secret Book of HERMES which is THOTH,
Is opened to thine hand and called thine own.

He wrote it, and the Gods before his face
Fled.--And it lies . . . If ever word of grace
  Or spell of power thou need, come then to me
And speak. Thou shalt be guided to the place.

Two leaves it hath, on which two sorceries
Are written. If thou read the first of these,
  Thou shalt enchant the earth, the clouds above,
The underworld, the mountains and the seas;

And all the words that winged things may say,
And creeping things, shall be made thine that day;
  Yea, thou shalt see all fishes in the deep
And God's power guiding each upon his way.

And if thou read the second, though there lies
Above thee all AMENTI, thou shalt rise
  And take thy shape again, and see the MOON
And RA and all the children of the skies.'

And NEFREKEPTA cried: 'O Priest and King!
I bless thee. Tell me every gorgeous thing
  Thy soul desireth, they shall all be thine,
Wilt thou but guide my steps to that great spring.'

Then smiled the Priest: 'My Prince, so let it be!
Send me an hundred bars of silver, free
  Of all fault, for my burial when I die;
And two full priesthoods give me without fee.'

And NEFREKEPTA called a youth, and bade
An hundred bars of silver pure be made,
  And two new priesthoods named to THOTH and PTAH,
And sealed him priest to PTAH and THOTH unpaid.

Then the man spoke: 'The Book of THOTH doth rest
In Coptos Sea, hid in a golden chest;
  The gold doth lie in silver; that in wrought
Ebon and ivory, fitted nest in nest;

That in sweet cedar; that in bronze doth lie;
The bronze in iron. 'Tis knotted with a ply
  Of endless Snake; and round it for one league
Are scorpion, asp, and worm to make men die.'

He spoke, and NEFREKEPTA no more knew
What place he stood in nor what breath he drew,
  But forth he hied him in great joy, and caught
My hand, and all this tale he told me true;

And cried: 'South, South to Coptos! None shall stay
Our going.' But I turned from him away
  And found that aged Priest and said: 'Thou Priest,
May AMUN curse thee for thy words this day!

The Book of THOTH, the serpents and the sea!
Most bitter striving thou hast made for me,
  And bitter watching till my lord's return;
False art thou, and thy South all cruelty.'

And much I prayed my brother not to sail
To Coptos, but my prayer might not avail,
  For straight to PHARAOH'S throne he went, and spake
To PHARAOH of the Priest and all his tale.

And PHARAOH said: 'What wilt thou I should do?'
'Give me thy ship of pleasure and its crew,'
  He said: 'and with me let AHURE sail
To find the Book, and the boy MERAB too.'

So PHARAOH'S pleasure-ship was brought, and all
Its crew; and southward in high festival
  We sailed to Coptos; and the news went forth
Before us, and the folk stood on the wall.

The Priests of ISIS and HARPOCRATES
And the Chief Priest of ISIS, all of these
  Came down to NEFREKEPTA, and to me
The women of the Priests in their degrees.

They led us to their Temple in a line;
And NEFREKEPTA gave ox, goose, and wine,
  And brought to ISIS and HARPOCRATES
Rite and oblation and all dues divine.

A temple beautiful exceedingly
Was over us, and there four days did he
  Make with the Priests of ISIS holiday,
And the priests' women holiday with me.

But when the morning of the fifth day came,
He called for wax made holy, without blame,
  And shaped a boat with men, and spake a spell,
And breathed; and life woke in them like a flame.

He went on board that boat, and heaped it high
With sand, and pushed it from the shore. And I
  Sate on the shore alone, and said: 'I wait
Here till he comes, and if he dies I die.'

He said: 'O Rowers, row me to the place
I wot of.' And the rowers rowed apace,
  By day, by night, and ceased on the third day.
Then he took sand, and cast the sand a space

Before him, and the water rose on both
Sides, and the floor below did ooze and froth
  With scorpion, asp, and worm to make men die,
One league before the treasure chest of THOTH.

And round the chest was coiled an endless Snake.
Then NEFREKEPTA took his charms, and spake
  A spell on all that league of serpent things,
And down they sank, and slept, and could not wake.

Then o'er the league of asps he walked, and fought
With the endless Snake and slew it; but it caught
  Life as it fell, and joined again and flew
To tear him; and again its death he wrought;

Then a third time it quickened, and again
He fought and smote the endless Snake in twain
  The third time; and between the parts he cast
Fine sand; and it lay still, for ever slain.

And on he strode and found the caskets, rolled
Each within each; iron the outmost fold,
  Then bronze; then cedar; then came ivory
And ebon; then the silver; then the gold.

He broke the gold, and kneeling on his knees
Read out the first of the two sorceries,
  Enchanting all the earth, the clouds above,
The underworld, the mountains and the seas.

And everything that bird or worm might say,
Or mountain beast, he heard and knew that day,
  And saw all fishes moving in the deep,
And God's power guiding each upon its way.

He read the second sorcery, and far
In heaven he saw the shining forth of RA,
  And all his Children round him, and the MOON
Uprising, and the shape of every Star.

And NEFREKEPTA shut the Book, and then
Went to his boat and called the magic men:
  'Row day, row night, and row me to the shore.'
So rowed they, and he reached the shore again.

And found me sitting by the sea to wait
His coming. Seven full days and nights I sate,
  And ate nor drank, but waited, and was grown
Like them they bear to the embalmer's gate.

I said to him: 'My brother, let me see
The Book that wrought such pain on thee and me.'
  He gave the Book into my hands, and slow
I read what there was writ of sorcery.

I laid upon the earth and sky my spell,
The underworld, the hills, the ocean swell;
  And understood what tales the birds of heaven
And mountain beasts and deep-sea fishes tell.

Then did I read the second spell, and high
Above saw RA enthroned in the sky,
  And all his Children; and I saw the MOON
And all the Stars in all their shapes go by.

And NEFREKEPTA bade them bring a roll
Of new papyrus, and wrote out the whole
  Of those two charms, and melted it in wine,
And drank it. So the charm was in his soul.

Then sacrifice we made and gifts of worth
Heaped high in all the temples, and set forth
  On PHARAOH'S ship with singing and great joy,
One league, one league, from Coptos to the North.

But THOTH himself had seen our deed, and, ah,
His wrath was hot! Before the throne of RA,
  'Judgement!' he cried, 'Give judgement between me
And NEFREKEPTA, son of MERNAB-PTAH,

Who broke into my treasure-house this day,
And slew my Snake and stole my Book away.'
  And RA said: 'Surely he is in thy hand,
O THOTH, both he and his, to spare or slay.'

And lo, a Power of God went forth, and fell
On all the river and lay invisible;
  And THOTH said: 'NEFREKEPTA shall come home
No more, nor one of those that with him dwell.'

Then the boy MERAB, singing, from the shade
Of PHARAOH'S awning stepped; one step he made,
  And, lo, the River took him, and his face
Was covered and the will of RA obeyed.

Then all about us cried with a great cry.
But NEFREKEPTA from his awning high
  Called with a spell, and the dead boy rose up;
But over him that Power of God did lie.

Then NEFREKEPTA spake a written spell,
And the boy MERAB told all that befell
  About him; yea, the very words which THOTH
Spake at the throne of RA he made him tell.

Then slow to Coptos we returned, and bore
The boy MERAB to the embalmer's door;
  And like a Prince he was embalmed and laid
On Coptos Hill with the great dead of yore.

And NEFREKEPTA said: 'My sister, come
Quick; let us row till all the road be foam,
  Lest PHARAOH hear what hath befallen us,
And his heart faint because we come not home.'

We went on board, and northward rowed apace
One league from Coptos; and I saw the place
  Where MERAB died, and from the canopy
Stepped, and the River took me; and my face

Was covered and the will of RA obeyed.
Then all upon the boat great mourning made,
  But NEFREKEPTA from his awning high
Called, and I knew a spell upon me laid;

And I rose up, though o'er me still had hold
That Power of God. I rose and did unfold
  All that befell me, yea, and every word
Which THOTH before RA'S throne had spoke I told.

Then slow to Coptos he returned and bore
Me, his dead sister, to the embalmer's door;
  And like a Queen I was embalmed, and laid
Where MERAB my dead child was laid before.

He went on board, and down the stream apace
Rowed one league north from Coptos, to the place
  Where MERAB died and I, AHURE, died;
And stood and communed with his heart a space:

'Shall it be backward now, ere THOTH can slay?
Shall it be on to PHARAOH, come what may?
  And, lo, when PHARAOH asks me where those two,
His children, are, what is it I shall say?

"I took thy children to a burning land
And living let them die; and here I stand."
  I will not speak it.'--Then he bade them bring
A band of finest linen, such a band

As dead kings wear, to bind them at the last;
And seven times round his body made it fast,
  And close against his body bound the Book
Firm; and from out the canopy he passed.

And, lo, the River took him, and the will
Of RA was done. And they on board did fill
  The air with wailing: 'Great woe! Grievous woe!
Dead, dead, is the Good Scribe and all his skill.'

And down the stream the pleasure-ship sailed on
Toward Memphis, and to no man there was known
  Where NEFREKEPTA lay; and when they came
Message was brought to PHARAOH on his throne.

And PHARAOH came in robes of funeral,
And all the folk of Memphis, great and small,
  And PTAH'S High Priest and all the Priests of PTAH,
And PHARAOH'S council and his household, all;

And saw the ship, and, lo, beneath it drowned
Saw NEFREKEPTA lying, both hands wound
  About the rudder, guiding still his ship;
So great a scribe was NEFREKEPTA found.

They raised him, and against his body dead
They found the Book pressed close. And PHARAOH said:
  'Behold the Book he died for! Let it lie
In this King's grave, a pillow for his head.'

Then sixteen days embalming did they keep
For NEFREKEPTA, thirty-five of deep
  Wrapping; of burial threescore days and ten;
And here he resteth in the House of Sleep.

And I, AHURE, far away must lie
In Coptos; but my heart within doth cry
  For NEFREKEPTA, and our shadows come
Waking and watch beside him sleeplessly.


_The Contest for the Book_

And thou, SETNE KHAMUAS, who dost look
To take from us that which from THOTH we took,
  Where hast thou paid the price?--These twain and I,
Our lives on earth were taken for this Book.

But SETNE said: 'AHURE, none the less,
For all thy tale of old unhappiness,
  Yield me the Book at NEFREKEPTA'S head:
I take it else by wrath and bitter stress.'

Then NEFREKEPTA from his marble bed
Rose up: 'O thou to whom my wife hath said
  Words vainly wise, and thou hast hearkened not,
How wilt thou win the Book beneath my head?

Think'st thou to take it from me by the wit
Of a good scribe? Or wilt thou play for it
  Four games of draughts, the fifty points and two?'
And SETNE said: 'The draughts'; and down did sit.

Between them then the gaming board they drew
For the first game of fifty points and two;
  And NEFREKEPTA won the game, and spake
A spell, and with the board he ruled it true.

And SETNE ankle-deep into the floor
Sank. And again they played, and as before
  Dead NEFREKEPTA won the second game;
And SETNE sank up to the thighs and more.

Again they played; and NEFREKEPTA dead
Won the third game; and SETNE to his head
  Sank, and the earth came close below his ears.
And SETNE lifted up his voice in dread:

'Brother, where art thou? Brother AN-HERRU,
Bear word to PHARAOH of the deeds I do.
  Pray PHARAOH the last amulets of PTAH
Be sent me. Haste! Haste!'--Then the dead man drew

The board up close, and the fourth game began.
And AN-HERRU far off had heard, and ran,
  Ran unto PHARAOH'S throne and told his tale.
And PHARAOH said: 'To save a sinking man

Take the last amulets!' And AN-HERRU
Flew with them to the dead man's gate, and flew
  Through all the windings, all the doors, and, lo,
The game was playing still between those two.

He laid the amulets on SETNE'S head,
And SETNE shivered in the earth, and said
  A great spell; then, upstriving from the ground,
Reached out his arm, and caught the Book, and fled.

Light went before him, and behind great gloom
Closed, and he heard AHURE for her doom
  Wailing: 'King Darkness, come! King Light, farewell!
Gone, gone, is the last comfort of the Tomb.'

But NEFREKEPTA on his marble bed
Lay back and laughed: 'A little while,' he said,
  'O Shadow of my Sister, and this man
Shall come again. Therefore be comforted.

His dreams shall bring him back, before mine ire
Kneeling, to do the worst of our desire,
  A fork upon his neck, a rod between
His hands, and on his head a bowl of fire.'


_Ta-Buvue, and the Return of the Book_

But SETNE out into the light above
Returned, and saw the light with a great love;
  And sealed the tomb, and stood at PHARAOH'S throne
And told his doings and the end thereof.

And PHARAOH said to SETNE: 'These be vain
Doings. Go back and give the dead again
  His book, as a wise man to a wise man,
Now, lest thou give it some day with much pain.'

But SETNE hearkened not. By day and night
He read the Book and took therein delight,
  And showed it at his feasts; and all his days
Were sweet to SETNE and his breath was light.

'Twas joy to read, joy also when he made
Mirth with his sons, joy when he rose and prayed
  In PTAH'S great Temple; till one day, behold,
In PTAH'S great Temple, through the colonnade,

A troop of damsels fair exceedingly,
And one who led them. Beautiful was she,
  And not like other women; good beyond
All he had seen or ever thought to see.

Her girdle was of gold and gold her hood,
And all that touched her fragrant was and good,
  And maids behind her fifty walked and two;
And, seeing, SETNE wist not where he stood,

But called the Slave that served him: 'Haste thee, go
To where yon woman worships; I would know
  What need hath brought her and what name she bears.
Go swiftly.' And the servant bowed him low,

And found a handmaiden who walked aside:
'Damsel, thy mistress cometh in much pride;
  Say by what name men call her, and what need
Brings her to Memphis.' And the maid replied:

'This is the child of the Chief Vision Seer
Of Bast, Queen of the Far World and the Near;
  Her name is TA-BUVUE, and a vow
To PTAH, your mighty God, hath brought her here.'

The slave returned and told to SETNE all
The handmaid spoke; and SETNE said: 'Go, call
  This handmaid secretly behind the rest;
Greet her from me and speak my name withal:

"SETNE KHAMUAS, son of RAMESES,
Greets thee: he sends ten gold Arsinoes;
  And more, if any man hath done thee wrong,
SETNE the judge will right thine injuries;

All this, if thou wilt speak with him an hour,
And help him. To a great and secret tower
  Thou shalt go in, where none shall do thee hurt
Nor know thy name; so great is SETNE'S power."'

The slave returned and all of SETNE'S word
Told to the handmaid; and her wrath was stirred,
  And loud she railed, as though 'twere blasphemies
His lips had spoke; and TA-BUVUE heard,

And called him: 'Strive not with this foolish one;
But hither, tell to me what wrong is done.'
  But quick the handmaid ran before, and cried:
'He bringeth words of shame from PHARAOH'S son:

Thus saying: "SETNE, son of RAMESES,
Greets thee, and sends ten gold Arsinoes;
  And more, if any man hath done thee wrong,
SETNE the judge will right thine injuries";

All this, if I will speak with him an hour
And help him. To a great and secret tower
  I shall go in, where none shall do me hurt
Nor know my name; so great is SETNE'S power!'

Then TA-BUVUE laughed: 'I think he spake
This word to thee for TA-BUVUE'S sake.--
  Go, speak to SETNE, saying: "Who am I
That thou shouldst send my bondmaid gifts to take?

I am no common woman; I am one
Born of great kings, who walk my ways alone,
  Priestess of Bast, the Queen of the Two Worlds,
And seeking no man's gift and fearing none.

If me thou seekest, I will speak within
Mine own house: knock and thou shalt enter in:
  In Per-Bast, by the Houses of the Dead,
Past Kemi, where the desert doth begin.

There ask for TA-BUVUE. I go hence
Now with my maids to make magnificence
  Before thee. And no man shall watch thy way
Into my house, nor mark thy coming thence."'

The Slave returned, and SETNE'S heart did fail
For very joy at hearing of the tale.
  He called his servants: 'Make me a swift boat
Ready, with rowers and a silken sail.'

And SETNE marvelled in his heart a space,
And in his mirror looked; and, lo, his face
  Seemed beautiful again, and all his limbs
Light, like a young man when he runs a race.

So walked he to the boat and entered in,
And bade them row as ne'er they rowed, to win
  Per-Bast, beyond the Houses of the Dead,
Past Kemi, where the desert doth begin.

And there, behold, a tower exceeding tall
Set in a pleasant place; and a great wall
  Was round it, and a garden to the north
With many trees. And SETNE gave a call:

'Whose is this tower?' And heard an answer: 'Here
Dwells TA-BUVUE, daughter of the Seer
  Of Bast, she who is named The Beautiful.'
And SETNE entered and no man was near.

And up the garden ways he went, and cast
His eyes on all and marvelled as he passed:
  And TA-BUVUE came and held his hand
And spoke: 'Now by the Holiness of Bast,

This day is happiness. Come to mine high
Chamber, we two alone amid the sky.'
  So up the stair they went, to a cool room
Of turquoise wrought and lapis lazuli.

Couches were there, decked with fair linen strand
Like PHARAOH'S couch; and cups of gold did stand
  On a great dresser, and a cup of gold
Was filled with wine and laid in SETNE'S hand.

And TA-BUVUE said: 'Take wine and meat.'
But he said: 'Love, how could I drink or eat?'
  Then in a censer burning gums they brought
And spices rare and unguent for his feet.

Lo, none was like her, none that bore the name
Of woman! And his heart rose like a flame:
  'O TA-BUVUE, let the end be now:
Let us make perfect that for which we came!'

'Is not this house thine own and I thy bride?'
Said she: 'Yet one thing first shalt thou decide.
  I am no common woman, but to Bast
Pure, and full-filled of majesty and pride.

Thy present wife put from thee, that no soul
Near me may stand; and write it in a scroll.
  And all thy wealth of Priesthoods and of Powers,
With me alone thou shalt divide the whole.'

Said SETNE: 'Call a scribe.' And at their call
The scribe came; and he wrote a scroll withal
  And cast off SETNE'S wife; and SETNE'S wealth,
With TA-BUVUE did he share it all.

And in that hour one spoke to SETNE: 'Lo,
Thy children, waiting in the court below,
  Sit with the dogs and curling cats of Bast.'
And SETNE said: 'Bring them, and let them know.'

Then TA-BUVUE laid her raiment proud
Off, and put on soft linen, like one vowed
  To bridal; and her body through the robe
Shone, as the moon shines through a little cloud.

And back she turned to him and poured him wine,
And said: 'These children must not strive with mine.
  Make them to sign the scroll, too, and give up
Their part in thee.' And SETNE made them sign.

The fine, fine, linen robed her like a mist
Which robeth RA in pearl and amethyst;
  And SETNE marvelled gazing; and again
She spoke, and SETNE'S hand she took and kissed:

'These children, knowing all to me thou art,
Hate me.--Let them be mine to take apart
  And do my will upon them.' And he said:
'Do all the abomination of thy heart.'

She slew them then, and from her window fine
Cast them. And far below he heard the whine
  Of dogs that tore and curling cats of Bast
Which lapped their blood. And SETNE drank his wine.

He said: 'Those children that were slain had birth
By me. O Woman, thou hast made much dearth
  About me. Give me that for which I came,
Else have I nothing, nothing, on this earth.'

'Hast thou not me,' she said, 'in place of all?
Come, therefore!' And she led him through the hall
  To a fair couch, ebon and ivory;
And down he lay, and spread swift arms withal

To clasp her; and within his arms outspread,
Behold, she withered, withered; and her head
  It had no eyes, and downward all her jaw
Dropped, like the jaws of the uncared-for dead.

And SETNE strove to rise, but cloud on cloud
Held him: hot wind and hate and laughter loud,
  And one that wept for a world's glory gone,
And dust, dust, dust: and SETNE shrieked aloud:

And saw: and, lo, all naked in the day
In a waste place of bricks and shards he lay,
  And clutched a burning kiln. And near him passed
The way and much folk jeering on the way,

Soldiers and priests, beggars and men of pride.
And SETNE rolled him in the dust and cried:
  'My children!' And a great lord rose in wrath:
'Thy children stand this hour at PHARAOH'S side,

Thou naked man! Thou Priest whom none shall bless!
And ask for thee. What? Is it drunkenness?'
  And SETNE said: 'They live.' And said: 'O King,
Throw me, I pray, some robe in this distress,

Wrought by dead NEFREKEPTA in his ire.
I go to yield him up his worst desire,
  A fork upon my neck, between my hands
A rod, and on my head a bowl of fire.'

One of the bondmen threw him, at that call,
A poor man's robe; and on to PHARAOH'S Hall
  He journeyed with them, and stretched out his arms
And clasped his sons, and told to PHARAOH all.

'Yea, take the Book, take quickly,' PHARAOH said,
'The rod, the fork, the fire upon thine head,
  And seek dead NEFREKEPTA in his tomb,
And kneel and pray the pardon of the dead.'

And SETNE heard; and quick ere set of sun
He stood before the Tomb, and one by one
  Passed the great doors, and opened the last door,
And, lo, a light through all the chamber shone,

A great light, like the going forth of RA.
And while he stood the Woman cried: 'Aha,
  SETNE, thou com'st! And if thou com'st alive
'Tis PTAH hath saved thee and the grace of PTAH.'

But NEFREKEPTA laughed. And SETNE came
Kneeling: 'O King, with rod and fork and flame
  I come,' he said; 'and yield thee up thy Book.
What is thy judgement? Is it further shame?'

But NEFREKEPTA laughed: 'I would not now
Make thee my slave, nor smite, nor burn thy brow.
  This was enough.--Yet one thing lacketh me
Still, and thereto I bind thee by a vow.

Far off in a strange grave 'mid much annoy
My wife AHURE lieth and the boy
  MERAB; 'tis but their shadows, by the art
Of a good scribe, dwell here and have no joy.

Therefore I charge upon thee my behest:
Go, bring from Coptos to this House of Rest
  My wife AHURE and MERAB the boy.'
And SETNE rose and took on him the quest.

And straightway before PHARAOH bowed his head
And told him all the tale. And PHARAOH said:
  'I give thee mine own pleasure-ship to sail
To Coptos and bring back those ancient dead.'

So PHARAOH'S pleasure-ship with all its crew
Was brought, and southward on the wind they flew
  To Coptos; and the High Priest saw the ship,
And all the Priests, and came in haste thereto.

The Priests of ISIS and HARPOCRATES
And the Chief Priest; SETNE to all of these
  Gave ox and goose and wine, and with them walked
On Coptos Hill amid the tombs and trees.

Three days and nights among the tombs they trod
In Coptos on the Hill, and every sod
  They turned and marked, and every graven stone,
And the Scribes' writings in the House of God.

But never could they find by night nor day
The tomb where MERAB and AHURE lay.
  And NEFREKEPTA knew they found it not,
And sent his shadow forth to guide their way.

Like an old man, a bent and aged Priest,
It sate. And SETNE said: 'Joy be increased,
  O Father! Thou dost know the things of old;
Three days and nights we search, and have not ceased,

To find the tomb which holds AHURE dead
And MERAB.' Then the old man raised his head:
  'The father of my grandsire in old days
Spoke of it to my grandsire; and he said

The father of his grandsire once had told
His grandsire how those two were laid of old
  Far in the southmost corner, where the house
Now stands in which the scrivener tells his gold.'

And SETNE said: 'Old man, methinks I see
Some hate here. Hath the scrivener injured thee,
  That thou wouldst wreck his house and dig beneath?'
He answered: 'Have a watch set over me;

Then raze the scrivener's house, and, under ground
By the south corner, if there be not found
  Both MERAB and AHURE, have me slain!'
So there they held him and a guard stood round.

The scrivener's house was razed; and that same day
They found where MERAB and AHURE lay,
  And, like great PHARAOHS, down to PHARAOH'S boat
Bore them 'mid Priests and Princes in array.

And SETNE sought that ancient man, and, lo,
He was not. By that sign did SETNE know
  This too was NEFREKEPTA. Then they built
The scrivener's house again, and turned to go:

And went on board, and back to Memphis bore
Those PHARAOHS home, with stream and wind and oar;
  Singing they went, and PHARAOH heard them sing;
And PHARAOH rose and met them by the shore,

And led those Mighty Ones in robes of pride
To NEFREKEPTA'S tomb, and sanctified
  Their entering in, and made a mound above;
And there for ever sleep they, side by side.

And there is finished all that fell between
SETNE and NEFREKEPTA and his Queen
  AHURE and the boy MERAB. 'Twas writ
In the first month of winter, Year XV.


[Illustration: 5 black cats by Florence Kingsford.]


Oxford: Horace Hart, M.A.
Printer to the University



Transcriber's Note:-

Original spelling and punctuation retained.






End of Project Gutenberg's The Story of Nefrekepta, by Gilbert Murray

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF NEFREKEPTA ***

***** This file should be named 36887.txt or 36887.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/8/8/36887/

Produced by James Wright and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Canada Team at http://www.pgdpcanada.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
