The Project Gutenberg EBook of His Lady of the Sonnets, by Robert W. Norwood

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: His Lady of the Sonnets

Author: Robert W. Norwood

Release Date: September 8, 2011 [EBook #36915]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HIS LADY OF THE SONNETS ***




Produced by Al Haines










HIS LADY

OF THE SONNETS


BY

ROBERT W. NORWOOD




BOSTON

SHERMAN, FRENCH & COMPANY

1915




COPYRIGHT, 1915

SHERMAN, FRENCH & COMPANY




TO

MY WIFE




  "I shall never, in the years remaining,
  Paint you pictures, no, nor carve you statues,
  Make you music that should all-express me;
  So it seems: I stand on my attainment.
  This of verse alone, one life allows me;
  Verse and nothing else have I to give you.
  Other heights in other lives, God willing:
  All the gifts from all the heights, your own, Love!"
                                        ROBERT BROWNING.




CONTENTS


  His Lady Of The Sonnets
  Antony To Cleopatra, After Actium
  Paul To Timothy
  Dives In Torment


SONNETS AND SONGS

  Fellow Craftsmen
  Posca
  Reincarnation
  Jacob's Dream
  Keats
  A Poet's Prayer
  What Is Religion?
  A Song Of Spring
  A Fallen Angel
  A Litany
  The Great Comrade
  A Revery
  Good-Bye
  David's Song To Michal
  David Before Saul
  A Villanelle Of Fate
  One Woman




  HIS LADY OF THE SONNETS



  I

  My soul awoke from slumber--the long ease
  Of years that passed away in dull content,
  Not caring what the world's deep voices meant--
  Sunk in my dreams, I heard their harmonies
  Like wind-blown clamour of far-calling seas
  That told of Ithaca to sailors spent
  With trouble, and forgetful at the scent
  And taste of fruit plucked from the lotus trees;

  For as I slept, your footsteps on the grass,
  Your voice, wrought once again the Miracle
  Of Eden; and I saw appear and pass
  Eve in her beauty, binding still the spell
  That Adam felt, when from his opened side
  Stepped Woman forth in loveliness and pride.




  II

  I meet you in the mystery of the night,
  A dear Dream-Goddess on a crescent moon;
  An opalescent splendour, like a noon
  Of lilies; and I wonder that the height
  Should darken for the depth to give me light--
  Light of your face, so lovely that I swoon
  With gazing, and then wake to find how soon
  Joy of the world fades when you fade from sight.

  Beholding you, I am Endymion,
  Lost and immortal in Latmian dreams;
  With Dian bending down to look upon
  Her shepherd, whose aeonian slumber seems
  A moment, twinkling like a starry gem
  Among the jewels of her diadem.




  III

  If I could tell why, when you look at me,
  Dreams that have visited half wakeful nights
  Re-form and shape themselves, and Pisgah-sights
  Fill one far valley to a purple sea;
  And white-domed cities rise with porphyry,
  Jacinth and sapphire gates, beneath the heights,
  Rose-flamed within the dawn where Ph[oe]bus smites
  Earth with his heel--claiming its lord to be;

  Then would you know what my heart seeks to say
  And falters ere sufficient words be found:
  How all the voiceless night and vocal day
  Love looks on you and trembles into sound;
  Love longs and pleads for his one moment's bliss--
  You and him mingled in a silent kiss.




  IV

  My love is like a spring among the hills
  Whose brimming waters may not be confined,
  But pour one torrent through the ways that wind
  Down to a garden; there the rose distills
  Its nectar; there a tall, white lily fills
  Night with anointing of two lovers, blind,
  Dumb, deaf, of body, spirit, and of mind
  From breathless blending of far-sundered wills.

  Long ere my love had reached you, hard I strove
  To send its torrent through the barren fields;
  I wanted you, the lilied treasure-trove
  Of innocence, whose dear possession yields
  Immortal gladness to my heart that knows
  How you surpass the lily and the rose.




  V

  Like one great opal on the breast of Night,
  Soft and translucent, hangs the orb of June!
  I hear wild pipings of a joyous tune
  Played on a golden reed for the delight
  Of you, my hidden, lovely Eremite--
  You by the fountain from the marble hewn--
  You silent as in dream, with flowers strewn
  About your feet--you goddess, robed in white!

  Mute and amazed, I at the broken wall
  Lean fearful, lest the sudden, dreadful dawn
  For me Diana's awful doom let fall;
  And I be cursed with curious Action,
  Save that you find in me this strong defence--
  My adoration of your innocence.




  VI

  When from the rose-mist of creation grew
  God's patient waiting in your wide-set eyes,
  The morning stars, and all the host that flies
  On wings of love, paused at the wondrous blue
  With which the Master, mindful of the hue,
  Stained first the crystal dome of summer skies;
  And afterward the violet that vies
  With amethyst, before He fashioned you.

  And I have trembled with those ancient stars;
  My heart has known the flame-winged seraphs' song;
  For no indifferent, dreamy eyelid bars
  Me from the blue, nor veils with lashes long
  Your love, that to my tender gazing grows
  Bold to confess it: I am glad he knows!




  VII

  There came three wise men riding from the east;
  One was a king and brought a gift of gold;
  And one bore frankincense that fate foretold;
  While myrrh was offered by a mitred priest.
  Nor ever hath Love's brave adventure ceased
  Since that fair night ashine with stars and cold,
  When even angels paused their wings to fold--
  Love to adore made one with man and beast.

  Accept three gifts I to thee gladly bring;
  Each hath its own divine significance:
  Gold is the Body thou hast crowned a king;
  My Spirit is the prophet's frankincense;
  Myrrh is the Mind which strives to tell thee all
  Love's mystic and melodious ritual!




  VIII

  Sometimes I think that we have lived before,
  And found sweet interest down the centuries
  In all life's little things that charm and please;
  That we have toiled together at the oar
  In one of Caesar's galleys; that we bore
  One burden on our backs and bowed the knees
  Of servitude to Charlemagne; and these
  Have taught us how to love for evermore.

  Dear Comrade, we have often changed our state;
  We have been slaves and masters, serfs and kings;
  You have been man, I woman, wont to wait
  Upon my lover's word; rememberings
  Are in the mystic rapture that we feel
  Whenever at your feet a while I kneel.




  IX

  Two faces haunt the stillnesses of sleep.
  The first is of a woman I have known
  Past years, in many lives, as on a throne
  Within my heart, for whom I daily keep
  Fast and high vigil while deep calls to deep;
  You also stir me, like wind-voices blown
  Through woodland hollows where I walk alone
  When twilight and its shadows slowly creep;

  And I am torn 'twixt love of you and her--
  My dear Dream-Lady of some long ago--
  Till past and present, pausing to confer,
  Determine what I hardly dare to know:
  The faces I have loved and love are one--
  How you have followed me from sun to sun!




  X

  Last night I crossed the spaces to your side,
  As you lay sleeping in the sacred room
  Of our great moment.  Like a lily's bloom,
  Fragile and white were you, my spirit-bride,
  For pain and loneliness with you abide,
  And Death had thought to touch you with his doom,
  Until Love stood angelic at the tomb,
  Drew sword, smote him, and life's door opened wide.

  I looked on you and breathed upon your hair--
  Your hair of such soft, brown, translucent gold!
  Nor did you know that I knelt down in prayer,
  Clasped hands, and worshipped you for the untold
  Magnificence of womanhood divine--
  God's miracle of Water turned to Wine!




  XI

  Paola and Francesca, dead these years,
  And lost forever unto Rimini!
  Lanciotto's garden blooms no more where ye
  Found love is laughter, love is also tears;
  Is peace and pain, high hopes and sudden fears;
  That love is gain and loss, an ecstasy
  Of heaven and then hell's hot eternity;
  A balm that soothes the soul, a flame that sears.

  I, too, know of a secret garden where
  Pale asphodels are rivals of the rose;
  And all life's opposites are gathered there
  Before the spirit's agony, that knows
  Gladness ineffable through loving One
  Who hath no equal underneath the sun.




  XII

  What has become of our great moment when
  The love we veiled was daringly revealed--
  You in my arms, O Heart--and one kiss sealed
  The covenant?  I, who among all men
  Was weakest, gained forthwith the strength of ten;
  And you for my sake instantly repealed
  Your prayer for death, that you might live and yield
  Me title to possess your spirit's ken.

  We may not ever that dear bliss renew;
  But what we found has entered into me--
  A change of motive and a fairer view,
  As though God whispered: "Henceforth thou shalt be
  Strong to fulfil thy soul; rise up and make
  Paths and a song in deserts for her sake!"




  XIII

  What barriers are these that bid me stand
  Baffled, amazed, and wrathful at the sign
  That threatens me for claiming what is mine!
  Have we not walked together hand in hand
  Down lanes of Devon; mused upon the sand
  Beside the Bay of Naples; drunk the wine
  Of famed Fiesole, where Shelley's line
  Thundered of freedom for Italia's land!

  Tradition built this guarded shadow-wall,
  And Shelley's song hath strength to sing it down.
  Come, brave the craven face funereal,
  Of Pharisees who weave of thorns a crown
  For him who has not faltered at the cross,
  But counts that gain which others reckon loss.




  XIV

  There needs must be misunderstandings, dear;
  For love is more than the much-written word,--
  Transcends it, as the home-flight of a bird
  Is distanced by the sun.  Let fall the fear;
  Let Joy and constant Certainty appear
  Armed with angelic swords of flame that gird
  Their thighs; for though the day with rain is blurred,
  Hark to the singing legions of the year!

  Always I find gain in lamented loss;
  Some treasure in the beaten path I tread;
  And that alone survives which bears a cross
  Branded by some hot trial that is dead.
  Last night as I was weeping someone cried:
  "Love cannot live save love be crucified!"




  XV

  Who is to blame that suddenly there fell
  Suspicion like a shadow on our souls?
  Love, who was once supreme, no more controls
  The harmonies.  Hark!  Can you hear the bell
  Across the valley of our tears that swell
  The brook called Cedron?  'Tis a flood that rolls
  Between us; while Doubt in his tower tolls
  Love's loss in our dear, shattered miracle.

  Was it a word that somehow clouded thought?
  Was it a flaw in substance of myself
  That proved two tendencies within me wrought--
  Plantagenet commingled with the Guelph?
  Ah, Love, if so, have patience, and behold
  How God blends His base metals with the gold.




  XVI

  All night my soul groped blindly in a dream
  Through mazes of a mighty corridor,
  Pillared between the stars; and my heart bore
  Its youthful sorrow, calling for the gleam
  Shed from your golden body like a beam
  Sent from the sun--a beauty nevermore
  Mine to behold, to have, to cherish, for
  Faith's rule was ended and Doubt stood supreme!

  All night my soul groped blindly till the dawn
  Woke on the world with matin song of birds
  And choral thunder of the wind upon
  The mountains; while the trees chanted the words
  Of an old litany that cried the grief
  Of lovers sundered through their lost belief!




  XVII

  Dear Love is fallen, fallen by my hand!
  Lost is my Eden, closed its golden gate;
  Winged seraphim, guarding the ways, await
  With swords of sudden flame me to withstand.
  I am that uncrowned king at whose command
  Earth and the sky obeyed, things small and great
  Bowed down to serve.  Oh, terrible the fate
  Of Adam, lonely in an alien land!

  Henceforth in bitterness I shall eat bread.
  Cursed for my sake, the fields, which day adorns
  No more with fruitage of the autumn spread,
  Shall bear me briars and abundant thorns;
  My glory, too, shall know the moth and rust,--
  Come quickly, Death, and be it: Dust to dust!




  XVIII

  And I have lost you, so the voices say--
  Voices that taunt, deride my silent pain;
  Voices that fall incessant, like the rain
  Throughout this dim and memory-haunted day!
  Dear Love, come back, resume your ancient sway
  For my strong pleading!  Or is it in vain
  That I beneath the stars all night have lain
  Prone upon earth, clay crying unto clay?

  No answer....  O thou God-vacated sky,
  Thunder upon my head the riving flame!
  There is no more for me to do but die!
  Or else for One, whom now I dare not name,
  At crossroads of the world a watch to keep
  With those who thither come, a while to weep.




  XIX

  Last night--or was it in the golden morn--
  Once more I dreamed that I alone did fare
  Forth into spirit-silences; and there
  I found you not; my star was set!  Forlorn,
  I sought the kindred company of worn
  And stricken souls--lost, sundered souls, who bear
  Old and avoided crosses with each care
  Woven together in their crowns of thorn.

  Gods of the patient, vain endeavour, these
  Claimed me and called me fellow, comrade, friend,
  And bade me join in their brave litanies;
  Because, though I had failed you, I dared bend
  Before you without hope of one reward,
  Save that in loving you my soul still soared.




  XX

  When singing first my smitten heart's lament,
  My thought was only turned upon my pain,
  And I was also querulous with Cain,
  Crying: "This thing that thou on me hast sent
  Is more than I can bear!"  But now content,
  Peace, and a quiet joy close the refrain
  Of passionate protesting with a strain
  Of dulcimers and silver trumpets blent:

  For though my shame be branded on my brow,
  And you in tears have driven me afar
  Because I faltered and forgot my vow,
  The night has still for me a single star
  That will not let me quite forget your eyes--
  You, and the dear dream-hours of Paradise!




  XXI

  Since we have sundered been by broken vow
  Of faith and trust--the fault was mine, O Heart--
  Much have I learned of Woman and the part
  She plays in shaking from the laden bow
  Life's blossoms; all that has been, and is now,
  And ever shall be: Science, Music, Art,
  Religion, these, as from a fountain start
  The rivers, have been hers--Man to endow.

  So must I, wounded in the valley, call
  To you, alone upon the morning-height:
  Praise and thanksgiving for the throw and fall!
  Vanquished by you, I shall rise up and fight
  Him armed with trident and the subtle mesh--
  Mankind's most ancient enemy, the Flesh!




  XXII

  Through what dark centuries have all your kind
  Upon the cross of Sex been crucified!
  Betrayed with kisses, smitten, then denied;
  Mocked in the place of judgment, and made blind
  To please the ruling of some priestly mind.
  Along the cobbled highroad straight and wide,
  They have gone bleeding, stumbling forth, and died
  That Man through them might his redemption find.

  This your rebuke has taught me.  Take my sword,
  And on your form divine my purple bear;
  While, kneeling at your feet, I pledge my word
  For King Love's sake in Woman's cause to fare
  Against Tradition's standard--church or state--
  And be my Sister's knight and laureate.




  XXIII

  O woman, now thy golden day's at morn!
  Dawn leaps and laughs upon the waiting hills,
  And sings thy freedom; for thy sorrow fills
  The cup at last; and all that thou hast borne
  Pleads thy release! ... Lord Christ, and crowned with thorn,
  Lay bare each sacred agony that spills
  Blood of the crucified pure hearts and wills,
  Brows, hands, and feet, the centuries have torn!

  This be the song that you have taught me sing,
  The strain you on my ready harp confer.
  Love seeks, as sought each Christ-adoring king,
  But to bow down ... Gold, frankincense, and myrrh,
  Are offered, not the body to possess,
  Neither command, but reverently to bless.




  XXIV

  I am all gladness like a little child!
  Grief's tragic figure of the veiled face
  Fades from my path, moving with measured pace
  Back from the splendour that breaks on the wild,
  High hills of sorrow, where the storm-clouds piled
  In drift of tears.  Lo! with what tender grace
  Joy holds the world again in her embrace
  Since you came forth, and looked on me, and smiled.

  Down in the valley shines a scimiter--
  A stream with autumn-gold deep damascened;
  And of the bards of day one loiterer
  Still lingers at his song, securely screened
  By foliage.  Dear, what miracle is this,
  Transforming void and chaos with a kiss!




  XXV

  There are so many things to say and do
  After that moment of our breathless bliss
  When separation ends upon a kiss,
  And I have passed the dreary spaces through.
  Words as of one long leashed by silence who
  Finds tongue at last, and, eager, would not miss
  Fulfilment of ten thousand fancies; this
  Must follow my first swift embrace of you.

  Secure within the palaces of thought,
  And guarded by my soul as with a sword,
  These fancies are; no curious eyes have caught
  Their gleam and glory: you alone, Adored,
  May enter the uplifted gates of gold
  To hear and see what never has been told.




  XXVI

  There is a little path among the trees
  That leads me to a quiet garden-plot;
  Thither I go for the content of thought,
  Dreams, and the quiet joy of reveries;
  And in this place my simple melodies
  Are sung with you beside me--fancies caught
  From the swift moment, as if one forgot
  The truth that cries: "Imaginings are these!"

  So have I with the magic of the mind
  Called and compelled you to my lonely heart;
  And never have you failed me.  Now I find
  No more the anguish of dead days; apart
  From you I faltered; at your side I gain
  Gladness from sorrow, and peace out of pain!




  XXVII

  Come down the woodland way a while with me.
  Be still, and know the spirit of this place
  That is my garden.  How each flower's face
  Turns to us o'er the serried rosemary
  Which guard my lilies from captivity!
  What slow unfolding of the harebell's grace!
  What quiet moving of majestic pace
  In the persistence of the shrub and tree!

  Made one with Nature, you, my Love, and I
  Are reconciled; for life to us is good,
  Who heard a Presence in the garden cry:
  "Delve earth, smite rock, plunge pool, and cleave the wood;
  There thou shalt find Me!" ... Dear, and we have found
  Peace through our loyal kinsmen of the ground.




  XXVIII

  Companion of the highroad, hail! all hail!
  Day on his shoulder flame of sunset bears,
  As he goes marching where the autumn flares
  A banner to the sky; in russet mail
  The trees are trooping hither to assail
  Twilight with spears; a rank of coward cares
  Creep up, as though to take us unawares,
  And find their stratagems of none avail.

  Accept the challenge of the royal hills,
  And dare adventure as we always dared!
  Life with red wine his golden chalice fills,
  And bids us drink to all who forward fared--
  Those lost, white armies of the host of dream;
  Those dauntless, singing pilgrims of the Gleam!




  XXIX

  Here have we made fair songs on psalteries
  Played tenderly by lovers in all lands.
  Sometimes the strings are smitten by harsh hands
  Of anger, doubt, and frowning jealousies;
  And sometimes are drawn forth sad threnodies
  For dear Love dead.  Let him who understands
  Man's way with Woman loose the mystic bands
  That bind my parabled heart-secrecies.

  In dreams again o'er leagues of purple sea
  My bark is borne to some far, fabled strand--
  Dear, how the world is young!  I seem to be
  One of famed Helen's lovers; her command
  Is in your eyes as you gaze forth from Troy--
  Immortal in your beauty and your joy.




  XXX

  My Lady of the Sonnets, one word more,
  The last; and, after, let the silence fall.
  Our year is ended, and things great and small
  Glow with its glory; could we live it o'er,
  What would we scatter from its precious store
  Of pearl, chalcedony, and topaz--all
  The many-jewelled moments that we call
  Love's treasure--we who had not loved before!

  Into that treasure plunge we both our hands,
  The while we laugh, and love, and live again.
  What rainbow-splendours and what golden sands
  Fall from our fingers! ... Now let come the pain
  And steal the shadow, moan the wintry sea;
  Locked is the casket: in your hands the key!




  ANTONY TO CLEOPATRA,

  AFTER ACTIUM



  I

  Day is all drenched with heavy rain of tears;
  The silences of joy are lost in sound
  Of sorrow; for I weep the wasted years--
  Wasted as wine poured out upon the ground
  From beakers brimming red for thirsty lips.
  Hushed are the trumpets that will call no more;
  Lonely and vast the spaces of the sea
  Where oft my mariners have flashed the oar
  And ploughed deep furrows with my scarlet ships--
  Eager and ready for the fight, and free.



  II

  Egypt!  My Egypt!  Actium, and thou
  The glory and the wonder of the world,
  Titles and place, all that I had are now
  Rolled up within a sphere of flame and hurled
  Into the gulfs of doom; quaking of earth,
  And thunder, as of gods deriding, fill
  The darkness and the void of those abysses:
  Yet in my anger and my anguish still
  Hath Love his ancient way, stirring to birth
  Dreams of the lost, dead days, thy lips and kisses.



  III

  Yea, I must love thee though I fall and die!
  Yea, hath my heart become for Love a lyre,
  And he hath syllabled thy name, and I
  Fill in each silence with a song; aspire
  To rival in my rapture Euterpe.
  For life or death, Elysium or Doom,
  We soar and sink together through the vast
  And unrevealed, dim reaches of the Room
  Whose walls are Night, and its wide portals three--
  The Future, and the Present, and the Past!



  IV

  Leave thou thy chamber and its spectral glooms;
  Rise like the morn upon the mountains; stand,
  My Rose of Dawn, among all lesser blooms,
  And with white lilies mate each slender hand,
  And let the sky grow glorious and blue
  To match thine eyes! ... Come, Queen, and my Adored,
  Clothed in thy splendour as I saw thee first!
  Oh, come, ere I thwart Caesar on my sword,
  And with my body pay him what is due!
  Quench with thy lips on mine, O Heart, love's thirst.



  V

  Why dost thou linger, thou the miracle
  Among all marvels?  Hither call the birds;
  The faint, far song of rivers; silver bell
  And pause of twilight, when the crooning words
  Of mothers bending over babes awake
  Echoes of whispers through the reeds and grass:
  Let these and other voices vie with thine,
  And lo! the god who vanquished Marsyas
  Yields thee his harp, and one by one forsake
  The nymphs their singing for thy voice divine.



  VI

  O beauty, beauty that can never die!
  O music, music meeting on thy mouth!
  Challenge the wings of morning, bid them fly
  Over the earth, east, west, north, and south,
  To find one other woman fair as thou;
  One other woman in whom harmonies
  Rise up like fountains singing in the sun.
  Supernal Wonder! thou art more than these
  Frail jars of perfumed balsams from the bough
  Of Life's tree, emptied ere the day be done.



  VII

  Since thou wast born, the dreamy lotus blows
  Its blossomed buds no more in vales of ease;
  Mnemosyne revives where Lethe flows
  Past sad, lost souls; for he who beauty sees,
  That moment lives forever, and the sight
  Shatters the crystal chalices of dream;
  While phantom faces form, and legions wan
  And ghostly gather from the dark to stream
  Out through the wide, star-studded gates of night,
  Claiming the open portals of the dawn!



  VIII

  Behold the chaff is beaten from the wheat:
  Dost thou not hear the flails upon the floor?
  Within the presses purple-stained feet
  Bruise joy from out the grape, and o'er and o'er
  The tale of Bacchus and the vine is told.
  Laughter and dance and song are everywhere.
  Shall we who live and love be then denied
  The harvest?  Nay; the fields are not all bare;
  Still have they fragrant autumn gourds of gold;
  The trees have yet their majesty and pride.



  IX

  Listen and hear Rome roaring from afar!
  Oh, hearken to the tumult of the hordes
  Of Caesar, drunk with the red wine of war!
  Blow trumpets!  Clang, O brazen shields and swords,
  Your thunder to the steady march of men!
  And sing, O purple pennons that unfold
  Beneath the bronze-tipped menace of the spears!
  The gods!  The gods are gleaming on the gold,
  Wide-winged, great eagles of the Tiber, when
  The standard of the Emperor appears!



  X

  Come, Cleopatra, from thy prison break,
  And I will gather now my waiting band--
  My cohorts; yea, I will rise up and shake
  Over Octavius a mighty hand;
  Yea, I--  What sayest thou?  The Queen is dead?
  O Joy of gods and men! thou couldst not die--
  Never to Cleopatra could come death!
  There, lad! hold thou my sword, and let me fly
  On wings of love to realms unvisited
  Where Cleopatra, waiting, wandereth!




  PAUL TO TIMOTHY

  The long day ends at last, O Timothy,
  And I, Paul, prisoner of Jesus Christ,
  Wait for the dark.

                Upon my window-ledge
  A sparrow twitters, pecks at the iron bars
  As though to set me free this night of Rome.
  A lad is singing somewhere in the street;
  His voice, careless and free, recalls Cilicia--
  Tarsus, my city, where the Cydnus flows--
  Recalls those first, far days when in my heart
  No pain had found a place, and I was Saul--
  Named for the Son of Kish--A Benjamite.

  How swiftly Age turns back the gate of Time,
  And with what eager pace pursues the path
  Trod by the feet of Childhood!  I can see
  The scarlet-prowed Phenician ships, triremes
  Down from the Tiber, and Egyptian barges,
  Abundant fruitage of the date and palm,
  Tall, Bacchic amphora, and perfumed bales
  Of Tyrian purple, stand along the quay;
  And I can hear the sailors and their songs,
  The strange, brown mariners of many seas,
  With arms like anchor-cables in their strength:
  Oh, then was I a wanderer of earth,
  And dreamed of brave adventure in far lands!

  They say the Hebrew burning in my blood
  Closed all life's doors, save one, upon the world;
  That I, the Pharisee of Pharisees,
  Contemned the beauty and the song of Greece!
  How little do they know, my Timothy,
  My dear disciple, and my bosom friend,
  Heart, soul, feet, hands, eyes, ears, and lips of Paul,
  How little do they know!
                  To-morrow morn
  Without the city wall I shall kneel down
  Before the Roman sword and die!

                  O Death,
  Where is thy sting?  O Grave....
                  The lad still sings!
  Would thou could hear his song: Anacreon?
  Nay; Sappho!  He?  Athenian, I think.
  'Tis such a voice as that which Eunice heard--
  Son of the Faith once and for all delivered--
  Oft in the streets of Lystra's eventide,
  Telling of Timothy returning home,
  Or ever thou didst follow Christ and Paul.
  Why doth he sing, and hale me back to life
  Who on the morn must die?  And Sappho's song!
  Flee from this wicked world ordained to death!
  The wrath of God is kindled in the sky,
  And Babylon shall be consumed in smoke!

  How all the gold has gone from out the west:
  'Tis crimson now, and on the Forum falls
  A menace as of blood!
                  O Babylon,
  The cup of thine iniquity is full,
  And runneth over even to the ground!

  Still doth he sing; and always Sappho's song!
  O Greece, the tongue of Homer and of Paul
  Is in that song!  Behold, the sound thereof
  Goes forth unto the ends of all the world;
  And neither speech nor language shall prevail
  Upon its magic and its mastery!

  How little do they know, son Timothy,
  Of Paul, the prisoner of Jesus Christ.
  A Pharisee?  Yea, straitest of that sect.
  Learned in the law?  Aye, from Gamaliel.
  And persecutor of the Church of God?
  Saul who consented unto Stephen's death!
  Ah, woe is me!  Yet little do they know,
  Who know not this: the law of sin and death
  Is done away in Christ, by Whom all things
  Are sanctified; and neither Jew nor Greek,
  And neither bond nor free, exist in Him
  Who is the First Begotten Son of God,
  The Keystone of life's slow-ascending arch,
  And Who completeth all things in Himself.

  Nathless, I found this truth not easily:
  In those far boyhood days beside the Cydnus,
  Watching the sailors and the ships, I felt
  Shame of my passion for the many tones
  And tinctures of the coloured sails and prows,
  Shame at the tumult in my heart at songs
  Sung by the boatmen; for the law is hard,
  And presseth with a heavy hand upon
  Youth and the innocent delights of youth.

  Young Rabbi Saul the Thunderer, and Saul
  Consenting unto Stephen's death, are dead;
  Slain by the piercing of the Cross of Christ!
  Christ of the lilies--He Who loved the fields,
  And heard the children in the market place
  Complaining at the unresponsive feet,
  And ears deaf to their piping and sweet song.

  Doth He know my lad singing in the street--
  My young Athenian, whose voice for Paul
  Breathes _Ave atque Vale_ on the world?

  Christ is not quickly learned; and gradual
  Is the progression of a soul to Him.
  Hard strove I through the barriers of thought,
  And one by one dissolved the old ideas
  That misted o'er the mountains of desire,
  Before I found that all things beautiful,
  Like lilies of the open field, are spread
  Beneath the benediction of His love.

  Write this again: _There is no bond nor free!_
  This is the Faith; and this is Jesus Christ,
  The Saviour of the world!
                  Think what it means,
  O Timothy, this Faith thou hast received
  To give and guard at Ephesus.  Let fall
  Distinctions from henceforth, and keep in one
  The diverse aspirations of mankind.
  Jerusalem and Alexandria,
  Rome, Athens, Corinth and Iconium,
  Moses and Socrates, Plato and Paul,
  Isaiah, Homer, and Euripides,
  Bezaleel and thine own Phidias,
  David and Sappho--all are in His heart!

  Thou wilt remember what I lately wrote--
  The feet of him who bears that letter speed,
  As sped Pheidippides--"All inspired Scripture
  Is given of God;" for nothing beautiful
  Lives but by breathing of the Holy Ghost.

  Force is of Satan; Art the child of God;
  And they, who like this foredoomed Babylon
  Build citadels cemented by men's blood,
  Are numbered with the damned!

                  Do I not know?
  Am I not Paul, the prisoner of Christ?

  Creators of sweet sounds and lovely forms
  Care not for Babylon; they seek the hills,
  And know God in the thunders of the seas;
  They find Him where pomegranate and the pine
  Are passionate with pleading of all souls
  That are with dross of earth unsatisfied.
  This have I learned from the Athenian
  Who sings the song of Sappho unto Paul.

  Gone are the gold and scarlet from the west;
  Night falls; and Rome is like the Galaxy--
  Indefinite with stars.  A myriad
  Of tiny flames are flaring on the hills;
  And in those evening fires the souls of men
  Are manifested--souls that upward burn
  In emulation of the beautiful:
  For the invisible, pure things of Him
  From the creation of the world are seen
  And understood by what is made.  One God,
  One Law, one Hope, one Faith, and one Desire,
  Are in the impulse of creative hands,
  And on the lips that sing--as sings the lad
  To Paul the prisoner, great Sappho's song!




  DIVES IN TORMENT

  Out of the gulf of a grief that is flame,
  Spent with the storm of an aeon of tears,
  Call I at last the Ineffable Name--
  Thou Who art throned o'er the flood of the years

  Dim are the depths of the City of Dis
  Where Thou hast plunged me; an infinite pain
  Harries me on to its lowest abyss,
  Beats on my head in a torment of rain.

  Shapes that are dreadful with uttermost hate
  Follow me down, and a Voice follows after:
  Stay! thou dost flee from the furies of Fate!
  Hell trembles with their demoniac laughter.

  Why didst Thou form me so helpless and frail
  Out of the clod and allied to the star?
  Lured by the vision and fashioned to fail,
  Is it my fault I have fallen so far?

  Why in my breast didst Thou kindle desire,
  Love for the lips of a woman divine?
  Why did I swoon at the sound of the lyre,
  Dance and grow wild in the wonder of wine?

  God, how I hate Thee enthroned in the sky;
  Cruel Omnipotence torturing me!
  Clenched are these manacled hands that defy
  Hosts of the seraphim singing to Thee!

  Paused One a moment and played on a harp,
  Joyous and free in the quest of his star:
  Passed and was gone, in despair of the sharp
  Pain that smote me like a swift scimetar--

  Pain that was memory stirred by his song--
  Breath of the lily and breath of the rose,
  Myrrh on the fingers of maidens that throng
  Home from the pools when the day is at close:

  Hark! how they sing as they carry the jars
  High on the shoulder: "Home, home from the well!
  Gold on the dates is the kiss of the stars,
  Soft as the kiss of betrothal that fell

  Sweet on the lips when my lover claimed me
  Caught in the vineyard, delayed by the moon
  Orbed in the west, which I tarried to see:--
  Night hath a charm that is not in the noon."

  Flight of the Seraph, thou bringest me this--
  Love and the laughter of maidens who tell
  Life is revealed in the breath of a kiss;
  Softly they sing it: "Home, home from the well!"

  Flight of the Seraph, delay, oh, delay!
  Spread wide those pinions of purple and gold;
  Strike on the strings, O my Harpist, and play!
  Sing me that song that they anthemed of old,

  When from the dust all my members were made,
  When o'er the cradle a mother looked down,
  Saw me, her first-born, and clasped me and prayed
  God to bequeath me a sceptre and crown!

  Sing till Jehovah is shamed by that prayer--
  False to the covenant sealed by her pain,
  He Who hath damned what she suckled with care--
  Sing back the years, and her love is again!

  Gone is the Seraph!  O God! and O God!
  Thou only art left, Thou only, and I--
  Wouldst have my pity?  I who am a clod
  Give that much, Torturer, throned in the sky.

  Man is unconquered, Jehovah hath failed;
  Love and not Hate is the end of the law!
  Lonely is He, and His heart is assailed
  By the swift arrow He ventured to draw--

  Head to the bow and the haft to the cord--
  Arrow called "Judgment" and "Rod of His Might,"
  Barbed with the vengeance and wrath of the Lord,
  Winged with the flame of an infinite Right!

  Yea, Thou hast pity! and Man will forgive--
  Man will forgive and Thine anger forget--
  Man who hath learned in the dying, to live!
  Open the books, for the judgment is set:

  Was I to blame that Lazarus lurked
  Loathsome with sores at the banqueting hall,
  Vile in return for the labour he shirked,
  Begging for crumbs when the world was his all?

  "The race to the swift," the proverb hath said;
  Fleet-footed I strove and won to the goal,
  Got me a palace, anointed my head,
  Unctioned my body and pleasured my soul--

  Pleasured my soul that is tortured in hell!
  Unctioned my body that crumbles to dust!
  Got me a palace whose pinnacles fell!
  Gone are the garments to moth and to rust!

  Dim are the depths of the gulf of my pain!
  Memory burns! ... The fine linen! ... The feast!
  Beautiful faces of souls I have slain!
  Blood of the threatening prophet and priest!

        *      *      *      *      *

  Lazarus! thou like a dream in the night
  Ere one awaketh to find that the day
  Leaps on the hills in the joy of his might,
  Sings till the shadows are driven away!

  Lazarus! thou like a god in his star
  Speeding through space, and whose chariot wheels
  Thunder on pavements of crystal, and jar
  Hell's deep foundations!  My spirit appeals,

  Clamours and cries in protest of its pain,
  Rages and rails at the wreck and the wrong
  Done by Jehovah!  Revenge is in vain;
  Hate hurls at Hate with a hate that is strong!

  Lazarus, why art thou come unto me?
  Stand like a star on a mountain of morn,
  Spirit redeemed by Jehovah's decree,
  And drink to the dregs of my chalice of scorn.

  Bitter the chalice of Dives' disgrace!
  Shudderest thou at the purple stained brim!
  Drink! or I dash the cup full in thy face--
  Drink! and then back to hosannah and hymn!

  Fade from my sight! and thy glory withdraw
  Over the gulf to dim islands of palm,
  Where the Redeemed by the blood of the law
  Sing to the Lord on their harps, with a psalm!

  Taunt me not, Lazarus, thou, and thy smile!
  Pity or scorn I regard not!  Away!
  Is Paradise lonely that thou must beguile
  Hell with thy holiness!  What does thou say?

  Nay, thou are silent; why wilt thou not speak?
  This is the torment: that never a word,
  Touch of a hand, or of lips on my cheek
  Cloud of Gehenna's death-stillness hath stirred.

  Think of it, Lazarus!  Thou wast alone;
  Down by the gate of my palace didst call:
  "Give of thy bread!" and I gave thee a stone!
  Lazarus!  Lazarus!  I would give all--

  I would give all, for I know thou didst crave
  Love, only love, who had no one to love;
  Even as I who have learned in the grave
  What I had missed in the earth-life above.

  Life is in loving: and lonely is he
  Who hath not found in the flower and fern,
  Song of the bird and the hum of the bee,
  Voice and a prayer as of spirits that yearn

  Upward forever to fellowship; strive
  Bravely for place in the legions of light;
  Dauntless of death in the tempest they thrive,
  Laugh and are glad of the foe and the fight.

  This was my failure, who thought that the feast
  Rivalled the rapture of bird on the wing;
  Rivalled the lily all robed like a priest;
  Smoke of the pollen when rose-censers swing.

  This was my folly, who gave for a gown--
  Purple and gold, and a bracelet and rings,
  Shouts in the streets as I rode through the town--
  Life in the love of the kinship of things.

  Lazarus!  Lazarus!  This is my thirst,
  Fever from flame of the love I have missed;
  Ache of the heart for the friends I have cursed;
  Longing for lips that I never have kissed!

  Hell is for him who hath never found God
  Hid in the bramble that burns by the way;
  Findeth Him not in the stone and the clod;
  Heareth Him not at the cool of the day.

  Hell is for him who hath never found Man!
  God and my Brother, I failing to find,
  Failed to find me; so my days were a span
  Void of the triumph of Spirit and Mind.

  Once, I recall, at the table I leaned
  Back on the breast of Pomona, my slave,
  Saw through the window, with lattice-work screened,
  Thee in thy rags, and I laughed! then grew grave:

  Up the white street came a Man with a face
  Sad with the woe and the pain of the world;
  Moving with kingliness, ease, and a grace;
  Crowned with wine-coloured hair wavy and curled

  Over broad shoulders, so broad that I vowed
  Here was Messias--the Samson--the King!
  Leaped from the table and joined with the crowd;
  Offered my purple, my bracelet, my ring!

  Then through the clamour and dust of the street
  Words of rebuke were directed to me:
  "Lift thou up Lazarus; give him a seat
  High among all who are feasting with thee."

  Lift up the beggar!  I laughed at Him there--
  "Thou and Thy tattered ones take to the street--
  I to the palace ... Begone! ... And beware!
  Caiaphas comes, and the Sanhedrin meet!

  "Go! or I hale Thee to judgment of them;
  Go! or Thy God shall avail Thee in vain;
  Thou art of Japheth, and I am of Shem
  Lazarus, outcast and cursed with Cain!

  "Needs must there be a division of men;
  Hewer of wood is the Gibeonite,
  Cutter of stone in the quarries, and then
  Slave to the Covenant-Israelite."

  "Nay, all are equal and loved of the Lord,"
  Whispered the Stranger.  The listening street,
  Filled with the murmur of those who adored,
  Hushed at the sound of His voice that was sweet,

  Stirring my heart as a harp in the hall,
  Silent for ages, is stirred by the wind
  Breathed through the arras; and memories call
  Over the summits of spirit and mind.

  Yea, for a moment I struggled with Love;
  Yearned to embrace thee and pour on thy hair
  Oil of anointing, and place thee above
  All of the guests who were gathering there--

  There in my palace of pleasure and ease,
  Builded by Herod, and bought with my gold,
  Portaled and curtained with soft tapestries
  Woven at looms of the Orient, sold

  Down in Damascus.  A palm in the sands,
  That was my palace; a palm with a soul
  Breathing of beauty when each leaf expands
  Out to the desert which brims like a bowl--

  Brims like a bowl of Falernian wine
  Turned to the sun!  O my palace and hall!
  O sound of the psaltery under the vine
  Grown in the garden!  O footsteps that fall

  Soft as the leaves in a pomegranate grove,
  Soft on the pavement of beryl and pearl
  Under the moon when my Miriam strove,
  Laughing, to dance down the Syrian girl!

  These thrust between my compassion and thee--
  Beauty that mocked like a maid from her bower--
  Beauty that looked through the lattice at me;
  Sighed: "I have tarried, my Love, for this hour!"

  Then to the palace all flaming I went,
  Flaming with love for Pomona, my pride.
  Back like a bow her dear body I bent,
  Kissed her and placed her in joy at my side;

  Crowned her with myrtle, proclaimed her a queen;
  Drank to her eyes and her lips and her hair;
  Clasped on her throat of an ivory sheen
  Gems of an order kings only might wear.

  Oh, how she sparkled and gleamed like a sword!
  Oh, how the cymbals and tabours did sound!
  Oh, my Pomona, my loved and adored--
  Dust of the body is dust of the ground!

        *      *      *      *      *

  For I forgot Him, and bought with my gold
  Houses and lands.  Yea, I sought far and wide
  Pleasure and ease.  Then one day I was old....
  Darkness came over the noon ... and I died!

  Dead and companioned in pomp to the grave!
  Dead and forgotten in less than a day
  Save by Pomona, my mistress and slave
  Sold unto Herod! ... Oh, she had a way,

  Turn of the head and glance of the eye!
  Touch of the hand and a fall of the feet!
  Voice that was coo of the dove and a cry
  Heard in the night when the seraphim meet!

  Sometimes I fancy Gehenna's abyss
  Gleams with a light that is love; and I feel
  Lips on my lips in the tenderest kiss,
  Making hell heaven: as though the appeal

  Sent from my soul to Pomona had gained
  Heart and the whole of her throned on a star,
  Where for an son of bliss she hath reigned
  Lonely for Dives so lost and afar!

  Lazarus!  Nearer!  The light on thy face
  Shines through the dark!  Oh, what glory is thine!
  Nay, not too near lest thou see my disgrace
  Naked! behold bruised the image divine!

  Lazarus!  Pity!  Pursue not my soul
  Down the last gulf!  I am fearful of thee--
  Not of Jehovah, Whose thunders may roll
  Over my head--Have thou pity on me!

  This have I learned in the torment of hell:
  Man is the judge of the soul that hath sin;
  Man must raise man from the depths where he fell,
  Hurled by the hand of his passion.  Begin,

  Lazarus, Lord of the light and the dark;
  Stand on the cloud that hath bridged the abyss,
  Judging my cause; for my spirit is stark
  Under thy glance in abandon of bliss!

  Yea, there is joy in the judgment; a peace
  I have not known in an aeon of pain;
  Joy in the thought that thy love will not cease
  Till it hath cleansed all my spirit from stain.

  Therefore I hail thee, O Lazarus! cry:
  "Hail to the love that restoreth the years
  The locusts have eaten!  Search me and try
  The thought of my heart and the tale of my tears!"

  Try me and prove me; for I am undone,
  Conquered by love of a love that hath sought
  Me unto hell!  Thou hast triumphed and won,
  Lazarus, who for my spirit hath fought.

  Yield I the trophies of battle; lay down
  All of the pride and the hatred of heart;
  Weeping I give thee my sceptre and crown;
  Nothing I claim; not a tithe, not a part!

        *      *      *      *      *

  Lazarus, art thou the same that I saw
  Begging for crumbs?  Thou hast changed, thou hast changed!
  Through what dominions of wonder and awe,
  Beauty and joy, hast thou ranged, hast thou ranged?

  Kingly and glorious, mantled with flame,
  Lo! in thyself the Messias I see.
  Lazarus, thou and the Christ art the same,
  Thou art the Christ and the Master of me--

  Thou art Messias! ... And this Paradise! ...
  There is Pomona! ... There Mother who gave
  Breast to her babe! ... From Gehenna I rise
  Cleansed by a love that is mighty to save!

  Light, and the sound of a song that is love!
  Light, and the freedom of spirit to soar!
  Light, and Messias enthroned above
  High where the seraphim bow and adore!




  SONNETS AND SONGS



  FELLOW CRAFTSMEN

  As in some workshop where the hammers ring
  And bare-armed artizans toil, blow on blow,
  To make each, crude, imperfect member grow
  To the completed plan, rise thou, and fling
  Aside all doubt and languor; strive to bring
  The deed up to its best; in gladness go
  Undaunted; have full confidence; and know
  Thou and thy God can perfect everything!

  Throughout the busy day He works with us
  And knows that we are tired; He hears and feels
  The grind of every cog, the plaint, the fuss,
  The purr of pinions in the thousand wheels
  That whir forever down the endless walls,
  Where, as we toil, His light perpetual falls.




  POSCA

  The light within the sky was growing dim.
  Death-white, a thorn-crowned face looked from a cross
  And watched with dying eyes the soldiers toss
  Dice for the seamless robe they stripped from Him;
  And of that number there was one who first
  Was touched with pity for Him hanging there,
  And ran a sponge of vinegar to bear,
  When in His anguish Jesus said: "I thirst!"

  O nameless soldier of the long ago,
  Yours was the doing of a deathless deed;
  Who braved the people passing to and fro,
  And gave to Christ the sponge upon a reed
  The while His own disciples standing near,
  Dismayed, moved not to help Him in their fear.




  REINCARNATION

  I saw three souls before a jasper throne
  That stood, star-canopied, beyond the world
  Where angels knelt before a Presence--furled
  White wings and waited.  In vast undertone
  A Voice said: "Choose!"  And instantly were shown
  Three chalices: one like a lily curled
  About a stem of gold; one was empearled
  In silver; one was carved from common stone.

  I saw three souls sink swiftly back to earth;
  I heard three children wailing in the night;
  I met three men of diverse rank and birth:
  A king; a priest; a slave whose wretched plight
  Moved me to pity, till mine ancient dream
  Recalled the proverb: "Things are not what they seem!"




  JACOB'S DREAM

  Lonely and worn by day's dull toil and heat,
  Life lay before me stark, and dead, and drear;
  Night had engulfed the desert, and a fear
  Was on me as of slow, resistless feet
  Of foes invisible, from whom retreat
  Denied me respite!  I knew the moment near--
  Jehovah's hand uplifted, and His spear
  Down-glancing through the dark my heart to meet;

  And as I crouched to take the stroke that fell
  Swift from the sky, a cloud of cherubim
  Burst on my vision with a mighty song
  That filled the wilderness, as though a bell
  Chimed from afar.  Then someone said: "Be strong,
  Son of the Highest!  Find thyself in Him!"




  KEATS

  To sing, as thou didst in full throated ease,
  Sweeter than thine oft-envied nightingale,
  And with thy singing waken hill and dale
  Until the many harpstrings of the trees
  Murmured in strange and old antiphonies;
  To wander at thy will into the vale
  Where sleeps Endymion, and tell the tale
  Of Dian's nymphs or Pan's dear dryades:

  Was it, in sooth, too great a price to pay--
  The heart-ache and the passion and the tears
  With which God mixed for thee life's cup of gold?
  Against the sadness of thy lot I hold
  The joy of him who sees and feels and hears
  Earth's splendour, fulness, music, night and day.




  A POET'S PRAYER

  Give me pause and time for dreaming;
  Send me to some quiet place
  Where the winding water, gleaming,
  Holds a glass before my face.

  Here within the grind and clamour
  I forget what I have known;
  Life and love have lost their glamour,
  And my heart is turned to stone.

  Shrub and bird and beast are mingled
  With a clumsy dream of man;
  Lost the ancient art that singled
  Hoof and brow of brooding Pan!

  Strike the rock, release the river,
  Bid it through the desert go;
  Let its shallows dance and quiver,
  And its flood majestic flow;

  Till again the rushing rapture
  Of the poet's soul is mine,
  With its swift pursuit to capture
  Visions that are all divine.




  WHAT IS RELIGION?

  What is Religion?--Word of many creeds
  Blared forth in streets by solemn Pharisee,
  And piped in doleful tones on scrannel reeds,
  Untouched by love or tender sympathy
  That moves the soldier where the Master bleeds?

  What is Religion?--Lofty minster-spires
  And rich mosaics on the chancel wall;
  Deep organ-tones, and silver-throated choirs
  Whose golden Glorias night and morning fall,
  With sanctus-bell and flares of altar-fires?

  What is Religion?  Note of bird on bough;
  The sunlight falling o'er the waving grass;
  A child's clear gaze and unashamed brow;
  The little deeds that, living, come and pass
  And are forgot: Religion is, I trow.

  What is Religion?  Why, who anywhere
  Stoops down to touch the dusty wayside-flower,
  And then as tenderly the face of care;
  Who thus in love lives on from hour to hour
  Has caught the secret, and has mastered prayer.




  A SONG OF SPRING

  Little laughter of the grass;
  Clapping of soft, tiny hands;
  Fleeting forms that come and pass
  In relays of fairy bands;
  And the birds upon the wing--
  Tell the secret!  It is Spring!

  In the woods the dryades
  Hear the sounding pipes of Pan,
  Leave their temples of the trees
  And return to haunts of man;
  This the song they sweetly sing--
  Ave!  Ave!  It is Spring!

  Domed with sapphire is the sky;
  Haze of opal hath the hills;
  Brown the brooks that rushing by
  Call to their companion rills;
  These their joyous welcome bring--
  Hail!  All hail!  For it is Spring!




  A FALLEN ANGEL

  Out of the light,
  Into the night,
  God, I am falling!
  Fashioned of flame,
  Spent with my shame,
  God, I am calling!

  All through the day
  Sin has had sway--
  Lost is the token;
  Evening brings
  Hurt of my wings,
  Blackened and broken.

  Child of a star,
  Thine avatar,
  Drunk from the revel;
  Who am I, God,--
  Spirit or clod,
  Angel or devil?

  Yet Thou hast made
  Me Thy sword-blade--
  Sheathed, that its brightness
  Flash up to win,
  When the last sin
  Burns into whiteness.

  Hand that can smite,
  Hold the hilt tight,
  Draw, and strike faster!
  Strike with me, Lord!
  My soul Thy sword,
  And Thou its Master.

  Strike! till the day
  Grow from the gray
  Gloom of the peril;
  And in the skies
  Dream-domes arise--
  Jacinth and beryl!




  A LITANY

  For what we to ourselves have done,
  We who are miracles divine,
  Flares from a universal sun,
  Or lees from an Olympian wine;
  For the abuse of laughter,
  And tears that follow after;
  For love betrayed, and hope delayed:
  Cry we mercy, God!

  For what we to ourselves have said:
  "Thou hast much goods; peace, O my Soul,
  Nor fret if beggars cry for bread,
  And show their rags in hope of dole.
  God giveth thee much pleasure,
  Want is the poor man's measure!"
  For all of these dark heresies:
  Cry we mercy, God!

  For what we on ourselves have wrought--
  Wild havoc with the weird, grotesque,
  Abortive images of thought,
  Making of beauty the burlesque;
  For much pretence in praying;
  And little heart at playing;
  For smothered smiles and countless guiles:
  Cry we mercy, God!

  For casting dice where Jesus bleeds
  Upon His cross, naked, alone;
  Unheedful in the noise of creeds
  Of Him and His last dying moan;
  For Rahab robed in scarlet,
  Cursed with the title, "Harlot,"
  By the decrees of Pharisees:
  Cry we mercy, God!

  For the delight of out-of-doors
  Missed in our minsters made of stone,
  Unmindful that pure incense pours
  To Thee from wild rose-petals blown
  Down forest-aisles; that altar fires
  Burn in the sunset on the hills,
  And from the pine-wood's ancient spires
  The varied chime of evening fills
  All hearts with rapture; for the light
  Lost on white lilies, and the blue
  Of heaven wasted, the dear night
  With her gold stars and silver dew
  Neglected.  Oh, for what we fail
  To find from life so rich and fair--
  The rain, the snow, the sleet, the hail,
  Summer, and blossom-breathing air;
  For every useless sorrow,
  And fears for the to-morrow,
  Not knowing Thee, great Deity:
  Cry we mercy, God!




  THE GREAT COMRADE

  I hear Thy voice within the world,
  Thy thunder from the heaven hurled;

  I lean and listen to the trees
  Chanting Thine age-long litanies.

  Over white leagues of ice and snow,
  Through drift and storm I watch Thee go;

  Upon the sea's sad surge behold
  Marks of Thy journeyings manifold.

  Where lilies lowly bow the head
  Some marvel of Thyself is shed;

  Earth's joyous, wild, and wandering things
  Are hints of Thy rememberings.

  From mist of stars upward to man,
  Lord, all Thy ways I dimly scan.

        *      *      *      *      *

  To what divine and unguessed goals,
  Comrade, invitest Thou all souls!




  A REVERY

  The green sea surges up to land;
  I feel its salt breath on my cheek;
  In deep-throated tones it seems to speak
  As it falls thundering, seething on the sand.

  The wild gulls circling sweep and cry;
  A thin mist veils the crimson west;
  The great, red sun sinks swiftly down to rest;
  A dying flame crawls flickering up the sky.

  Deep darkness, and the sullen boom
  Of sea receding into dark;
  I hear a faint, "Hoy, heave hoy!"  I mark
  A vessel's lights that pierce the gloom.

        *      *      *      *      *

  Night! and remoteness of the stars;
  Vast, unrevealed infinitude
  Of ocean, and the interlude
  Of sobbing from the sandy bars!




  GOOD-BYE

  Dear, and dark, and tall
  Lady of my heart,
  Summer roses fall
  Now that we must part!

  What has happened, dear?
  All the flowers are dead!
  Since you are not near,
  Laughter, too, is fled.

  All the tender blue
  Turned to tearful gray,
  When I said to you,
  "Good-bye," and went away!




  DAVID'S SONG TO MICHAL

  From "The Witch of Endor"

  O Heart, dear Heart, Heart of the wild, red rose!
  Hid in the loveliest flower that grows;
  Hands of the seraphim scatter, let fall
  Myrrh from thy leaves in the garden of Saul.

  O Heart, dear Heart, Heart of the wild, red rose!
  Breath from the lips of the cherubim blows
  Soft on thy petals; they whisper and call,
  Laugh and are glad in the garden of Saul.

  O Heart, dear Heart, Heart of the wild, red rose!
  Flame from the gold of the Mercy Seat glows,
  Shines like a star on my love's festival;
  Michal is mine in the garden of Saul!




  DAVID BEFORE SAUL

  From "The Witch of Endor"

  Down by the stream of the waters
  Came the king; and his face was sad,
  Sad with a grief beyond belief,
  For a bitter grief he had:
  To be a king means sorrowing--
  A king may not be glad.

  Down by the stream of the waters
  Came the king, and alone at night;
  His robe was torn, a crown of thorn
  Was on his brow so white:
  They placed it there, who did not care
  His eyes with tears were bright.

  Down by the stream of the waters,
  Where it flows through the valley of death,
  He came, the king, all sorrowing;
  A sob was in his breath:
  They broke his heart, who stood apart--
  The crowd that wondereth.




  A VILLANELLE OF FATE

  When the day of life is done,
  And the tools are laid aside,
  We shall slumber one by one.

  Norns their threads of fate have spun
  Lust and virtue, grace and pride--
  When the day of life is done.

  All that we have here begun
  Must be scattered far and wide;
  We shall slumber one by one.

  Gone the folly and the fun,
  Spilled the wine and spent the tide,
  When the day of life is done.

  By the marge of Acheron
  Shall dear dreams be then denied,
  When we slumber one by one?

        *      *      *      *      *

  Build your tower to the sun!
  Surely death may be defied.
  When the day of life is done,
  Shall we slumber one by one?




  ONE WOMAN

  O light that overflows,
  O wind that wildly blows,
  O sweet and tender grace,
  All in One Woman's face!

  O love that is like fire,
  O pain that is desire,
  O melodies that start,
  All in One Woman's heart!











End of Project Gutenberg's His Lady of the Sonnets, by Robert W. Norwood

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HIS LADY OF THE SONNETS ***

***** This file should be named 36915.txt or 36915.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/9/1/36915/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
