The Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch, or The London Charivari, Vol. 150,
April 19, 1916, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Punch, or The London Charivari, Vol. 150, April 19, 1916

Author: Various

Release Date: August 5, 2011 [EBook #36981]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH, CHARIVARI, APR 19, 1916 ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, David Garcia and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net











PUNCH,

OR THE LONDON CHARIVARI.

VOL. 150.

APRIL 19, 1916.


[Illustration: _Overworked and exasperated Colonel (who has told Adjutant
to answer the telephone)._ "WELL, WHAT THE BLAZES DO THEY WANT?"

_Adjutant._ "IT'S THE C.O. OF THE BLANKSHIRES, SIR; WANTS YOU TO REPEAT
THE FUNNY STORY YOU TOLD HIM LAST NIGHT AT MESS."]

       *       *       *       *       *




CHARIVARIA.


The recent Zeppelin raids have not been without their advantages. In a
spirit of emulation an ambitious hen at Acton has laid an egg weighing
5-1/4 oz.

       * * *

The opponents of Colonel ROOSEVELT regard the advice given in the title
of his new book, _Fear God and take your own part_, to be unusually
moderate as coming from one who, whatever he may have said to the contrary,
is very generally suspected of being prepared to take the part that is
at present being played by President WILSON.

       * * *

At a meeting of the "No-Conscription Fellowship" last week, Mr. PHILIP
SNOWDEN referred to the Conscientious Objectors as the "Salt of the
Earth." Perhaps, but we don't care to have them rubbed into us.

       * * *

Germany has addressed a Note to the United States explaining that the
_Sussex_ could not possibly have been torpedoed for the reason that the
submarine commander who sank the vessel had no difficulty in drawing
a picture of her which closely resembled a totally different ship.

       * * *

It is announced that the care of the great vine at Hampton Court has been
taken over by the Office of Works from the Board of Green Cloth. It is
rumoured that the latter body, which has been of late somewhat lost sight
of, is to be entrusted with the general supervision of our aerial forces.

       * * *

So successful have been the electrically-heated footwarmers supplied
to the police of Pittsburg, Pa, that the State Department is said to
be contemplating their adoption.

       * * *

For shouting "The Zepps are coming!" a Grimsby girl has been fined
L1. It was urged in defence that the girl suffered from hallucinations,
one of which was that she was a daily newspaper proprietor.

       * * *

While announcing in Parliament last week that the Zoo would have to
pay the Amusement Tax the CHANCELLOR promised to "keep an open mind in
regard to any representations that might be made on the subject." Mr.
MCKENNA, we understand, has since received a strong representation from
the hippopotamus, protesting that, while he and his fellow-pachyderms are
commonly considered as instructive, their natural dignity precludes them
from attempting to provide amusement in any form.

       * * *

"In twenty years' time," says Mr. PEMBERTON BILLING, "the aeroplane will
bring about universal peace." This statement will come as a distinct shock
to many who imagined that with Mr. BILLING at Westminster it might be
expected to achieve this desirable result in about twenty days.

       * * *

The Gaslight and Coke Co., in the interests of economy, are proposing
to abandon the painting of street lamp-posts. The chief patrons of
these institutions, they say, will be quite satisfied as long as the
lamp-posts still feel the same to the touch.

       * * *

A woman doctor has lately advanced the theory that talking leads to long
life; but an attested married man of our acquaintance assures us that
this is a mistake, and that it merely makes it seem longer.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "BURY MARRIED MEN AND LORD DERBY."

                                                    _Provincial Paper._

A tempting solution of the Government's problem, but perhaps a little
too mediaeval for these times.

       *       *       *       *       *




METHODS OF A GERMAN MISSIONARY.

[See note to Cartoon on opposite page.]

_The Sultan soliloquises:--_


  MEHMOUD, the gilt is off your idol's crown;
    Clear shows the clay beneath the chipped enamel;
  In sporting phrase, your dibs have been planked down
        On the wrong camel.

  This WILLIAM had a God he called his peer,
    And yet must needs take on a new religion;
  Spoke well of ALLAH; in His Shadow's ear
        Cooed like a pigeon;

  Pressed you to join him in a Holy War;
    Advanced the wherewithal you badly needed;
  And taught you how to go for Christian gore
        The same as he did.

  And now, where Afric's fountains fling their balm,
    In his last place within the sun, 'tis written
  With how remote a love for dear Islam
       Your Bosch was bitten.

  He hoped to stamp your creed out, branch and root;
    This missionary meant to take your Arabs
  And crush their souls beneath his mailed boot
        Like crawling scarabs.

  And if they still ignored his ponderous heel,
    If still their faith in ALLAH stood unshaken,
  He looked to stimulate a local zeal
        For heathen bacon!

  MEHMOUD, it is too much! Sick Man you are,
    Yet in your veins I hope enough of vigour is
  To tell this WILLIAM he has gone too far
        With his damned piggeries!

                                                                  O. S.


       *       *       *       *       *




UNWRITTEN LETTERS TO THE KAISER.

No. XXXVII.

(_From Dr. LIEBKNECHT._)


If such trifling matters as the meeting of the Reichstag now occupy any
portion of your Majesty's attention, it may please you to learn that my
membership of that august body has been temporarily suspended. At the
same time I should be sorry that your Majesty should labour under any
misapprehension as to what happened. No doubt I was forbidden to speak,
though I am the representative of people whose voices have a right to be
heard even in the unhappy Parliament which is all that the German Empire
is allowed to provide for the subjects of the German KAISER. But I wish
you to understand that I was not silenced before I had said aloud nearly
everything that I had in my mind to say. It is true that I did not make
any formal speech. The bellowing blockheads who now arrogate to themselves
the name of patriots and all the virtues of patriotism were easily able
to prevent me from doing this, and I was forced, therefore, to confine
myself to short and sharp interjections thrown in at appropriate moments
while BETHMANN-HOLLWEG, that arch-impostor, was proving to the whole world
that even if Germany had a good case he is the last man who would be able
to place it in a convincing manner before the judgment of the world.

Your Majesty has had a long practice in the use of words. You pride
yourself on the glorious and beneficial effect of such speeches as that
in which you condescendingly praised the Almighty for having allied
Himself with you, very much, as it appeared, to His own advantage,
or that other speech in which you announced to your conscripts their
duty to shoot down their parents if in some momentary whim you ordered
them to do it, or even that other brave and Imperial harangue in which
you declared your humane and merciful designs on the Chinese people. I
have no doubt, then, that if you could be induced to speak your opinion
fairly and openly you would admit that, though you yourself could, of
course, have done better, I did not do so very badly in my little bout
with poor BETHMANN. At any rate I spoke the truth, which is an inconvenient
course of conduct, and made BETHMANN look the fool that everybody (except,
perhaps, your Majesty) knows him to be.

Indeed, your Majesty, a fool who is also arrogant is a very terrible
thing. When BETHMANN, for instance, spoke of Germany's love for her
neighbours, and in particular for the small nations, he delivered himself
into my hands. All I had to do--and I did it--was to remind him that he
proved his love by jumping upon them and strangling them. In a moment
the whole fabric of his stupid argument was shattered and he was left
gaping open-mouthed and without an answer before the whole world. The
incident showed the man's mind and his disposition in a lightning flash,
and from all countries, even from wretched Belgium and from ruined Serbia,
there came a laugh of hatred and contempt. Why are we so hated? Not
because we are great and powerful and prosperous, but because we make our
greatness an incubus, our power a tyranny and our prosperity an offence.

Fools like BETHMANN do not see this. They and their fellow-fools, some
of them quite brilliant men, with high notions on literature and music and
the drama, are for ever in a state of jealous fear. They have the mania
of persecution and imagine that all other countries are leagued against
them for the purpose of wiping Germany off the map. Then they lose their
unfortunate heads and strike out blindly to right and left. The other
nations have no course open to them except to defend themselves as best
they may, and then Herr BETHMANN and his superior fools shout out that
this wicked defensive proves up to the hilt that when they spoke of
conspiracies they were fully justified and that Germany for her own safety
must smash and in the end control every other country under the sun.

And yet, your Majesty, the time will come when we must have peace. This
pouring out of blood, this tremendous waste of money and lives must some
day have an end. Those are the best patriots who would put a stop to it
as soon as possible, for the longer you defer peace the more difficult
it becomes to make it. We have been told of great victories, but they
profit us not at all. All is desolation and cruelty and confusion. And
those who think most of Germany know best how bitterly she needs peace.

Your truth-telling but suspended subject,

                                                            LIEBKNECHT.

       *       *       *       *       *


    "THE LIAR'S PUNISHMENT.

    "_The Matin_ points out the predicament in which the German High
    Command must have found itself yesterday when editing its daily
    _communique_. No doubt it wished to place on record with all
    customary exaggeration the slight advantage gained on the slopes
    of the Dead Man. But how can the German High Command state this
    convincingly when for over a week it has solemnly announced the
    complete capture of the Dead Man? It has therefore to maintain
    silence as the only expedient."--_Evening News_.

On the principle: "_De mortuis nil nisi bonum_."

       *       *       *       *       *


    "We are told that the maximum of the income-tax duty will be
    reached at five shillings in the pound, a figure that will recall
    the Budgets of the Neapolitan wars."--_Irish Paper._


When, as now, Vesuvians were so heavily taxed.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: LOVE ME, LOVE MY PIG. [Captured documents show that the
German Government had schemed to stamp out Mohammedanism in East Africa
both by force and by the encouragement of pig-breeding.]]




GRASS VALLEY ARMISTICE.


"'E didn't mean to do it," he said, touching the bandages on his head.
"Oh no, quite an accident. It was a foo-de-joy--doorin' the armistice.
Wot, haven't you 'eard of Grass Valley Armistice?"

I said I couldn't recall it for the moment.

"It was doorin' September," he said; lasted two hours. Sergeant Duffin
started it.

"'E was out on a patrol one night, and suddenly 'e comes rashin' back
over the parapet and goes chargin' down to the Major's dug-out with a
face like this 'ere sheet.

"'They'me comin',' ses Bints 'oo was next to me, and we were just goin'
to loose off a round or two, when we 'eard ole Duffy 'ollerin' in the
Major's bunk.

"'Barbed wire's gone, Sir,' 'e ses.

"'Wot?' ses the Major.

"''Ave to report the wire's gone,' ses Duffy again.

"'Tell Lootenant Bann,' drawls the ole man, as if someone 'ad told
'im tea was ready.

"When Bann 'ears the noos, 'e fires a light up.

"'Can't see none,' 'e mutters, quite annoyed, and off 'e goes over the
top to find out for sure. In 'alf-an-hour 'e was back again.

"'The blighters 'ave pinched our wire,' 'e ses to the Major. 'They've
drawed across them chevoo-der-freezes I put out, and stuck them on their
own dirty scrap-'eap.'

"'Fetch 'em back,' says the Major, very off-'and like.

"'Right-O,' says Bann. 'Right-O.' For 'e'd spent three solid hours
puttin' the wire out.

"'Fetch a pick an' some rope,' 'e ses to Duffy. 'I'm goin' to 'arpoon
our wire.' Then he ties the rope to the 'andle of the pick and trots
off over the parapet.

"After a bit we 'ears the pick land amongst the barbed wire with a rattle
like a bike smash, an' the next minit back comes young Bann, sprintin'
like a 'are an' uncoilin' the rope on the way.

"'Now then,' he shouts, jumpin' into the trench, 'man the rope!' an' we
lines up ready down the communication trench. ''Aul away,' 'e 'ollers,
an' back we goes, pullin' like transport-mules.

"It give a few inches to start with, an' then a foot or two, an' then,
just when the wire must 'ave been 'alf-way 'ome it suddenly stuck fast.

"'Must 'ave caught on summat,' ses Bann, an' sets off with 'is
wire-cutters to clear it.

"''Eave,' grunts ole Jones at the end of the rope. ''Eave-o, my
'earties,' an' then 'e knocks up against the ration-party comin'
'ome down the communication trench. ''Ang on, mates,' 'e shouts to
them, an' down goes the bully bif, an' the next minit a loud rip an'
some bad language told us 'is coat couldn't stand it.

"We got some more chaps at it then, but the rope never budged an inch.

"Then Bann comes runnin' back again, very excited-lookin'. 'Look out!'
he shouts; 'the Bosches 'ave got a rope 'itched on, too.'

"Sure enough, the next minit the Germans puts their weight on, and pulls
'alf of us right over the bloomin' parapet.

"The Major comes along then, and when 'e sees the state of things 'e
looks quite solemn, for there was only Lootenant Bann and ole Jones
left in the trench.

"Where's the team?' 'e snaps, as severe as if you'd come on parade
without your rifle.

"'Fall in, tug-o-war team,' sings out Duffy, and our eight, 'oo 'ad been
lookin' on rather superior like, moistens their 'ands and stands to.

"'This is your work,' ses the Major to them, very significant.

"'Take the strain,' 'ollers Duffy, and the evenin' doo fair streamed
out of the rope when they put their weight on. Back goes our team, two
foot at least, whilst the lads cheers and yells as if we was winnin'
the divisional prize on Salisbury Plain again.

"By this time the Bosches was just as excited as we were. They was
rushin' about in the open with our men, 'owling their lingo and firin'
off their rifles for encouragement. I stopped a shot somebody 'ad aimed
at the sky for joy.

"When old Binks and the German chap 'oo 'ad done it was carryin' me
back to our trench, I saw the Major come rushin' past.

"'Go it, men,' 'e sings out to our chaps, and then off 'e sprints again,
to finish a bet he was makin' with the German officer.

"For an hour and a 'alf the excitement was awful. Up and down went that
wire until the place looked like a ploughed field. First we gained an
inch, then Germany 'ad a couple, then England gets one back, and up goes
our caps again. Everybody was rushin' about yellin', and ole Binks,
'oo knows a bit of German, made a nice bit of money at interpretin'.

"Then things suddenly got worse. Our eight 'ung on like 'eroes,
everyone swearin' 'e wouldn't loose that rope if 'e was pulled into the
KAYSER's bloomin' bedroom; but sure enough the Huns was slowly winnin'.
Inch by inch we saw our chaps give way, black in the face at the notion of
bein' beat. The Bosches yelled like 'eathens, and was shakin' hands with
everybody. Then all of a sudden young Bann comes rushin' up to the Major,
'oo was takin' four to one with a chap from Coburg.

"'Stop, Sir!' I 'ears 'im shout. 'Stop the contest! The dirty blighters
are usin' a _windlass_.'

"'Wot?' 'owls the Major, goin' purple at the thought of international
laws bein' disregarded like that.

"'Take the men off the rope,' 'e orders. 'We hunderstood we was pullin'
with gentlemen,' 'e ses very dignified, and then thinkin', no doubt,
of the four to one in dollars 'e 'd 'ave won if they'd played fair 'e
orders us to stand to and give them ten rounds rapid; and 'e used such
language on the telephone that the Artillery thought we was attacked,
and loosed off every shell they could lay hands on. So the War started
again, you see.

He touched his head and thought a minute. "That was Grass Valley
Armistice," he said finally, and relapsed into silence.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: WAR ECONOMY.

_Street Hawker (to chatty old lady)._ "YES, MUM, I'M BEING BADLY 'IT. YER
SEE, ALL MY BISNESS COMES UNDER THE 'EAD OF LUXURIES."]

       *       *       *       *       *

    "In Prize Court Attorney-General read affidavit showing there
    were gangs in Germany, America and other neutral countries
    engaged in evading our blockade."

                                                      _Liverpool Echo._

It will take more than an affidavit to convince us that Germany is
a neutral.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: OUR ADOPTED ALIENS.

_He._ "THAT'S MANNHEIM--CHAP I WAS SPEAKING ABOUT."

_She._ "MADE IN GERMANY, I SUPPOSE?"

_He._ "NO. MADE IN ENGLAND--ONLY BORN IN GERMANY."]

       *       *       *       *       *




SAINT GEORGE OF ENGLAND.

_His Day, April 23rd._


  SAINT GEORGE he was a fighting man, as all the tales do tell;
  He fought a battle long ago, and fought it wondrous well;
  With his helmet and his hauberk and his good cross-hilted sword,
  Oh, he rode a-slaying Dragons to the glory of the Lord.
  And when his time on earth was done he found he could not rest
  Where the year is always Summer in the Islands of the Blest,
  So back he came to earth again to see what he could do,
  And they cradled him in England--
              In England, April England--
  Oh, they cradled him in England where the golden willows blew!

  SAINT GEORGE he was a fighting man and loved a fighting breed,
  And whenever England wants him now he's ready to her need;
  From Crecy field to Neuve Chapelle, he's there with hand and sword,
  And he sailed with DRAKE from Devon to the glory of the Lord.
  His arm is strong to smite the wrong and break the tyrant's pride;
  He was there when NELSON triumphed, he was there when GORDON died;
  He sees his Red-Cross ensign float on all the winds that blow,
  But ah! his heart's in England--
              In England, April England--
  His heart it dreams of England where the golden willows grow.

  SAINT GEORGE he was a fighting man; he's here and fighting still,
  While any wrong is yet to right or Dragon yet to kill;
  And faith! he's finding work this day to suit his war-worn sword,
  For he's strafing Huns in Flanders to the glory of the Lord!
  SAINT GEORGE he is a fighting man, but, when the fighting's past,
  And dead amid the trampled fields the fiercest and the last
  Of all the Dragons earth has known beneath his feet lies low,
  Ah, his heart will turn to England--
                To England, April England--
  He'll come home to rest in England where the golden willows blow.

       *       *       *       *       *




GLORY O' ENGLAND.

(_At the "Plough and Horses."_)


"Glory o' England, be passin', sure 'nough."

"She been passin' ever since I been 'ere to tell o' it, seems to me. 'Ow
be she passin' now more 'n ordinary times, Luther Cherriman?"

"Way as is nearest to sudden death, George. 'Er young men gettin' that
soft an' sloppy-like that there ain't no tellin' some of 'em from gals."

"Gals be comin' 'long won'erful--not much to complain o' wi' they.
Drivin' motors, they be, an' diggin' an' all."

"Times be changin' fast; nigh time women wore the breeches an' done wi'
it, now."

"I did think as our lads was doin' their bit middlin' well, too, out
to Front. I did seem to 'ear they 'd counted f'r a German or two,
first an' last."

"Fightin' Germans is a man's _work_ just to present--if 'e be strong
'nough an' young 'nough an' all rest of it. But ye can't judge a man by
'is work 'lone, not to make a proper man of 'im. Sport did used to be
the glory o' England, in my young days. An' now the young uns ain't
got spunk 'nough to shoot a rabbit."

"That be an 'ard sayin', Luther, if ye like. 'Oo be you 'ludin' to
partic'lar?"

"I be 'ludin' to young Squire--'oo did ought to set a good 'xample in this
'ere village, if anyone ought."

"'E were th' first to go when th' War broke out, though 'e be th' only
son of 'is parents. An' more 'n 'alf of our chaps went 'cos of 'im, so
'tis said."

"That's all right, far as it goes----"

"I've 'eard say as 'e 've got a few more t' join ev'ry blessed time
'e've been 'ome on leave. They do say 'e be mortal keen."

"I don't say nothin' 'bout 'im shootin' Germans--I knows nothin'
'bout that. But in these 'ome fields I 'ave seen what I 'ave seen--no
longer ago 'n yesterday."

"Be it too much to ask ye, then, what ye 'ave seen, Luther?"

"I seen a sight as tells me glory o' England be on th' wane. I seen
young Squire loppin' 'bout 'ome fields an' 'is bits o' span'els at
'is 'eels same as ever. An' yet 'e looked that strange like I couldn't
take m' eyes off of 'im. An' then it come over me all of a sudden what
'twas. 'Where be y'r gun, Sir?' I shouts to 'im over th' stile."

"What did 'e say to question personal as that?"

"'E come up to me an' I sees 'e got bunch o' daffodils in 'is 'and. 'These
things smell o' Heaven,' 'e says, smilin' quiet. 'My gun is in the
rack, Cherriman,' 'e says, 'where it's like to be.' 'Lor' love me,
Sir,' says I, 'that do be strange, surelye, wi' th' rabbits 'oppin'
'round y' feet like a lot o' gals courtin' o' ye.' 'Strange,' 'e says;
'but we lives in strange times now, Cherriman. An' I've seen slaughter
'nough in Flanders to serve me for th' moment,' 'e says."

"'E said that?"

"'E did. An' white 'e went as 'e said it--you see the white comin'
up under the brown of 'im."

"Pickin daffs?"

"Like some bloomin' gal."

"Didn't 'e say nothin' more?"

"'You dunno what it's like,' 'e says, 'to be back in this old place--to
smell the good old Sussex clay, to watch the plovers flyin', to pick
these flowers. You dunno what it's like, Cherriman,' 'e says, 'seein'
you ain't come back to it from 'ell. Rabbits be safe 'nough from me now,'
'e says, an' drops his daffs all unknowin' like an' goes off at a mooney
stride. An' 'e finest shot in th' county, some do say--an' I believes
'em!"

"Teh, Luther--stop yer jaw! There be young Squire a-comin'. An' bless
me if 'e ain't ..."

"Here, you two old rascals, I've been looking for you--for you, anyhow,
Cherriman. Here's a rabbit apiece for your suppers--shot 'em myself."

"Thank ye kindly, Sir. But I thought as you'd give up shootin'?"

"I thought so too, Cherriman--till I saw your face in the field yesterday.
And then I said to myself, I must regain Cherriman's respect if it means
the hardest bit of shooting I've ever done here or in Flanders."

"That's right, Sir! Don't do to let glory o' England die. Thank ye kindly
for rabbits, Sir--us'll enjoy 'em proper."

"Hope you'll break your last tooth on them, Cherriman--that's what
I hope."

"Glory o' England's more to me, Sir, 'n an 'ole set o' teeth at my time
o' life."

       *       *       *       *       *

    "MARRIED MEN PROPOSALS EXPLAINED."

                                               _"Evening News" poster._

Are not these revelations just a little hard on our friends' wives?

       *       *       *       *       *


The Art of Journalistic Expansion.

    "The 'Russky Invalid' states: 'The Caucasus army has performed
    a miracle which in military history will be remembered for years
    to come.'"--_The Age (Melbourne)._

    "'General Russky, though an invalid, and his Caucasus army,'
    declares _The Messenger_, 'have performed a miracle which military
    history will remember for years to come.'"

                                               _The Argus (Melbourne)._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE ROLLING STONE.


  At Cambridge, where on field or flood
  He shone like a GOLDIE or a STUDD,
  He was an intellectual "blood."

  He made the grimmest dons unbend,
  And missed his First, right at the end,
  For he cut his Tripos--to nurse a friend.

  Then he wrote a novel. The weekly press
  Declared it was worthy of R.L.S.;
  But it wasn't a great financial success.

  So, after a spell at the Bar, he flew
  To the rubber-fields in remote Peru,
  But stayed there only a month or two.

  For he suddenly conceived a plan
  Of studying music at Milan,
  Where he sang in the style of the great god Pan.

  I heard him sing in the Albert Hall
  In the chorus of MENDELSSOHN's _St. Paul_,
  And his voice was the loudest of them all.

  Next he leased a Colorado mine,
  And dealt in Californian wine,
  And rented a ranche in the Argentine.

  But whatever the job and whatever the pay
  I certainly never knew him to stay
  Anywhere as long as a year and a day--

  Except one job, which is not yet done,
  Though twenty months ago begun,
  Of holding and hammering the Hun.

  His horoscope I have never scanned,
  But as long as there's any fighting on hand
  The rolling stone has come to a stand.

       *       *       *       *       *


Irreplaceable.

Evidence of a conscientious and candid objector:--

    "I am sure the Rector could not get anyone to take my place,
    as Cowley is now empty, and there are no loafers about."

                                                  _Gloucester Citizen._

       *       *       *       *       *

    "The first cases to come before the tribunal were appeals from
    three Thirsk butchers, for the exemption of their respective
    slaughtermen. Mr. Johnson said he killed himself about 20
    years ago. He thought he would start again."--_Darlington and
    Stockton Times._

Very difficult to repeat the first fine careless rapture of a successful
suicide.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "No, while it is a crime to spend money extravagantly on dress,
    it is just as emphatically one to abstain from it altogether."

                                                     _Daily Chronicle._

If _The Daily Chronicle_ says so, we accept it. There is no paper for
whose judgment we have a more profound regard.

       *       *       *       *       *


MR. PUNCH'S POTTED FILMS. THE DRAMA OF STUDIO LIFE.


[Illustration: CLARENCE ALLARDYCE, THE RISING YOUNG ARTIST, CANNOT IN
ALL LONDON FIND A MODEL WORTHY TO POSE FOR THE HAIR IN HIS MASTERPIECE,
"THE WOOD NYMPH." ON THE EVE OF THE EXHIBITION HE TELLS HIS TROUBLE
TO HIS FRIEND, CHARLES CARFAX, WHO, WITH HIS FIANCEE, HAS VISITED THE
STUDIO.]

[Illustration: THAT EVENING, AS HE SITS IN HIS STUDIO BEWAILING HIS
LOT, A MYSTERIOUS VISITOR IS USHERED IN.]

[Illustration: SHE UNVEILS HER HEAD, AND IN DUE COURSE THE MASTERPIECE
IS FINISHED.]

[Illustration: THE NEXT DAY A FASHIONABLE CROWD THRONGS ALLARDYCE'S
STUDIO TO VIEW THE PICTURE BEFORE ITS DEPARTURE TO THE EXHIBITION. AMONG
THEM IS CARFAX, WHO, RECOGNISING HIS FIANCEE'S HAIR, IS OVERCOME WITH
RAGE AND THREATENS TO DESTROY THE PICTURE.]

[Illustration: AS HE IS ABOUT TO EXECUTE HIS FELL PURPOSE HE IS
STOPPED BY HIS FIANCEE. "STAY!" SHE CRIES. "IT IS NOT AS YOU SUPPOSE. IT
_IS_ MY HAIR, BUT--I WEAR A WIG. I SENT IT TO HIM BY POST." BY THIS NOBLE
LIE SHE SAVES THE PICTURE AT THE COST OF HER MATRIMONIAL HOPES.]

[Illustration: CAST OFF BY CARFAX, THE HEROINE VISITS THE EXHIBITION
ALONE. THERE SHE IS FOUND BY CLARENCE, WHO ASKS HER TO SHARE WITH HIM
THE FAME AND FORTUNE WHICH SHE HAS BROUGHT HIM.]

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: _Face Massage Specialist._ "NO DOUBT, SIR, YOUR SPEECHES
ON FRIGHTFULNESS HAVE AFFECTED YOUR EXPRESSION."

_Prussian Orator._ "WELL, YOU MUST DO THE BEST YOU CAN FOR ME. TO-NIGHT
I HAVE TO SPEAK ON 'OUR LOVE FOR THE SMALLER NATIONS.'"]

       *       *       *       *       *




ROUND ABOUT THE RESTAURANTS.


The famous QUEX having relinquished the raree show of London--its lunches,
its beauties, its theatres, its celebrities and its suppers--to take part
in this boring and extremely inconvenient War, how proper that he should
be succeeded by a younger _flaneur_! Behold then QUEX MINIMUS busy as a
chronicler in your service.

       *       *       *       *       *

Met Sir Loney Loon at the Fitz, where I had the greatest difficulty in
finding a host. Succeeded, however, at last, but as he was an unknown
person I do not mention him here. Sir Loney told me he was thinking of
standing as Independent candidate when next there is a vacancy, being so
utterly tired of the Coalition and all its incompetencies. Fancy, said he,
after at least ten years of existence, aviation not being perfect! And
the iniquity of any hitch whatever in any department after nearly two
years of war! All I can say is I hope the famous magnate wins.

       *       *       *       *       *

Heard Lord and Lady Provender eating their soup at the Barlton grill,
where I had an excellent position behind the screen. His lordship looks
older than he did in 1893, when he was in India. Her ladyship was wearing
the famous Sheepshanks agates.

       *       *       *       *       *

Talked to Dicky Post, the famous trainer, after Newmarket. He said it
was most gratifying to see how finely racing men took the War. No one
could visit the historic course and not realise what a wonderful country
England was. To see the jockeys doing their bit on this mount and that,
no matter how they might kick or plunge or buck, was a real tonic and
indicated what stuff they were made of. He said that M. HUMBERT's recent
article on the need for the Allies of France to be as much in earnest as
she was, had a very favourable reception on the Heath.

       *       *       *       *       *

Met, at Liro's, Harry Wagtail, who is the author of most of the best _bons
mots_ of the day, although they go into circulation usually under other
men's names. Paying the new income-tax, he said, will be like selling
the gold in your teeth to discharge the dentist's bill.

       *       *       *       *       *

Watched a famous millionaire at the Vasoy wondering whether he dare
flout public opinion and the economy campaign by eating a plover's egg.
Finally he got under the table to eat it unperceived, and was most
surprised to find me there.

                                                          QUEX MINIMUS.

       *       *       *       *       *


"MIGHT BE DUE TO PICTURES.

    "Magistrate and three Leeds youths charged with warehouse-breaking,"

                                              _Yorkshire Evening News._

We regret to see that the demoralizing influence of the cinema appears
to have extended to the Bench.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "On arrival at the Hook there was nothing left whatever in the
    way of eatables, and even the greater part of those saved were
    still in their nightdresses."--_Scotsman._

_Pommes de terre en robe de chambre_, we presume.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "A MEMORY.--Thirty-nine years ago Miss Mary Rorke was playing
    with John Hare, now Sir John, in the famous old play, 'Old Men and
    New Acres.'"--_Daily Paper._

A treacherous memory.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: THE REPUDIATION.

MARTIN LUTHER (_to SHAKESPEARE_). "I SEE MY COUNTRYMEN CLAIM YOU AS ONE OF
THEM. YOU MAY THANK GOD THAT YOU'RE NOT THAT. THEY HAVE MADE MY
WITTENBERG--AY, AND ALL GERMANY--TO STINK IN MY NOSTRILS."]

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: GRANDFATHER'S NEW HAT.]




ESSENCE OF PARLIAMENT.


_Monday, April 10th._--Some sadness mingled with the cheers that greeted
the moving of the writ for the Wimbledon Division. The House is pleased
that Mr. HENRY CHAPLIN's long services to the State should have received
the customary reward of a peerage, but it will miss his genial and
majestic presence. Though an unfortunate accident in 1906 (a year
prolific in electoral casualties) debarred him from becoming the titular
Father of the House, his venerable appearance, his courtly and old-world
bearing, and his full-bodied eloquence gave him an uncontested claim
to be regarded as its Grandfather. Lord CLAUD HAMILTON, the only other
survivor of the Parliament of 1868, will now feel very lonely.

[Illustration: POP!

MR. WILL THORNE.]

The best things said at a public meeting are often uttered by an
anonymous "Voice." Mr. WILL THORNE is the "Voice" of the House of Commons.
Endowed with a fine pair of lungs and a style of delivery that resembles
the cork coming out of a ginger-beer bottle he frequently expresses in
his explosive style the collective opinion of his fellow-Members. At
Question time Lord ROBERT CECIL referred to the abominable treatment of
British prisoners of war at the Wittenberg camp, and said that steps were
being taken to circulate in neutral countries the report of Mr. Justice
YOUNGER's Committee. There was a sudden "Pop," and out came Mr. THORNE with
"Send it to the conscientious objectors."

On the Second Reading of the Budget Mr. THOMAS O'CONNOR, as the SPEAKER
punctiliously calls him, led off with a vigorous attack upon the
match-tax. The discovery, made many years ago, that match-making as
then conducted caused a painful disease of the jaw first aroused T.P.'s
sympathetic interest. He now displayed an intimate acquaintance with
the details of the industry and discoursed learnedly on the shortage
of muriate of potash for the heads and of aspen for the splints. His
argument briefly amounted to this--that the manufacturers of matches,
like those of mustard, depended for their profits upon the amount wasted,
and that to check public extravagance would destroy the trade.

The aspens on the Treasury Bench did not quiver visibly under
this assault. They were more amenable to the criticisms on the
railway-tax, which would fall very hardly upon commercial travellers
and other business people. Mr. MCKENNA promised to give careful
consideration to the criticisms before the Committee stage. Possibly it
has occurred to him that as the Government have undertaken to bring
the net receipts of the railway companies up to the 1914 level the
Exchequer might have to pay out of one pocket nearly as much as it puts
into the other.

_Tuesday, April 11th._--One of the French Deputies visiting Westminster
thinks us a queer people. He had heard last night the PRIME MINISTER's
stout declaration of the Allies' resolve to bring Prussia's military
domination to an end. Again this afternoon he had been told on the same
high authority that the late Conference in Paris had reaffirmed the
entire solidarity of the Allies and established the complete identity
of their views. Then he had walked across the corridor to the House of
Lords, expecting, no doubt, to hear the same sentiments expressed in even
loftier language. Instead, he had to listen to Lord COURTNEY, in the
traditional yellow waistcoat, declaiming with all the vigour of his
_premiere jaunesse_ against the notion that we should enter into any
fiscal relations with our Allies that might imperil the sacred principles
of Free Trade.

Lord COURTNEY believes that there is in Germany a large and powerful
peace-party, which must not be frightened by any threats of reprisals,
and he commends to the Allies in 1916 the example of BISMARCK in letting
the Austrians off easily in 1866. Our visitor was a little relieved by
the explanation that the orator was an interesting survival of a school
of thought now passed away, and represented no one but himself. But he
was again puzzled when Lord BRYCE, who knows as much about the manners
of the gentle Hun as anybody (witness his report on the atrocities in
Belgium), joined in the appeal that we should be nice to Germany after
the War.

He was, however, somewhat comforted when Lord CREWE made it plain that
the Government did not share Lord COURTNEY's illusions about the strength
of the German peace-party, and, having regard to the manner in which
Germany had in the past combined commercial expansion with political
intrigue, could not hold out hopes that after the War we should do
business with her in the same old easy-going way. But if our French
friend is still not quite convinced that British statesmen fully realize
what the War means to him and his country I don't I think we can altogether
blame him.

[Illustration: MARRIED MEN TRACKING DOWN THE SINGLE.

"I am unable to say what steps the married men may take to track the
single."--_Mr. TENNANT, in the House._]

In the Commons Mr. PEMBERTON BILLING developed his usual Tuesday "hate."
But on this occasion there was no reply from the Government heavy
batteries; little Mr. REA explaining that as the Hon. Member had failed
to warn them of his intention to bombard they had no ammunition ready.

_Wednesday, April 12th._--Although, like another noble Earl, Lord SELBORNE
is "not an agricultural labourer," he does his best to play the part, and
save our food-producers from the maw of the hungry recruiting officer.
A representative of the Board of Agriculture now holds a watching brief
at every local Tribunal, to see that the Military representative does
not have things too much his own way. No wonder that the taxes mount
up faster than the recruiting returns.

Time was when Mr. SWIFT MACNEILL successfully dissembled his affection
for the House of Lords. To-day his principal object in life is to purge
the roll of that illustrious House of the peerages now held by the
enemy Dukes of CUMBERLAND and ALBANY. The PRIME MINISTER was strangely
unsympathetic. Legislation would be necessary, and would occupy too much
time. "Three minutes," suggested Sir ARTHUR MARKHAM; but Mr. ASQUITH was
still obdurate, and seemed to think that as the Dukes in question had
lost their Garters they were sufficiently down-at-heel already.

When packing his Budget a wise CHANCELLOR OF THE EXCHEQUER always includes
some little tit-bit that he can throw to the wolves if they become too
insistent. In the present case the tax on railway tickets was marked
for abandonment at the outset, and to-day it met its expected fate.

The Amusements tax was strenuously opposed by Mr. BARNES, on the ground
that most of the money would come from the poor; but Mr. MCKENNA frankly
replied that that was just what he intended. He agreed, however, to
consider the claim of the Zoo to exemption. The match-makers were partially
appeased by a promise that mechanical lighters should not be overlooked.
The CHANCELLOR is now in some doubt as to whether he or AESCHYLUS has
produced the more notable version of "Prometheus Bound."

_Thursday, April 13th._--A provincial paper lately referred to Mr. MCKENNA
as the "Cancellor"--a humorous compositor's way, no doubt, of indicating
the modifications in the Budget. Hardly one of the proposed new taxes
has survived intact. Even the tax on mineral waters has had to undergo
considerable alteration. It was devised to get some contribution towards
the nation's needs from those who wear the blue ribbon of a beerless
life, and to that end the tax was to be collected by means of a stamp on
each individual bottle. But the manufacturers successfully protested that
the boys and girls who affix the labels already adorning these gaseous
wares could not be trusted to put on stamps as well. Mr. MONTAGU announced
this afternoon that the manufacturers would be taxed direct on their
certified output. But he did so with obvious reluctance, and as if what
was once a sparkling proposition had become indubitably flat and possibly
unprofitable.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our Stylists.

    "Now and again a mirthless laugh rose silently to the red banks of
    her lips."

                                                      _Grand Magazine._

       *       *       *       *       *

Signature to a legal notice:--

    "MONTGOMERYSHIRE HORSE REPOSITORY, E.C., Solicitors for the said
    Administratrix."

                                                 _Manchester Guardian._

If "the law is a hass" you are tempted to say, These equine attorneys
will answer, "Neigh, neigh."

       *       *       *       *       *

Fashions for Female Humourists.

    "Blouses of the useful variety have jokes in various designs, the
    sleeves cut in one with the joke are generally a modification."

                                                    _Provincial Paper._

Our more subtle contributors prefer the latter kind, enabling them to
laugh up their sleeve.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: _Constable (failing to notice insignia of "Special")._
"NAH, THEN, YOU! GET A MOVE ON YER UNLESS YER WANTS TO BE RUN IN FOR
LOITERING!"]




A NIGHT OUT WITH A ZEPPELIN.

By Karl von Weekend

(HYPHENATED NEUTRAL).

PART I.

                                                _Somewhere in Germany,_
                                                     _April 1st, 1916._


I had just partaken of the frugal breakfast to which I had been invited
General Headquarters and was in the act of helping my distinguished
host, Feldmarschall von und zu Grosskopf-Esel, to remove some fragments
of sauerkraut from his ears, when a superbly-mounted orderly dashed
up and handed me a missive bearing the significant superscription,
"General Staff." I must confess that to me the messenger's manner
seemed sufficiently deferential. Not to my friend the Major-General,
who, with a sudden and well-placed kick in the stomach, sent the
unfortunate despatch-bearer hurtling down the steps. It was not for
me to inquire what the trouble was, and I mention the incident as one
more illustration of the iron discipline that has driven the gallant
troops of the Fatherland to victory on all fronts.

Imagine my gratification on finding that the letter was an invitation to
inspect on the following morning the latest Zeppelin sheds at ---- and
to be a passenger on board one of the new airships that was scheduled
to pay a surprise visit to the fortress of London that same evening,
weather permitting.

Punctually at seven on the following morning I found von und zu
Grosskopf-Esel waiting for me in the huge twenty-cylinder roadster
which the General Staff customarily places at the disposal of American
newspaper correspondents. Within the hour we were at ----, where I was
turned over to the good offices of Herr Ober-Leutnant von Dachswurst,
of the Imperial Flying Corps, who immediately conducted me to the shed
from which (when the weather is propitious) the aerial monsters depart
upon their errands of doom.

I had expected to see two, or at most three, Zeppelins in the great
shed. Imagine my astonishment on beholding no fewer than a hundred
huge engines of destruction tugging impatiently at their moorings. I
was speechless. But the Ober-Leutnant read my thoughts. "What would you
say," he asked, smiling drily, "if I were to tell you that Germany to-day
possesses no fewer than one hundred such fleets of airships as you see
before you?" So overcome was I that I scarcely had the strength to ask
him why, up to that time, attacks had been usually carried out with
two or three ships only. He smiled still more at enigmatically. "You
must not ask me that," he said, "or at least you must first ask the
Grand Admiral why his five hundred submersible battle cruisers are
still at anchor in Kiel Harbour, or the General Staff why five million
of Germany's finest veteran troops are still doing the goose-step in
the Potsdam Thiergarten, or Herr HELFFERICH why the rate of exchange has
not been corrected by releasing some small portion of the ten thousand
billion marks that lie in the Imperial treasury at Spandau! Be patient,"
he added. "Our perfidious enemies will bite the dust whenever it suits
our glorious leaders to say the word."

I muttered something about the enormous German casualty lists. The
Ober-Leutnant smiled more enigmatically than ever. "A ruse to deceive
our enemies," he said. "Would it surprise you to know that up to date
the total German losses on all fronts amount to seventeen killed and
ninety-one wounded and missing, while our material losses have so far
been confined to three field guns left over from the Franco-German War
and five dozen cases of collapsible sausage rolls?"

It was incredible, yet I could not but accept the statement as true,
and have in fact had ample opportunity since of verifying the assertions
of the gallant officer.

"But come," he said; "it is time we were on board."

The Zeppelins that were actually selected to conduct the proposed
operations were housed in another shed, and thither we repaired. We were
greeted at the gangway by the famous Captain Sigismund von Muenchhausen,
a gruff but hearty old mariner, who immediately escorted me into his
cabin and insisted on my enjoying a cigar and a glass of schnapps with
him. Once again I was struck with that almost Oriental charm of manner
which seems to lift the German Higher Command above the plane occupied
by the rest of the Occidental world.

It was no doubt my impatience that caused me to interrupt the gallant
Captain's delightful flow of racy anecdote to ask when we should
start. My host smiled enigmatically. "By now," he said, "we should be
somewhere over the Dogger Bank."

It was true. So perfectly had all things been appointed that while
I had been consuming a single glass of schnapps the huge airship had
completed half the journey.

We now emerged from the cabin. As we approached the rail a sailor stepped
up to the Captain, saluted and asked permission to speak. As far as I
could gather, the wretched man complained of seasickness and asked to be
put ashore. There was no mistaking the Captain's answer. "Ja wohl!" he
roared, and with a mighty kick sent the luckless seaman hurtling over
the rail and into the abyss below. A momentary sense of pity seized me,
but it quickly occurred to me that only by such drastic means could be
kept alive the splendid spirit of chivalry that has made the German
airman victorious throughout the firmament.

It was now quite dark, but far beneath us could be seen with the aid
of a telescope little points of light. Perfidious England, the author
of all Germany's troubles, lay helpless beneath us.

                                                   (_To be continued._)

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: "YOU ADVERTISED AS CHAUFFEURETTE-MAID."

"YES, MADAM."

"WHAT WERE YOUR DUTIES AT YOUR LAST PLACE?"

"I DROVE AND CLEANED THE CARS SINGLE-HANDED."

"AND AS MAID?"

"I TOOK DOWN MY LADY AT NIGHT AND ASSEMBLED HER IN THE MORNING, MADAM."]

       *       *       *       *       *




TO CHARLOTTE BRONTE.


  STRANGE that the most _farouche_ of all the ladies
    Rightly renowned as drivers of the quill,
  Who hated all publicity like Hades,
    And showed in self-advancement little skill,
  Who did not write for Smiths and Browns and Bradys,
    But at the prompting of her own sweet will--
  Her most obsequious partisans should find
  In penmen of the parasitic kind.

  In vain did Mrs. GASKELL, wise and gracious,
    Paint us your portrait, delicate yet true;
  Sensation-mongers, strident and voracious,
    Must needs explore your inner life anew,
  Clutching with fingers ruthlessly tenacious
    At the remotest semblance of a clue;
  Raking the dustbins for unprinted matter,
  And prodigal of cheap and tasteless chatter.

  And now in days of endless storms and stresses
    Comes your Centenary, with odes and lays,
  And lantern slides and lectures and addresses,
    And all the modern ritual of praise;
  With columns in _The Sphere_ of C. K. S.'s
    Comments upon your life and work and ways,
  Judicial summings-up of old disputes
  And photographs of PATRICK BRONTE's boots.

  And men and maids will doubtless march with banners
    To prove their worship of your "massive brain";
  And intellectual Chicago "canners"
    Will send their relics from across the main;
  And critics will discuss your various manners,
    And HAROLD BEGBIE will pronounce you "sane";
  In short, you'll be the bookman's prey and quarry
  At many a high-class literary "swarry."

  Well, well, brave CHARLOTTE, though our admiration
    Prompts some of us your memory to revere
  In ways less vocal in their adulation,
    You will not hold our homage less sincere
  If we refrain from pouring a libation
    In orthodox Centenary small-beer,
  But choose to greet in silent awe and wonder
  The stormy spirit of the child of Thunder.

       *       *       *       *       *

Commercial Candour.


    "Messrs. ---- & Co., Ltd., Court Dress-fakers, &c."

                                                    _Provincial Paper._

       *       *       *       *       *

    "OUR YOUNGEST GENERAL.

    "He was educated at Glasgow University and Gottingen University,
    and entered the army in 1716."--_Bangalore Daily Post._

Our Indian contemporary is misinformed. Several of our Generals are
younger than that.

       *       *       *       *       *




AN UNRECORDED ENGAGEMENT.


The following interesting letter has been forwarded to us by the relatives
of one of our wounded heroes. It gives a vivid idea of his impressions
during a severe engagement, particulars of which have not so far appeared
in the Press.

                                                 _"Red Cross Hospital,_
                                                _Somewhere in England._

"... And now I must tell you of a very hot time that our lot here had
recently. The attack was due to open at 5.30 in the afternoon. We had
been warned to expect it, and the appointed hour found us ready in our
positions. We were five deep, strongly posted on deck chairs; moreover,
the warning had given us opportunity to construct a defensive rampart
of evergreens and pot-plants before the front line.

"The engagement opened fairly punctually with a furious pianoforte
bombardment, accompanied by asphyxiating footlights. Owing to the
closeness of the range and the weight of metal employed, our first rank
gave way a little, but subsequently rallied smartly. The attack now
became general, the enemy advancing first in detached units, subsequently
in column or quartette formation. A stubborn resistance was put up,
but we were nearly forced to recoil before a desperate charge by _The
Men of Harlech_.

"Hardly had we contrived to withstand these, when, with blood-curdling
cries, the Funny Men dashed forward and fell upon us. The engagement
was at this point so fierce that it was impossible to obtain more
than a confused impression of it. I saw several of my brave comrades
doubled up. Puns and lachrymatory wheezes darkened the air. At last,
after a specially violent offensive, in which he was supported by the
full strength of his piano, the enemy retired, followed by salvoes from
our ranks, and left us, at least temporarily, masters of the situation.

"A lull ensued, during which, however, in spite of the curtain
behind which the enemy endeavoured to mask his preparations, we were
convinced, from certain unmistakable signs, that a fresh and possibly
more violent attack was shortly to develop. Nor was this view wrong;
for, when the curtain lifted, we at once saw that our worst fears were
justified. Confronting us were the 1st Amateur Thespians, the most
dreaded battalion in the enemy's Volunteer forces, and one reputed to
have decimated more British classics than any two professional regiments.

"The methods of this body have changed very little during the last
half-century. They still employ for choice the old _Box-and-Cox_
attack, which has proved so effective in the past, followed frequently
by _A Case for Eviction_ or else _Gentlemen Boarders_. Bold to the
point of rashness, no difficulties are found to daunt them; and the
stoutest hearts might well quail at being exposed to the fury of their
onslaught. Indeed how any of us survived the half-hour that followed I
hardly know. It was a nightmare of smashed china, dropped cups, shouts
of 'Bouncer, Bouncer!' and general confusion.

"But time was on our side; and when, towards seven o'clock, the curtain
fell again, we knew that, holding as we did almost our original positions,
we were victorious. Our exact casualties I have not yet heard, but they
are certain to have been heavy. The ground lately held by the enemy
presented a spectacle of appalling confusion; and everything pointed to
the struggle having been most determined. Restoratives were administered
to our men, and we turned in, exhausted but happy."

       *       *       *       *       *


PERSONALIA.

It has been noticed by close observers that among curious developments
brought about by the War the personal advertisements have been growing
increasingly intimate. Mars and Venus again are associated. So far,
only the Classes have been conspicuous. Why not the Masses too?
Something like this:--

WILL LADY wearing handsome garnet necklace and ostrich feathers in large
hat in front row of gallery of Britannia Theatre, who threw orange at
Gordon Highlander in pit, injuring his left eye, meet him Sunday evening,
Marble Arch, 7 sharp?--Box F.3.

       *       *       *       *       *

WILL GIRL seated second table on left at Lockhart's, 17th April, 6.30,
eating cold meat-pie, communicate with Bedfordshire Corporal with arm in
sling, two tables away?--Box 183.

       *       *       *       *       *

LONELY MARRIED MAN invites correspondence while waiting for single men
to do their duty.--Box 84.

       *       *       *       *       *

SAW YOU marching past Charing Cross Station, three a-breast, whistling
"Keep the Home Fires Burning," Saturday night at 10.15, and called out to
you from top of omnibus. Please write.--Box 10.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "LOST, gold CHAIN and PENDANT,
    containing sailor and baby; 5/- reward."

                                                      _Liverpool Echo._

Small enough, even for the baby.

       *       *       *       *       *




ECONOMY IN THE PRESS.


I.--THE EDITORIAL PAGE.

  Here upon our middle page,
  Where the correspondents rage,
      Grim and dour and dry,
  Here with counsel bold and sage
  War on lollipops we wage,
      Smiting hip and thigh.

  "Pare potatoes very thin;
  All the virtue's in the skin;
      Save the peel for soups;
  Drop cigars; abandon gin;
  Leave the bristles on your chin;
      Tie your hair in loops.

  "Golf and ties and collars shun;
  Lunch upon a penny bun;
      Butter not your bread;
  Save your pennies--every one
  Helps to crush the brutal Hun."
      Thus and thus we've said.


II.--THE ADVERTISEMENT PAGES.

  Now the advertiser comes;
  Hush the sound of warning drums;
      Hear his siren song:
  "Leave your economic sums;
  Leave the task of saving crumbs;
      Join the shopping throng.

  "Come to Blank's--the thing to do!
  Here are chiffons, ninons too,
      Quilts for Fido's cot;
  Silken robe and satin shoe,
  Figured fabrics, gold and blue,
      Bangles, pearls--what not?

  "Bon-bons, perfumes, trifles gay--
  Still you'll find a fresh display
      Where the last one ends;
  New sensations every day!
  Motor round without delay!
      Come, and bring your friends!"

       *       *       *       *       *


In Its Proper Element.

    "No appointments have been made in the place of Lord Derby
    and Lord Montagu [who have resigned their seats on the Joint
    Air Committee], and the Committee is, for the present, _en
    l'air._"--_The Times._

       *       *       *       *       *

    "Amongst the sights which never fail to draw the attention of
    curious Londoners is that of girls perched high up on enormous
    vans manipulating the reins and guiding fresh nurses through
    the maze of city traffic."

                                              _"Star" (Ch. Ch. N. Z.)_

There must be some mistake here. The nurses we see in London are always
perfectly sober.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. BLATCHFORD on the match-tax:--

    "In this insidious manipulation of the thin end of the Tory
    wedge do we not perceive the cloven hoof of the serpent casting
    its shadow before?"--_Weekly Dispatch._

No; all we see is Mr. BLATCHFORD laboriously trying to emulate Sir
BOYLE ROCHE.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: OUR SPOILT WARRIORS.

_Tommy._ "I WENT TO A PLACE A BIT FURTHER DOWN THE ROAD FOR SUPPER LAST
NIGHT. I DON'T GO THERE AGAIN."

_Lady Muriel Beltravers-Montmorency._ "OH, WHAT'S THE MATTER WITH IT?"

_Tommy._ "WHAT'S THE MATTER WITH IT? WHY, THEY HAVE PAID WAITRESSES
THERE."]

       *       *       *       *       *




NOT RUNNING TO SEED.

_To Reginald Cressingham, Esq._


DEAR SIR (OR MADAM),--Looking over our records a few days ago, we noticed
that you had not been so good a customer of ours for Seeds during
the past twelve months as you used to be; and the more we looked at
that record the more we wondered what we had done that caused you to
practically stop dealing with us.

Finally we decided to drop you a line and ask you whether you will kindly
tell us, personally, frankly, whether there is anything we have not done
that we should have done.

Unfortunately accidents will happen at times, and if one has happened in
this case we hope you will tell us about it so that we can try to put it
right the day we get your letter. IT DOES NOT MAKE ANY DIFFERENCE
WHAT THE TROUBLE IS, WE WILL DO OUR BEST TO MAKE IT GOOD.

                                   Your faithful and obedient Servants,
                                                     GOODENOUGH & SONS.

       *       *       *       *       *

_To Messrs. Goodenough & Sons._

DEAR SIRS,--I regret to say there _is_ a reason for discontinuing my seed
order, and I am pleased to hear you will do your best to make the trouble
good; but I am half afraid you will not be able to "put it right the day
you get my letter."

The fact is there is a European War going on just now, and it has sadly
upset our gardening plans. Instead of having eight men (counting a
husband) about the place, I am now reduced to one gardener, and he
will shortly be called up in a married group, unless the flat foot he
is assiduously cultivating softens the heart of the Exemption Tribunal.

I am sorry I have no time to tell you more about this War, but I must
now go and dig the vegetables.

Yours faithfully,

                                                    HELENA CRESSINGHAM.

       *       *       *       *       *

"STABBING AFFRAY DUE TO A GIRL'S CHARM.

    "In the village of Sharwida, Zagazig district, lives a girl who
    is a paragraph of beauty."

                                                       _Egyptian Mail._

This barely does her justice. She seems to have been quite the penny
novelette.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "In the Argonne we carried out a coup domain this morning."--_Evening
    Paper._

It is a good General who never puts off till to-morrow what he can do
this morning.

       *       *       *       *       *




NURSERY RHYMES OF LONDON TOWN.


VI.--CHALK FARM.

  Certain farmers farm in fruit, and some farm in grain,
  Others farm in dairy-stuff, and many farm in vain,
  But I know a place for a Sunday morning's walk
  Where the Farmer and his Family only farm in Chalk.
  The Farmer and his Family before you walk back
  Will bid you in to sit awhile and share their midday snack;
  O they that live in Chalk Farm they live at their ease,
  For the Farmer and his Family can't tell Chalk from Cheese.


VII.--THE SPANIARDS.

  Three Spaniards dwell on Hampstead Heath:
  One has a scowl and a knife in a sheath;
  One twangs a guitar in the bright moonlight;
  One chases a bull round a bush all night!

       *       *       *       *       *

    "In talking of flying, Boillot only returned to a pastime that
    he had been one of the first to practise."--_Pall Mall Gazette._

Just like our Mr. BILLING.

       *       *       *       *       *




OUR BOOKING-OFFICE.

(_By Mr. Punch's Staff of Learned Clerks._)


_Miss Pandora_ (HEINEMANN) is proclaimed by its publishers to be a first
novel. Probably, however, it will not also be a last, as the author,
M. E. NORMAN, has a considerable gift for tale-telling. Perhaps I may
be permitted to hope that he (or she) will use it next time to illuminate
a rather more attractive set of characters. I don't think that the circle
in which _Pandora_ moved contains a single person whom I should wish to
meet twice. There was _Pandora_ herself, who was dark and Spanish-looking,
with an origin wrapped in mild mystery. There was her friend, a futile
lady-novelist; there were three quite disagreeable men, a spoilt child
and an old lady suffering from senile dementia. Oh, and I nearly forgot
the sniffy neighbour, who, having cut _Pandora_ dead for half the book,
was revealed in the second half as her mother. Add to this that _Pandora_
had a past (and a present too, for that matter) with the husband of
the lady novelist, and you will, I think, agree with me that they were
a queer lot. Also I have seldom read a novel with such an unsatisfactory
ending. It almost seemed as though M. E. NORMAN, having got the affair
into a tangle, was too bored to unravel it. I am by no means sure,
for example, that he (or she) had any clearer ideas about _Pandora's_
paternity than I have. The depressing conclusion is that, while I
readily admit that the writing of it shows originality and promise,
_Miss Pandora_ is hardly the novel I should have expected to be produced
in a paper famine.

       *       *       *       *       *

Before I began to unweave _The Web of Fraeulein_ (HODDER AND STOUGHTON)
a dreadful and, as it turned out, an unnecessary fear seized me that Miss
_Katharine Tynan_ had written a spy-novel of the present day. Imagine
then my relief when I found that the story dates back some thirty or
forty years, and that, although _Fraeulein_ was really as pestilential a
woman as ever became governess to a respectable British family, espionage
was not part of her game. With uncanny skill Miss TYNAN relates the
influence that this flat-footed German woman gained in the _Allanson_
household; but I must protest, in justice to our race, that we have
not many families so lacking in enterprise as to allow themselves to be
enmeshed in such a web as this. In short I can dislike this German product
very cordially but without for a moment understanding the source of the
devastating power she had over others. You must not, however, imagine that
the web casts a gloom over the whole book, for when _Fraeulein_ is not
on the scene--and we do have some holidays from her--those _Allansons_
whom she had not marked down could be attractively natural and gay;
and the younger _Allanson_ girl is as delightful a portrait as any in
Miss TYNAN's generous gallery.

       *       *       *       *       *

I think I never met a writer who splashed language about with a greater
recklessness than Miss MARION HILL. I see that one of the reviews of that
previous best seller of hers, _The Lure of Crooning Water_, speaks of
its literary charm. Well, there are, of course, many varieties of charm,
but "literary" is hardly the epithet that I should myself apply to the
undoubted attractions of _A Slack Wire_ (LONG). This very bustling story
of the marriage between a variety artist and a quiet, not to say
somewhat prigsome, young engineer is told for the most part in the purest
American, an engaging and vivid medium with which I am but imperfectly
acquainted. Further, Miss HILL's command of words seems to be gloriously
unhampered by tradition. "It was with a supercargo of relief even heavier
than usual that he found it" is a sample that I select at random. No,
I certainly do not think that "literary" would be the epithet. But I
am far from saying that there is no charm in the tale, of a sort. Not
specially original perhaps the situation of the Bohemian wife brought
to an ultra-Philistine home; but Miss HILL manages to keep it going
briskly enough. And, as I have hinted, you never know what she will say
next, or how. The whole thing would make such an admirable film-play that
I can hardly believe this idea to have been absent from the intention of
its author. The final sensation-scene, in which _Violet_ uses her old
wire-walking agility to prevent a catastrophe (never ask me how!),
would make a fortune on the screen. Poor _Violet_, I may tell you,
had been born in England, and, on the death of her rightful guardians,
was "farmed off to peasants, who boarded her because it would cancel
their poor-tax." I feel somehow that if I could grasp this reference
it would make much in _Violet_ clear. But so far it eludes me.

       *       *       *       *       *

If powers of absorption are still left to you for any battles save those
of to-day, you will find a vivid account of Flodden in _The Crimson
Field_ (WARD, LOCK). I won't believe it is Mr. HALLIWELL SUTCLIFFE's
fault that the fighting scenes of his story left me cold; the blame
lies rather with the Hunnish times in which we live. While describing
the beauty of the Yorkshire dales and the lives of their inhabitants,
Mr. SUTCLIFFE held me in the hollow of his hand. But when he started to
tell of the valiant deeds of the yeoman-hero, _Sylvester Demain_, who was
knighted on the field of battle and won the maiden of high degree, I was
released from that bondage. Indeed, I think Mr. SUTCLIFFE was no more
anxious to leave the dales than I was, for, when the march to Flodden
begins, his style becomes almost bewilderingly jumpy, so often does
he look over his shoulder to see--and let us know--what is happening
to those who were left behind. The fight, however, when it does come,
is strenuous enough, and in the midst of it KING JAMES--German papers
please copy--stands out as a pattern of chivalry.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: HISTORICAL PARALLELS.

_At the Siege of Carthage._

"LOOK OUT, BOYS! HERE COMES ANOTHER SAUCY SCIPIO!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

A Dickens Revival.

    "WANTED--Fat Boy for yard: 10s. weekly."

                                          _Dublin "Daily Independent."_

       *       *       *       *       *

Eighteen tailors from Leeds have been arrested at Dublin as deserters from
the Army. As nine tailors make a man this is a net gain of two recruits.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch, or The London Charivari, Vol.
150, April 19, 1916, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH, CHARIVARI, APR 19, 1916 ***

***** This file should be named 36981.txt or 36981.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/9/8/36981/

Produced by Jonathan Ingram, David Garcia and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
