The Project Gutenberg EBook of Three Accounts of Peterloo, by
Edward Stanley and William Jolliffe and John Benjamin Smith

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Three Accounts of Peterloo
       By Eyewitnesses Bishop Stanley, Lord Hylton, John Benjamin
       Smith with Bishop Stanley's Evidence at the Trial

Author: Edward Stanley
        William Jolliffe
        John Benjamin Smith

Editor: F. A. Bruton

Release Date: August 7, 2011 [EBook #37004]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THREE ACCOUNTS OF PETERLOO ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/Canadian
Libraries.)









  PUBLICATIONS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF MANCHESTER

  HISTORICAL SERIES
  No. XXXIX.

  THREE ACCOUNTS OF
  PETERLOO.




  Published by the University of Manchester at
  THE UNIVERSITY PRESS (H. M. MCKECHNIE, M.A., Secretary)
  12 LIME GROVE, OXFORD ROAD, MANCHESTER

  LONGMANS, GREEN & CO.

  LONDON:
  39 Paternoster Row, E.C.4

  NEW YORK:
  443-449 Fourth Avenue and Thirtieth Street

  BOMBAY:
  336 Hornby Road

  CALCUTTA:
  6 Old Court House Street

  MADRAS:
  167 Mount Road




[Illustration: BISHOP STANLEY 1779-1849

_From a Print lent by Lord Sheffield_

_Photo by R. H. Fletcher_

_Frontispiece_]




  Three Accounts
  OF
  Peterloo

  BY EYEWITNESSES

  BISHOP STANLEY
  LORD HYLTON
  JOHN BENJAMIN SMITH

  with

  Bishop Stanley's Evidence at the Trial


  Edited by F. A. BRUTON, M.A., Litt.D
  of the Manchester Grammar School


  MANCHESTER:
  AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS

  LONGMANS, GREEN & CO.
  LONDON, NEW YORK, BOMBAY, etc.
  1921




PUBLICATIONS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF MANCHESTER

No. CXL.




CONTENTS.

                                                      PAGE

  Introduction                                         vii

  Bishop Stanley                                         1

  Stanley's Account of Peterloo                         10

  Stanley's Evidence at the Trial in 1822               24

  Sir William Jolliffe, afterwards Lord Hylton          45

  Lieutenant Jolliffe's Account of Peterloo             48

  John Benjamin Smith                                   59

  Mr. J. B. Smith's Account of Peterloo                 62


  APPENDIX A                                            75
    Some Relics of Peterloo:--
      1. A Banner carried at Peterloo.
      2. Bamford's Cottage at Middleton.
      3. Constables' Staves.
      4. Head of Flagstaff.
      5. Hussar's Plume.
      6. Account-Book of the Relief Committee.
      7. Account-Book recording amounts raised
         for the relief of Special Constables
         and their families.

  APPENDIX B                                            81
    1. Note on the Casualties at Peterloo.
    2. Presence of women and children at Peterloo.
    3. Some gleanings from the Scrap-Books.
    4. Explanation of the Contemporary Plan and
       Picture of Peterloo.




ILLUSTRATIONS.


                                                            PAGE

  Portrait of Bishop Stanley                      _Frontispiece_

  Stanley's Plan of Peterloo                                   8

  Nadin, the Deputy Constable                        _Facing_ 21

  "Orator Hunt"                                         "     27

  Plan of Peterloo, compiled from the
  contemporary Plans and modern Street Maps                   44

  Portrait of Mr. John Benjamin Smith                _Facing_ 59

  The Hunt Memorial at the Manchester Reform
  Club                                                  "     69

  The Peterloo Medal                                    "     71

  The Banner carried at Peterloo by the
  Middleton Contingent                                  "     75

  Samuel Bamford's Cottage at Middleton                 "     76

  Three Relics picked up on the Field of Peterloo       "     77

  A Page of the Relief Committee's Account Book               79

  Plan of Peterloo published with the Report of
  the Trial in 1822                                           89

  Wroe's Picture of Peterloo, showing the
  Manchester Yeomanry riding for the Hustings        _Facing_ 90




INTRODUCTION.


Of the three accounts of the Tragedy of Peterloo given here, two (the
first and third) have never been published before. The second appeared in
the "Life of Lord Sidmouth" in 1847. All three, written with care and
judgment, by men who afterwards rose to eminence, form a valuable
contribution to the understanding of an event, the accounts of which have
been for the most part distorted and misleading. Moreover, as each of the
three writers deals with a different phase of the day's happenings, the
accounts complement one another.

The Editor had already arranged for the publication of the first, when he
received the following letter from Lord Sheffield, dated Penrhos,
Holyhead, August 21st, 1919:--

    "It is many years since I had the copy of the Rev. E. Stanley's
    report, and no doubt it was one of the lithographed copies you
    mention.

    I think it would be well if it were published, along with the evidence
    to which you refer. I also think the Plan, of which you speak, should
    be added, and the reports of Jolliffe and J. B. Smith."

Lord Sheffield supported his suggestion by enclosing a cheque towards the
cost of printing, and this made easy the publication of the whole. Lord
Sheffield also kindly lent the portrait of Bishop Stanley, which appears
as the Frontispiece.

Acknowledgments are due, besides: (1) to Mr. Henry Guppy, M.A., for
permission to use the blocks of Wroe's picture of Peterloo, and the Plan
from the "Story of Peterloo" in the Bulletin of the John Rylands Library
for October, 1919; and to copy a page of the Account-book of the Relief
Committee; (2) to Lady Durning Lawrence, who (with the late Mr. C. W.
Sutton, M.A.) gave permission to print the Extract from the Reminiscences
of Mr. J. B. Smith, and to reproduce his portrait; (3) to Mr. W. Marcroft
of Southport; and Messrs. Hirst & Rennie of Oldham, for the loan of the
blocks of "Orator Hunt," the "Hunt Memorial," and the "Peterloo Medal";
(4) to Mr. John Murray for leave to reprint Lieutenant Jolliffe's letter;
(5) to Mr. W. W. Manfield, for the loan of the three Relics of Peterloo;
and (6) to Mr. R. H. Fletcher, amateur photographer, of Eccles, for
photographing the relics, etc.

F. A. B.




Three Accounts of Peterloo

BISHOP STANLEY


The Rev. Edward Stanley (1779-1849) was the second son of Sir J. T.
Stanley, the Sixth Baronet, and Margaret Owen, of Penrhos, Anglesey. His
elder brother was the first Baron Stanley of Alderley. As a boy, he had a
natural inclination for the sea, but this was not encouraged. For
thirty-two years he was Rector of Alderley, in Cheshire. While making
himself beloved as a Parish Priest, he found time for many scientific and
other interests. His _Familiar History of Birds_ is a standard work; he
advocated, and assisted in, the teaching of Science and Temperance at
Alderley; and he became one of the first Presidents of the Manchester
Statistical Society. Though he declined the See of Manchester, when it was
offered him, he accepted from Lord Melbourne, in 1837, the Bishopric of
Norwich, and introduced a number of reforms into that diocese. A short
memoir of him was written by his son, the famous Dean of Westminster.

At the date of Peterloo, a number of clergymen sat on the Bench of
Magistrates for Lancashire and Cheshire, but Stanley stated clearly at the
Trial that he was not a Magistrate. He was then forty years of age, and
Rector of Alderley, and in his evidence he was careful to say that his
narrative of Peterloo was compiled about two months after the event, for
private circulation among his friends, and had never been published. It is
clear that a copy was in the hands of Counsel who cross-examined him at
the Trial in 1822. The manuscript is very neatly written (I should
conjecture by Stanley himself) on nine large quarto pages, the plan being
drawn by the same hand, and the notes given at the end. I have thought it
more convenient for the reader to have the notes thrown to the foot of the
respective pages. The manuscript was lithographed, in 1819, by the
Lithographic Press, Westminster, and entered at Stationers' Hall. I found
on enquiry that there was one copy in the Manuscript Department of the
British Museum (Add. MSS., 30142, ff. 78-83). It is addressed to
Major-Gen. Sir Robert Wilson, and sealed with the Stanley crest. The
authorship was not known, and the Keeper of the MSS. was glad to be able
to add this to the document as the result of my communication. In the
Printed Book Department of the British Museum there is a second copy,
catalogued under Manchester, with press-mark 8133i. There is no trace of
Stanley's MS. in the Public Records Office. I can find no other copy but
the one at the Manchester Reference Library, which is in excellent
preservation, and has recently been rebound. Mr. J. C. Hobhouse quoted
from Stanley's narrative once in a speech in the House of Commons.
Speaking on May 19th, 1821, in support of a Petition for an enquiry as to
the outrage at Manchester, Mr. Hobhouse, following Sir Francis Burdett,
said: "The Rev. Mr. Stanley, who watched from a room above the
magistrates, saw no stones or sticks used, though if any stone larger than
a pebble had been thrown, he must have seen it." I have not found any
other reference to the narrative except that made by Counsel at the Trial,
and that is recorded in the Evidence which follows.

       *       *       *       *       *

Three notes may find a place here. The first two refer to points mentioned
by Stanley:--

1. Pigot and Dean's _Manchester Directory_ for 1819 mentions:

    (_a_) Edmund Buxton, Builder, &c., No. 6, Mount Street, Dickinson
    Street.

    (_b_) Thomas & Matthew Pickford & Co., Carriers, Oxford Street.

I do not find Mr. Buxton's "shop," which is mentioned by Stanley; nor are
Pickfords described as "timber merchants," though timber may easily have
been stacked in their yard.

Stanley's movements on reaching Manchester are not, at a first reading,
quite clear. Riding in from Alderley, he seems to have approached by way
of Oxford Road, passing (as he tells us) the Manchester Yeomanry, posted
at Pickford's yard. At twelve o'clock, he turned up Mosley Street (very
likely to avoid the crowd which was already filling the Square) and in
Mosley Street he met the contingent of Reformers coming from Ashton. He
then proceeded to Mr. Buxton's _shop_, which seems to have been near the
lower end of Deansgate. Not finding Mr. Buxton there, he was directed to
his _residence_ in Mount Street. The shortest way to Mount Street from
Alport would have taken him through the crowd. He therefore approached
Mount Street "by a circuitous route to avoid the meeting" (possibly by
Fleet Street and Lower Mosley Street, the route afterwards taken by the
Hussars), and met Mr. Buxton on the steps of his house.

Stanley evidently knew little of Manchester. He confesses in his narrative
that he had not been in St. Peter's field before or since the tragedy; in
his evidence he said: "I know no street," and stated that he could not
locate the Friends' Meeting-house.

2. Stanley's estimate of a hundred yards, as the distance from the
hustings to Mr. Buxton's house can be demonstrated to-day to be almost
exactly correct. This is only one of many points in his narrative which
show what a shrewd, quick, and accurate observer he was. When Mr. Hulton
was asked, at the Trial, to estimate the same distance, he conjectured
four hundred yards, and this was actually quoted as the distance in one of
the standard histories of the period.

For the rest, it seems better to leave Stanley's extremely lucid account
to speak for itself. To annotate it in detail would be to spoil its
completeness. As has been stated above, each observer witnessed the scene
from his own stand-point. A complete picture can only be obtained by
forming a mosaic of the various reports. Stanley's narrative is that of an
outsider, who came upon the scene unexpectedly, and watched the whole with
the eye of a statesman and a statistician. Lieutenant Jolliffe's account
gives the view of a young soldier, a stranger to Manchester, who rode in
the charge of the Hussars, and afterwards took part with them in the
patrol of the town. Mr. J. B. Smith speaks from the point of view of a
Manchester business man, familiar with the civic and economic conditions
that led to the catastrophe, and his narrative reaches a few days beyond
the tragedy itself. Samuel Bamford's account--too well-known to need
repetition here--was written from the stand-point of a local weaver, who
had already suffered for his outspoken advocacy of Parliamentary Reform,
had a large share in organising the Peterloo meeting, and served a term of
imprisonment for his share in the proceedings. An attempt to dovetail
these and other Reports into a continuous narrative has already been made
in _The Story of Peterloo_ (Rylands Library Lectures, 1919.).

3. Stanley's Evidence at the Trial, which is here printed immediately
after his connected narrative, has been taken from McDonnell's _State
Trials_, supplemented--where passages are omitted by McDonnell--by
Farquharson's verbatim report, issued by the Defence after the Trial. As a
matter of fact McDonnell made use of Farquharson's version.

       *       *       *       *       *

The portrait of Bishop Stanley which appears here is from a print kindly
lent for the purpose by Lord Sheffield.




Stanley's Notes attached to his Plan


Never having seen St. Peter's fields before or since, I cannot pretend to
speak accurately as to distance, etc. I should, at a guess, state the
distance from the hustings to Mr. Buxton's house to be about a hundred
yards, which may serve as a general scale to the rest of the plan.


KEY TO STANLEY'S PLAN.

1. The hustings. The arrow shows the direction in which the orators
addressed the mob, the great majority being in front: F, F, F.

2. The Barouche in which Hunt arrived, the line from it showing its
entrance and approach.

3. The spot on which the Manchester Yeomanry Cavalry halted previous to
their charge; the dotted lines in front showing the direction of their
charge on attacking the hustings.


[Illustration: Stanley's Plan]


4. On this spot the woman alluded to in the account (p. 15) was wounded
and remained apparently dead, till removed at the conclusion of the
business.

5. Here the 15th Dragoons paused for a few moments before they proceeded
in the direction marked by the dotted line.

6. The Cheshire Cavalry; my attention was so much taken up with the
proceedings of the Manchester Yeomanry Cavalry, etc., and the dispersion
in front of the hustings, that I cannot speak accurately as to their
subsequent movements.

7, 7, 7. The band of special constables, _apparently_ surrounding the
hustings.

8, 8, 8. The mob in dense mass; their banners displayed in different
parts, as at x, x.

9, 9, 9. A space comparatively vacant; partially occupied by stragglers;
the mob condensing near the hustings for the purpose of seeing and
hearing.

10, 10, 10. Raised ground on which many spectators had taken a position; a
commotion amongst them first announced the approach of the cavalry; their
elevated situation commanding a more extensive view.




Bishop Stanley's Account of Peterloo


Soon after one o'clock on the 16th of August, I went to call on Mr.
Buxton, with whom I had some private business. I was directed to his house
overlooking St. Peter's field, where I unexpectedly found the magistrates
assembled.[1] I went up to their room, and remained there seven or eight
minutes. Hunt was not then arrived; a murmur running through the crowd
prepared us for his approach; a numerous vanguard preceded him, and in a
few moments the Barouche appeared in which he sat with his coadjutors,
male and female; a tremendous shout instantly welcomed him; he proceeded
slowly towards the hustings. On approaching the knot of constables the
carriage stopped a short time, I conceive from the difficulty of making
way through a band of men who were little inclined to fall back for his
admission. The Barouche at length attained its position close to the
hustings, and the speakers stepped forth, the female--as far as I can
recollect--still remaining on the driver's seat with a banner in her hand.
I then left the magistrates and went to a room immediately above them,
commanding a bird's-eye view of the whole area, in which every movement
and every object was distinctly visible. In the centre were the hustings
surrounded _to all appearance_[2] by a numerous body of constables,
easily distinguished by their respectable dress, staves of office, and
hats _on_; the elevation of the hustings of course eclipsed a portion of
the space immediately beyond them, so as to prevent my seeing, and
consequently asserting positively, whether they were completely surrounded
by this chain of constables. The chain from this its main body was
continued in a double line, two or three deep, forming an avenue to Mr.
Buxton's house, by which _there seemed to be_ free and uninterrupted
access to and from the hustings. Had any interruption of their
communication occurred previous to the change, I think I must have
perceived it from the commanding position I occupied. A vast concourse of
people, in a close and compact mass, surrounded the hustings and
constables, pressing upon each other apparently with a view to be as near
the speakers as possible. They were, generally speaking, bare-headed,
probably for the purpose of giving those behind them a better view.
Between the outside of this mob and the sides of the area the space was
comparatively unoccupied; stragglers were indeed numerous, but not so as
to amount to anything like a crowd, or to create interruption to foot
passengers. Round the edges of the square more compact masses of people
were assembled, the greater part of whom appeared to be spectators. The
radical banners and caps of liberty were conspicuous in different parts
of the concentrated mob, stationed according to the order in which the
respective bands to which they belonged had entered the ground, and taken
up their positions.

After the orators had ascended the hustings, a few minutes were taken up
in preparing for the business of the day, and then Hunt began his address.
I could distinctly hear his voice, but was too distant to distinguish his
words. He had not spoken above a minute or two before I heard a report in
the room that the cavalry were sent for; the messengers, we were told,
might be seen from a back window. I ran to that window from which I could
see the road leading to a timber yard (I believe) at no great distance,
where, as I entered the town, I had observed the Manchester Yeomanry
stationed. I saw three horsemen ride off, one towards the timber yard, the
others in the direction which I knew led to the cantonments of other
cavalry.

I immediately returned to the front window, anxiously awaiting the result;
a slight commotion among a body of spectators, chiefly women, who occupied
a mound of raised, broken ground on the left, and to the rear, of the
orators, convinced me they saw something which excited their fears; many
jumped down, and they soon dispersed more rapidly. By this time the alarm
was quickly spreading, and I heard several voices exclaiming: "The
soldiers! the soldiers!"; another moment brought the cavalry into the
field on a gallop,[3] which they continued till the word was given for
halting them, about the middle of the space which I before noticed as
partially occupied by stragglers.

They halted in great disorder, and so continued for the few minutes they
remained on that spot. This disorder was attributed by several persons in
the room to the undisciplined state of their horses, little accustomed to
act together, and probably frightened by the shout of the populace, which
greeted their arrival. Hunt had evidently seen their approach; his hand
had been pointed towards them, and it was clear from his gestures that he
was addressing the mob respecting their interference. His words, whatever
they were, excited a shout from those immediately about him, which was
re-echoed with fearful animation by the rest of the multitude. Ere that
had subsided, the cavalry, the loyal spectators, and the special
constables, cheered loudly in return, and a pause ensued of about a minute
or two.

An officer and some few others then advanced rather in front of the troop,
formed, as I before said, in much disorder and with scarcely the semblance
of line, their sabres glistened in the air, and on they went, direct for
the hustings. At first, _i.e._, for a very few paces, their movement was
not rapid, and there was some show of an attempt to follow their officer
in regular succession, five or six abreast; but, as Mr. Francis Phillips
in his pamphlet observes, they soon "increased their speed," and with a
zeal and ardour which might naturally be expected from men acting with
delegated power against a foe by whom it is understood they had long been
insulted with taunts of cowardice, continued their course, seeming
individually to vie with each other which should be first. Some
stragglers, I have remarked, occupied the space in which they halted. On
the commencement of the charge, these fled in all directions; and I
presume escaped, with the exception of a woman who had been standing ten
or twelve yards in front; as the troop passed her body was left, to all
appearance lifeless; and there remained till the close of the business,
when, as it was no great distance from the house, I went towards her. Two
men were then in the act of raising her up; whether she was actually dead
or not I cannot say, but no symptoms of life were visible at the time I
last saw her.[4]

As the cavalry approached the dense mass of people they used their utmost
efforts to escape: but so closely were they pressed in opposite directions
by the soldiers, the special constables, the position of the hustings, and
their own immense numbers, that immediate escape was impossible. The rapid
course of the troop was of course impeded when it came in contact with the
mob, but a passage was forced in less than a minute; so rapid indeed was
it that the guard of constables close to the hustings shared the fate of
the rest. The whole of this will be intelligible at once by a reference to
the annexed sketch.

On their arrival at the hustings a scene of dreadful confusion ensued. The
orators fell or were forced off the scaffold in quick succession;
fortunately for them, the stage being rather elevated, they were in great
degree beyond the reach of the many swords which gleamed around them. Hunt
fell--or threw himself--among the constables, and was driven or dragged,
as fast as possible, down the avenue which communicated with the
magistrates' house; his associates were hurried after him in a similar
manner. By this time so much dust had arisen that no accurate account can
be given of what further took place at that particular spot.

The square was now covered with the flying multitude; though still in
parts the banners and caps of liberty were surrounded by groups. The
Manchester Yeomanry had already taken possession of the hustings, when the
Cheshire Yeomanry entered on my left in excellent order, and formed in the
rear of the hustings as well as could be expected, considering the crowds
who were now pressing in all directions and filling up the space hitherto
partially occupied.

The Fifteenth Dragoons appeared nearly at the same moment, and paused
rather than halted on our left, parallel to the row of houses. They then
pressed forward, crossing the avenue of constables, which opened to let
them through, and bent their course towards the Manchester Yeomanry. The
people were now in a state of utter rout and confusion, leaving the ground
strewed with hats and shoes, and hundreds were thrown down in the attempt
to escape. The cavalry were hurrying about in all directions, completing
the work of dispersion, which--to use the words given in Wheeler's
_Manchester Chronicle_, referred to by Mr. Francis Phillips--was effected
in so short a space of time as to appear as if done "by magic."

I saw nothing that gave me an idea of resistance, except in one or two
spots where they showed some disinclination to abandon the banners; these
impulses, however, were but momentary, and banner after banner fell into
the hands of the military power.[5] The extent of their defence may
perhaps best be estimated by the gallant conduct, which I particularly
noticed, of a man on horseback, apparently a gentleman's servant. Unarmed
as far as I could perceive, he separated from the cavalry, and rode
directly into a compact body of people collected round a banner; a scuffle
ensued highly interesting; the banner rose and fell repeatedly, but
ultimately fell into his hands, and he galloped off with it in triumph.

During the whole of this confusion, heightened at its close by the rattle
of some artillery[6] crossing the square, shrieks were heard in all
directions, and as the crowd of people dispersed the effects of the
conflict became visible. Some were seen bleeding on the ground and unable
to rise; others, less seriously injured but faint with the loss of blood,
were retiring slowly or leaning upon others for support. One special
constable, with a cut down his head, was brought to Mr. Buxton's house. I
saw several others in the passage, congratulating themselves on their
narrow escape, and showing the marks of sabre-cuts on their hats. I saw no
firearms, but distinctly heard four or five shots, towards the close of
the business, on the opposite side of the square, beyond the hustings; but
nobody could inform me by whom they were fired. The whole of this
extraordinary scene was the work of a few minutes.

The rapid succession of so many important incidents in this short space of
time, the peculiar character of each depending so much on the variation of
a few instants in the detail, sufficiently accounts for the very
contradictory statements that have been given; added to which it should
be observed that no spectator on the ground could possibly form a just
and correct idea of what was passing. When below, I could not have
observed anything accurately beyond a few yards around me, and it was only
by ascending to the upper rooms of Mr. Buxton's house that I could form a
just and correct idea of almost every point which has since afforded so
much discussion and contention.

The cavalry were now collected in different parts of the area; the centre,
but a few minutes before crowded to excess, was utterly deserted; groups
of radicals were still seen assembled on the outskirts, screening
themselves behind logs of timber or mingling with the spectators on the
pavement. The constables remained in a body in front of the house waiting
for the reappearance of Hunt, who (with his colleagues) was secured in a
small parlour opening into the passage to which I had now descended. I
believe the original intention was to send him to the New Bailey in a
carriage, but it was soon after decided that he should walk. When this was
made known it was received with shouts of approbation and "bring him out,
let the rebel walk," was heard from all quarters. At length he came forth,
and notwithstanding the blows he had received in running the gauntlet down
the avenue of constables, I thought I could perceive a smile of triumph
on his countenance. A person (Nadin, I believe) offered to take his arm,
but he drew himself back, and in a sort of whisper said: "No, no, that's
rather too good a thing," or words to that effect. He then left the house,
and I soon afterwards also went away.


[Illustration: JOSEPH NADIN DEPUTY-CONSTABLE OF MANCHESTER AT THE TIME OF
PETERLOO

_From a Print at the Reference Library_

_Photo by R. H. Fletcher_

_To face page 21_]


I saw no symptoms of riot or disturbances before the meeting; the
impression on my mind was that the people were sullenly peaceful, and I
had an excellent opportunity of forming an opinion by suddenly coming in
contact with a large body from Ashton, who met me in Mosley Street, as I
entered the town.[7] They were walking at a moderate pace, six or seven
abreast, arm in arm, which enabled them to keep some sort of regularity in
their march. I was soon surrounded by them as I passed, and though my
horse showed a good deal of alarm, particularly at their band and flags,
they broke rank and offered no molestation whatever.

As soon, however, as I had quitted Mr. Buxton's house at the conclusion of
the business, I found them in a very different state of feeling. I heard
repeated vows of revenge. "You took us unprepared, we were unarmed to-day,
and it is your day; but when we meet again the day shall be ours." How far
this declaration of being unarmed men may be relied upon, I cannot pretend
to say; I certainly saw nothing like arms either at or before the meeting;
their sticks were, as far as came under my observation, common
walking-sticks; that some, however, were armed I can have no doubt, as a
constable, when I was leaving Mr. Buxton's house, showed me a couple of
short skewers or daggers fixed in wooden handles, which he had taken in
the fray.

I have heard from the most respectable authority that the cavalry were
assailed by stones during the short time they halted previous to their
charge. I do not wish to contradict positive assertions. What a person
_sees_ must be true. My evidence on that point can only be negative. I
certainly saw nothing of the sort, and yet my eyes were fixed most
steadily upon them, and I think that I must have seen any stone larger
than a pebble at the short distance at which I stood (from thirty to fifty
yards) and the commanding view I had. I indeed saw no missile weapons used
throughout the whole transaction, but as I have before stated, the dust
at the hustings soon partially obscured everything that took place near
that particular spot; but no doubt the people defended themselves to the
best of their power, as it was absolutely impossible for them to get away
and give the cavalry a clear passage till the outer part of the mob had
fallen back. No blame can be fairly attributed to the soldiers for
wounding the constables as well as the radicals, since the chief
distinguishing mark (the former being covered and the latter uncovered)
soon ceased to exist; every man for obvious reasons covering himself in
haste the moment the dispersion commenced.

Such are the leading features of this event, to which I can speak
positively; comments and opinions I have avoided as much as possible, my
object being to give a clear and impartial account of facts, which whether
for or against the adopted conclusions of either party must speak for
themselves.




The Evidence of The Rev. Edward Stanley


in the Trial of an action for assault, brought by Thomas Redford against
Hugh Hornby Birley and others, members of the Manchester Yeomanry, before
Mr. Justice Holroyd and a Special Jury, at Lancaster on the 4th, 5th, 6th,
7th, 8th, and 9th of April, 1822.


_Second day of the Trial._

The Rev. EDWARD STANLEY examined by Mr. SERJEANT BLACKBURNE (_Counsel for
the Plaintiff_).

You, I believe, are the Rector of Alderley, in Cheshire?--I am.

Brother to Sir Thomas Stanley?--Brother to Sir John Stanley.

On the 16th of August, 1819, had you any business with Mr. Buxton?--I had.

How far do you live from Manchester?--Between fifteen and sixteen miles.

You came into Manchester on the morning; about what time?--As near twelve
o'clock as possible I entered Mosley Street.

In your passage up Mosley Street, did you meet with any number of
people?--I did.

Walking?--Walking.

In what manner?--They were coming down the street, walking in a
procession, six, or seven, or eight abreast, and arm in arm.

Were you on horseback?--I was.

Was there any interruption to your passage?--No. Should I explain?

Tell us the reason?--As I was going down the street, some persons on the
pavement desired me--

I do not wish to know what the persons on the pavement desired you to do;
I do not wish you to tell us the conversation, but simply to relate what
happened?--I passed through them.

By their opening to give you way?--Certainly.

Did you go on that day to Mr. Buxton's house, and what time did you get
there? I got to Mr. Buxton's house, I should think, a quarter after one.

Did you go into a room there where the magistrates were assembled?--I did.

How long did you remain there?--I should think about from eight to ten
minutes.

During the time you were in the room, did Mr. Hunt arrive on the
ground?--He was called Mr. Hunt; he was in a barouche.

And a multitude accompanying him?--A vast multitude.

I believe there was a cheer given by the populace at the time when he did
arrive?--A tremendous shout.

Did you remain in the room or did you go elsewhere?--I did not remain
there; I went into the room above it.

Were there any other persons in the room besides you?--Several.

Did you see the Manchester Yeomanry come on to the ground?--I did.

And form in front of Mr. Buxton's house?--They formed with their left
flank a little to the right of the special constables, and a few yards to
the right of Mr. Buxton's house.

You say to the left of the line of special constables?--Their left flank
was on the right of Mr. Buxton's house.

You saw the line of constables; where did it extend to?--It extended from
the door of Mr. Buxton's house, apparently up to the hustings.

Was there more than one line of constables?--There were two lines of
constables.

What was the interval between them?--Near Mr. Buxton's house and the mob,
three or four feet.


[Illustration: "ORATOR" HUNT, 1773-1835 CHAIRMAN OF THE PETERLOO MEETING

_To face page 27_]


Afterwards, the line was closed by the pressure of the mob, expanding
again when they came near the hustings?--According to my observation; to
the best of my judgment; such is the impression on my mind.

Of course you saw the people collected?--Certainly.

In a large mass?--In a very large mass.

What was it enabled you to distinguish the special constables from the
rest?--They were superior-dressed people, had their hats on, and their
staffs were constantly appearing, and they were nearer the hustings.

And the people round the hustings had their hats off?--My general
impression is, all, to speak accurately.

The people on this side of the area of St. Peter's field were not so
numerous?--There were more stragglers, and no crowd.

You saw colours and caps of liberty on the ground?--I did.

What number of either the one or the other? Perhaps you do not distinctly
recollect?--I cannot say.

You heard Mr. Hunt speak?--No, I could just hear his voice, but I was not
able to distinguish what he said.

How long had that taken place before you saw the cavalry advance towards
the hustings?--From their halt, I should think three minutes.

From the time you heard Mr. Hunt?--Not from the time I heard Mr. Hunt; he
was speaking before I arrived.

Then from the time of the halt?--Two or three minutes.

When you saw them advance towards the hustings, with what speed did they
go?--They were formed in an irregular mass. Those on the left advanced in
some sort of order. They went on at first, for a few paces, at no very
quick pace; but they soon increased their speed, till it became a sort of
rush or race amongst them all towards the hustings.

Did you observe the effect that this had upon the people, whether it
caused them to disperse or not?--They could not disperse instantly.

But on the outside of them?--On the right, in front of the hustings, they
immediately began to melt away, as it were, as far as they could at the
extreme.

The outward edge of the meeting?--The outward edge, in front of the
hustings.

Did you observe the cavalry when they got first among the thick part of
the meeting?--Their speed was diminished as soon as they came in contact
with the dense mob.

Well?--But they worked their way to the hustings still, as fast, under
existing circumstances, as they could.

From the place in which you were, I believe you had a very commanding view
of the hustings?--I looked down upon it like a map.

I understood you, you had also been in a room below that, and looked
through there?--I had.

Which, in your opinion, was the better place for a correct observation of
what passed after the meeting?--Decidedly, the highest room.

Did you watch the advance of the cavalry from their place up to the
hustings?--I did.

Did you see either sticks, or stones, or anything of the kind used against
the cavalry in their advance up to the hustings?--Certainly not.

Did you see any resistance whatever to the cavalry, except the thickness
of the meeting?--None.

Do I understand you to say you saw them surround the hustings, or
not?--Surround I could not say, for the other side of the hustings, of
course, was partially eclipsed by the people upon it.

But you saw them encircle part?--Encircle part.

Did you see what was done when they got there?--Yes.

Will you tell us what it was that you saw done?--I saw the swords up and
down, the orators tumbled or thrown over, and the mob dispersed.

In your judgment, what length of time elapsed between the cavalry first
setting off into the meeting and the time of their complete
dispersion?--Starting from their halt to the complete dispersion of the
meeting, I should think from three to five minutes; but I cannot speak to
a minute.

In your judgment it took from three to five minutes? You did not observe
it by a watch?--No.

Did you see any other troops come into the field?--I did.

What were they?--

Mr. JUSTICE HOLROYD: He says he saw what?--

Mr. SERJEANT BLACKBURNE: Other troops come into the field.

When was it that you saw them come into the field?--When the mob around
the hustings were dispersing rapidly, and I think Mr. Hunt was taken off.

What were those troops that you saw come into the ground then?--First came
in, on the left of Mr. Buxton's row of houses, the Cheshire Yeomanry, who
filed to the left.

Mr. JUSTICE HOLROYD: You mean to the left, looking from the house,
then?--From the house.

Mr. SERJEANT BLACKBURNE: Where did the Cheshire Yeomanry take up their
position when they came on the ground?--They took up their position in the
rear of the hustings, rather in advance, I think, of some mounds of earth.

Do you know Windmill Street?--I know no street.

You don't know its name?--I know no name.

You say near a rising ground?--There is a sort of little elevated bank or
ground.

Had the multitude from that part been dispersed?--The multitude in the
rear were pretty much as they had been at first. I think they were
dispersing, but not so rapidly.

Do you mean in the rear of the cavalry?--In the rear of the hustings.

The Cheshire Yeomanry's position was in the rear of the hustings?--Part
near amongst these people.

What other troops beside the Cheshire Yeomanry did you see come on to the
ground?--Soon after the Cheshire Yeomanry had come in and taken their
position, a troop of Dragoons, I think the 15th, came in under the windows
of Mr. Buxton's house.

You say you think they were the 15th Hussars?--They were called the 15th
Dragoons; they had Waterloo medals.

Where did they take up their position?--

Mr. JUSTICE HOLROYD: "Near Mr. Buxton's house," he said.

Mr. SERJEANT BLACKBURNE: Did they continue there?--They halted or paused
for a moment or so, a little to the left of Mr. Buxton's house, a very
little to the left, almost in front, inclining to the left.

What others did you see come on the ground, besides them and the Cheshire
Yeomanry?--At the close of the business I saw some artillery driving
through the place.

Was there any other besides those that you saw take up any position on the
ground?--None, on the ground.

At this time, was the whole of the multitude dispersed?--It was dispersing
most rapidly; I may say dispersed, except in partial spots.

After leaving the hustings, to which part of the field did the Manchester
Yeomanry go?--To all parts. I think more behind the hustings, and on the
right; they did not come back to me so much.

Do you know the Quakers' meeting-house?--I have heard where it is since;
then I did not know.

Was it that way that they went?--If you could point out, in a plan, the
Quakers' meeting-house, I could tell you if they went that road.

There is the Quakers' meeting-house, you will see written on the
plan?--Some went that way.

Some of the people, too, dispersed in that direction, did they?--The
people dispersed in every direction.

I am not sure whether I asked you before, whether from your situation in
this window, if any stones, or brickbats, or sticks, had been raised
against the cavalry, on their way to the hustings, you must have seen
it?--I think I must have seen it.


Cross-examined by Mr. SERJEANT HULLOCK:

Will you venture to swear, Mr. Stanley, that no stones nor brickbats would
be thrown during the advance of the cavalry towards the hustings, without
your perceiving it?--I can only venture to say that I saw none.

I believe you have favoured the public with an account of this
transaction?--No, I have not.

You printed or wrote something?--It was in circulation among my friends. I
wrote something which was never published.

There was a document, written by you, circulated among your
friends?--Among my friends.

Before that time, had you seen yourself and read any publication, either
in manuscript or print, on this subject?--I had read the reports in some
papers, naturally, after that time, and I might have seen a pamphlet
printed at Manchester.

Then you had seen several accounts which had been given to the world
before you wrote?--Yes, I saw the reports of the papers immediately after
the meeting.

Whose account did you see, besides the reports in the paper?--A Mr.
Phillips's.

You, it seemed, entertained a different view of the transactions that had
taken place upon this day from those which had been given to the world
before that time?--I do not know; I should say a different view from some,
perhaps, and coinciding with the views of others.

Coinciding with the views of some, and differing from the views of
others?--Respecting stones.

No matter what. You are a magistrate, I understand?--I am not.

Of neither Cheshire nor Lancashire?--No.

I beg your pardon. You, however, were in the magistrates' room, I think
you said, at Mr. Buxton's?--I was.

Of course you had an acquaintance with the gentlemen who were there
assembled, as acting magistrates of the committee for the counties of
Chester and Lancaster?--With two or three I had.

Probably upon terms of intimacy with one of them?--Certainly.

Was that gentleman there at that time?--He was.

Did it occur to your mind at the time that the cavalry were sent for
(because you went back to a window, and saw the messenger crossing the
field, for the purpose of bringing them to the place, and were told or
heard there was a rumour in the room above, that the cavalry had been
sent for) did it occur (attend to my question) to you, at the time, from
the observations which you had made on the subject, that that step was
improper or premature?--I don't think it occurred to me either one way or
the other.

Am I to understand from that then that you exercised no judgment upon the
subject at that time?--I certainly did exercise some judgment, some
opinion on it, at that time.

Having exercised some judgment upon the subject, I ask you whether, in
your judgment, such as you exercised upon that point, the step was either
improper or premature?--I saw no necessity for it.

Then you deemed it premature?--I saw no necessity for it.

It struck you then as an unnecessary act?--Certainly.

Then you would go down, of course, immediately and speak to your friend
upon the subject?--No.

Nor ever expressed to that friend or to any other, at the time, your
opinion with respect to the impropriety of the step?--I had no other
friend to speak to.

Did you speak to him?--I did not go down into the room again.

Probably you might, being a gentleman of considerable acquaintance, meet
with some friend on going home, and might ride home with some gentleman,
at least part of the road?--Part of the road I did.

Mr Markland, I presume?--I overtook Mr. Markland.

Did you express any opinion to Mr. Markland upon these
proceedings?--Probably I did; but I have not the most distant
recollection.

I ask you, upon your oath, Mr. Stanley, if you did not express to him your
entire concurrence in, and approbation of, the measures adopted by the
magistrates?--I answer, upon my oath, that I do not recollect having said
any such thing.

Can you tell me whether you expressed any disapprobation of the measures
which it had been deemed necessary to adopt?--I have no recollection
whatever of the conversation.

Then you mean to represent to us now, that your feelings upon the subject
were so indifferent, that you cannot tell now, whether you approved or
disapproved of these steps at the time?--I have not the most distant
recollection of any conversation I had with Mr. Markland.

That is not an answer to my question. I ask you whether you mean to state
that at this time, you don't remember whether you entertained feelings of
approbation or disapprobation of those steps?--I thought it was a dreadful
occurrence; but I hoped that there were some grounds for it.

Mr. JUSTICE HOLROYD: You are speaking of what you thought?--It was in
answer to the question.

Mr. SERJEANT HULLOCK: I am speaking of what you thought then. As I
understand you, you cannot recall to your recollection the impression
under which you laboured at the time you travelled home with Mr.
Markland?--I thought it a dreadful occurrence, but I hoped there were
grounds for it.

Did you mention that to Mr. Markland?--I cannot recollect.

It is very important that I should endeavour to extract from you, Mr.
Stanley, without meaning the slightest disrespect to you, every fact
within your knowledge on the subject; you say that after the meeting had
been dispersed, the first cavalry which appeared on the ground was the
Cheshire Yeomanry?--Not after the meeting had dispersed, but whilst in
progress to dispersion.

Do you mean to state now, to the best of your recollection, that the
Cheshire Yeomanry were the first cavalry advancing on the ground after
that?--It depends on what you call the ground; the Cheshire Yeomanry were
the first, after the Manchester cavalry, that advanced at the left.

Tell me, according to the best of your recollection, which of these troops
came first upon the ground?--The Cheshire Yeomanry; but you will observe
that, at this time, the disposition of the hustings occupied a good deal
of my attention, and I did not expect the others.

The Cheshire Yeomanry came over broken and uneven ground?--I cannot tell.

I observe that you use the word "apparently" twice, in answer to two
questions which were put to you, which were a repetition of the same
question--whether the two lines of constables surrounded the hustings or
not; I think you said they "apparently" did?--Apparently they did.

Mr. JUSTICE HOLROYD: Surround the hustings?--Apparently.

Mr. SERJEANT HULLOCK: Do you mean to state, then, that in your judgment
the avenue which was formed by the two lines of constables extended from
the house to the hustings?--At that time the impression on my mind was,
and it now is, that it certainly did.

But of course you won't swear that it did?--I cannot swear; I can only
speak to the impression on my mind.

In the same way that you swear to the existence of brickbats and
stones?--To the non-existence.

I think you say you saw Hunt come upon the ground?--I saw the barouche.

You saw the ladies and gentlemen both. Did you see any female?--I saw a
female.

What was her use?--I have no conception of that.

Mr. JUSTICE HOLROYD: Of what?--

Mr. SERJEANT HULLOCK: I asked whether she was for use or show.

You did not know any of the parties inside?--I had not the most distant
knowledge of them.

You had heard of Carlile?--I heard of him in London.

You have heard since he was in Manchester that day?--I have heard it
to-day, in the course of another examination. I never heard it before.

Hunt, when he saw the cavalry coming, I think, intimated his
knowledge--his cognisance of the fact--by desiring them to give three
cheers?--I could not hear.

There was some cheering given?--There was a very loud cheer.

From the hustings?--From all the mob.

You say when he was addressing the mob, you did not hear his words, "but I
think, whatever his words were, they excited a shout from those
immediately about him, which was re-echoed with fearful animation by the
rest of the multitude"?--Certainly, that is the impression on my mind;
those were my own words.

It was tremendous--the shout?--It was not so tremendous as the shout with
which Hunt was received on the ground; the first was the loudest shout.

And the most appalling?--The first, when Hunt was received on the ground;
I never heard so loud a shout.

"Terrific," was your word?--I should say terrific.

You say that the people who were immediately contiguous to the hustings
heard what Hunt said?--I cannot say.

You inferred that from their shouting?--Certainly.

Then that shout was re-echoed by the mob at a distance?--I conceived so.

What proportion, do you think, of the mass of the people, with their eyes
up, and mouths open, looking at that man during the time, could hear one
word he said?--I should think no one beyond ten yards from the hustings,
in the bustle of such a day--that is guess.

I daresay it is a good guess, too; how do you think they would carry the
resolutions at the outside, at the right flank, the left flank, and beyond
the ten yards, upon the propositions made by this orator?--I have no
opinion to give about that.

It certainly is a difficult point. It appeared to you that Hunt, as far as
his voice could reach, had a pretty absolute control over his friends;
they shouted as he spoke; it appeared that he was
commander-in-chief?--The thing never occurred to me; I cannot speak
positively.

Have not you an opinion that he was head and leader of the party?--My
opinion certainly is, that he was.

And now, I will ask you this question, as a clergyman, and as a man of
character, which I believe you to be--I ask you, upon your oath, whether,
in your judgment, the public tranquillity and the peace of Manchester were
not endangered by a mob of that description, composed in that manner, and
having such a man as Hunt at its head--Hunt and Carlile, for
instance?--Hunt and Carlile are dangerous people, and any mob under their
control must be dangerous.

Re-examined by Mr. SERJEANT BLACKBURNE:

Do you know, Mr. Stanley, whether this meeting was under the command of
either Hunt or Carlile?--No.

When you say there was a shout given on the Manchester Yeomanry coming
into the field, was there any other shout besides that given by the
multitude?--There was.

Whose shout was that?--The Manchester Yeomanry, the special constables,
and the people round the pavement in front of our house.

May I ask you whether you were terrified by those shouts?--Personally,
certainly not.

Mr. JUSTICE HOLROYD: Explain what you mean by that?--I myself was not
alarmed about them.

Mr. SERJEANT BLACKBURNE: And whether it did not create terror and
alarm?--Not to me individually, certainly not.

You have said that you presented a description of what you saw at the
meeting, to some of your friends?--I did.

How soon was that written after the meeting?--I can scarcely say; I should
think perhaps two months, but I cannot speak accurately. It was when the
impression was clear on my mind.

Clear and fresh in your recollection. Will you have the goodness to tell
me whether you heard or saw any person read the Riot Act?--I neither heard
it read nor saw it read.

Mr. SERJEANT HULLOCK: If it was read you did not hear it?--I did not hear
it.

If it should turn out to have been read, and read loudly, there might have
been something else done--but that is conclusion--that is reason.

Mr. EVANS: Your Lordship has on your note that McKennell said that he did
not[8] hear the Riot Act read.

Mr. SERJEANT CROSS: He said so.

Mr. JUSTICE HOLROYD: Yes, I have.

Mr. SERJEANT BLACKBURNE: Then that is my case, my Lord.


[Illustration: Plan of Peterloo. (_F. A. B._)

Compiled from a number of Contemporary Plans, and showing (in dotted
outline) the position of modern blocks of buildings.

_By permission of Mr. H. Guppy._]




Sir William Jolliffe

_afterwards_

LORD HYLTON


William George Hylton Jolliffe (1800-1876), the first Baron Hylton, was
the son of the Rev. W. J. Jolliffe. At the date of Peterloo he was not
quite nineteen years of age, and was serving as a Lieutenant in the 15th
Hussars, then quartered at the Cavalry Barracks at Manchester. He retired
from the Hussars with the rank of Captain. He was created a Baronet in
1821, and sat as member for Petersfield for about thirty years, acting for
a short time as Under Secretary for Home Affairs, and afterwards as
Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasury. He was exceedingly popular as a
Conservative Whip, and when he was raised to the Peerage in 1866, he took
the title of Baron Hylton from the family's connection with the Hyltons of
Hylton Castle.

The letter which follows appeared in Dean Pellew's _Life of Lord
Sidmouth_, published in 1847. It will be seen that it is addressed to T.
G. B. Estcourt, Esq.; presumably he obtained the information for Dean
Pellew. The letter is approved and annotated by "E. Smyth, Esq., of
Norwich, who commanded a troop of the Cheshire Yeomanry at Peterloo."
Unfortunately, the Notes to the letter are somewhat confusing: some are
signed by Captain Smyth, others are not signed, and it is not easy to
determine their authorship. Moreover, Captain Smyth's contributions are
not on a level with the letter itself. It has therefore been thought
better to omit the Notes altogether, and allow Lieut. Jolliffe's very
clear and well-balanced report to speak for itself. A few explanatory
words have been inserted in square brackets.

The Rev. Edward Stanley, in his Evidence, given above, mentioned the fact
that the Hussars who rode at Peterloo were wearing their Waterloo medals.
As a matter of fact, the 15th (the King's) Hussars, whose motto is
"Merebimur," have not only "Waterloo," but also the Peninsula, Vittoria,
Afghanistan and a number of other names inscribed on their colours. The
uniform is blue, with a Busby bag and scarlet plume. Presumably the plume
shown in our photograph came from the helmet of one of the Hussars. It
seems clear from the evidence which was given before the Relief Committee,
after Peterloo, that there was not the same feeling of resentment against
the Hussars as against the local Yeomanry; in fact, it was more than once
asserted that troopers of the Hussars actually restrained the Manchester
Yeomanry from excessive violence.

       *       *       *       *       *

I wrote to the present Lord Hylton to ask if he could lend a portrait of
his Grandfather for reproduction here. He replied that he could not do so,
but added: "As a matter of fact, a full-length portrait (by Sir Francis
Grant, P.R.A., in my possession) has been engraved, and a copy of this
engraving is, I should think, not difficult to procure." I have not been
able to find it. It is not included in the British Museum Series.




The Charge of the 15th Hussars at Peterloo

_as described by_

SIR WILLIAM G. H. JOLLIFFE, BART., M.P. (who rode in the charge as a
Lieutenant of Hussars) in a letter which appears in Dean Pellew's _Life of
Lord Sidmouth_, Vol. III., p. 253 _et seq._

9, ST. JAMES'S PLACE,

_April 11th, 1845_.

MY DEAR SIR,

Twenty-five years have passed since the collision unfortunately occurred
between the population of Manchester and its neighbourhood and the
military stationed in that town, on the sixteenth of August, 1819.

I was at that time a Lieutenant in the 15th King's Hussars, which Regiment
had been quartered in Manchester Cavalry Barracks about six weeks. This
was my first acquaintance with a large manufacturing population. I had
little knowledge of the condition of that population, whether or no a
great degree of distress was then prevalent, or whether or no the distrust
and bad feeling which appeared to exist between employers and employed,
was wholly or in part caused by the agitation of political questions. I
will not, therefore, enter into any speculation on these points, but I
will endeavour to relate the facts which fell under my own observations,
although acting, as of course I was, under the command of others, and in a
subordinate situation. The military force stationed in Manchester
consisted of six troops of the 15th Hussars, under the command of Colonel
Dalrymple; one troop of Horse Artillery with two guns, under Major
Dyneley; and nearly the whole of the 31st Regiment, under Colonel Guy
L'Estrange (who commanded the whole as senior officer). [Sir John Byng was
then at Pontefract.] Some companies of the 88th Regiment and [six troops
of] the Cheshire Yeomanry had also been brought into the town in
anticipation of disturbances which might result from the expected meeting;
and these latter had only arrived on the morning of the sixteenth, or a
few hours previously; and, lastly, there was a troop of Manchester
Yeomanry Cavalry, consisting of about forty members, who, from the manner
in which they were made use of (to say the least) greatly aggravated the
disasters of the day. Their ranks were filled chiefly by wealthy master
manufacturers; and without the knowledge possessed by a (strictly
speaking) military body, they were placed, most unwisely, as it appeared,
under the immediate command and order of the civil authorities.

Our Regiment paraded in field-service order at about 8.30 or it might be 9
o'clock, a.m. Two squadrons of it were marched into the town about ten
o'clock. They were formed up and dismounted in a wide street, the name of
which I forget,[9] to the North of St. Peter's field (the place appointed
for the meeting), and at the distance of nearly a quarter of a mile from
it.

The Cheshire Yeomanry were formed, on our left, in the same street. One
troop of our Regiment was attached to the artillery, which took up a
position between the Cavalry Barracks and the town; and one troop remained
in charge of the Barracks.

The two squadrons with which I was stationed must have remained dismounted
nearly two hours. During the greater portion of that period a solid mass
of people continued moving along a street about a hundred yards to our
front on the way to the place of meeting. Other officers as well as myself
occasionally rode to the front (to the end of a street) to see them pass.
They marched at a brisk pace in ranks well closed up, five or six bands of
music being interspersed, and there appeared to be but few women with
them. Mr. Hunt, with two or three other men, and I think two women dressed
in light blue and white, were in an open carriage drawn by the people.
This carriage was adorned with blue and white flags; and the day was fine
and hot. As soon as the great bulk of the procession had passed, we were
ordered to stand to our horses. In a very short time afterwards, the four
troops of the 15th mounted, and at once moved off by the right, at a trot
which was increased to a canter. Someone who had been sent from the place
of meeting to bring us led the way through a number of narrow streets and
by a circuitous route to (what I will call) the South-west[10] corner of
St. Peter's field. We advanced along the South[11] side of this space of
ground without a halt or pause even: the words "Front!" and "Forward!"
were given, and the trumpet sounded the charge at the very moment the
threes wheeled up. When fronted, our line extended quite across the
ground, which in all parts was so filled with people that their hats
seemed to touch.

It was then for the first time that I saw the Manchester troop of
Yeomanry; they were scattered singly or in small groups over the greater
part of the field, literally hemmed up and hedged into the mob so that
they were powerless either to make an impression or to escape; in fact,
they were in the power of those whom they were designed to overawe, and it
required only a glance to discover their helpless position, and the
necessity of our being brought to their rescue. As I was at the time
informed, this hopeless state of things happened thus: A platform had been
erected near the centre of the field, from which Mr. Hunt and others were
to address the multitude, and the magistrates, having ordered a strong
body of constables to arrest the speakers, unfortunately imagined that
they should support the peace officers by bringing up the troop of
Yeomanry at a walk. The result of this movement, instead of that which the
magistrates desired, was unexpectedly to place this small body of horsemen
(so introduced into a dense mob) entirely at the mercy of the people by
whom they were, on all sides, pressed upon and surrounded.

The charge of the Hussars, to which I have just alluded, swept this
mingled mass of human beings before it; people, yeomen, and constables,
in their confused attempts to escape, ran one over the other; so that by
the time we had arrived at the end of the field the fugitives were
literally piled up to a considerable elevation above the level of the
ground. (I may here, by the way, state that this field, as it is called,
was merely an open space of ground, surrounded by buildings, and itself, I
rather think, in course of being built upon.).

The Hussars drove the people forward with the flats of their swords, but
sometimes, as is almost inevitably the case when men are placed in such
situations, the edge was used, both by the Hussars, and, as I have heard,
by the yeomen also; but of this last part I was not cognizant, and
believing though I do that nine out of ten of the sabre-wounds were caused
by the Hussars, I must still consider that it redounds to the humane
forbearance of the men of the 15th that more wounds were not received,
when the vast numbers are taken into consideration with whom they were
brought into hostile collision; beyond all doubt, however, the far greater
amount of injuries were from the pressure of the routed multitude. The
Hussars on the left pursued down the various streets which led from the
place; those on the right met with something more of resistance.

The mob had taken possession of various buildings on that side,
particularly of a Quakers' chapel and burial ground enclosed with a wall.
This they occupied for some little time, and in attempting to displace
them, some of the men and horses were struck with stones and brickbats. I
was on the left, and as soon as I had passed completely over the ground
and found myself in the street on the other side, I turned back, and then,
seeing a sort of fight still going on on the right, I went in that
direction. At the very moment I reached the Quakers' meeting-house, I saw
a farrier of the 15th ride at a small door in the outer wall, and to my
surprise his horse struck it with such force that it flew open. Two or
three Hussars then rode in, and the place was immediately in their
possession. I then turned towards the elevated platform, which still
remained in the centre of the field with persons upon it; a few straggling
Hussars and yeomen, together with a number of men having the appearance of
peace-officers were congregating about it. On my way thither I met the
Commanding-officer of my Regiment, who directed me to find a Trumpeter, in
order that he might sound the "rally" or "retreat." This sent me again
down the street I had first been in (after the pursuing men of my troop);
but I had not ridden above a hundred yards before I found a Trumpeter, and
returned with him to the Colonel. The field and the adjacent streets now
presented an extraordinary sight: the ground was quite covered with hats,
shoes, musical instruments, and other things. Here and there lay the
unfortunates who were too much injured to move away, and this sight was
rendered the more distressing by observing some women among the sufferers.

Standing near the corner of the street where I had been sent in search of
a Trumpeter, a brother officer called my attention to a pistol being fired
from a window. I saw it fired twice, and I believe it had been fired once
before I observed it. Some of the 31st Regiment just now arriving on the
ground were ordered to take possession of this house, but I do not know if
this was carried into effect.

I next went towards a private of the Regiment whose horse had fallen over
a piece of timber nearly in the middle of the square, and who was most
seriously injured. There were many of these pieces of timber (or
timber-trees) lying upon the ground, and as these could not be
distinguished when the mob covered them, they had caused bad falls to one
officer's horse and to many of the troopers'. While I was attending to the
wounded soldier, the artillery troop with the troop of Hussars attached to
it, arrived on the ground from the same direction by which we had entered
the field; these were quickly followed by the Cheshire Yeomanry. The 31st
Regiment came in another direction, and the whole remained formed up till
our squadrons had fallen in again.

Carriages were brought to convey the wounded to the Manchester Infirmary,
and the troop of Hussars who came up with the guns was marched off to
escort to the gaol a number of persons who had been arrested, and among
these Mr. Hunt. For some time the town was patrolled by the troops, the
streets being nearly empty, and the shops for the most part closed. We
then returned to the Barracks. I should not omit to mention that, before
the men were dismissed, the arms were minutely examined; and that no
carbine or pistol was found to have been fired, and only one pistol to
have been loaded.

About 8 p.m. one squadron of the 15th Hussars (two troops) was ordered on
duty to form part of a strong night picket, the other part of which
consisted of two companies of the 88th Regiment. This picket was stationed
at a place called the New Cross, at the end of Oldham Street. As soon as
it had taken up its position, a mob assembled about it, which increased as
the darkness came on; stones were thrown at the soldiers, and the Hussars
many times cleared the ground by driving the mob up the streets leading
from the New Cross. But these attempts to get rid of the annoyance were
only successful for the moment, for the people got through the houses or
narrow passages from one street into another, and the troops were again
attacked, and many men and horses struck with stones. This lasted nearly
an hour and a half, and the soldiers being more and more pressed upon, a
town magistrate, who was with the picket, read the Riot Act, and the
officer in command ordered the 88th to fire (which they did by platoon
firing) down three of the streets. The firing lasted only a few minutes;
perhaps not more than thirty shots were fired; but these had a magical
effect; the mob ran away and dispersed forthwith, leaving three or four
persons on the ground with gunshot wounds. At 4 a.m. the picket squadron
was relieved by another squadron of the Regiment. With this latter
squadron I was on duty, and after we had patrolled the town for two hours,
the officer in command sent me to the magistrates (who had remained
assembled during the night) to report to them that the town was perfectly
quiet, and to request their sanction to the return of the military to
their quarters.

On the afternoon of the 17th I visited, in company with some military
medical officers, the Infirmary. I saw there from twelve to twenty cases
of sabre-wounds, and among these two women who appeared not likely to
recover. One man was in a dying state from a gunshot wound in the head;
another had had his leg amputated; both these casualties arose from the
firing of the 88th the night before. Two or three were reputed dead; one
of them a constable, killed on St. Peter's field, but I saw none of the
bodies.

As shortly as I could I have now related what fell under my own
observation during these twenty-four hours ... I trust that I have, in
some degree, complied with your wishes.

WILLIAM G. HYLTON JOLLIFFE.

_To_ Thomas Grimston Bucknall Estcourt, Esq., M.P.




[Illustration: JOHN BENJAMIN SMITH 1794-1879

_By permission of Lady Durning Lawrence_

_Photo by Briggs_

_To face page 59_]


John Benjamin Smith

_First Chairman of the Anti-Corn Law League_.


John Benjamin Smith (1794-1879), whose account of Peterloo follows, was
better known as a strenuous advocate of Free Trade; even in this capacity,
however, a breakdown of health some years before the Repeal of the Corn
Laws, robbed him of much of the credit which was due to him for the
important spade-work that he had done. He was the first Treasurer of the
Anti-Corn Law Association, and when that developed into the Anti-Corn Law
League, he became its first Chairman. He contested several elections on
Free Trade principles, and used himself to tell how he had converted
Cobden to "total repeal." He sat as member, first for the Stirling Burghs,
and afterwards, during more than twenty years, for Stockport. His
correspondence with John Bright has recently been placed in the Manchester
Reference Library. During the American War he strongly espoused the cause
of the North, and he was one of those who urged the Government to
encourage the growth of cotton in India.

Mr. Smith was a Trustee of Owens College under the Founder's will; and he
subscribed liberally towards its extension. His name is perpetuated in the
"Smith" Professorship of English Literature, which was endowed in memory
of him by his two daughters and his son-in-law. A short memoir of him,
which appeared in Alderman Thompson's _History of Owens College_, has been
reprinted and published separately. (Manchester, J. E. Cornish, 1887.)

At the date of Peterloo he was only twenty-five years of age, but he had
already shown great promise as a business man. Entering the office of his
uncle, a Manchester merchant, at the early age of fourteen, he was made
responsible for the whole correspondence of the firm five years later; and
before he was twenty he had negotiated some very profitable purchases of
cotton at the sales of the East India Company.

The account of Peterloo which follows is an extract from his
"Reminiscences," which were written towards the close of his life at the
earnest request of his family. The manuscript of these is now at the
Manchester Reference Library, as is also a typed and bound copy presented
by his daughter, Lady Durning Lawrence. Among his other manuscripts (also
at the Manchester Reference Library) is a shorter account of Peterloo,
apparently written immediately after the event. The statement made
recently that Mr. J. B. Smith was the author of the well-known _Impartial
Narrative of the Melancholy Occurrences at Manchester_ seems to be due to
an error: apparently the _Impartial Narrative_ (which seems to have been
written by another hand) has been confused with Mr. Smith's shorter and
earlier account.

We have already pointed out that Mr. Smith's narrative, which is not so
detailed as those of Stanley and Jolliffe in its description of the charge
of the troops, is specially valuable for the account it gives of the
circumstances immediately preceding and following the catastrophe, and its
estimate of the character of the crowd. In these details it is strikingly
corroborative of Bamford's story, as told in his _Passages in the Life of
a Radical_, and of the information given by Mr. John Edward Taylor,
who--under the pseudonym of "An Observer"--edited the contemporary tracts
entitled _The Peterloo Massacre_.

       *       *       *       *       *

The portrait of Mr. Smith which appears here is from a photograph kindly
lent by his daughter, Lady Durning Lawrence.




_AN EXTRACT FROM THE_

"Reminiscences" of John Benjamin Smith

_Copied from the original manuscript then in the possession of his
daughter, Lady Durning Lawrence. (August 1913.)_


... The people, disappointed in their expectations that prosperity and
plenty would follow the return of peace, and having no faith in a
legislature which as soon as the war terminated inflicted upon them a Corn
Law to deprive them of cheap corn, demanded a better representation in
Parliament. Stimulated by the writings of Cobbett, associations were
formed in all the manufacturing districts to obtain a reform in
Parliament. Lancashire took the lead in this movement. Clubs were
established in 1816 in all the manufacturing towns and villages. At the
small town of Middleton, near Manchester, a Club was formed in which
Bamford, the weaver-poet, took a leading part. They were joined by many
honest and intelligent men from all parts of the district, among whom was
John Knight, a small manufacturer. A meeting of delegates was held on the
first of January, 1817, at which it was decided that the reforms required
could only be accomplished by the establishment of annual parliaments and
universal suffrage.

The establishment of these clubs alarmed the Government, who saw in them
nothing but an intention to overturn the institutions of the country, and
to revive in this country the enormities of the French Revolution. Spies
and Informers were employed by the Government, and John Knight and
thirty-seven others who had legally assembled to discuss the reforms which
they deemed necessary to obtain a repeal of the Corn Laws and good
government, were arrested on the information of spies, and sent for trial
to Lancaster, but on their trial before Mr. Baron Wood, were all found not
guilty by the Jury.

The Sidmouth Government suspended the Habeas Corpus Act so that they could
arrest and imprison any person as long as they pleased. The Tories,
following the example of the Radicals, established Associations for the
protection of the Constitution.

In January, 1818, however, it was announced that the Act for the
suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act would be repealed. No sooner were the
people relieved from the danger of being sent to prison for being present
at a meeting to petition Parliament for reform, as great numbers had been
in Lancashire imprisoned from March, 1817 until January, 1818, and then
discharged without being informed what charges were made against
them--than the Reform Associations were revived. A fresh campaign was
rigorously commenced early in 1819.

Henry Hunt (commonly called Orator Hunt) had come forward as the champion
of the people's rights. On the 25th of January, he made a public entry
into Manchester from Stockport, accompanied by large crowds with flags and
banners. The meeting was enthusiastic but very peaceable. Meetings were
held in all the surrounding towns and villages to appoint district
delegates to make arrangements for a great meeting to be held in
Manchester. This memorable meeting was held on the 16th of August, 1819,
on a large vacant plot of land called St. Peter's field, adjoining St.
Peter's Street, and in sight of St. Peter's Church. The actors in the
bloody tragedy of that day were called "The Heroes of Peterloo," in
contrast with the brave heroes of Waterloo.

This meeting was called to petition Parliament for a Reform of Parliament
and the Repeal of the Corn Laws, and it is a curious coincidence that on
the very spot where the largest public meeting was ever held to petition
Parliament for the Repeal of the Corn Laws, in the dispersion of which by
military force six hundred persons were killed and wounded there now
stands the Free Trade Hall, erected twenty years afterwards on Peterloo,
for the peaceful and noble object of obtaining bread for the people by the
repeal of the wicked laws by which it was prohibited.

I had no intention of going to this meeting, but my Aunt called at the
Counting House and asked me to accompany her to Mrs. Orton's, Mount
Street, St. Peter's field, to see the great meeting--a house overlooking
the whole space, and next but one to where the Magistrates were assembled.
We reached there about half-past eleven o'clock, and on our way saw large
bodies of men and women with bands playing and flags and banners bearing
devices: "No Corn Laws," "Reform," etc. There were crowds of people in all
directions, full of good humour, laughing and shouting and making fun. I
always wore a white hat in summer, and I found that Mr. Hunt also wore a
white hat, and it became the symbol of radicalism, and may have been the
cause of the politeness shown to us by the crowd.

It seemed to be a gala day with the country people who were mostly dressed
in their best and brought with them their wives, and when I saw boys and
girls taking their father's hand in the procession, I observed to my Aunt:
"These are the guarantees of their peaceable intentions--we need have no
fears," and so we passed on to Mrs. Orton's. When we arrived there we saw
great crowds which were constantly increased by the arrival of successive
country processions until it was estimated that the meeting amounted to
60,000 people. There was a double row of constables formed from Mr.
Buxton's (where the magistrates had taken their station) to the hustings.

My Father joined us soon after our arrival at Mrs. Orton's.

At length Hunt made his appearance in an open barouche drawn by two
horses, and a woman dressed in white sitting on the box. On their reaching
the hustings which were prepared for the orator, he was received with
enthusiastic applause; the waving of hats and flags; the blowing of
trumpets; and the playing of music. Hunt stepped on to the hustings, and
was again cheered by the vast assemblage. He began to address them, and I
could distinctly see his motions through the glass I held in my hand, and
I could hear his voice, but could not understand what he said. He paused,
and the people cheered him.

About this time there was an alarm among the women and children near the
place where I stood, and I could also see a part of the crowd in motion
towards the Deansgate side, but I thought it a false alarm, as many
returned again and joined in the huzzas of the crowd. A second alarm
arose, and I heard the sound of a horn, and immediately the Manchester
Yeomanry appeared, coming from Peter Street, headed by Hugh Birley, the
same man who, in 1815, as Boroughreeve of Manchester, presided at the
public meeting assembled to petition Parliament for the Repeal of the Corn
Laws. They galloped up to the house where the Magistrates were assembled,
halted, and drew up in line. After some hesitation, from what cause I do
not know, I heard the order to form three deep, and then the order to
march. The Trumpeter led the way and galloped towards the hustings,
followed by the yeomanry.

Whilst this was passing, my attention was called to another movement
coming from the opposite side of the meeting. A troop of soldiers, the
15th Hussars, turned round the corner of the house where we stood and
galloped forwards towards the crowd. They were succeeded by the Cheshire
Yeomanry, and lastly by two pieces of artillery. On the arrival of the
soldiers, the special constables, the magistrates, and the soldiers set
up loud shouts. This was responded to by the crowd with waving of hats.
After this the soldiers galloped amongst the people creating frightful
alarm and disorder. The people ran helter-skelter in every direction.

It was a hot, dusty day; clouds of dust arose which obscured the view.
When it had subsided a startling scene was presented. Numbers of men,
women, and children were lying on the ground who had been knocked down and
run over by the soldiers. I noticed one woman lying face downwards,
apparently lifeless. A man went up to her and lifted one of her legs; it
fell as if she were lifeless; another man lifted both her legs and let
them fall. I saw her some time after carried off by the legs and arms as
if she were dead.

My attention was then directed to a number of constables bringing from the
hustings the famous Hunt wearing a white hat, and with him another man,
also wearing a white hat, who was said to be Johnson. The prisoners were
treated in a scandalous manner; many of the constables hissed and beat
them as they passed. When they reached the Magistrates' house he was
surrounded by constables, some pulling him by the collar, others by the
coat. A dastardly attack was made upon him by General Clay, who with a
large stick struck him over the head with both hands as he was
ascending the steps to the Magistrates' house. The blow knocked in his hat
and packed it over his face. He then turned round as if ashamed of himself
and became a quiet spectator. The ground by this time was cleared, and
nothing was to be seen but soldiers and constables.


[Illustration: THE HUNT MEMORIAL IN THE VESTIBULE OF THE MANCHESTER REFORM
CLUB

_Bronze Relief by John Cassidy, R.C.A._

_To face page 69_]


The Rev. Mr. Hay (the Chairman to the Magistrates) then stood on the steps
of Mr. Buxton's house and addressed the constables. I could not hear what
he said, but he was cheered when he concluded. He then returned into the
house, but came out again soon afterwards with Mr. Marriott, the
Magistrate, and Hunt in the custody of Nadin, Chief Constable, and with
Johnson in the custody of another constable. When Hunt made his
appearance, he was assailed with groans and hisses by the soldiers and
constables. Hunt took off his hat and bowed to them, which appeared to
calm them while they marched towards Deansgate on their way to the New
Bailey prison, escorted by the cavalry. On quitting the windows from
whence we had witnessed so many painful scenes, we descended and found two
special constables who had been brought into the house. One presented a
shocking sight--the face was all over blood from a sword-cut on his head,
and his shoulder was put out. The other was bloody from being rode over
and kicked on the back of his head.

When the particulars of this bloody tragedy became known, strong feelings
of indignation were expressed all over the country. The Manchester
magistrates, alarmed at the tone of public opinion in London, had a
meeting hastily convened on the 19th of August at the Police Office, which
was adjourned to the Star Inn, where resolutions were passed thanking the
magistrates and the soldiers. I happened by accident to be present at the
meeting. A young man with whom I was acquainted, a clerk in the office of
the Clerk to the Magistrates, happening to meet me in the street on his
way to the meeting, took me by the arm and said: "Come with me." I asked
where he was going, and when I learned, declined to go. He replied:
"Nonsense, you will hear what is going on," and so I somewhat reluctantly
went with him to the Star Inn. On our arrival we found the room pretty
full and I took a seat. The Chairman, Mr. Francis Phillips, rose and said:
"If there be any persons present who do not approve of the objects of this
meeting they are requested to withdraw." I thought he looked at me, and
felt a little uncomfortable. He sat down again and rose to repeat his
request. I thought that as I should know better what the object of the
meeting was after I had heard it explained, I would sit still, and so I
remained to the end. After the meeting I told some of my Reform friends
how I came to be present at the meeting, and they wished me to write out
an account of the proceedings. I did so, and with a few alterations and
the omission of names it was inserted in _Cowdroy's Gazette_. This
statement created great alarm among those who got up the meeting to thank
the magistrates, and they denounced it as a false statement, but another
letter to _Cowdroy's Gazette_ affirmed the truth of the account of the
meeting to thank the magistrates, and threatened to make public the names
of the speakers if its correctness was again called in question.


[Illustration: THE PETERLOO MEDAL

Note the women and children, and the cap of Liberty held aloft in the
centre

_To face page 71_]


The dispersion of a legally convened meeting by military force aroused a
general indignation, and the smuggled passing of thanks to the magistrates
so dishonestly sent forth occasioned an expression of public feeling and
opinion such as had never been manifested in Manchester before. A
"Declaration and Protest" against the Star Inn resolutions was immediately
issued, stating that "We are fully satisfied by personal observation on
undoubted information that the meeting was _perfectly peaceable_; that no
seditious or intemperate harangues were made there; that the Riot Act, _if
read at all_, was read _privately, or without the knowledge of a great
body of the meeting_, and we feel it our bounden duty to protest against
and to express our utter disapprobation of the unexpected and unnecessary
violence by which the assembly was dispersed.

"We further declare that the meeting convened at the Police Office on the
19th of August for the purpose of thanking the magistrates, municipal
officers, soldiers, etc., was strictly and exclusively _private_, and in
order that the privacy might be more completely ensured was adjourned to
the Star Inn. It is a matter of notoriety that no expression of dissent
from the main object of the meeting was there permitted. We therefore deny
that it had any claim to the title of a 'numerous and highly respectable
meeting of the inhabitants of Manchester and Salford and their
neighbourhood.'"

In the course of three or four days this protest received 4,800
signatures.

By way of counteracting this energetic protest, on the 27th of August Lord
Sidmouth communicated to the Manchester Magistrates and to Major Trafford
and the military serving under him the thanks of the Prince Regent "for
their prompt, decisive, and efficient measures for preservation of the
public peace on August the 16th."

Meanwhile hundreds of persons wounded on that fatal day were enduring
dreadful suffering. They were disabled from work; not daring to apply for
parish relief; not even daring to apply for surgical aid, lest, in the
arbitrary spirit of the time, their acknowledgment that they had received
their wounds on St. Peter's field might send them to prison--perhaps to
the scaffold.

A committee was formed for the purpose of making a rigid enquiry into the
cases of those who had been killed and wounded; and subscriptions were
raised for their relief. After an enquiry of many successive weeks the
committee published the cases of eleven killed and five hundred and sixty
wounded, of whom about a hundred and twenty were females.

The Rev. W. R. Hay, Chairman of the Bench of Magistrates, was rewarded by
being presented to the living of Rochdale, worth L2,000 a year.

Hunt and his companions were committed to Lancaster, and subsequently
tried at York, where he was found guilty and sentenced to be imprisoned
for two years and a half, and Johnson, Healey, and Bamford to one year's
imprisonment.

The bloody proceedings at Peterloo startled the whole nation. Meetings
were held everywhere, denouncing them in the strongest terms. Sir Francis
Burdett addressed a letter to the Electors of Westminster, expressing his
"Shame, grief, and indignation" at the proceedings, and was prosecuted by
the Attorney-General for Libel and was fined L2,000 and imprisoned for
three months. Lord Fitzwilliam, for attending a public meeting to express
disapprobation at the means by which the meeting at Peterloo was
dispersed, was dismissed from his office as Lord Lieutenant of Yorkshire.

These proceedings produced a deep impression on the minds of thoughtful
men, who began to think we were on the brink of despotism, and that the
time had arrived when the country should be no longer ruled by Landowners
and Boroughmongers, but by representatives chosen by the people....




[Illustration: BANNER CARRIED AT PETERLOO

_Photo by R. H. Fletcher_

_To face page 75_]


APPENDIX A.

Some Relics of Peterloo


1.--A BANNER CARRIED AT PETERLOO.

At the entrance to the Reading-room of the Reform Club at Middleton (on
the left as you reach the door) may be seen one of the Banners carried at
Peterloo by the Middleton contingent, which was led by Samuel Bamford. It
is of green material (or so it seemed to me) and the letters are stamped
on it in gold capitals. The motto facing the entrance is LIBERTY AND
FRATERNITY. On the other side of the Banner (seen from within the room)
are the words: UNITY AND STRENGTH. The explanatory inscription reads:
"This Banner was carried by the Middleton Reformers, with Samuel Bamford
at their head, to Peterloo, and is frequently mentioned in the historical
records of that movement." (See Illustration opposite).

In chapter XXXIII. of _Passages in the Life of a Radical_ Bamford speaks
of "the colours; a blue one of silk, with inscriptions in golden letters:
UNITY AND STRENGTH, LIBERTY AND FRATERNITY. A green one of silk, with
golden letters, PARLIAMENTS ANNUAL, SUFFRAGE UNIVERSAL." Apparently the
Banner here figured is the one of which he writes later in chapter XXXVI.:
"I rejoined my companions [_i.e._, after Peterloo], and forming about a
thousand of them into file, we set off to the sound of fife and drum,
_with our only banner waving_, and in that form we re-entered the town of
Middleton. The Banner was exhibited from a window of the Suffield's Arms
public-house." The Banner is now carefully preserved between sheets of
glass. The photograph was taken under considerable difficulties as regards
light by Mr. R. H. Fletcher, of Eccles. The Chadderton Banner, though much
dilapidated, is also still in existence, but I could not obtain the
address of the person in whose keeping it is. She had left Chadderton, and
was living at Blackpool.


2.--BAMFORD'S COTTAGE.

Some distance higher up the town may be seen the house where Bamford lived
at the date of Peterloo. Over the door is a stone inscribed: "Samuel
Bamford resided and was arrested in this house, Aug. 26, 1819." Bamford
describes the event in detail in chapter XL of the work named above,
beginning: "About two o'clock on the morning of Thursday, the twenty-sixth
of August, that is, on the tenth morning after the fatal meeting, I was
awoke by footsteps in the street opposite my residence. Presently they
increased in number, etc." The photograph is again by Mr. R. H. Fletcher.
(See Illustration.) In the Churchyard above may be seen Bamford's tomb and
also the monument raised to his memory.


[Illustration: SAMUEL BAMFORD'S HOUSE AT MIDDLETON

_Photo by R. H. Fletcher_

_To face page 76_]


3.--CONSTABLES' STAVES.

(_a_) In the Catalogue of the _Old Manchester & Salford Exhibition_ (held
at the Art Gallery in 1904), on p. 27, exhibit 157 appears as "Handcuffs
belonging to Joe Nadin, Deputy Constable of Manchester at the time of
Peterloo;" lent by G. C. Yates, Esq. On the same page, exhibit 167 is a
"Special Constable's Staff, used at the time of Peterloo in Manchester,
and then the property of Mr. Beever;" lent by C. Shiel, Esq. This
collection is now for the most part dispersed.


[Illustration: THREE RELICS OF PETERLOO

_Photo by R. H. Fletcher_

_To face page 77_]


(_b_) Mr. T. Swindells, of Monton Green, in the third volume of his
_Manchester Streets and Manchester Men_, mentions "A Special Constable's
Staff" given to him by a descendant of James Fildes. It is inscribed: "A
relic of Peterloo. Special Constable's Staff which belonged to the late
James and Thomas Fildes, grocers, Shudehill, Manchester."

(_c_) In November, 1919, on the afternoon of the day on which I was to
lecture on _The Story of Peterloo_, at the Rylands Library, Mr. W. W.
Manfield, of Chorlton-cum-Hardy, brought me three interesting relics of
Peterloo, which have been in the possession of his family since 1819. On
the occasion of Peterloo his father and grandfather saw the crowd
streaming through Salford after the catastrophe, and their curiosity led
them to walk out to St. Peter's fields. There they picked up the three
relics, which have been carefully preserved ever since. One of them is a
long, heavy Constable's baton, apparently of rosewood, with the Royal Arms
painted at the thicker end. (See Illustration opposite.)


4.--HEAD OF FLAGSTAFF.

The second of Mr. Manfield's relics is the head of one of the Banner poles
carried at Peterloo. It is shaped like the traditional cap of Liberty, and
inscribed in neat gilt capitals: "Hunt and Liberty." (See Illustration.)


5.--HUSSAR'S PLUME.

The third of Mr. Manfield's relics is a plume of horsehair, apparently
originally dyed red, though (if so) much of the dye has faded. This, it
may be presumed, was the plume from the helmet of one of the Hussars. It
has been mentioned that the 15th Hussars wear a scarlet plume. These three
relics have been photographed on one plate by Mr. Fletcher. (See
Illustration opposite to page 77.)


6.--ACCOUNT-BOOK OF THE RELIEF COMMITTEE.

In the year of the Centenary, Mr. Guppy was fortunate enough to secure for
the Rylands Library the actual Account-Book used by one of the Committees
formed for the relief of those injured in the fray. A single page of this
book has been photographed by Mr. R. H. Fletcher for the present volume.
(See Illustration.) Mr. Guppy's account of the volume (_Bulletin of
Rylands Library_, April to November, 1919, p. 191) is as follows:--

"The Library has been fortunate in being able to acquire a small octavo
account-book, leather bound, which seems to have been an official record
of the casualties at Peterloo which were dealt with by one of the Relief
Committees. It contains details of the names, addresses, and injuries of
347 individuals, particulars of the successive grants made to them by one
Committee, and references to the grants made by another Committee
(possibly two others).

The details given are corroborative of many of the statements in Mr.
Bruton's _Story of Peterloo_. Thus: the cases include those of Elizabeth
Gaunt (mentioned on pp. 274 and 275), of Mrs. Fildes (on p. 274), of
Thomas Redford (on pp. 285, 291, and 294). There are references to the
loose timber (see pp. 269, 284 and 294), the injuries to Special
Constables (see p. 280), the fight near the Friends' Meeting-house (see
pp. 284 and 289), the oak trees growing near that building (see pp. 269,
294), the white hat as a symbol of Radicalism (see p. 273), the fear of
losing employment evinced by the wounded (see p. 291), the infantry
intercepting fugitives (see p. 290), the child killed by a trooper in
Cooper Street (see p. 277), and so on. The sum total voted by this
Committee appears to have been L687; it must be remembered, however, that
the sum of L3,000 mentioned on p. 291 as having been subscribed may have
been used partly for legal expenses.


[Illustration: One Page of the Account Book of the Relief Committee.

_By permission of Mr. H. Guppy._

_Photo by R. H. Fletcher._]


Since this manuscript account-book came to light, Mr. Bruton has
discovered a printed Report of the Relief Committee, in which 560 cases
are described, and the amount raised to date is given as L3,408 1s. 8d.,
and pronounced to be inadequate for 600 people. It also gives the amount
spent on legal expenses as L1,077."


7.--ACCOUNT-BOOK RECORDING AMOUNTS RAISED FOR THE RELIEF OF SPECIAL
CONSTABLES & THEIR FAMILIES.

I have to thank Dr. A. A. Mumford for calling my attention to another
account-book connected with Peterloo, which I believe he met with while
going over the Crossley papers at the Chetham Library. Its number in the
Library Catalogue is MS. B. 3. 70. It is a small note-book ruled for cash,
and entitled: "Subscriptions for Special Constables. Nos. 10 and 11."
There is a note of a Resolution carried on August 27th, 1819, to the
effect that a Relief Fund should be raised on behalf of Special Constables
injured at Peterloo and their families. The subscriptions recorded in this
book range from L1 to L10 10s., and amount in all to about L400.




APPENDIX B.


1.--NOTE ON THE CASUALTIES AT PETERLOO.

On few points do the accounts of Peterloo vary more than on the question
of the casualties. There is sufficient historical material available to
enable us to investigate this matter in detail, but the task would be a
gruesome one, and no useful object would be attained if it were
accomplished. On the other hand, a few words may serve to show whereabouts
the truth lies.

In the _Cambridge Modern History_ (Vol. X., pp. 580, 581) it is stated
that "a man was killed and forty were injured." In the _Political History
of England_ (1906, Vol. XI., pp. 178, 179) we read that "happily the
actual loss of life did not exceed five or six, but a much larger number
were more or less wounded." A number of the most important school
histories in use at the present time reproduce one or the other of these
statements _verbatim_.

If we turn to the contemporary records, they are somewhat conflicting. The
hurried estimates given by the local papers immediately after the
catastrophe (_e.g._, one newspaper reported twelve killed) had to be
corrected later. The most general estimate seems to be "eleven killed and
between 500 and 600 wounded." When we come to examine these figures in
detail, however, these points emerge: (1) "Killed" is evidently taken to
include the cases of those who died after lingering (possibly) for some
weeks. (2) The summary includes the casualties due to the firing of the
infantry in the neighbourhood of New Cross, some hours after the great
event; included in the list, also will be the child (Fildes) knocked from
its mother's arms by one of the yeomanry as they were riding to the
meeting.

Archibald Prentice, in his _Historical Sketches and Personal Recollections
of Manchester_ (p. 167), states that eleven were killed, that 420 were
wounded, and that there still remained (according to the Relief
Committee's Report) 140 cases to be investigated, making a total of 560.
Mr. John Benjamin Smith (who very likely refreshed his memory by looking
up records when writing his Reminiscences) gives the same result. Mr. J.
C. Hobhouse, speaking in the House of Commons, on May 19th, 1821, said
that "he held in his hand a list of killed and wounded running to 25-30
sheets, and defied them to disprove it." It is clear, then, that these
estimates are quoted from the Committee's Report, and to this it will be
well now to turn.

With the kind assistance of Mr. Swann, of the Reference Library, I have
been able to find one (and only one) copy of this Report. It is bound up
with a series of papers catalogued as "Lancashire and Yorkshire Tracts,"
at the Manchester Reference Library. (The Reference number is "Lancashire
and Yorkshire Tracts; Barlow's Historical Collector. H. 63. 3. No. 3
(15104)"). It is entitled: "Report of the Metropolitan and Central
Committee appointed for the Relief of the Manchester Sufferers, with an
Appendix containing the names of the sufferers and the nature and extent
of their injuries; also an account of the distribution of funds, and other
documents. Published by order of the Committee. London, 1820." This
Committee seems to have been formed by amalgamating several organisations
in the metropolis which sprang into being as a result of public sympathy
with the sufferers, and it worked in conjunction with the Manchester and
other Lancashire Committees. The subscriptions recorded to date amount to
L3,408 1s. 8d. of which L1,206 13s. 8d. had been distributed, L250 having
been received from the local Manchester Committees. The amount expended on
law charges and expenses of witnesses is given as L1,077 6s. 9d.;
advertisements and sundries cost L355 13s. 6d.; and this leaves a balance
of over L768, which is pronounced inadequate to deal with the cases that
remain. A fresh appeal is therefore made to the British Public. A
Deputation was sent from London to investigate cases, and this Deputation
reports, in January, 1820, that out of 420 sufferers visited and relieved
113 are females; that 130 received severe sabre-cuts, 14 of these being
females. (To be quite safe, we must admit the possibility that the term
"sufferers" may sometimes include members of the families of those killed
or injured.) There follow 38 pages filled with the names of those killed
and wounded at Peterloo, some 430 in all, with full details of their
injuries, and in the case of the former the description is "Killed, _or_,
who have subsequently died in consequence of injuries there received," the
number of these being given as eleven. Of these eleven: two were "sabred;"
one was "sabred and trampled upon;" one was "sabred and stabbed;" one
"sabred and crushed;" two (one of them a woman) "rode over by the
cavalry;" one "trampled by the cavalry;" one "inwardly crushed;" and one
(a woman) "thrown into a cellar." In the case of two of these the words
are added "killed on the spot." The child killed in Cooper Street
completes the total.

One of the Relief Committees met at Mr. Prentice's warehouse, and the care
with which the various cases were investigated, and successive grants made
from the funds of the different Committees, is clearly shown by the
details given in the account-book secured by Mr. Guppy in 1919 for the
Rylands Library, which is mentioned above.

Perhaps it will never be possible to say exactly how many were left dead
on the field. One, at anyrate, who died at once, or very shortly
afterwards, was (by a strange irony) a Special Constable, and this is
probably the "one man killed" of some of the accounts. It will be
remembered that Lieut. Jolliffe reported "two women not likely to recover;
one man in a dying state; and two or three reputed dead;" in the letter
quoted above, describing his visit to the Infirmary on the Sunday
following the event.

Most of the cases investigated by the Committees belonged to the side of
the Reformers; but it must not be forgotten that the other side claimed to
have serious casualties. Mr. Francis Phillips, _e.g._, enumerates the
casualties to the troops, and an estimate of these is given also in the
Centenary Volume of the Cheshire Yeomanry; we have already seen above,
moreover, that a subscription list was opened for the families of the
Special Constables, and that the appeal met with a generous response. It
is a curious feature of the case that each side seems to be anxious to
make its casualty list as imposing as possible. An interesting summary of
the various estimates is given by MacDonnell in his _State Trials_. This
summary includes the Official Report from the Infirmary, and the list of
casualties to the troops. Without pursuing the matter further, we may say
that a careful examination of the somewhat confusing evidence would seem
to show that the estimate "eleven killed and between 500 and 600 wounded"
will not prove to be far wrong, provided that (1) we understand "killed"
to include those who died as the result of injuries received on the field;
(2) we include in the general total the casualties incurred during the
disturbances some hours later in the neighbourhood of New Cross. At least
one list, published subsequently, brings the total of killed up to
fourteen.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two points not directly concerned with this discussion are dealt with by
the Relief Committee, and are sufficiently interesting to be recorded: (1)
The Committee paid out L710 "on account of the Trial at York; the
Manchester Committee voting L100 for the same object." (2) The Deputation
sent from London to investigate the cases, mentioned in their Report some
striking details of the conditions of life amongst the operatives. To
quote only two sentences: "in no one instance among the weavers did your
Deputation see a morsel of animal food, and they ascertained that in most
families where there were children the taste of meat was unknown from one
year to another." "Six shillings a week was the average wage of an
able-bodied and industrious weaver. Many could not get this."


2.--PRESENCE OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN AT PETERLOO.

It has often been asserted that the peaceful intentions of the crowd at
Peterloo are attested by the presence among them of women and young
children. As every detail of evidence is of value, I give here a sentence
from a letter which I received from Principal Reynolds: "My father was
there, in his mother's arms, though only one year old; so my grandmother
told me."


3.--SOME GLEANINGS FROM THE SCRAP-BOOKS.

It was the custom in the early decades of the nineteenth century, when
newspapers were dear and newspaper files were not available, as there were
no free libraries, to collect newspaper cuttings and illustrations, with
tracts and "broadsides," election squibs and so forth, in large
scrap-books. Thus, at the Peel Park Library is preserved the scrap-book of
Joseph Brotherton (for many years Member for Salford), running to over
forty volumes. The Greaves scrap-book at the Reference Library contains a
valuable collection of this kind. The Owen collection at the same Library
fills over eighty volumes. At the Chetham Library may be seen Lord
Ellesmere's scrap-book and a number of others. From many references to
Peterloo in these books we may select the three items which follow: The
Greaves collection contains a rare print of Peterloo, somewhat lurid in
its detail. Mr. Albert Nicholson has in his possession a highly-coloured
copy of this, which he has shown me. No other copies seem to be known.

I have to thank Mr. J. J. Phelps for calling my attention to two papers in
a scrap-book at the Chetham Library which he conjectures to have been that
of Mr. Francis Phillips, the protagonist on behalf of the magistrates, and
the author of _An Exposure of the Calumnies, &c._ One of these is the
actual subpoena which Mr. Phillips received, summoning him to give
evidence in the trial at York: "there to testify the truth on our behalf
against Henry Hunt and others for certain misdemeanours whereof they are
indicted." (MS. B. 9. 41. 110. p. 43.).

The other paper is of some importance as it fixes the date of the
embodiment of the Manchester Yeomanry. In _The Story of Peterloo_ (p. 13)
some details are given in support of a conjecture that the corps was
formed later than March in 1817. The scrap-book just quoted confirms this
conjecture, for there appears a printed copy of a letter addressed to the
Boroughreeves and Constables of Manchester and Salford, and bearing over a
hundred signatures (that of Mr. Phillips coming second), asking that a
meeting may be convened with the object of forming such a corps. In
response to this appeal the Boroughreeves and Constables summoned a
meeting for the purpose, in a letter dated Manchester, June the 16th,
1817. (MS B. 9. 41. 110. p. 22). With this date as a guide, it was easy to
find in the advertisement columns of _Wheeler's Manchester Chronicle_ for
Saturday, June the 21st, 1817, a copy of both letters, a list of the
signatures, and the announcement that the proposed meeting was actually
held on June the 19th, 1817, when it was resolved: "that under the present
circumstances it is expedient to form a body of Yeomanry Cavalry in the
Towns and neighbourhood of Manchester and Salford." Details follow as to
Government allowances for uniform, etc., and as to the possibility of
amalgamating with similar corps in the surrounding towns, should such be
formed. Each man was to provide his own horse.

This information has an important bearing on the tragedy of Peterloo, and
taken in conjunction with the Resolution of the Magistrates mentioned in
_The Story of Peterloo_ (p. 13), leaves no doubt as to what was the nature
of the "present circumstances" that called the corps into being.


4.--EXPLANATION OF THE CONTEMPORARY PLAN AND PICTURE OF PETERLOO.

(_a_) The Contemporary Plan of St. Peter's Field which appears on the
following page was published in Farquharson's verbatim Report of the Trial
in 1822. As the lettering is small, some explanation is necessary.

The shaded area in the centre represents the open space on which the
tragedy was enacted. To the south of it is clearly seen the "raised
ground" mentioned by Stanley, and shown also in his Plan. The windmill
which stood near, and gave its name to Windmill Street, had disappeared
some years before. The site of it is now occupied by the Central Station
Approach.

On the shaded space are marked: "Hustings;" "Carriage" (_i.e._, Mr. Hunt's
carriage, marked also on Stanley's Plan); the double line of "Constables;"
and the "Manchester Yeomanry," drawn up in front of the row of houses in
Mount Street, labelled: "Magistrates assembled here." The Friends' Meeting
House is marked "Quaker's Meeting House," and the enclosing wall is stated
to measure in height "3 ft. 7 in. on the inside" and "10 ft. 3 in. on the
outside." These measurements would be inserted, probably, in connection
with the statement that one of the Cavalry jumped his horse over this
wall. Apparently a gate and posts cross Mount Street in front of the
Meeting House, and lead into "St. Peter's Field," across which two dotted
lines indicate the _projected_ line of Peter Street.


[Illustration: Plan of Peterloo. From Farquharson's Report of the Trial,
1822. (See page 88.)

_Photo by R. H. Fletcher._]


The position of the Troops and the line of their approach to the Field are
shown as follows: The "31st Infantry" are drawn up in Brazennose Street,
the upper end of which is also blocked with a gate and posts; the "88th
Infantry" are lined up in Dickinson Street; in Portland Street are the
"Manchester Yeomanry," and their course is shown by a dotted line up
Portland Street, along Nicholas Street, down Cooper Street, and then round
the corner of Cooper's garden wall (now the site of the north-western
corner of the Midland Hotel) into Mount Street; the Plan stating that "The
Manchester Yeomanry came this way to the ground;" another troop of the
"Manchester Yeomanry" is drawn up in front of St. John's Church, in Byrom
Street; facing them, in the same street, are shown the "15th Hussars" in
two sections, presumably representing the "two squadrons" mentioned by
Lieutenant Jolliffe in his letter; lastly, the "Cheshire Yeomanry" are
drawn up in St. John's Street, off Deansgate, and the line of approach of
all these mounted troops is shown by a dotted line passing along Byrom
Street, St. John's Street, southward down Deansgate, then along Fleet
Street, up Lower Mosley Street, and along the "raised ground" already
mentioned to St. Peter's Field, the inscription on the Plan reading: "The
15th Hussars, one troop of the Manchester and Cheshire Yeomanry came this
way to the ground." The artillery are not shewn.

The scale of yards given on the Plan shows that Stanley's estimate of a
hundred yards as the distance from Mr. Buxton's house to the Hustings was
exactly correct.

(_b_) Wroe's Contemporary Picture of Peterloo, which is shewn on the
following page, is perhaps the best of a number of sketches extant. The
details are fairly accurate. In the background, on the extreme left, is
seen (to quote Bamford) "the corner of a garden wall, round which the
Manchester Yeomanry, in blue and white uniform, came trotting, sword in
hand, to the front of a row of new houses." The "corner" is on the site of
the north-western corner of the Midland Hotel. The "new houses" were on
the site of the present Midland Buffet. Mr. Ewart's factory, in the
distance, was just off Lower Mosley Street. The row of houses to the right
of this, in the background, was on the upper side of Windmill Street. The
Hustings are on the site of the south-eastern corner of the Free Trade
Hall. Standing on them we may distinguish Mr. Hunt and the Leader of the
Manchester Female Reformers. Around them are the Banners of the various
contingents; we may even make out the legend "No Corn Laws" on the one in
front. The Banner-poles are shaped to resemble caps of Liberty, as shown
in another of our illustrations. The crowd are occupying the site of the
Free Trade Hall, the Theatre Royal, the Y.M.C.A., the Gaiety, and a number
of adjoining buildings.


[Illustration: A VIEW OF St PETER'S PLACE

_To face page 90_]


The moment seized by the artist for his picture is that in which the
Manchester Yeomanry, many of whom are scattered and entangled among the
crowd, have reached the Hustings, while in the distance the Hussars can
just be seen lining up in Mount Street and charging to their relief. The
crowd, consisting of men, women and children, are seen dispersing in all
directions.

The view might be imagined to have been taken from the roof of a building
which then occupied the site of the present Albert Hall, in Peter Street.
Other contemporary prints include St. Peter's Church and the Friends'
Meeting House in the picture.




FOOTNOTES:

[1] I met Mr. Buxton on the steps of his house, not at all aware till then
that his _residence_ was at or near the place of meeting. I had been
directed to his _shop_, considerably beyond the square, to which I was
proceeding. I state this to prove that what I afterwards saw was purely
accidental, and that I had no previous intention of witnessing in detail
the transactions of the day. As I came from the bottom of Alport Street,
on the Altrincham side of Manchester, my original directions were indeed
to pass through St. Peter's field as the shortest line, but I had taken a
circuitous route to avoid the meeting, which led me to the corner of it
near Mr. Buxton's house.

[2] It has been stated, upon evidence which I should be unwilling to
discredit, that the body of persons more immediately in contact with the
hustings were of Hunt's party. My reasons for believing them at the time
to be (as I was told) special constables, were because they resembled them
in appearance, were connected in their lines, had their hats on, and
staves of office occasionally appeared amongst them. Mr. Hay, in his
official letter, says: "A body of special constables took their ground,
about two hundred in number, close to the hustings, from whence there was
a line of communication to the house where we were." This is precisely my
view of the case; doubtless, had the communication been cut, he would have
noticed it.

[3] Some, by being better mounted or rather in advance, might have been
more moderate in their pace, but generally speaking it was very rapid, and
I use the word gallop, as conveying the best idea of their approach.

[4] I am particular in mentioning these minute circumstances, because in
this and some other points in which I could not be mistaken, I have been
strongly contradicted.

[5] It has been often asked when and where the cavalry struck the people.
I can only say that from the moment they began to force their way through
the crowd towards the hustings swords were up and swords were down, but
whether they fell with the sharp or flat side, of course I cannot pretend
to give an opinion.

[6] On quitting the ground I for the first time observed that strong
bodies of infantry were posted in the streets, on opposite sides of the
square; their appearance might probably have increased the alarm and would
certainly have impeded the progress of a mob wishing to retreat in either
of those directions. When I saw them they were resting on their arms, and
I believe they remained stationary, taking no part in the transaction.

[7] On entering Mosley Street at 12 o'clock I stopped to question some
persons on the footway respecting the proceedings of the day. When about
to proceed, I was recommended to move from the middle of the street to the
path, as the mob were advancing. I declined, suspecting my advisers might
be radicals, adding: "I am on the King's highway, and shall remain where I
am." I mention this because I have heard it reported that I was insulted
by the Ashton people, which may have originated from the above account.

[8] [In the copy of Farquharson's verbatim Report of the Trial, which is
preserved at the Reference Library, Manchester, this "not" is omitted. The
omission is, of course, due to a misprint, and someone has inserted "not"
in pencil. Similarly, in my own copy of Farquharson's Report, someone has
inserted the "not" in ink. McDonnell, in his "State Trials," inserted the
"not." Mr. McKennell's evidence, as reported in Farquharson, is as follows
(pp. 169, 170; he was cross-examined by Mr. Serjeant Hullock):--

By whom was the Riot Act read?

--I never heard it read.

You heard no such thing?

--I did not.

EDITOR.]

[9] [St. John Street or Byrom Street.--EDITOR.]

[10] [South-east would be more correct.--EDITOR.]

[11] [East would be more correct. The Cheshire Yeomanry filed along the
south side. The arrows in Stanley's Plan make this clear.--EDITOR.]






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Three Accounts of Peterloo, by
Edward Stanley and William Jolliffe and John Benjamin Smith

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THREE ACCOUNTS OF PETERLOO ***

***** This file should be named 37004.txt or 37004.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/0/0/37004/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/Canadian
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
