The Project Gutenberg EBook of Canada, My Land, by W. M. MacKeracher

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Canada, My Land
       and Other Compositions in Verse

Author: W. M. MacKeracher

Release Date: August 21, 2011 [EBook #37155]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CANADA, MY LAND ***




Produced by Al Haines










CANADA, MY LAND

AND OTHER COMPOSITIONS IN VERSE



BY

W. M. MacKERACHER




TORONTO

WILLIAM BRIGGS

1908




Copyright, Canada, 1908, by W. M. MacKeracher




CONTENTS.


CANADA, MY LAND
    There may be more enchanting climes

FORWARD, CANADA!
    Northland of our birth and rearing

CANADIAN-BORN
    Although I'm not unduly proud

KNOW'ST THOU THE LAND!
    Know'st thou the land where the pious and bold

O MAPLE LEAF!
    Thee best of leaves I love

DOMINION DAY
    Where the purple-vestured mountains

CANADA'S EIGHTEEN
    At Paardeberg they fell

DOMINION DAY, 1900
    Rejoice, O Canada, rejoice

O CANADA, MON PAYS, MES AMOURS
    O Canada, my country and my love

SOL CANADIEN, TERRE CHERIE
    O soil Canadian, cherished earth

MY OWN CANADIAN GIRL
    The demoiselles of sunny France

THE ST. LAWRENCE
    Though like Ulysses, fam'd of old

ST. LAWRENCE AND THE COMING SHIPS
    I cannot loiter on my way

THE QUEBEC EXODUS
    Why should we leave the soil our fathers cleared

HEAT
    The fickle sun that had the earth caress'd

INVOCATION TO SUMMER
    Come, Summer, come, nor in the south delay

SIR SUMMER
    When conquering Summer stalks the street

THE NIGHT
    A tremor, a quiver, through her ran

TO BEAUTY
    Beauty, beloved of all gentle hearts

THE DOCTOR
    He bent above our darling's bed

MY VALENTINE
    O Dorothy, sweet Dorothy

MY FRIENDS
    Some to and fro for converse flit

NOTHING TOO GOOD FOR THE IRISH
    It's the Emerald Isle is the beautiful land

AN ENGLISH TOAST
    The English soil!--'tis hallowed ground

THE SCOT
    That no Scotsman is perfect, we freely confess

THE ROARIN' GAME
    The roarin' game, the roarin' game

THE OLD SCOTTISH MINISTER
    A man he was of Scottish race

THE MACS
    There's a race, or a part of a race, if you will

THE PARSON AT THE HOCKEY MATCH
    It's very disagreeable to sit here in the cold




  CANADA, MY LAND.

  There may be more enchanting climes
    Within a southern zone;
  There may be eastern Edens deckt
    With charms to thee unknown;
  But thou art fairest unto me,
    Because thou art mine own,
      Canada, my land.

  More spacious plains and loftier heights
    In other realms may be,
  And mightier streams than those which bear
    Thy waters to the sea;
  But thou, great handiwork of God,
    Art grandest unto me,
      Canada, my land.

  More glorious records may adorn
    The annals of the past
  Than those which tell the rise and growth
    Of thy dominion vast;
  But I am proudest of the land
    In which my lot is cast,
      Canada, my land.

  Beneath thy green or snow-clad sod
    My fathers' ashes lie;
  Thou hast my all, to thee I'm bound
    By every dearest tie;
  For thee I'll gladly live, for thee
    I cheerfully would die,
      Canada, my land.




  FORWARD, CANADA!

  Northland of our birth and rearing,
  Bound to us by ties endearing,--
  Forward ever, nothing fearing!
      Forward, Canada!

  Hear thy children's acclamations!
  Vanquish trials and vexations!
  Higher rise among the nations!
      Forward, Canada!

  Not by battles fierce and gory,
  Not by conquest's hollow glory,
  Need'st thou live in deathless story:
      Forward, Canada!

  Not by might and not by power,---
  Truth shall be thy fortress tower;
  Arts of peace shall be thy flower:
      Forward, Canada!

  Yet if tyrant foe should ever
  'Gainst thee come with base endeavor,
  Strike, and yield thy freedom never:
      Forward, Canada!




  CANADIAN-BORN.

  Although I'm not unduly proud,
    Inordinately vain,
  But humble, as will be allowed,
    And modest in the main;
  I must confess to pride of birth,
    And all detractors warn
  To let alone one land on earth:
    I am Canadian-born.

  In one respect I fill the bill
    As well as any man
  Between Vancouver and Brazil,
    Morocco and Japan.
  From Hobart Town to Hammerfest,
    From Greenland to the Horn,
  My native land is much the best:
    I am Canadian-born.

  The Greeks beside their Hellespont
    Thought all but they were scum;
  The Latins loved the classic vaunt,
    "Civis Romanus sum."
  I'm not so impudent as they
    To hold the world in scorn,
  But have a better boast to-day,
    "I am Canadian-born."

  My land is beauty's flag unfurled,
    A garden of increase,
  The crowning wonder of the world,
    Creation's masterpiece;
  And deathless deed and kingly name
    Her chronicles adorn;
  I'm pardonably proud to claim
    I am Canadian-born.

  I love her cities old and new,
    Her crested mountain-chains,
  Her lakes and rivers fair to view,
    Her meadows and her plains,
  Her tented fields of yellow sheaves,
    Her spears of towering corn,
  Her forests with their maple leaves:
    I am Canadian-born.

  I love her verdant springtime sweet,
    Her autumn red and gold;
  I love her summer's tropic heat,
    Her winter's arctic cold,
  The splendor of her evening glow,
    The glory of her morn;
  And day and night I love to know
    I am Canadian-born.

  All honor to her pioneers,
    The gallant sons of France;
  All honor to their British peers,
    Who aided her advance;
  To workers like the great Champlain,
    And Dufferin and Lorne,
  And those who could take up the strain,
    "I am Canadian-born."

  Here my allotted time I'd live
    And play my little part,
  My service here to Nature give,
    To Industry and Art;
  Here pluck life's roses when I may,
    And when I feel the thorn
  Look up with fortitude and say,
    "I am Canadian-born."

  And should unfriendly circumstance
    (Which Providence forbid!)
  Decree that from my latest glance
    My country should be hid,
  Ah, then 'twill ease my parting sigh
    And cheer my heart forlorn,
  To think, wherever I may die,
    I am Canadian-born.




  KNOW'ST THOU THE LAND?

  Know'st thou the land where the pious and bold
  Beared Christianity's emblem of old,
  And civilization's beneficent reign
  Extended o'er anarchy's savage domain?
  The land of the dauntless explorers who prest
  Upstream, through the wilderness, into the West?
  Know'st thou the land of the soldier and knight,
  The land of adventure and toil and delight?
        Know'st thou the land?
        Know'st thou the land?
  'Tis the land of my home, my beloved native land.

  Know'st thou the land where the Briton and Gaul,
  In courage and prowess supreme over all,
  Contending for lordship and vying for place,
  Collided and locked in a mighty embrace
  So bravely that fame has awarded the palm
  Of deathless renown to both Wolfe and Montcalm?
  Know'st thou the land for which heroes have died,
  The land of the strong and the true and the tried?

  Know'st thou the land of the broad maple tree?
  The noblest and best of his fellows is he:
  He grows in the meadow, the grove and the wood;
  His trunk is for timber, his sap is for food;
  His boughs are for fire in the cold winter days;
  His leaves are for shade from the summer sun's blaze.
  Know'st thou the land of the maple benign,
  The land of the elm and the oak and the pine?

  Know'st thou the land where the great inland seas
  Are tossed by the tempest or fanned by the breeze;
  The land of Superior's crystalline tide,
  Of Huron's exuberant vigor and pride,
  Of Erie's alluring voluptuous glance,
  Ontario's laughing Elysian expanse?
  Know'st thou the land that is praised evermore
  By the chant of their surge and Niagara's roar?

  Know'st thou the land of the clear-flowing streams
  That mirror the stars and reflect the sun's beams?
  Through the woods and the farmland they wander at large,
  And the deer and the kine come to drink at their marge;
  They flash in the distance like ribands of white;
  Their trout-haunted pools are the angler's delight.
  Know'st thou the land of the rivers and rills,
  The boon of the lowlands, the joy of the hills?

  Know'st thou the land where St. Lawrence proceeds
  By cities and hamlets and blossoming meads
  And islands and waters of lesser degree,
  With his tribute to pour in the lap of the sea?
  His shining battalions he halts to deploy,
  Or leaps through the rapid with turbulent joy.
  Know'st thou the land that he laves in his flow,
  Where deep-laden argosies royally go?

  Know'st thou the land of the mountains that rise
  Till their summits are lost in the depths of the skies?
  Their granite foundations are far underground,
  Where the gold and the coal and the iron abound;
  And the sun on their white-headed majesty flings
  The radiance of crowns and the purple of kings.
  Know'st thou the land of these citadels tall,
  With their ramparts and battlements, wall upon wall?

  Know'st thou the land where the ice and the snow
  On all things a magical beauty bestow?
  Then the earth is a bride and the tingling air wine,
  The frosty sky sparkles, the Pleiades shine,
  And the bright "merry dancers" in gorgeous array,
  Like ghosts of dead sunbeams, come forth to their play.
  Know'st thou the land of the sleigh-bells, the land
  Of the warm fireside and the welcoming hand?

  Know'st thou the land where kind Nature has given
  In earth's beauty and grandeur a foretaste of heaven;
  Where History lingers, enthralled with the view
  Of as splendid exploits as the world ever knew;
  Where Industry reaps the rewards of her toil
  In the wealth of the cities, the fruits of the soil?
  Know'st thou the land which the Muses regard,
  The land of the sculptor, the singer, the bard?

  Know'st thou the land where the spell of the past
  Is over the mind irresistibly cast;
  Where the present fulfills the fond hopes of the years,
  The dreams of romancers, the visions of seers,
  Where the future inspires with a prospect sublime,
  Maturing the fairest fruition of time?
  Know'st thou this land of Heaven's favor possest,
  The fortunate land of a destiny blest?
        Know'st thou the land?
        Know'st thou the land?
  'Tis the land of my home, my belov'd native land.




  O MAPLE LEAF!

  Thee best of leaves I love,
  In forest or in grove,
        O Maple Leaf;
  O thou which art the sign
  Of this dear land of mine,
  What loveliness is thine,
        O Maple Leaf!

  Naught can with thee compare,
  On earth or in the air,
        O Maple Leaf;
  Wondrous thy beauties are;
  Thy form is like a star,
  But thou art not afar,
        O Maple Leaf.

  When drops of dew adorn
  Thy surface in the morn,
        O Maple Leaf,
  No hue so fair is seen,
  In silk or satin's sheen,
  As thy rich shade of green,
        O Maple Leaf.

  No music in my ear
  Is half so sweet to hear,
        O Maple Leaf,
  As that which thou dost make
  When winds of summer shake
  The branches of the brake,
        O Maple Leaf.

  Most beautiful in pain,
  When suns begin to wane,
        O Maple Leaf,
  Thou never growest old,
  But in the time of cold
  Thou turnest but to gold,
        O Maple Leaf.

  And when the earth expires,
  And mute are all her choirs,
        O Maple Leaf,
  Thy dower thou dost shed
  Of tribute, richest red,
  Upon her sombre bed,
        O Maple Leaf.

  May heaven bless thy land,
  And make it strong to stand,
        O Maple Leaf;
  For it we humbly pray
  That God will be its stay,
  Now, henceforth, and for aye,
        O Maple Leaf.




  DOMINION DAY.

  Where the purple-vestured mountains
    Bear their summits crowned with snow,
  Haughty lords of all the riches
    In the rocks and streams below;
  Tow'ring to the azure heavens,
    Frowning on the sapphire sea:
  There to-day, O wide Dominion,
    Thine own children honor thee.

  Where the shadeless, open prairie
    Spreads its lone expanse unstirred
  By a sound of living creature,
    Save the lowing of the herd,
  And the half-grown wheat in verdure
    Reaches thickly to the knee,
  There to-day, O fair Dominion,
    Thine own children honor thee.

  Where the south wind from the bushes
    The large, luscious berry shakes,
  And the commerce of the cities
    Meets the traffic of the lakes,
  And the thunderous Niag'ra
    Sings the paean of the free:
  There to-day, O strong Dominion,
    Thine own children honor thee.

  Where the deep, majestic river
    Bears upon its solemn tide,
  By the haunts of ancient story
    And the seats of former pride,
  Ocean argosies to markets
    Where the world is held in fee:
  There to-day, O great Dominion,
    Thine own children honor thee.

  Where the stalwart sea-girt peoples
    Keep the gateway of the land;
  In the meadows of New Brunswick,
    On the Nova Scotian strand,
  In the Gulf's fair island garden,
    Sheltered by the maple tree:
  There to-day, O blest Dominion,
    Thine own children honor thee.

  In thy cherished mother country,
    In thy sister lands afar,
  On the burning eastern desert,
    Underneath the southern star,
  'Midst the speech of alien races,
    Wheresoe'er thy children be,
  There to-day, O dear Dominion,
    Loyal hearts remember thee.




  CANADA'S EIGHTEEN.

  At Paardeberg they fell,
    Within the Orange State;
  They did their duty well;
    They bravely met their fate.

  A stubborn fight they made
    Upon the level plain,
  While from the barricade
    The bullets poured like rain.

  They fiercely charged the trench;
    They took the outer line;
  Who saw a visage blench?
    Who heard a voice repine?

  They bore the ruthless fire;
    But deadly was the cost:
  They lived not to retire,
    Nor saw their capture lost.

  No lustrous deed they wrought
    To prompt the epic pen:
  They only bravely fought,
    And gave their lives like men.

  And yet no hero's fame
    That rings across the seas,
  Shall e'er eclipse the name
    And memory of these.

  While suns shall rise and set
    Upon the fatal scene,
  We never shall forget
    Our Canada's Eighteen.

  And now, as Britain weaves
    The garland of her grief,
  We place among the leaves
    A blood-red maple leaf.




  DOMINION DAY, 1900.

  Rejoice, O Canada, rejoice,
    On this thy natal day;
  In East and West lift up thy voice,
    And to thy children say:
  "Behold me now to stature sprung;
    Acclaim my second birth;
  A Nation now I stand among
    My sisters of the earth."

  The wrath of man doth praise the Lord;
    And, glorious be His name,
  An Empire, fashioned by the sword
    And welded in the flame,
  Hath risen o'er the battle-smoke,
    And near and far unfurled
  Its righteous standard to evoke
    Heaven's blessings on the world.




  O CANADA, MON PAYS, MES AMOURS.

  (Title of a French-Canadian song.)

  O Canada, my country and my love,
  Held in my heart all other lands above;
  To thee to whom my homage should belong
  I pay the cheerful tribute of my song,
  And swear allegiance as on bended knee,
  And vow undying fealty to thee,
  O Canada, my country and my love.

  I crave no land of epic story cast
  In giant shadows on the misty past;
  No land illustrious in former time,
  Which has outlived the vigor of its prime;
  No lordlier land renowned across the sea,
  Nor any other land on earth but thee,
  O Canada, my country and my love.

  Past is thy night of darkness and of tears;
  Thy radiant dawn hath driv'n away our fears;
  Thy sun in morning splendor mounts the sky;
  Thy hopes, thy aims, thy destinies are high.
  God make thee great, as thou art fair and free,
  And give thee sons and daughters worthy thee,
  O Canada, my country and my love.

  Eternal blessing rest upon thy head!
  Abounding Plenty heap thy board with bread!
  Justice and Peace upon thy steps attend,
  And Virtue be thy guardian and thy friend!
  And Righteousness, like thine own maple tree,
  Flourish and rear her shelter over thee,
  O Canada, my country and my love.




  SOL CANADIEN, TERRE CHERIE.

  (From the French of Isidore Bedard.)

  O soil Canadian, cherished earth,
    The brave, the noble, peopled thee;
  They left the country of their birth,
    And sought a land of liberty.
  It was from glorious France they came:
    They were the pick of warriors, they;
  The shining lustre of their fame
    Is kept untarnished till to-day.

  How beautiful thy fields appear!
    How much thou hast to give content!
  All hail, ye mountains that uprear
    Your lordly heights magnificent!
  All hail, St. Lawrence' noble tide!
    Hail, land by Nature richly deckt!
  Thy children's hearts should throb with pride,
    Thy sons should walk with head erect.

  Still honor the protecting hand
    Of Albion, friend of the opprest;
  And harbor no malicious band
    Of traitors nourished in thy breast.
  Yield never in the storm, be brave;
    Thine only masters are thy laws;
  Thou wast not made to be a slave;
    Fear not, thy rights are Britain's cause.

  If that belov'd, protecting hand
    Should ever fail thee, undismay'd
  Stand by thyself, alone, my land,
    Rejecting, scorning foreign aid.
  From glorious France thy founders came;
    They were the pick of warriors, they:
  The shining lustre of their fame
    Unsullied shall be kept for aye.




  MY OWN CANADIAN GIRL.

  The demoiselles of sunny France
    Have gaiety and grace;
  Britannia's maids a tender glance,
    A sweet and gentle face;
  Columbia's virgins bring to knee
    Full many a duke and earl;
  But there is none can equal thee,
    My own Canadian girl.

  Thy hair is finer than the floss
    That tufts the ears of corn;
  Its tresses have a silken gloss,
    A glory like the morn;
  I prize the rich, luxuriant mass,
    And each endearing curl
  A special grace and beauty has,
    My own Canadian girl.

  Thy brow is like the silver moon
    That sails in summer skies,
  The mirror of a mind immune
    From care, serene and wise,
  Thy nose is sculptured ivory;
    Thine ears are lobes of pearl;
  Thy lips are corals from the sea,
    My own Canadian girl.

  Thine eyes are limpid pools of light,
    The windows of thy soul;
  The stars are not so clear and bright
    That shine around the pole.
  The crimson banners of thy cheeks
    To sun and wind unfurl;
  Thy tongue makes music when it speaks,
    My own Canadian girl.

  God keep thee fair and bright and good
    As in thy morning hour,
  And make thy gracious womanhood
    A still unfolding flow'r.
  And stay thy thoughts from trifles vain,
    Thy feet from folly's whirl,
  And guard thy life from every stain,
    My own Canadian girl!




  THE ST. LAWRENCE.

  Though like Ulysses, fam'd of old,
    I travell'd, or the wandering Jew,
  No nobler sight could I behold
    Than one which daily meets my view,
  This mighty stream, my country's pride,
  St. Lawrence' broad, majestic tide.

  By Babylonia's waters, 'mong
    Unwonted scenes, disconsolate,
  Their harps upon the willows hung,
    The Jewish exiles weeping sate,
  Recall'd the river of their land,
  And yearn'd to tread its winding strand.

  When stern Elisha bade him lave
    Seven times in Jordan and be clean,
  His Syrian upland's flashing wave
    Seem'd better to the Damascene.
  "Albana, Pharpar far excel,"
  He said, "the streams of Israel."

  In India Ganges was rever'd,
    In Egypt worshipp'd was the Nile,
  To Romans Tiber was endear'd
    From Apennine to Sacred Isle;
  And Rhine and Danube, Thames and Rhone
  A people's votive love have known.

  And we to this imposing flood
    A cordial homage needs must pay,
  Who in the solemn night have stood
    Upon its banks, and day by day
  Been fill'd with gladness to behold
  Its floor of silver flush'd with gold.

  It brings the nations to our marts,
    It bears our commerce to the sea,
  Has virtue, too, to cleanse our hearts,
    And make our spirits strong and free;
  It flows, our struggling lives to bless,
  With volume, grace and cheerfulness.




  ST. LAWRENCE AND THE COMING SHIPS.

  I cannot loiter on my way,
    The ice is drifting through Belle Isle,
  And far to seaward by Cape Ray
    Broad leagues of open water smile.
  Unheeded now, the inland barge
    Creeps heavily, the fisher dips
  His meshes in my brimming marge;
    I go to meet the coming ships.

  They steam from Thames by Dover Strait,
    They cleave the Bristol Channel's tide,
  They pass the Mersey's thronging gate,
    And issue from the crowded Clyde.
  Out past the homing craft they sheer,
    The Irish coastline by them slips;
  Ere many days they will be here:
    I go to meet the coming ships.

  Full-fraught with wealth of merchandise,
    They plough the main with furrows deep;
  Upon the waves they sink and rise,
    But onward, onward ever keep.
  And some a viewless message send,
    Whose airy flight their speed outstrips;
  And all their yearnings hither tend:
    I go to meet the coming ships.

  I tarry not by fortress old,
    Nor pause by any pleasant shore,
  But hasten, eager to behold
    Those brave leviathans once more,
  To welcome them with parted banks,
    And kiss their prows with loving lips,
  And soothingly caress their flanks;
    I go to meet the coming ships.




  THE QUEBEC EXODUS.

  Why should we leave the soil our fathers cleared,
    And lifelong tilled with patient, loving hands?
  Why should we leave the homes our fathers reared,
    And seek strange dwellings in unhallowed lands?
  Why should we leave the shrines where they revered
    Their guardian God, and break the golden bands
  That bind us to the ashes of our sires,
  Their haunts, their hearthstones and their altar-fires?

  Is it that now no longer from our doors
    The forest stretches with its gloom profound?
  That they who first set foot upon these shores
    Increase and multiply and hedge us round,
  Co-heritors of the exhaustless stores
    Of natural wealth that more and more abound?--
  Because of brethren of a differing speech,
  From whom we learn, and whom perhaps we teach?

  It was not thus our conquering race arose;
    It was not thus our copious language grew:
  The Saxon mingled with his Celtic foes,
    The Norman brought to both a spirit new.
  Not thus we read th' heroic tale of those
    Who built the younger Britains o'er the blue:
  'Twas here and there a handful in the earth,
  Prevailing, not by numbers, but by worth.




  HEAT.

  The fickle sun that had the earth caress'd
    And quickened all her amorous desire,
  And brought fresh roses to adorn her breast,
    Now spurned her in the madness of his ire;
  A haze of heat half hid the mountain's crest;
    The very river seemed of liquid fire;
  The air was flame, the town a stifling pale,
  And all the land was like a Hinnom's Vale.

  I thought of Hagar and what she endured,
    Faint in the desert, driv'n from Sara's sight;
  Of angry Jonah underneath his gourd,
    Grown in a night and withered in a night;
  Of the sun-stricken lad Elisha cured
    For the good, hospitable Shunammite;
  And of the fiery furnace made to glow
  For Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego.

  I called to mind Boccaccio's tale of her
    Left on a sun-scorched roof, and like to die;
  And I beheld the Ancient Mariner
    Becalmed beneath his hot and copper sky;
  And heard a long-forgotten traveller
    Speak from a page which made my childhood sigh,
  And tell of horrid climes by God accurst,
  And men and horses perishing of thirst.

  And to myself I said, Is this the land
    Where freezing cold claims sometimes half the year?
  Is this the region where the streams are spanned
    With floors of azure crystal, hard and clear,
  And all the snow-enveloped mountains stand
    Like hoary chiefs, majestic and austere?
  Was't here we saw so late King Winter stern?
  And will he shortly here again return?




  INVOCATION TO SUMMER.

  Come, Summer, come, nor in the south delay;
  We do thee honor with a longer day;
  We prize thee more, we better know thy worth;
  We hold thee dearer in the truer north:
        Come, Summer, come.

  Come, Summer, come, and in the early dawn
  Find sparkling dewdrops on the fragrant lawn;
  Hush all before thy majesty at noon,
  And hallow the long evening hours; come soon,
        Come, Summer, come.

  Come, Summer, come, make meadow grasses long;
  Make all the groves exuberant with song,
  The pasture corners canopy with shades,
  And thickly roof the silent forest glades:
        Come, Summer, come.

  Come, Summer, come, and with thy magic breath
  Make consummation of the death of death;
  Complete the work of thy sweet sister, Spring;
  Life more abundantly give everything:
        Come, Summer, come.




  SIR SUMMER.

  When conquering Summer stalks the street,
    His eyes are eyes of fire,
  The pavement burns beneath his feet,
    Men droop before his ire;
  But yonder, out upon the land,
    His manners are not these:
  He is a courtier mild and bland
    Beneath the maple trees.

  He throws his buckler on the grass,
    Unclasps his sheathed blade;
  He doffs his helmet and cuirass,
    And lounges in the shade;
  His pennon, fastened to a bough,
    Is fluttering in the breeze:
  He is at home and happy now
    Beneath the maple trees.

  No furious rage disturbs his breast,
    No fever heats his brain;
  Right cheerily he takes his rest,
    And views his glad domain;
  His lady seated by his side,
    His children on his knees,
  His heart expands with joy and pride
    Beneath the maple trees.

  He hears the happy farmer folk
    Who toss the fragrant hay;
  Blessings upon him they invoke,
    And beg of him to stay.
  The music of the feathered choirs,
    The murmur of the bees,
  Are sounds of which he never tires
    Beneath the maple trees.

  He hums a sweet, melodious tune,
    His hand a garland weaves,
  He talks the while he feasts at noon,
    His laughter shakes the leaves.
  He tells of conquests in the south,
    Of triumphs overseas,
  Of realms redeemed and deeds of drouth,
    Beneath the maple trees.

  He shouts and holds his jolly sides,
    And strikes his lusty thigh,
  To think of how Sir Winter hides
    His face when he is nigh,
  Or how with city exquisites
    His swagger disagrees:
  Thus glad Sir Summer gaily sits
    Beneath the maple trees.

  I know where I can find his bower
    Upon a wooded hill,
  Where I can pluck his favorite flower,
    And bathe within his rill;
  And thither I will take my flight,
    And loiter at my ease,
  And pay my homage to the Knight
    Beneath the maple trees.




  THE NIGHT.

  A tremor, a quiver,
    Through her ran
  As over the river
    The dawn began.
  She drew her veil
    Over her eyes,
  And her face grew pale,
    As she watched the sun rise.
  She faded, turned
    To a ghost, was gone,
  As the morning burned
    And the day came on.
  With veiled, sad eye,
    And face still wan,
  She waited nigh
    When the dusk began.
  With her tears of bliss
    The earth was wet,
  And soothed with her kiss,
    When the sun had set.
  And with stately pride
    She sat on the throne
  Of her empire wide
    When the day had gone;
  And her robes she spread
    With their sable hem,
  And crowned her head
    With her diadem.
  And the mute earth saw
    That a Queen was she,
  And gazed with awe
    On her majesty.




  TO BEAUTY.

  Beauty, beloved of all gentle hearts
    And pure, and cherished of the gifted tribe
  Whose skill to canvas and even stone imparts
    Such things as words are powerless to describe.
  And bards, who woo thee in the silent shade
    And dote upon thee under moonlit skies,
  And lovers, who behold thee new-array'd,
    As our first parents did in Paradise!

  These all have been thy priests.  In times remote,
    In Athens and the cool Thessalian dells,
  They sung thy liturgy with dulcet note,
    And quaff'd thy chalice from the sacred wells
  Of leafy Helicon.  Beneath the brows
    Of fam'd Olympus and among the isles
  Of the Aegean sea they paid their vows,
    And read thy lore in Nature's frowns and smiles.

  Nor strange to Zion's sanctuaried hill
    Wast thou, embalmer of the holy page;
  Ambrosial odors from thy garments fill
    The garden where the amorous royal sage
  Walk'd and discours'd with his beloved; there
    Alluring in thy soft and sumptuous dress:
  And to his kinglier sire supremely fair,
    Companion sweet of meek-ey'd Holiness.

  Thou hast no local temple, no set shrine;
    Thou art diffus'd o'er earth and sky and sea;
  In every land a thousand haunts are thine,
    Spirits of every race respond to thee.
  Here thy Olympus and thy Zion hill,
    Thy silvery Aegean, I survey;
  Thy majesty and loveliness at will
    I view, and own thy tranquilizing sway.




  THE DOCTOR.

  He bent above our darling's bed
    When her life was ebbing low,
  And in his serious look we read
    The truth we feared to know.

  We knew a slender thread was all
    That held her now; we saw
  The dark, portentous shadow fall,
    And near and nearer draw.

  Our hopes were centred all in him;
    We stood with bated breath
  As, pitiful and calm and grim,
    He fought and fought with Death.

  We hung upon the desperate fight,
    And saw in him combined
  The tiger's stealth, the lion's might,
    The man's superior mind.

  We saw the fearful hate he bore
    His old, relentless foe,
  His beautiful compassion for
    The one we cherished so.

  No mortal ever waged alone
    A conflict so severe;
  The high-souled, stainless champion
    Finds heavenly succor near.

  Legions of angels to his aid
    His pure devotion brought;
  Celestial strength his spirit swayed;
    'Twas Life that in him fought.

  The awful stillness of the night!
    The long and bitter hours!--
  It seemed that Time had stayed his flight
    To watch the battling pow'rs.

  And ere the ghastly night had fled
    He conquered in the strife,
  And gently took the slender thread,
    And drew her back to life.




  MY VALENTINE.

  O Dorothy, sweet Dorothy,
    You make my heart rejoice;
  Your presence is like Arcady,
    There's music in your voice;
  Heaven's purity is on your brow,
    Its light is in your eyne;
  I love you, and I ask you now
    To be my Valentine.

  Your face is like the lily in
    The morning's ruddy light;
  Your dimpled cheeks and tiny chin
    Are blessings to my sight;
  Your lips are fairer than the rose
    And redder far than wine;
  Your teeth are whiter than the snows:
    You'll be my Valentine!

  You are not quite so old as I,
    You've seen but summers three;
  And that's no doubt the reason why
    You are not coy with me.
  I'll come to you to-morrow,
    And on chocolates we'll dine;
  And you'll have no thought of sorrow
    When you are my Valentine.




  MY FRIENDS.

    "My never-failing friends are they,
    With whom I converse day by day."
                     --_Southey_.


  Some to and fro for converse flit
    And on their friends intrude,
  Or shun society and sit
    In cheerless solitude;
  But I can sit, when night descends,
  At home among a thousand friends.

  The garish day is left behind,
    The scurry and the din;
  The hours of toil are out of mind,
    As if they had not been.
  No thought of morrow that impends
  Comes in between me and my friends.

  We reck not of the flight of time,
    To them a subject strange;
  They pass their days in a sublime
    Indifference to change:
  Theirs is the life that never ends;
  Immortal beings are my friends.

  They toil not, neither do they spin;
    Yet none is meanly drest;
  And some are clad in costly skin,
    And some in silken vest;
  And everyone who sees commends
  The decent habits of my friends.

  And some are short, and some are tall;
    Some portly, and some spare;
  Here is a group of pygmies small,
    A Tom Thumb family; there
  A Brobdingnagian row extends,
  The best-informed among my friends.

  Wot one among them all is low,
    A fellow to be spurned;
  And none is ever rude, although
    Their backs are often turned.
  No observation that offends
  Is dropped by any of my friends.

  And some are steeped in classic lore;
    Some brim with wisdom sage;
  And some can trace a far-off shore,
    Or paint a former age;
  And each his talent freely lends,
  For talented are all my friends.

  Some tell of deeds and lives sublime
    And triumphs over foes;
  Some weave a spell of lofty rhyme,
    Some charm with stately prose;
  And here and there a mind unbends
  Familiarly among my friends.

  In diction antiquated, quaint,
    Or with a modern sound,
  They speak their thoughts without restraint,
    Although they're mostly bound;
  And cease to speak when none attends,
  A valued feature of my friends.

  Although they shun the thoughtless crowd,
    The frivolous disdain,
  Their titles have not made them proud,
    Nor all their pages vain;
  No common mortal less pretends,
  None can be opener than my friends.

  They care not that they've all been cut,
    A number by myself,
  And often taken down, and put
    As often on the shelf;
  My estimation makes amends
  For such ill-treatment of my friends.

  An ever-fresh, unfailing source
    Of thought and sympathy,
  What hours of goodly intercourse
    They have afforded me!
  I cannot doubt that heaven still sends
  Us angels while I have my friends.

  If he who sits at home in gloom,
    Or rushes here and there,
  Will put a bookshelf in his room
    And furnish it with care,
  He'll bless the evenings that he spends
  With such companions as my friends.




  NOTHING TOO GOOD FOR THE IRISH.

  It's the Emerald Isle is the beautiful land:
    There's nothing too good for the Irish.
  O'er the whole of it, Nature, at heaven's command,
  Has scattered her charms with a prodigal hand
  From Skibbereen town to the Donegal strand;
    For there's nothing too good for the Irish.

  And it's many a hero the Irish can claim:
    There's nothing too good for the Irish.
  "Red Hugh" put his country's invaders to shame;
  Owen Roe was a fighter they never could tame;
  As a nation the Irish have glory and fame;
    For there's nothing too good for the Irish.

  And the Irish are noted for piety, too:
    There's nothing too good for the Irish.
  In the far-away time before Brian Boru,
  The faith by Saint Patrick was planted and grew,
  And the "Island of Saints" has had saints not a few:
    For there's nothing too good for the Irish.

  And the best of all orators Irishmen are:
    There's nothing too good for the Irish.
  The voice of Columba was heard from afar,
  Burke's eloquence rolled like a conquering car,
  And the name of O'Connell's a radiant star;
    For there's nothing too good for the Irish.

  And the Irishman always is witty, of course;
    There's nothing too good for the Irish.
  And his wit is as genial and kind as its source;
  It never leaves anyone feeling the worse;
  He makes bulls, but a good Irish bull's a white horse;
    For there's nothing too good for the Irish.

  You are thinking, no doubt, to the race I belong:
    There's nothing too good for the Irish.
  You think I am Irish, but that's where you're wrong;
  I am Scotch, but our love for the Irish is strong;
  We gave them a saint and we'll give them a song;
    For there's nothing too good for the Irish.




  AN ENGLISH TOAST.

  The English soil!--'tis hallowed ground:
    Its restless children roam
  The world, but they have never found
    So dear a land as home;
  Their passion for its hills and downs
    Nor space nor time can spoil;
  A golden mist of memory crowns
    The good old English soil.

  The English race!--its pluck and pith,
    Its power to stay and win,--
  Wise Alfred's, dauntless Harold's kith,
    And Coeur de Lion's kin!
  Sir Philip Sidney, Hampden, Noll,
    Who sat in kingly place!
  Wolfe, Nelson, Wellington and all
    The good old English race!

  The English speech!--the copious tongue,
    Terse, vivid, plastic, fit,
  Which Chaucer, Spenser loved and sung,
    Which gave us Holy Writ;
  Which Shakespeare, Milton used, to write,
    Which Taylor used, to preach,
  And Pitt, to speak, as we to-night--
    The good old English speech!

  "St. George and Merrie England!"--still
    The stirring phrase imparts
  Warmth to the blood, and sends a thrill
    Through more than English hearts.
  God save Old England by His grace!
    We all alike beseech,
  Who know the English soil or race
    And speak the English speech.




  THE SCOT.

  That no Scotsman is perfect, we freely confess,
    Nor has been since the time of the fall;
  Yet we think, notwithstanding and nevertheless,
    He is "nae sheep-shank bane," after all.
  "Sic excellent pairts" as he has will atone
    For the lack of a tittle or jot;
  And, although we don't boast, it is very well known
    For some things you must go to a Scot.

  If you want a sweet song that comes straight from the heart
    Of a man who had few for his peers,
  An approved son of genius and master of art.
    And a lover, with laughter and tears;
  A song that gives honor to personal worth,
    And ennobles the lowliest lot,
  And makes brothers of all who inhabit the earth;
    You must go "for a' that" to a Scot.

  If you want a good story, entrancingly told,
    By a genuine king of the pen,
  A right royal dispenser of things new and old,
    And a faithful portrayer of men;
  A tale that will brighten your work and your play,
    And will do what some others do not,--
  Give you knowledge and wisdom and heart for the fray;
    You will go to Sir Walter, the Scot.

  If you want the high spirit that scorns to make truce
    With a foeman on suppliant knee,
  The untameable will of a Wallace or Bruce,
    Or the dash of a Bonnie Dundee;
  Fierce courage that nothing on earth can subdue,
    Sense of honor that shrinks from a blot,
  Inexhaustible loyalty, loving and true,
    You will find them to-day in a Scot.

  If you want an intense love of country and kin,
    An attachment as tender as strong,
  That can gar the blood leap when the pipers begin,
    And the tear start at sound of a song;
  A grand patriotic devotion and pride,
    That makes sanctified ground of the spot
  Where a Scotsman for freedom has suffered and died;
    You will find what you want in a Scot.

  If you want a hale-bodied and clear-headed chiel,
    Independent and honest and good,
  With a hand that can do and a heart that can feel,
    And tenacious of purpose--and shrewd;
  Whose thrift makes the face of prosperity smile,
    Who's contented with what he has got,
  But is ready and careful to add to his pile;
    You may find what you want in a Scot.

  Gin ye wush a douce body, auldfarrant and gash,
    Unco' waukrife and couthie and braw,
  Ower eydent wi' daft clishmaclavers to fash,
    Or to thole whigmaleeries ava;
  Mak's nae collieshangie wad fley a bit flee,
    But is siccer and dour as a stot;
  Tak's the scone and the kebbuck and carries the gree;
    Ye'll be spierin', gude faith! for a Scot.


GLOSSARY.--"Nae sheep-shank bane" (Burns), no unimportant person;
"gars," makes; "chiel," fellow; "gin," if; "wush," wish; "douce,"
sober; "auldfarrant," wise; "gash," sagacious; "unco," uncommonly;
"waukrife," wideawake; "couthie," kindly; "braw," handsome; "ower,"
over; "eydent," busy; "daft," foolish; "clishmaclavers," idle talk;
"fash," trouble; "thole," bear; "whigmaleeries," crotchets; "ava," at
all; "collieshangie," commotion; "fley," disturb; "siccer," steady;
"dour," stubborn; "stot," ox; "scone," a cake; "kebbuck," a cheese;
"carries the gree" (Burns), has the pre-eminence; "spierin'," inquiring.




  THE ROARIN' GAME.

  The roarin' game, the roarin' game,
  From Scotland's bonnie land it came,
  The land of loch and firth and ben,
  And comely dames and stalwart men;
  It crossed the broad Atlantic tide
  With Scots who came to dwell this side,
  And bring our country wealth and fame,
  The roarin' game, the roarin' game.

  The roarin' game, the roarin' game
  Makes every land to Scotsmen "hame";
  Where'er the winter's breath congeals
  The water, see the sturdy "chiels"
  With "stane" and besom play and sweep,
  Intently gaze, and shout and leap,
  With genial fervor all aflame:--
  The roarin' game, the roarin' game.

  The roarin' game, the roarin' game,
  Though stupid folk may think it tame,
  Affect the smile that wisdom casts
  On rattle-brained enthusiasts,
  And jest in condescending tones
  Of boys and marbles, men and stones;
  'Tis fine enjoyment just the same,
  The roarin' game, the roarin' game.

  The roarin' game, the roarin' game
  Its meed of praise may justly claim:
  As firm as ice upon the pond
  It is of hearts a brother bond;
  It trains us to be wise and true
  In all we undertake to do,
  And fits for every higher aim,
  The roarin' game, the roarin' game,

  The roarin' game, the roarin' game
  Will never give us cause for shame,
  No shattered nerves and aching heads,
  Bad consciences and nameless dreads,
  But health and strength and minds serene
  And kindly hearts and friendly mien:
  No honest tongue will e'er defame
  The roarin' game, the roarin' game.




  THE OLD SCOTTISH MINISTER.

  A man he was of Scottish race,
    And ancient Scottish name;
  Of common mould, but lofty mien,
    That dignified his frame.
  And he lived a humble, quiet life,
    Obscure, unknown to fame;
  God's glory and the good of man
    His constant, only aim:
      Like a fine old Scottish minister,
        All of the olden time.

  He dearly loved his gentle wife,
    As everyone could tell;
  And watched his children as they grew,
    Lest any ill befell;
  And as he looked upon his boys
    His bosom oft would swell;
  For he reared them in the fear of God,
    And ruled his household well:
      Like a true old Scottish minister,
        All of the olden time.

  A father, too, he was to all
    His congregation there:
  To all he felt a father's love,
    And showed a father's care:
  He wisely counselled them with speech,
    And pled for them in prayer;
  And ever for the needy ones
    He something had to spare:
      Like a kind old Scottish minister,
        All of the olden time.

  The servant of the Lord he was,
    In hovel and in hall,--
  The high ambassador of heaven
    Whom earth could not enthrall;
  Like Christ among the wedding guests,
    Or by the funeral pall;
  And he made his daily life sublime,
    A pattern unto all:
      Like a grand old Scottish minister,
        All of the olden time.

  For truth and righteousness and love
    His voice was ever heard;
  And minds were kindled into thought,
    And consciences were stirred,
  And weary, heavy-laden hearts
    To faith and hope were spurred,
  As from the pulpit he proclaimed
    The everlasting Word:
      Like a faithful Scottish minister,
        All of the olden time.

  And when, amid his elders grave,
    Extended in a line
  Beside the table of the Lord,
    He kept the rite divine,
  His face with a rapt, unearthly look
    Was seen to strangely shine,
  As he broke the white, symbolic bread,
    And passed the sacred wine:
      Like a saintly Scottish minister,
        All of the olden time.

  His lot was hard, his task severe;
    He found the burden light:
  When darkly o'er his pathway hung
    The shadows of the night,
  His heart was steadfast, for he walked
    By faith, and not by sight;
  And ran triumphantly his course,
    And fought a goodly fight:
      Like a brave old Scottish minister,
        All of the olden time.

  And when upon a summer's day
    He laid him down to die,
  He called his household to his side
    Without a moan or sigh,
  And blessed his children each in turn,
    And said a fond good-bye,
  And then consigned his soul to God,
    And went to live on high:
      Like a good old Scottish minister,
        All of the olden time.




  THE MACS.

  There's a race, or a part of a race, if you will,
  Of renown prehistoric, and vigorous still,
  Who back from their fastnesses scornfully hurl'd
  The redoubtable legions that trampled the world;
  They repelled, and they only, the Roman attacks,
  The stalwart, courageous, impetuous Macs.

  When the red-bearded pirates, the Saxons and Danes
  And Angles, came swarming across the sea plains,
  And the old British stock to exterminate tried,
  Caledonia and Erin their efforts defied;
  And the conquering Normans were glad to make tracks
  From the Macs and the Mics (who are properly Macs).

  Their proud patronymics, they rightfully hold,
  Proclaim them descended from heroes of old.--
  Illustrious titles that throw in the shade
  The dukedoms and earldoms but yesterday made;
  And even the King with his royalty lacks
  A lineage as ancient as that of the Macs.

  They are old and yet young, with a spirit possest
  By the dream of the East and the hope of the West;
  The earth is their country, the race is their kin;
  In populous cities their guerdon they win,
  And in gold miners' cabins and lumbermen's shacks
  You will find the ubiquitous, venturesome Macs.

  Distinguished they've been with the sword and the pen;
  In pulpit and parliament, leaders of men;
  Prime ministers, presidents, merchants, viziers,
  They have manag'd the business of both hemispheres;
  And the Dago day-laborers laying the tracks
  Are boss'd by the Macs or the Mics (who are Macs).

  'Twas thought by the ancients that Atlas upbore
  The sphere on his shoulders--'tis thought so no more;
  Prometheus and Atlas and all of their kith,
  The Titans, are now but a fable, a myth.
  The men who are bearing the world on their backs
  Are the Macs and the Mics (who are mixed with the Macs).




  THE PARSON AT THE HOCKEY MATCH.

  It's very disagreeable to sit here in the cold,
  And a sinful waste of time--ah, well, it's too late now to scold;
  I'll think about my sermon and my prayers for Sunday next,
  And the young folks may be happy--let me see--what was my text?
  But what a throng of people--an immortal soul in each:
  With such an audience this would be a splendid place to preach.
  I'd have the pulpit half-way down--what ice! without a smirch!
  Here are the men--I wonder if they ever go to church.
  "The teams?"  Ah, yes, "the forwards, point, and cover-point and goal";
  Thank you, my dear, I understand--is that a lump of coal?
  "Rubber?"  Ah, yes, "The puck?" just so!  One's holding it, I see--
  That fellow with his clothes all on--ah, that's the referee.
  What was he whistling for--his dog?  Why, they've begun to play;
  Well, well, that's rough; I really think we're doing wrong to stay.
  It's sickening, deafening; dear!  I wish this uproar could be stilled.
  I do sincerely trust there'll not be anybody killed.

  It's a wondrous exhibition of alertness, speed, and strength.
  I suppose there's not much danger--there's a fellow at full length.
  He's up again; that's plucky.  Well, the little lad has pluck--
  And now he's master of the ice, possessor of the puck.
  He dodges two opponents, but collides with one at last,
  A Philistine Goliath--David baffles him and fast
  Darts onward o'er the whitening sheet, while from each crowded row
  The crazed spectators cheer him on--Look!--has he lost it?  No!
  He's clear again.  Played, played, my boy.  I'd like to see him score:--
  (I'll have no voice for Sunday if I shout like this much more)--
  But there his ruthless enemies o'erwhelm him in a shoal--
  Well played, you hero, safely passed.  Now for a shot on goal.
  Shoot, shoot, you duffer; shoot, you goose, you ass, you great galoot,
  You addle-pated idiot, you nincompoop, you--shoot!
  You've lost it!  Never mind--well tried--that other dash was grand.
  Why do they stop?  "Off side," you say?  I don't quite understand.
  That's puzzling.  I suppose it's right.  I wish they'd not delay.
  This is a most provoking interruption to the play.

  "Cold?"  Nothing of the sort.  I was--I'm heated with the game.
  I'm really enjoying it; indeed, I'm glad I came.
  I'd like to see both ends at once; I can't from where we sit.
  They've scored one yonder--What's the row?  A player has been hit?
  Such things are bound to happen in a rapid game like this;
  They'll soon resume the play, my dear; there's nothing much amiss,--
  Some trifling accident received in a rough body check,
  A shoulder dislocated or a fracture of the neck.
  Oh, no, it's nothing serious--the game begins again.
  They're here, a writhing, struggling mass of half a dozen men
  Battling and groaning with the strife, and breathing hard and fast,
  Swayed back and forth and stooping low like elms before the blast,
  Changing their places like a fleet of vessels tempest-driven
  That blindly meet within the waves and part with timbers riven,
  Waving their sticks with frantic zeal--But isn't this a sight?
  My goodness!  I could sit and watch a game like this all night.
  There, dirty trousers, there's your chance.  Muffed it!  Why weren't
        you quick?
  This is a sight to make the sad rejoice, to heal the sick,
  To rouse the drones and give them life to last them half a year--
  Hit him again!--I wish I had my congregation here.

  My stars! and this is hockey.  Hockey's the king of sports.
  This is the thing to come to when you're feeling out of sorts.
  This is the greatest holiday I've had for many weeks.
  This helps one to appreciate the feeling of the Greeks.
  I understand my Homer now--O Hercules, behold
  Yon Trojan giant, he that's cast in an Olympian mould,
  Ye gods, he more than doubled up that other stalwart cove--
  Here comes swift-footed Mercury, the messenger of Jove.
  Adown the blue, outstripping all, he speeds.  Oh, what a spurt!
  His shoulders have no wings, but see, he has them on his shirt.
  He's broken through the forward line, baffled the cover-point,
  Thrown down the other man and knocked their game all out of joint.
  And now he rushes on the goal--this makes the senses reel--
  Goal! goal! hurrah! hurrah! well done, men of the winged wheel!

  At last--how soon!--the game is done; I've scarcely drawn a breath.
  This getting out is difficult; I'm almost crushed to death.
  The cars are packed; how we'll get home I'm sure I do not know.
  Here's room for you; get up, my dears; I'll walk; away you go.

  My sermon's gone, but as I walk I cannot help but think
  That, after all, perhaps I've found a sermon in the rink.

  This world is an arena with a slippery sheet of ice,
  And all have skates and hockey sticks and enter without price.
  And seats are round for those who rest--the idle and the old;
  But those who are not in the game are apt to find it cold.
  Some play defence, some forward, with terrific speed and stress.
  The puck keeps flying 'twixt the goals of failure and success,
  Now up, now down, across and back, here, there, and everywhere.

  The grit of skates, the crack of sticks, the shouting, fill the air.
  Some slip and fall a thousand times and spring up in a trice;
  Some go to pieces on their feet and have to leave the ice;
  Some play offside, kick, tackle, trip, try every kind of foul;
  Some players are forever cheered, some only get a howl.
  We seldom hear the whistle of the watchful Referee,
  Who mostly lets the game go on as if He didn't see.
  No gong rings out half-time to let the players get their breath--
  To most full time comes only with the solemn stroke of death.
  The winners are not always those who make the biggest score:
  The vanquished oft are victors when the stubborn game is o'er;
  For many things are added to make up the grand amount,
  And everything is taken at the last into account--
  The sort of sticks we played with, and the way our feet were shod,
  For the trophy is Salvation and the Referee is God.

  God prosper our Canadian sports and keep them clean and pure,
  Whole-hearted, manly, generous, and let them long endure!
  Long live each honest winter sport, each good Canadian game,
  To train the youth in lusty health and iron strength of frame,
  To make them noble, vigorous, straightforward, ardent, bold,
  Nearer a perfect standard than the grandest knights of old.

  Keep in the path of rectitude the young throughout the land,
  And guide them ever on their way by thine unerring hand,
  Along the slippery path of life in safety toward the goal,
  And keep their bodies holy as the temples of the soul:
  For the river of the future from the present's fountain runs,
  And a nation's hope is founded on the virtue of her sons.

  The glory of a man is strength, Thy wisdom hath declared:
  Let strength increase, and strength of frame with strength of will
        be paired,
  And let these twain go hand in hand with strength of heart and mind,
  And strength of character present all forms of strength combined.
  Oh, make out strength the strength of men to perfect stature grown,
  And use it for thine ends and turn man's glory to thine own.











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Canada, My Land, by W. M. MacKeracher

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CANADA, MY LAND ***

***** This file should be named 37155.txt or 37155.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/1/5/37155/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
