The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Day With Longfellow, by
Anonymous and Henry Wadsworth Longfellow

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Day With Longfellow

Author: Anonymous
        Henry Wadsworth Longfellow

Release Date: November 11, 2011 [EBook #37980]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A DAY WITH LONGFELLOW ***




Produced by Delphine Lettau, Susan Theresa Morin and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 DAYS WITH
 THE GREAT
 .POETS.

 LONGFELLOW


[Illustration: _Painting by A. E. Jackson._ THE CHILDREN'S HOUR.]

 Between the dark and the daylight,
     When the night is beginning to lower,
 Comes a pause in the day's occupations,
     That is known as the Children's Hour.

        *       *       *       *       *

 They climb up into my turret,
     O'er the arms and back of my chair;
 If I try to escape they surround me,
     They seem to be everywhere.




 A DAY WITH
 LONGFELLOW

 [Illustration: portrait of Longfellow]

 HODDER & STOUGHTON
 LTD., PUBLISHERS LONDON


_Uniform with this Volume_

_DAYS WITH THE POETS_

 BROWNING
 BURNS
 KEATS
 LONGFELLOW
 SHAKESPEARE
 TENNYSON

_DAYS WITH THE COMPOSERS_

 BEETHOVEN
 CHOPIN
 GOUNOD
 MENDELSSOHN
 TSCHAIKOVSKY
 WAGNER

_Made and Printed in Great Britain for Hodder & Stoughton, Limited,
by C. Tinling & Co., Ltd., Liverpool, London and Prescot._




A DAY WITH LONGFELLOW




The expression of serious and tender thoughtfulness, which always
characterized the quiet face of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, had deepened
during his later years, into something akin to melancholy. The tragic
loss of his beloved wife,--burned to death while she was sealing up in
paper little locks of her children's hair,--had left its permanent and
irrevocable mark upon his life. Still, he did not seclude himself with
his sorrow: the professor of Modern Languages at Harvard could hardly
do that. He remained the selfsame kindly, gentle, industrious man,
welcoming with ready courtesy the innumerable visitors to the Craigie
House.

This is a large old-fashioned house in Cambridge, Massachusetts--a place
of grassy terraces, long verandahs, lilac bushes, and shady trees--a
perfect dwelling for a man of cultured tastes, as the interior also
testifies.

From the Poet's study, a spacious, sunny room upon the ground floor,
he could look across the meadows behind the house to the distant
silver windings of the River Charles. It was a most orderly room.
Every book and paper lay where he could put his hand on it in a moment.
Book-cases full of valuable volumes--precious first editions--busts and
portraits,--were to be seen on every side. A certain austere simplicity
was noticeable all over Longfellow's house. "His private rooms," it has
been said, "were like those of a German professor." But the attractiveness
and delightfulness of Craigie House arose not from any intrinsic
opulence of its contents, but from the personality of the man who lived
there. "By his mere presence he rendered the sunshine brighter, and the
place more radiant of kindness and peace."

The Poet began his day, so long as age and health permitted, by a brisk
morning walk. He would be out and about by six, observing and enjoying
the beauty of earth and air, and subsequently recording his exquisite
impressions:

 O Gift of God! O perfect day:
 Whereon shall no man work, but play;
 Whereon it is enough for me,
 Not to be doing, but to be!

 Through every fibre of my brain,
 Through every nerve, through every vein,
 I feel the electric thrill, the touch
 Of life, that seems almost too much.

 I hear the wind among the trees
 Playing celestial symphonies;
 I see the branches downward bent,
 Like keys of some great instrument.

 And over me unrolls on high
 The splendid scenery of the sky,
 Where through a sapphire sea the sun
 Sails like a golden galleon,

 Towards yonder cloud-land in the West,
 Towards yonder Islands of the Blest,
 Whose steep sierra far uplifts
 Its craggy summits white with drifts.

 Blow, winds! and waft through all the rooms
 The snowflakes of the cherry-blooms!
 Blow, winds! and bend within my reach
 The fiery blossoms of the peach!

 O Life and Love! O happy throng
 Of thoughts, whose only speech is song!
 O heart of man! canst thou not be
 Blithe as the air is, and as free?
                _A Day of Sunshine._

The morning's post brought the first consignment of that enormous number
of epistles which were at once an affliction and an amusement to him.
The Poet was besieged by letters from ambitious aspirants seeking advice,
and from self-styled failures, desirous of help. To these last he was
peculiarly drawn, for he was distinguished by "a grace almost peculiar
to himself at the time in which he lived--his tenderness towards the
undeveloped artist, struggling towards individual expression." In short,
his first desire was to help on people, and bring out the best in them.

Of apparent failure or success he recked little, believing, like
Stevenson, that the true success is labour,--that pursuit, and not
attainment is the worthiest object of existence; and his philosophy is
summed up in the well-known words of _The Ladder of Saint Augustine_,


 Saint Augustine! well hast thou said,
     That of our vices we can frame
 A ladder, if we will but tread
     Beneath our feet each deed of shame!

 All common things, each day's events,
     That with the hour begin and end,
 Our pleasures and our discontents,
     Are rounds by which we may ascend.

        *       *       *       *       *

 The longing for ignoble things;
     The strife for triumph more than truth;
 The hardening of the heart, that brings
     Irreverence for the dreams of youth;

 All thoughts of ill; all evil deeds,
     That have their root in thoughts of ill;
 Whatever hinders or impedes
     The action of the nobler will;--

 All these must first be trampled down
     Beneath our feet, if we would gain
 In the bright fields of fair renown
     The right of eminent domain.

 We have not wings, we cannot soar;
     But we have feet to scale and climb
 By slow degrees, by more and more,
     The cloudy summits of our time.

 The mighty pyramids of stone
     That wedge-like cleave the desert airs,
 When nearer seen and better known,
     Are but gigantic flights of stairs.

 The distant mountains that uprear
     Their solid bastions to the skies,
 Are crossed by pathways, that appear
     As we to higher levels rise.

 The heights by great men reached and kept
     Were not attained by sudden flight,
 But they, while their companions slept,
     Were toiling upward in the night.

 Standing on what too long we bore
     With shoulders bent and downcast eyes,
 We may discern--unseen before--
     A path to higher destinies.

 Nor deem the irrevocable Past
     As wholly wasted, wholly vain,
 If rising on its wrecks, at last
     To something nobler we attain.


Constant requests for autographs formed the bulk of the day's budget,
and these also never went unanswered--even when couched in terms the
most _mal a propos_, much as those of the man who said that "he
loved poetry in 'most any style,"--"and would you please copy your
'Break, break, break' for the writer?" Possibly the worst offenders, in
this matter of autograph-hunting, were those multitudinous schoolgirls
of whom Longfellow humorously complained that he was always "kept busy
answering." They ignored the fact of his professional duties, and his
own unremitting work; anything to get a reply in the handwriting of the
celebrity! But he had a special delight in budding womanhood, and had
depicted it with magical insight and rare delicacy of touch, in lines
which have never been excelled in their charm and purity.


 Maiden! with the meek, brown eyes
 In whose orbs a shadow lies,
 Like the dusk in evening skies!

 Thou whose locks outshine the sun,
 Golden tresses, wreathed in one,
 As the braided streamlets run!

 Standing, with reluctant feet,
 Where the brook and river meet,
 Womanhood and childhood fleet!

 Seest thou shadows sailing by,
 As the dove, with startled eye,
 Sees the falcon's shadow fly?

 Hearest thou voices on the shore,
 That our ears perceive no more,
 Deafened by the cataract's roar?

 O, thou child of many prayers!
 Life hath quicksands,--Life hath snares!
 Care and age come unawares!

 Like the swell of some sweet tune,
 Morning rises into noon,
 May glides onward into June.

 Childhood is the bough, where slumbered
 Birds and blossoms many-numbered;--
 Age, that bough with snows encumbered.

 Gather, then, each flower that grows,
 When the young heart overflows,
 To embalm that tent of snows.

 Bear a lily in thy hand;
 Gates of brass cannot withstand
 One touch of that magic wand.

 Bear through sorrow, wrong, and ruth,
 In thy heart the dew of youth,
 On thy lips the seal of truth.

 O, that dew, like balm shall steal
 Into wounds that cannot heal,
 Even as sleep our eyes doth seal;

 And that smile, like sunshine, dart
 Into many a sunless heart,
 For a smile of God thou art.

                       _Maidenhood._


[Illustration: _Painting by W. H. Margetson._ MAIDENHOOD.]

 Maiden with the meek, brown eyes
 In whose orbs a shadow lies,
 Like the dusk in evening skies!

 Thou whose locks outshine the sun,
 Golden tresses, wreathed in one,
 As the braided streamlets run!


The early instalment of letters attended to, the Poet could devote
himself to his own affairs. He believed in _working_ at poetry,
methodically, systematically: although inspiration might flow with
sudden fervour, it was not to be waited for. "Regular, proportioned,
resolute, incessant industry," was the secret of his success, and the
erasures and substitutions in his MSS. bear witness to his care in
craftsmanship. The least conspicuous word must be as perfect as he
could make it. Longfellow's creed, as expounded in _The Builders_,
allowed for no scamped work.


 All are architects of Fate,
     Working in these walls of Time:
 Some with massive deeds and great,
     Some with ornaments of rhyme.

 Nothing useless is, or low;
     Each thing in its place is best;
 And what seems but idle show
     Strengthens and supports the rest.

 For the structure that we raise,
     Time is with materials filled;
 Our to-days and yesterdays
     Are the blocks with which we build.

 Truly shape and fashion these;
     Leave no yawning gaps between;
 Think not, because no man sees,
     Such things will remain unseen.

 In the elder days of Art,
     Builders wrought with greatest care
 Each minute and unseen part;
     For the Gods see everywhere.

 Let us do our work as well,
     Both the unseen and the seen;
 Make the house, where Gods may dwell,
     Beautiful, entire, and clean.

 Else our lives are incomplete,
     Standing in these walls of Time,
 Broken stairways, where the feet
     Stumble as they seek to climb.

 Build to-day, then, strong and sure,
     With a firm and ample base;
 And ascending and secure
     Shall to-morrow find its place.

 Thus alone can we attain
     To those turrets, where the eye
 Sees the world as one vast plain,
     And one boundless reach of sky.

                           _The Builders._


Work, indeed, whether mental or physical, was his first instinct, and
he has preached the gospel of honest work to the whole English-speaking
world in some of the most familiar lines in the language.


 Under a spreading chestnut tree
     The village smithy stands;
 The smith, a mighty man is he,
     With large and sinewy hands;
 And the muscles of his brawny arms
     Are strong as iron bands.

 His hair is crisp, and black, and long,
     His face is like the tan;
 His brow is wet with honest sweat,
     He earns whate'er he can,
 And looks the whole world in the face,
     For he owes not any man.

 Week in, week out, from morn till night,
     You can hear his bellows blow;
 You can hear him swing his heavy sledge,
     With measured beat and slow,
 Like a sexton ringing the village bell,
     When the evening sun is low.

 And children coming home from school
     Look in at the open door:
 They love to see the flaming forge,
     And hear the bellows roar,
 And catch the burning sparks that fly
     Like chaff from a threshing floor.

 He goes on Sunday to the church,
     And sits among his boys;
 He hears the parson pray and preach,
     He hears his daughter's voice,
 Singing in the village choir,
     And it makes his heart rejoice.

 It sounds to him like her mother's voice,
     Singing in Paradise!
 He needs must think of her once more,
     How in the grave she lies;
 And with his hard, rough hand he wipes
     A tear out of his eyes.

 Toiling,--rejoicing,--sorrowing,
     Onward through life he goes;
 Each morning sees some task begin,
     Each evening sees it close;
 Something attempted, something done,
     Has earned a night's repose.

 Thanks, thanks to thee, my worthy friend,
     For the lesson thou hast taught!
 Thus at the flaming forge of life
     Our fortune must be wrought;
 Thus on its sounding anvil shaped
     Each burning deed and thought!

                _The Village Blacksmith._


[Illustration: _Painting by Dudley Tennant._ THE VILLAGE BLACKSMITH.]

 And children coming home from school
     Look in at the open door:
 They love to see the flaming forge,
     And hear the bellows roar,
 And catch the burning sparks that fly
     Like chaff from a threshing floor.


Not for long, however, might Longfellow remain undisturbed in his
sunny room. Sometimes he welcomed the opening door that saw "a little
figure stealing gently in, laying an arm round his neck as he bent over
his work, and softly whispering some childish secret in his ear." For
this was no obstacle to the current of his tranquil thoughts. "My little
girls are flitting about my study," he wrote to a friend, "as blithe as
two birds. They are preparing to celebrate the birthday of one of their
dolls.... What a beautiful world this child's world is! I take infinite
delight in seeing it go on all around me."

It was with absolute sincerity that he had exclaimed:


 Come to me, O ye children!
     For I hear you at your play,
 And the questions that perplexed me
     Have vanished quite away.

 Ye open the eastern windows,
     That look towards the sun,
 Where thoughts are singing swallows,
     And the brooks of morning run.

 In your hearts are the birds and the sunshine,
     In your thoughts the brooklet's flow;
 But in mine is the wind of Autumn,
     And the first fall of the snow.

 Ah! what would the world be to us,
     If the children were no more?
 We should dread the desert behind us
     Worse than the dark before.

 What the leaves are to the forest,
     With light and air for food,
 Ere their sweet and tender juices
     Have been hardened into wood,--

 That to the world are children;
     Through them it feels the glow
 Of a brighter and sunnier climate
     Than reaches the trunks below

 Come to me, O ye children!
     And whisper in my ear
 What the birds and the winds are singing
     In your sunny atmosphere.

 For what are all our contrivings,
     And the wisdom of our books,
 When compared with your caresses,
     And the gladness of your looks?

 Ye are better than all the ballads
     That ever were sung or said;
 For ye are living poems,
     And all the rest are dead.

                        _Children._

But these were congenial moments. There were visitors much less
desirable. "He was besieged," as one of his friends declares, "by every
possible form of interruption which the ingenuity of the human brain
could devise." For his admirers, whose name was legion, were not
satisfied with hero-worship afar off: they must needs force themselves
into his presence, and express their admiration _viva-voce_. Most
amazing folks swooped suddenly down upon him, ruthless and unabashed.

Longfellow, always quick to see the comical side of a situation, would
tell with great delight strange tales of his unexpected guests. "One
man," he said, "a perfect stranger, came with an omnibus full of ladies.
He introduced himself, then returning to the omnibus, took out all the
ladies, one, two, three, four, five, with a little girl, and brought
them in. I entertained them to the best of my ability, and they stayed
an hour."

On another occasion, an English gentleman, with no letter of introduction,
abruptly introduced himself, thus: "In other countries, you know, we go
to see ruins, and the like--but you have no ruins in your country, and I
thought," growing embarrassed, "I would call and see _you_!" Another
strange gentleman accosted him with great fervour, "Mr. Longfellow, I
have long desired the honour of knowing you. I am one of _the few men_
who have read your _Evangeline_!"

All these worshippers at his shrine were received by the Poet with his
unfailing courtesy and patience; but he was invariably adroit in warding
off compliments. To applause and flattery he was impervious--reference
to his own works was distasteful to him. His perfect modesty was the
reflex of his natural reticence.

Longfellow regarded life from the standpoint of eternity, and thus
was one who, in the words of a Kempis, "careth little for the praise
or dispraise of men." His gaze was riveted upon that "Land of the
Hereafter," to which he was always more than ready to set out, and in
the departure of Hiawatha he had imaged his longing for the "Happiest
Land."


     On the shore stood Hiawatha,
 Turned and waved his hand at parting;
 On the clear and luminous water
 Launched his birch canoe for sailing,
 From the pebbles of the margin
 Shoved it forth into the water;
 Whispered to it "Westward! westward!"
 And with speed it darted forward.

     And the evening sun descending
 Set the clouds on fire with redness,
 Burned the broad sky, like a prairie,
 Left upon the level water
 One long track and trail of splendour,
 Down whose stream, as down a river,
 Westward, westward Hiawatha
 Sailed into the fiery sunset,
 Sailed into the purple vapours,
 Sailed into the dusk of evening.

     And the people from the margin
 Watched him floating, rising, sinking,
 Till the birch canoe seemed lifted
 High into that sea of splendour,
 Till it sank into the vapours
 Like the new moon slowly, slowly
 Sinking in the purple distance.

     And they said "Farewell for ever!"
 Said "Farewell, O Hiawatha!"
 And the forests, dark and lonely,
 Moved through all their depths of darkness,
 Sighed, "Farewell, O Hiawatha!"
 And the waves upon the margin
 Rising, rippling on the pebbles,
 Sobbed "Farewell, O Hiawatha!"
 And the heron, the Shuh-shuh-gah,
 From her haunts among the fenlands,
 Screamed "Farewell, O Hiawatha!"

     Thus departed Hiawatha,
 Hiawatha the Beloved,
 In the glory of the sunset,
 In the purple mists of evening,
 To the regions of the home-wind,
 Of the Northwest wind Keewaydin,
 To the Islands of the Blessed,
 To the kingdom of Ponemah,
 To the land of the Hereafter!

                     _Hiawatha._


[Illustration: _Painting by J. Finnemore._ HIAWATHA.]

     And the evening sun descending....
 Left upon the level water
 One long track and trail of splendour,
 Down whose stream as down a river,
 Westward, westward Hiawatha
 Sailed into the fiery sunset,
 Sailed into the purple vapours,
 Sailed into the dusk of evening.


Personal friends, of whom the Poet possessed many, would arrive in
time for lunch, and be welcomed by the master of Craigie House at the
gate in the lilac hedge. He would bring them into the large, cheerful
dining-room, and the children would sit at a little table on the
verandah, while the host, with his own hands, set the copper kettle
singing, and made tea in the antique silver pot.

It was a peaceful, happy hour for the guests. Longfellow, unlike
Tennyson, was never much of a talker: he was a listener and observer,
who dwelt in a speaking silence--in what has been defined as a heavenly
unfathomableness. Ruskin had written: "You come as such a _calm_
influence to me ... you give me such a feeling of friendship and repose."
And this feeling was enhanced by the man's natural dignity and grace,
the refinement of his features, the perfect taste of his dress, and
the exquisite simplicity of his manners. Many have alluded to his soft,
musical voice, to his steady blue-grey eyes, to the "innate charm of
tranquillity," which gave a peculiar spiritual sweetness to his smile.
But the man was even more, and better than the poet; so much so that a
young enthusiast exclaimed "All the vulgar and pretentious people in the
world ought to be sent to Mr. Longfellow to show them how to behave!"
Nor was this calm the outcome of natural placidity--it had been attained
through bitter suffering: it was that gleam of a hero's armour which the
"red planet Mars" unveils to a tear-dimmed sight, when


 The night is come, but not too soon;
     And sinking silently,
 All silently, the little moon
     Drops down behind the sky.

 There is no light in earth or heaven,
     But the cold light of stars;
 And the first watch of night is given
     To the red planet Mars.

 Is it the tender star of love?
     The star of love and dreams?
 O no! from that blue tent above,
     A hero's armour gleams.

 And earnest thoughts within me rise,
     When I behold afar,
 Suspended in the evening skies,
     The shield of that red star.

 O star of strength! I see thee stand
     And smile upon my pain;
 Thou beckonest with thy mailed hand,
     And I am strong again.

 Within my breast there is no light,
     But the cold light of stars;
 I give the first watch of the night
     To the red planet Mars.

 The star of the unconquered will,
     He rises in my breast,
 Serene, and resolute, and still,
     And calm and self-possessed.

 And thou, too, whosoe'er thou art,
     That readest this brief psalm,
 As one by one thy hopes depart,
     Be resolute and calm.

 O fear not in a world like this,
     And thou shalt know ere long,
 Know how sublime a thing it is
     To suffer and be strong.

                 _The Light of Stars._


After lunch, the guests would be taken round the house, and its various
treasures pointed out: books in every corner, and on every wall pictures
and portraits; antique furniture, interesting mementoes of every sort.
It was a home well worth seeing: and an old-world air pervaded all,
from the quaint drawing-room, with its old-fashioned, rose-festooned
wall-paper, to the upper rooms with the Dutch-tiled hearths.

Later on, to those with whom he felt specially _en rapport_, Longfellow
would read aloud some poems, new or old, his own, or those of other men.
He was not a forcible or a dramatic reader; the simplicity which he
loved "in all things," as he had said, "but specially in poetry," was
evident also here. Yet perhaps no other man could have done equal justice
to the lingering hexameters of his most successful poem--for such, by
reason of its novelty, pathos, and beauty, _Evangeline_ must always be
considered. "It has become a purifying portion," says Rossetti, "of the
experiences of the heart ... a long-drawn sweetness and sadness"; and,
though sixty years have elapsed since _Evangeline_ first appeared, the
ideal maiden of this "idyll of the heart" has lost no fraction of her
loveliness.


 Fair was she to behold, that maiden of seventeen summers.
 Black were her eyes as the berry that grows on the thorn by the
                                                              wayside,
 Black, yet how softly they gleamed beneath the brown shade of her
                                                              tresses!
 Sweet was her breath as the breath of kine that feed in the meadows.
 When in the harvest heat she bore to the reapers at noon-tide
 Flagons of home-brewed ale, ah! fair in sooth was the maiden.
 Fairer was she when, on Sunday morn, while the bell from its turret
 Sprinkled with holy sounds the air, as the priest with his hyssop
 Sprinkles the congregation, and scatters blessings upon them,
 Down the long street she passed, with her chaplet of beads and her
                                                               missal,
 Wearing her Norman cap, and her kirtle of blue, and the ear-rings,
 Brought in the olden time from France, and since, as an heir-loom,
 Handed down from mother to child, through long generations.
 But a celestial brightness--a more ethereal beauty--
 Shone on her face and encircled her form, when, after confession,
 Homeward serenely she walked with God's benediction upon her.
 When she had passed, it seemed like the ceasing of exquisite music.

                                                       _Evangeline._


In the course of the afternoon, some of the Poet's guests taking leave,
others would accompany him to a concert, organ recital, or any other
musical function which might be available. Longfellow was passionately
fond of good music, and lost no opportunity of hearing it. His own
lyrics are singularly susceptible, as all composers know, of an adequate
musical setting.


[Illustration: _Painting by H. M. Brock._ EVANGELINE.]

 But a celestial brightness--a more ethereal beauty--
 Shone on her face and encircled her form, when, after confession,
 Homeward serenely she walked with God's benediction upon her.
 When she had passed, it seemed like the ceasing of exquisite music.


Few short poems in the world have been so often sung as "Stars of
the summer night"--"Good-night, beloved"--"The rainy day"--and other
well-known verses. A most effective sense of sound and rhythm, joined
with perfect simplicity of diction, evince the inherent artistry of a
man who was no musician in the technical sense, but who could express
himself in such lines as


 The night is calm and cloudless,
 And still as still can be,
 And the stars come forth to listen
 To the music of the sea.
 They gather, and gather, and gather,
 Until they crowd the sky,
 And listen in breathless silence,
 To the solemn litany.
 It begins in rocky caverns,
 As a voice that chants alone
 To the pedals of the organ
 In monotonous undertone;
 And anon from shelving beaches
 And shallow sands beyond,
 In snow-white robes uprising
 The ghostly choirs respond.
 And sadly and unceasing
 The mournful voice sings on,
 And the snow-white choirs still answer
 Christe eleison!

                _The Golden Legend._


After dinner, to which perhaps an intimate friend or two remained,
the poet would remain awhile in his study: not actually at work, for
his writing was only done in the morning hours, but considering and
criticising work already accomplished, and carefully perusing that great
translation of Dante which he considered, rightly or wrongly, as the
most important work of his life. The twilight would slowly fade into the
dusk of a "blindman's holiday," and then came the sweetest moment of the
day.

Longfellow's intense affection for all little ones, his touching
kindness to them, his sympathy with their most trivial joys or troubles,
were focussed and centred in the love he bore to his own dear,
motherless children.


 Between the dark and the daylight,
     When the night is beginning to lower,
 Comes a pause in the day's occupations,
     That is known as the Children's Hour.

 I hear in the chamber above me
     The patter of little feet,
 The sound of a door that is opened,
     And voices soft and sweet.

 From my study I see in the lamplight,
     Descending the broad hall-stair,
 Grave Alice, and laughing Allegra,
     And Edith with golden hair.

 A whisper, and then a silence:
     Yet I know by their merry eyes
 They are plotting and planning together
     To take me by surprise.

 A sudden rush from the stairway,
     A sudden raid from the hall!
 By three doors left unguarded
     They enter my castle wall!

 They climb up into my turret,
     O'er the arms and back of my chair;
 If I try to escape they surround me;
     They seem to be everywhere.

 They almost devour me with kisses,
     Their arms about me entwine,
 Till I think of the Bishop of Bingen
     In his Mouse-Tower on the Rhine!

 Do you think, O blue-eyed banditti,
     Because you have scaled the wall,
 Such an old moustache as I am
     Is not a match for you all!

 I have you fast in my fortress,
     And will not let you depart,
 But put you down in the dungeon
     In the round-tower of my heart.

 And there I will keep you for ever,
     Yes, for ever and a day,
 Till the walls shall crumble to ruin,
     And moulder in dust away!

                    _The Children's Hour._


A brief period of childish gaiety would supervene, to which the man of
childlike heart responded readily; and when the little feet had pattered
bedward, and the house was silent from the merry little voices, the
father would sit on until midnight in his spacious empty room. He would
occupy himself with letters--long, fragrant, pleasant gossips to his
best and most familiar friends at a distance: till midnight came upon
him unawares. "It is nearly one o'clock--I am the only person up in the
house: my candle is sinking in its socket."

And a double loneliness descended upon him as his weary hand laid
down the pen. He remained inert and brooding; the solitude was
almost tangible. But this solitude was presently peopled by visions,
fraught with ineffable consolation to a mind never out of touch with
"other-worldly" influences.


 When the hours of Day are numbered,
     And the voices of the Night
 Wake the better soul, that slumbered,
     To a holy, calm delight;

 Ere the evening lamps are lighted,
     And, like phantoms grim and tall,
 Shadows from the fitful firelight
     Dance upon the parlour wall;

 Then the forms of the departed
     Enter at the open door;
 The beloved, the true-hearted,
     Come to visit me once more;

 He, the young and strong, who cherished
     Noble longings for the strife,
 By the roadside fell and perished,
     Weary with the march of life!

 They the holy ones and weakly,
     Who the cross of suffering bore,
 Folded their pale hands so meekly,
     Spake with us on earth no more!

 And with them the Being Beauteous,
     Who unto my youth was given,
 More than all things else to love me,
     And is now a saint in heaven.

 With a slow and noiseless footstep
     Comes that messenger divine,
 Takes the vacant chair beside me,
     Lays her gentle hand in mine.

 And she sits and gazes at me
     With those deep and tender eyes,
 Like the stars, so still and saint-like,
     Looking downward from the skies.

 Uttered not, yet comprehended,
     Is the spirit's voiceless prayer,
 Soft rebukes, in blessings ended,
     Breathing from her lips of air.

 O, though oft depressed and lonely,
     All my fears are laid aside,
 If I but remember only
     Such as these have lived and died!

                    _Footsteps of Angels._

"_Empty_ is a horrid word," the Poet had written to a friend--but the
room is no longer empty. It has become a habitation for other visitants
than the motley throng of flatterers impelled by curiosity, who hindered
his morning hours. Unspoken benedictions lie thick upon the air--the
man's griefs are soothed away by the touch of invisible fingers. Patient,
unselfish, indomitable, he resumes the burden of his daily life with new
hope and courage for the morrow.


 As torrents in summer,
 Half dried in their channels,
 Suddenly rise, though the
 Sky is still cloudless,
 For rain has been falling
 Far off at their fountains;

 So hearts that are fainting
 Grow full to o'erflowing,
 And they that behold it
 Marvel, and know not
 That God at their fountains
 Far off has been raining.

            _Tales of a Wayside Inn._





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Day With Longfellow, by
Anonymous and Henry Wadsworth Longfellow

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A DAY WITH LONGFELLOW ***

***** This file should be named 37980.txt or 37980.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/9/8/37980/

Produced by Delphine Lettau, Susan Theresa Morin and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
