The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mirrors of Washington, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Mirrors of Washington

Author: Anonymous

Posting Date: May 28, 2009 [EBook #3812]
Release Date: March, 2003
First Posted: September 19, 2001
Last Updated: March 21, 2002

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MIRRORS OF WASHINGTON ***




Produced by Charles Franks, Robert Rowe and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team. HTML version by Al Haines.










THE MIRRORS OF WASHINGTON





CONTENTS

WITH BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES



HARDING, Warren G.,

President of the United States; b. Corsica, Morrow Co., O., Nov. 2,
1865; Educ. student of Ohio Central Coll. (now defunct), Iberia,
1879-82; engaged in newspaper business at Marion, O., since 1884;
pres. Harding Pub. Co., pubs. Star (daily); mem. Ohio Senate,
1900-4; lt.-gov. of Ohio, 1904-6; Rep. nominee for gov. of Ohio, 1910
(defeated); mem. U. S. Senate, from Ohio, 1915-21; Baptist;
President of the United States, 1921


WILSON, Woodrow,

Twenty-eighth President of the United States; b. Staunton, Va.,
Dec. 28, 1856; Educ. Davidson Coll., N. C., 1874-5; A.B.,
Princeton, 1879, A.M., 1882; grad. in law, U. of Va., 1881;
post-grad, work at Johns Hopkins, 1883-5, Ph.D., 1886; (LL.D., Wake
Forest, 1887, Tulane, 1898, Johns Hopkins, 1902, Rutgers, 1902, U.
of Pa., 1903, Brown, 1903; Harvard, 1907, Williams, 1908,
Dartmouth, 1909; Litt. D., Yale, 1901); pres. Aug. 1, 1902--Oct.
20, 1910, Princeton U.; gov. of N. J., Jan. 17, 1911--Mar. 1, 1913
(resigned); nominated for President in Dem. Nat. Conv. Baltimore,
1912, and elected Nov. 4, 1912, for term, Mar. 4, 1913-Mar. 4,
1917; renominated for President in Dem. Nat. Conv., St. Louis,
1916, and reelected, Nov. 7, 1916; for term Mar. 4, 1917-Mar. 4,
1921; Left for France on the troopship "George Washington", Dec. 4,
1918, at the head of Am. Commn. to Negotiate Peace; returned to U.
S., arriving in Boston, Feb. 24,1919; left New York on 2d trip to
Europe, Mar. 5; arrived in Paris, Mar. 14; signed Peace Treaty,
June 28, 1919


HARVEY, George (Brinton McClellan),

Editor; b. Peacham, Vt., Feb. 16, 1864; Educ. Peacham Academy;
(LL.D., University of Nevada, University of Vermont, Middlebury
Coll. and Erskine Coll.). Consecutively reporter Springfield
Republican, Chicago News, and New York World, 1882-6; ins. commr.
of N. J., 1890-1; mng. editor New York World, 1891-93; constructor
and pres. various electric railroads, 1894-8; purchased, 1899, and
since editor North American Review, Pres. Harper & Bros., 1900-15;
North Am. Review Pub. Co., 1899-; editor and pub. Harvey's Weekly;
dir. Audit Co. of New York; Col. and a.-d.-c. on staffs of Govs.
Green and Abbett, of N. J., 1885-92; hon. col. and a.-d.-c. on
staffs of Govs. Heyward and Ansel, of S. C.; U. S. Ambassador to
Court of Saint James


HUGHES, Charles Evans,

Secretary of State; b. at Glens Falls, N. Y., Apr. 11, 1862; Educ.
Colgate U., 1876-8; A.B., Brown U., 1881, A.M., 1884; LL.B.,
Columbia, 1884; (LL.D., Brown, 1906, Columbia, Knox, and Lafayette,
1907, Union, Colgate, 1908, George Washington, 1909, Williams
College, Harvard, and Univ. of Pennsylvania, 1910, Yale Univ.,
1915); admitted to N. Y. bar, 1884; prize fellowship, Columbia Law
Sch., 1884-7; nominated for office of mayor of New York by Rep.
Conv., 1905, but declined; gov. of N. Y. 2 terms, Jan. 1, 1907-Dec.
31, 1908, Jan. 1, 1909-Dec. 31, 1910; resigned, Oct. 6, 1910;
apptd., May 2, 1910, and Oct. 10, 1910, became asso. justice
Supreme Court of U. S.; nominated for President of U. S. in Rep.
Nat. Conv., Chicago, June 10, 1916, and resigned from Supreme Court
same day; Secretary of State, 1921


HOUSE, Edward Mandell,

B. Houston, Tex., July 26, 1858; Educ. Hopkins Grammar Sch., New
Haven, Conn., 1877; Cornell U., 1881; active in Dem. councils,
state and national, but never a candidate for office. Personal
representative of President Wilson to the European governments in
1914, 1915, and 1916; apptd. by the President, Sept., 1917, to
gather and organize data necessary at the eventual peace
conference; commd. as the special rep. of Govt. of U. S. at the
Inter-Allied Conference of Premiers and Foreign Ministers, held in
Paris, Nov. 29, 1917, to effect a more complete coordination of the
activities of the Entente cobelligerents for the prosecution of the
war; designated by the President to represent the U. S. in the
Supreme War Council at Versailles, Dec. 1, 1917; Oct. 17, 1918;
designated by the President to act for the U. S. in the negotiation
of the Armistice with the Central Powers; mem. Am. Commn. to
Negotiate Peace, 1918-19


HOOVER, Herbert Clark,

Secretary of Commerce; Engineer; b. West Branch, Ia., Aug. 10,
1874; Educ. B.A. (in mining engring.), Leland Stanford, Jr., U.,
1895; (LL.D., Brown U., U. of Pa., Harvard, Princeton, Yale,
Oberlin, U. of Ala., Liege, Brussels; D.C.L., Oxford); Asst. Ark.
Geol. Survey, 1893, U. S. Geol. Survey, Sierra Nevada Mountains,
1895; in W. Australia as chief of mining staff of Bewick, Moreing &
Co. and mgr. Hannan's Brown Hill Mine, 1897; chief engr. Chinese
Imperial Bur. of Mines, 1899, doing extensive exploration in
interior of China. Took part in defense of Tientsin during Boxer
disturbances; Chmn. Am. Relief Com. London, 1914-15, Commn. for
Relief in Belgium, 1915-18; chmn. food com. Council of Nat.
Defense, Apr.-Aug. 1917; apptd. U. S. food administrator by
President Wilson, Aug. 10, 1917, resigned June, 1919. Secretary of
Commerce, 1921


LODGE, Henry Cabot,

Senator; b. Boston, May 12, 1850; Educ. A.B., Harvard, 1871, LL.B.,
1875, Ph.D. (history), 1876; (LL.D., Williams, 1893, Yale, 1902,
Clark U., 1902, Harvard, 1904, Amherst, 1912, also Union Col.,
Princeton U., and Dartmouth Coll., and Brown, 1918); Admitted to
bar, 1876; editor North American Review, 1873-6, International
Review, 1879-81; mem. Mass. Ho. of Rep., 1880, 81; mem. 50th to 53d
Congresses (1887-93), 6th Mass. Dist.; U. S. senator, since 1893;
mem. Alaskan Boundary Tribunal, 1903; mem. U. S. Immigration
Commn., 1907


BARUCH, Bernard Mannes,

Educ. A.B., Coll. City of New York, 1889; mem. of New York Stock
Exchange many yrs.; apptd., 1916, by Pres. Wilson, mem. Advisory
Commn. of Council Nat. Defense; was made chmn. Com. on Raw
Materials, Minerals and Metals, also commr. in charge of purchasing
for the War Industries Bd., and mem. commn. in charge of all
purchases for the Allies; apptd. chmn. War Industries Bd., Mar. 5,
1918; resigned Jan. 1, 1919; connected with Am. Commn. to Negotiate
Peace as member of the drafting com. of the Economic Sect.; mem.
Supreme Economic Council and chmn. of its raw materials div.; Am.
del. on economics and reparation clauses; economic adviser for the
Am. Peace Commn.; mem. President's Conf. for Capital and Labor,
Oct. 1919


ROOT, Elihu,

Ex-Secretary of State; senator; b. Clinton, N. Y., Feb. 15, 1845;
Educ. A.B., Hamilton Coll., 1864, A.M., 1867; taught at Rome Acad.,
1865; LL.B., New York U., 1867; (LL.D., Hamilton, 1894, Yale, 1900,
Columbia, 1904, New York U., 1904, Williams, 1905, Princeton, 1906,
U. of Buenos Aires, 1906, Harvard, 1907, Wesleyan, 1909, McHill,
1913, Union U., 1914, U. of State of N. Y., 1915, U. of Toronto,
1918, and Colgate U., 1919; Dr. Polit. Science, U. of Leyden, 1913;
D.C.L., Oxford, 1913; mem. Faculty of Political and Administrative
Sciences, University of San Marcos, Lima, 1906); Admitted to bar,
1867; U. S. dist. atty. Southern Dist. of N. Y., 1883-5; Sec. of
War in cabinet of President McKinley, Aug. 1, 1899-Feb. 1, 1904;
Sec. of State in cabinet of President Roosevelt, July 1, 1905-Jan.
27, 1909; U. S. senator from N. Y., 1909-15; mem. Alaskan Boundary
Tribunal, 1903; counsel for U. S. in N. Atlantic Fisheries
Arbitration, 1910; mem. Permanent Court of Arbitration at The
Hague, 1910-; pres. Carnegie Endowment for Internat. Peace, 1910;
president Hague Tribunal of Arbitration between Great Britain,
France, Spain, and Portugal, concerning church property, 1913;
ambassador extraordinary at the head of special diplomatic mission
to Russia, during revolution, 1917. Awarded Nobel Peace Prize for
1912.


JOHNSON, Hiram Warren,

Senator; b. Sacramento, Cal., Sept. 2, 1866; Educ. U. of Cal.,
leaving in jr. yr.; began as short-hand reporter; studied law in
father's office; admitted to Cal. bar, 1888; mem. staff of pros.
attys. in boodling cases, involving leading city officials and
almost all pub. utility corpns. in San Francisco, 1906-7; was
selected to take the place of Francis J. Heney, after latter was
shot down in court while prosecuting Abe Ruef, for bribery, 1908,
and secured conviction of Ruef; gov. of Cal., 1911-15; reelected
for term, 1915-19 (resigned Mar. 15, 1917); a founder of
Progressive Party, 1912, and nominee for V.-P. of U.S. on Prog.
ticket same yr.; U. S. senator from Cal. for term 1917-23


KNOX, Philander Chase,

Ex-Secretary of State; b. Brownsville, Pa., May 6, 1853; Educ.
A.B., Mt. Union Coll., Ohio, 1872; read law in office of H. B.
Swope, Pittsburgh; (LL.D., U. of Pa., 1905, Yale, 1907, Villanova,
1909); Admitted to bar, 1875; asst. U. S. dist. atty., Western
Dist. of Pa., 1876-7; Atty.-Gen. in cabinets of Presidents McKinley
and Roosevelt, Apr. 9, 1901-June 30, 1904; apptd. U. S. senator by
Governor Pennypacker, June 10, 1904, for unexpired term of Matthew
Stanley Quay, deceased; elected U. S. senator, Jan., 1905, for
term, 1905-11; Sec. of State in cabinet of President Taft, Mar.,
1909-13; Reelected U. S. senator, for term 1917-23


LANSING, Robert,

Ex-Secretary of State; b. at Watertown, N. Y., Oct. 17, 1864; Educ.
A.B., Amherst, 1886; (LL.D., Amherst, 1915, Colgate, 1915,
Princeton, 1917, Columbia, 1918, Union, 1918, U. State of N. Y.,
1919); Admitted to bar, 1889; Asso. counsel for U. S. in Behring
Sea Arbitration, 1892-3: counsel for Behring Sea Claims Commn.,
1896-7; solicitor and counsel for the United States under the
Alaskan Boundary Tribunal, 1903; counsel, North Atlantic Coast
Fisheries Arbitration at The Hague, 1909-10; agent of United
States, Am. and British Claims Arbitration, 1912-14; counselor for
Dept. of State, Mar. 20, 1914-June 23, 1915; Secretary of State in
Cabinet of Pres. Wilson, June 23, 1915-Feb., 1920; mem. Am. Commn.
to Negotiate Peace, Paris, 1918-19


PENROSE, Boies,

Senator; b. Phila., Nov. 1, 1860; Educ. A.B., Harvard, 1881;
Admitted to the bar, 1883; mem. Pa. Ho. of Rep., 1884-6, Senate,
1887-97 (pres. pro tem., 1889,1891); U. S. senator, 4 terms,
1897-1921; Chmn. Rep. State Com., 1903-5; mem. Rep. Nat. Com. since 1904


BORAH, William Edgar,

Senator; b. at Fairfield, Ill., June 29, 1865; Educ. Southern Ill.
Acad., Enfield, and U. of Kan.; Admitted to bar, 1889; U. S.
senator from Idaho, Jan. 14,1903; elected U. S. senator for terms
1907-13, 1913-19, 1919-25





WARREN GAMALIEL HARDING


Every time we elect a new President we learn what a various
creature is the Typical American.

When Mr. Roosevelt was in the White House the Typical American was
gay, robustious, full of the joy of living, an expansive spirit
from the frontier, a picaresque twentieth century middle class
Cavalier. He hit the line hard and did not flinch. And his laugh
shook the skies.

Came Wilson. And the Typical American was troubled about his soul.
Rooted firmly in the church-going past, he carried the banner of
the Lord, Democracy, idealistic, bent on perfecting that old
incorrigible Man, he cuts off the right hand that offends him and
votes for prohibition and woman suffrage, a Round Head in a Ford.

Eight years and we have the perfectly typical American, Warren
Gamaliel Harding of the modern type, the Square Head, typical of
that America whose artistic taste is the movies, who reads and
finds mental satisfaction in the vague inanities of the small town
newspaper, who has faith in America, who is for liberty, virtue,
happiness, prosperity, law and order and all the standard
generalities and holds them a perfect creed; who distrusts anything
new except mechanical inventions, the standardized product of the
syndicate which supplies his nursing bottle, his school books, his
information, his humor in a strip, his art on a screen, with a
quantity production mind, cautious, uniformly hating divergence
from uniformity, jailing it in troublous times, prosperous, who has
his car and his bank account and can sell a bill of goods as well
as the best of them.

People who insist upon having their politics logical demand to know
the why of Harding. Why was a man of so undistinguished a record as
he first chosen as a candidate for President and then elected
President?

As a legislator he had left no mark on legislation. If he had
retired from Congress at the end of his term his name would have
existed only in the old Congressional directories, like that of a
thousand others. As a public speaker he had said nothing that
anybody could remember. He had passed through a Great War and left
no mark on it. He had shared in a fierce debate upon the peace that
followed the war but though you can recall small persons like
McCumber and Kellogg and Moses and McCormick in that discussion you
do not recall Harding. To be sure he made a speech in that debate
which he himself says was a great speech but no newspaper thought
fit to publish it because of its quality, or felt impelled to
publish it in spite of its quality because it had been made by
Harding.

He neither compelled attention by what he said nor by his
personality. Why, then, without fireworks, without distinction of
any sort, without catching the public eye, or especially deserving
to catch it, was Warren Harding elected President of the United
States?

One plausible reason why he was nominated was that given by Senator
Brandegee at Chicago, where he had a great deal to do with the
nomination. "There ain't any first raters this year. This ain't any
1880 or any 1904. We haven't any John Shermans or Theodore
Roosevelts. We've got a lot of second raters and Warren Harding is
the best of the second raters."

Once nominated as a Republican his election of course inevitably
followed. But to accept Mr. Brandegee's plea in avoidance is to
agree to the eternal poverty of American political life, for most
of our presidents have been precisely like Warren G. Harding,
first-class second raters.

Mrs. Harding, a woman of sound sense and much energy, had an
excellent instructive answer to the "why." The pictures of the
house in Marion, the celebrated front porch, herself and her
husband were taken to be exhibited by cinema all over the land. She
said, "I want the people to see these pictures so that they will
know we are just folks like themselves."

Warren Harding is "just folks." A witty woman said of him, alluding
to the small town novel which was popular at the time of his
inauguration, "Main Street has arrived in the White House."

The Average Man has risen up and by seven million majority elected
an Average Man President. His defects were his virtues. He was
chosen rather for what he wasn't than for what he was,--the
inconspicuousness of his achievements. The "just folks" level of
his mind, his small town man's caution, his sense of the security
of the past, his average hopes and fears and practicality, his
standardized Americanism which would enable a people who wanted for
a season to do so to take themselves politically for granted.

The country was tired of the high thinking and rather plain
spiritual living of Woodrow Wilson. It desired the man in the White
House to cause it no more moral overstrain than does the man you
meet in the Pullman smoking compartment or the man who writes the
captions for the movies who employs a sort of Inaugural style,
freed from the inhibitions of statesmanship. It was in a mood
similar to that of Mr. Harding himself when after his election he
took Senators Freylinghuysen, Hale, and Elkins with him on his trip
to Texas. Senator Knox observing his choice is reported to have
said, "I think he is taking those three along because he wanted
complete mental relaxation." All his life Mr. Harding has shown a
predilection for companions who give him complete mental
relaxation, though duty compels him to associate with the Hughes
and the Hoovers. The conflict between duty and complete mental
relaxation establishes a strong bond of sympathy between him and
the average American.

The "why" of Harding is the democratic passion for equality. We are
standardized, turned out like Fords by the hundred million, and we
cannot endure for long anyone who is not standardized. Such an one
casts reflections upon us; why should we by our votes unnecessarily
asperse ourselves? Occasionally we may indulge nationally, as men
do individually, in the romantic belief that we are somebody else,
that we are like Roosevelt or Wilson--and they become typical of
what we would be--but always we come back to the knowledge that we
are nationally like Harding, who is typical of what we are. "Just
folks" Kuppenheimered, movieized, associated pressed folks.

Men debate whether or not Mr. Wilson was a great man and they will
keep on doing so until the last of those passes away whose judgment
of him is clouded by the sense of his personality. But men will
never debate about the greatness of Mr. Harding, not even Mr.
Harding himself. He is modest. He has only two vanities, his vanity
about his personal appearance and his vanity about his literary
style.

The inhibitions of a presidential candidate, bound to speak and say
nothing, irked him.

"Of course I could make better speeches than these" he told a
friend during the campaign, "but I have to be so careful."

In his inaugural address he let himself go, as much as it is
possible for a man so cautious as he is to let himself go. It was a
great speech, an inaugural to place alongside the inaugurals of
Lincoln and Washington, written in his most capable English,
Harding at his best. It is hard for a man to move Marion for years
with big editorials, to receive the daily compliments of Dick
Cressinger and Jim Prendergast, without becoming vain of the power
of his pen. It is his chief vanity and it is one that it is hard
for him who speaks or writes to escape. He has none of that egotism
which makes a self-confident man think himself the favorite of
fortune.

He said after his nomination at Chicago, "We drew to a pair of
deuces and filled." He did not say it boastfully as a man who likes
to draw to a pair of deuces and who always expects to fill. He said
it with surprise and relief. He does not like to hold a pair of
deuces and be forced to draw to them. He has not a large way of
regarding losing and winning as all a part of the game. He hates to
lose. He hated to lose even a friendly game of billiards in the
Marion Club with his old friend Colonel Christian, father of his
secretary, though the stake was only a cigar.

When he was urged to seek the Republican nomination for the
Presidency he is reported to have said, "Why should I. My chances
of winning are not good. If I let you use my name I shall probably
in the end lose the nomination for the Senate. (His term was
expiring.) If I don't run for the Presidency I can stay in the
Senate all my life. I like the Senate. It is a very pleasant
place."

The Senate is like Marion, Ohio, a very pleasant place, for a
certain temperament. And Mr. Harding stayed in Marion all his life
until force--a vis exterior; there is nothing inside Mr. Harding
that urges him on and on--until force of circumstances, of
politics, of other men's ambitions, took him out of Marion and set
him down in Washington, in the Senate.

The process of uprooting him from the pleasant place of Marion is
reported to have been thus described by his political transplanter,
the present Attorney General, Mr. Daugherty: "When it came to
running for the Senate I found him, sunning himself in Florida,
like a turtle on a log and I had to push him into the water and
make him swim."

And a similar thing happened when it came to running for the
Presidency. It is a definite type of man who suns himself on a log,
who is seduced by pleasant places like Marion, Ohio, whom the big
town does not draw into its magnetic field, whose heart is not
excited by the larger chances of life. Is he lazy? Is he lacking in
imagination? Does he hate to lose? Does he want self-confidence? Is
he over modest? Has he no love for life, life as a great adventure?
Whatever he is, Mr. Harding is that kind of man, that kind of man
to start out with.

But this is only the point of departure, that choice to remain in a
pleasant place like Marion, not to risk what you have, your sure
place in society as the son of one of the better families, the
reasonable prospect that the growth of your small town will bring
some accretion to your own fortunes, the decision not to hazard
greatly in New York or Chicago or on the frontier. Life asks little
of you in those pleasant places like Marion and in return for that
little gives generously, especially if you are, to begin with, well
placed, if you are ingratiatingly handsome, if your personality is
agreeable--"The best fellow in the world to play poker with all
Saturday night," as a Marionite feelingly described the President
to me, and if you have a gift of words as handsome and abundant as
your looks.

Mr. Harding is a handsome man, endowed with the gifts that
reinforce the charm of his exterior, a fine voice, a winning smile,
a fluency of which his inaugural is the best instance; an ample
man, you might say. But he is too handsome, too endowed, for his
own good, his own spiritual good. The slight stoop of his
shoulders, the soft figure, the heaviness under the eyes betray in
some measure perhaps the consequences of nature's excessive
generosity. Given all these things you take, it may be, too much
for granted. There is not much to stiffen the mental, moral, and
physical fibers.

Given such good looks, such favor from nature, and an environment
in which the struggle is not sharp and existence is a species of
mildly purposeful flanerie. You lounge a bit stoop-shoulderedly
forward to success. There is nothing hard about the President. I
once described him in somewhat this fashion to a banker in New York
who was interested in knowing what kind of a President we had.

"You agree," he said, "with a friend of Harding's who came in to
see me a few days ago. This friend said to me 'Warren is the best
fellow in the world. He has wonderful tact. He knows how to make
men work with him and how to get the best out of them. He is
politically adroit. He is conscientious. He has a keen sense of his
responsibilities. He has unusual common sense.' And he named other
similar virtues, 'Well,' I asked him, 'What is his defect?' 'Oh,'
he replied, 'the only trouble with Warren is that he lacks
mentality.'"

The story, like most stories, exaggerates. The President has the
average man's virtues of common sense and conscientiousness with
rather more than the average man's political skill and the average
man's industry or lack of industry. His mentality is not lacking;
it is undisciplined, especially in its higher ranges, by hard
effort. There is a certain softness about him mentally. It is not
an accident that his favorite companions are the least intellectual
members of that house of average intelligence, the Senate. They
remind him of the mental surroundings of Marion, the pleasant but
unstimulating mental atmosphere of the Marion Club, with its
successful small town business men, its local storekeepers, its
banker whose mental horizon is bounded by Marion County, the value
of whose farm lands for mortgages he knows to a penny, the lumber
dealer whose eye rests on the forests of Kentucky and West
Virginia.

The President has never felt the sharpening of competition. He was
a local pundit because he was the editor. He was the editor because
he owned the Republican paper of Marion. There was no effective
rival. No strong intelligence challenged his and made him fight for
his place. He never studied hard or thought deeply on public
questions. A man who stays where he is put by birth tends to accept
authority, and authority is strong in small places. The acceptance
of authority implies few risks. It is like staying in Marion
instead of going to New York or even Cleveland. It is easier, and
often more profitable than studying hard or thinking deeply or
inquiring too much.

And Mr. Harding's is a mind that bows to authority. What his party
says is enough for Mr. Harding. His party is for protection and Mr.
Harding is for protection; the arguments for protection may be
readily assimilated from the editorials of one good big city
newspaper and from a few campaign addresses. His party is for the
remission of tolls on American shipping in the Panama Canal and Mr.
Harding is for the remission of tolls. Mr. Root broke with his
party on tolls and Mr. Harding is as much shocked at Mr. Root's
deviation as the matrons of Marion would be over the public
disregard of the Seventh Commandment by one of their number. His
party became somehow for the payment of Colombia's Panama claims
and Mr. Harding was for their payment.

A story tells just how Senator Kellogg went to the President to
oppose the Colombia treaty. After hearing Mr. Kellogg Mr. Harding
remarked, "Well, Frank, you have something on me. You've evidently
read the treaty. I haven't."

A mind accepting authority favors certain general policies. It is
not sufficiently inquiring to trouble itself with the details. Mr.
Harding is for all sorts of things but is content to be merely for
them. A curious illustration developed in Marion, during the visits
of the best minds. He said to the newspaper men there one day, "I
am for voluntary military training."

"What would you train, Mr. President," asked one of the
journalists, "officers or men?"

The President hesitated. At last he said, "I haven't thought of
that."

"But," said one of his interlocutors, "the colleges are training a
lot of officers now."

This brought no response.

Another who had experience in the Great War remarked, "In the last
war we were lacking in trained non-coms; it would be a good idea to
train a lot of them."

"Yes," rejoined Mr. Harding eagerly, "That would be a good idea."

A more inquiring mind would have gone further than to be "for
voluntary military training." A quicker, less cautious, if no more
thorough mind would have answered the first question, "What would
you train, officers or men?" by answering instantly "Both."

In that colloquy you have revealed all the mental habits of Mr.
Harding. He was asked once, after he had had several conferences
with Senator McCumber, Senator Smoot, Representative Fordney, and
others who would be responsible for financial legislation, "Have
you worked out the larger details of your taxation policy?"

"Naturally not!" was his reply. That "naturally" sprang I suppose
from his habit of believing that somewhere there is authority.
Somewhere there would be authority to determine what the larger
details of the party's financial policy should be.

Now, this authority is not going to be any one man or any two men.
The President, his friends tell us, is jealous of any assumption of
power by any of his advisers. He is unwilling to have the public
think that any other than himself is President. A man as handsome
as Harding, as vain of his literary style as he is, has an ego that
is not capable of total self-effacement. He will bow to impersonal
authority like that of the party, or invoke the anonymous
governance of "best minds," calling rather often on God as a well
established authority, but he will not let authority be personal
and be called Daugherty, or Lodge or Knox or whomever you will.

The President's attitude is rather like that of the average man
during the campaign. If you said to a voter on a Pullman, "Mr.
Harding is a man of small public experience, not known by any large
political accomplishment," he would always answer optimistically,
"Well, they will see to it that he makes good." Asked who "They"
were he was always vague and elusive, gods on the mountain perhaps.
There is an American religion, the average man's faith: it is
"Them." "They" are the fountain of authority.

As Mr. Harding knew little competition in Marion so he has known
little competition in public life which in this country is not
genuinely competitive. Mr. Lloyd George is at the head of the
British government because he is the greatest master of the House
of Commons in a generation and he is chosen by the men who know him
for what he is, his fellow members of the House of Commons. An
American President is selected by the newspapers, which know little
about him, by the politicians, who do not want a master but a
slave, by the delegates to a national convention, tired, with hotel
bills mounting, ready to name anybody in order to go home. The
presidency, the one great prize in American public life, is
attained by no known rules and under conditions which have nothing
in them to make a man work hard or think hard, especially one
endowed with a handsome face and figure, an ingratiating
personality, and a literary style.

The small town man, unimaginative and of restricted mental horizon
does not think in terms of masses of mankind. Masses vaguely appall
him. They exist in the big cities on which he turned his back in
his unaudacious youth. His contacts are with individuals. His
democracy consists in smiling upon the village painter and calling
him "Harry," in always nodding to the village cobbler and calling
him "Bill," in stopping on the street corner with a group, which
has not been invited to join the village club, putting his hand on
the shoulder of one of them and calling them "Fellows."

Politics in the small town is limited to dealing with persons, to
enlisting the support of men with a following at the polls.

Mr. Harding once drew this picture of his idea of politics. "If I
had a policy to put over I should go about it this way," he said.
"You all know the town meeting, if not by experience, by hearsay.
Now if I had a program that I wanted to have adopted by a town
meeting I should go to the three or four most influential men in my
community. I should talk it out with them. I should make
concessions to them until I had got them to agree with me. And then
I should go into the town meeting feeling perfectly confident that
my plan would go through. Well it's the same in the nation as in
the town meeting, or in the whole world, if you will. I should
always go first to the three or four leading men."

Mr. Harding thinks of politics in this personal way. He does not
conceive of it as the force of ideas or the weight of morality
moving the hearts of mankind. Mankind is only a word to him, one
that he often uses,--or perhaps he prefers humanity, which has two
more syllables--a large loose word that he employs to make his
thought look bigger than it really is, something like the stage
device for making an ordinary man seem ten feet tall.

Thus he will never try to move the mass of the people as his
predecessors have. He will not "go to the country." He will not
bring public opinion to bear as a disciplinary force in his
household. He will treat the whole United States as if it were a
Marion, consulting endless "best minds," composing differences,
seeking unity, with the aid of his exceptional tact.

This attitude has its disadvantages. If you have a passion for
ideas and an indifference for persons you can say "yes" or "no"
easily; you may end by being dictatorial and arrogant, as Mr.
Wilson was; but you will not be weak. If, on the contrary, you are
indifferent to ideas and considerate of persons you find it hard to
say "Decided" to any question. And somewhere there must be
authority, the passing of the final judgment and the giving of
orders.

But he compensates for his own defects. Almost as good as greatness
is a knowledge of your own limitations; and Mr. Harding knows his
thoroughly. Out of his modesty, his desire to reinforce himself,
has proceeded the strongest cabinet that Washington has seen in a
generation. He likes to have decisions rest upon the broad base of
more than one intelligence and he has surrounded himself for this
purpose with able associates. His policies will lack imagination,
which is not a composite product, but they will have practicality,
which is the greatest common denomination of several minds; and he,
moreover, is himself unimaginative and practical.

Whatever superstructure of world organization he takes part in,
behind it will be the reality, a private understanding with the
biggest man in sight; for this reason the fall of Lloyd George and
the succession of a Labor government in England will disconcert him
terribly. The democratic passion for equality, which dogs the
tracks of the great, he mollifies by reminding the nation always
that he is "just folks," by opening the White House lawn gates, by
calling everyone by his first name. So constant is his aim to
appease it that I wonder if he is not sometimes betrayed into
addressing his Secretary of State as "Charley."




WOODROW WILSON


The explanation of President Wilson will be found in a certain
inferiority. When all his personal history becomes known, when his
papers and letters have all been published and read, when the
memoirs of others have told all that there is to be told, there
will stand clear something inadequate, a lack of robustness, mental
or nervous, an excessive sensitiveness, over self-consciousness,
shrinking from life, a neurotic something that in the end brought
on defeat and the final overthrow. He was never quite a normal man
with the average man's capacity to endure and enjoy but a strange,
impeded, self-absorbed personality.

History arranged the greatest stage of all time, and on it placed a
lot of little figures, "pigmy minds"--all save one, and he the
nearest great, an unworldly person summoned from a cloister, with
the vision of genius and the practical incapacity of one who has
run away from life, hating men but loving all mankind, eloquent but
inarticulate in a large way, incapable of true self expression in
his chosen field of political action, so self-centered that he
forgot the world's tragedy and merged it into his own, making great
things little and little things great, one of "life's ironies," the
everlasting refutation of the optimistic notion that when there is
a crisis fate produces a man big enough to meet it.

The world finds it hard to speak of Mr. Wilson except in superlatives.
A British journalist called him the other day, "the wickedest man in
the world." This was something new in extravagance. I asked, "Why
the wickedest?" He said, "Because he was so unable to forget himself
that he brought the peace of the world down in a common smash with
his own personal fortunes."

On the other hand General Jan Christian Smuts, writing with that
perspective which distance gives, pronounces it to be not Wilson's
fault but the fault of humanity that the vision of universal peace
failed. Civilization was not advanced enough to make peace without
vindictiveness possible.

This debate goes on and on. Mr. Wilson is either the worst hated or
the most regretted personality of the Great War. The place of no
one else is worth disputing. Lloyd George is the consummate
politician, limited by the meanness of his art. Clemenceau is the
personification of nationality, limited by the narrowness of his
view. Mr. Wilson alone had his hour of superlative greatness when
the whole earth listened to him and followed him; an hour which
ended with him only dimly aware of his vision and furiously
conscious of pin pricks.

You observe this inadequacy in Mr. Wilson, this incapacity to
endure, at the outset of his career. It is characteristic of
certain temperaments that when they first face life they should run
away from it as Mr. Wilson did when, having studied law and having
been admitted to the bar, he abandoned practice and went to teach
in a girls' school. That was the early sign in him of that sense of
unfitness for the more arduous contacts of life which was so
conspicuous a trait during his presidency. He could not endure
meeting men on an equal footing, where there was a conflict of
wills, a rough clash of minds, where no concession was made to
sensitiveness and egotism.

Some nervous insufficiency causes this shrinking, like the quick
retreat from cold water of an inadequate body. Commonly a man who
runs away from life after the first contact with it hates himself
for his flight and there begins a conflict inside him which ends
either in his admission of defeat and acknowledgment of his
unfitness or in his convincing himself that his real motive was
contempt of that on which he turned his back. If he admits to
himself that he is really a little less courageous, a little more
sensitive, a little less at home in this world, then he is gone. If
he does satisfy himself that he is superior, has higher ideals,
worthier ends, despises the ordinary arts of success he becomes
arrogant, merely in self defense.

Mr. Wilson's "intellectual snobbism" was this kind of arrogance,
acquired for moral self preservation, like that of the small boy
who when his companions refuse to play with him says to himself
that he is smarter than they are, gets higher marks in school, that
he has a better gun than they have or that he, when he grows up,
will be a great general while they are nobody. Almost everyone who
feels himself unequal in some direction can satisfy himself that he
exceeds in others. It is a common and human sort of arrogance, and
Mr. Wilson had it inordinately.

He hated and contemned the law, in which life had given him his
first glimpse of his frailty. He would have no lawyers make the
peace or draft the covenant of the league of nations. Lawyers were
pitiful creatures,--he kept one of them near him, Mr. Lansing,
admirably chosen, to remind him of how contemptible they were,
living in fear of precedents, writing a barbarous jargon out of
deeds and covenants, impeding the freedom of the imagination with
their endless citations.

He despised politicians, he despised business men, he despised the
whole range of men who pursue worldly arts with success. He
despised the qualities which he had not himself, but like all men
who are arrogant self protectively he was driven to introspection
and analyzed himself pitilessly.

The public got glimpses of these analyses. Sometimes he called that
something in him which left him less fit for the world than the
average, a little regretfully, "his single track mind." Sometimes
it leaped to light as an object of pride, his arrogance again, a
pride that was "too great to fight," like the common run of men,--in
the law courts or on the battlefields. He kept asking himself
the question, "Why am I not as other men are?", and sometimes his
nature would rise up in protest and he would exclaim that he was as
other men were and would pathetically tell the world that he was
"misunderstood," that he was not cold and reserved but warm and
genial and kindly, only largely because the world would see him as
he was.

But always the one safe recourse, the one assurance of personal
stability was arrogance. Contempt was the most characteristic habit
of his mind. Out of office he is no sage looking charitably at the
fumbling of his successor.

A friend who has seen him since his retirement describes him as
watching "with supreme contempt" the executive efforts of Mr.
Harding. Washington gossip credits him with inventing the phrase,
"the bungalow mind," to describe the present occupant of the White
House. Another remark of his about the new President is said to
have been "I look forward to the new administration with no
unpleasant anticipations, except those caused by Mr. Harding's
literary style."

There is always his contrast of others with himself to their
disadvantage, mentally or morally, as writers, or leaders, or
statesmen. So full a life as Mr. Wilson led in the last dozen or
more years ought to have made him less self-conscious. A robuster
person would have hated with a certain zest, continued with a
certain gaiety, laughed as he fought, found something to respect in
his foes, seen the curtain fall upon his own activities with a
certain cheerfulness.

He seems deficient in resources. He had not that gusto which richly
endowed natures ordinarily have. He found no fun in measuring his
strength with other men's. There was a certain overstrain about
him, which made him cushion himself about with non-resistant
personalities. He lacked curiosity. His fine mind seemed to want
the energy to interest itself in the details of any subject that
filled it, and this was one of his fatal weaknesses at the Peace
Conference. Perhaps it was a deficiency of vital force. Moreover he
came to his great task tired. His life till he was past fifty was
one of defeat. There was the early disappointment and turning back
from law practice, the giving up of his youthful ambition for a
public career to which he had trained himself passionately by the
study of public speaking. Dr. Albert Shaw, who was his fellow
student at Johns Hopkins, says that in the University Mr. Wilson
was the finest speaker, except possibly the old President of the
College, Dr. Daniel Coit Gilman.

Then there were the long years of poverty as a college professor,
when he overworked at writing and university extension lectures, to
make his small salary as a teacher equal to the support of his
family, his three children and his aged parents. There was his
failure at literature, for his "History of the United States"
brought him neither fame nor money, the public finding it dull and
unreadable.

Then the crowning unsuccess as President of Princeton; for when his
luck changed and a political career opened to him as Governor of
New Jersey, with trustees and alumni against him, nothing seemed to
be before him but resignation and a small professorship in a
Southern College. It was a straightened life that he had led when
he came to Washington for the first time as President, scandalizing
the servants of the White House with the scantness of his personal
effects. There had been neither the time nor the means nor probably
the energy for larger human contacts. And something inherent always
held him back from the world, something which diverted him to
academic life, which when he was writing his "Congressional
Government", his best book, held him in Baltimore, almost a suburb
of Washington, where he read what he wrote to his fellow-students
at Johns Hopkins, whose livelier curiosity took them often to the
galleries of the House and the Senate about which he was writing
from a distance.

Those to whom life is kinder than it was during many years to Mr.
Wilson have naturally a zest for it. Robuster natures than his even
though life averts her face, often preserve a zest for it.
Conscious of his powers he seems to have fortified himself against
failure with scorn. He had a scorn for the intellects of those who
succeed by arts which he did not possess. He had scorn for
politicians. He had a scorn for wealth. He had a scorn for his
enemies. He had a scorn for Republicans. He had a scorn for the men
with whom he had to deal in Europe, the heads of the Allied
Governments.

Above all he scorned Lloyd George, an instinct telling him that the
British Premier had a thousand arts where he himself, unschooled in
conference with equals, had none. He said of Lloyd George just
before he sailed for Paris, suspecting him of treachery to the
League of Nations, "I shall look him in the eye and say to him Damn
you, if you do not accept the League I shall go to the people of
Great Britain and say things to them that will shake your
government."

When he made this threat he could not foresee that the compromise
of the Peace would leave him with so little character that British
Liberals, their faith destroyed, should in the end couple his name
with their own Premier's and exclaim, "Your man Wilson talks like
Jesus Christ, but he acts like Lloyd George!"

More than all others he scorned Lodge. The Massachusetts Senator
who had put by scholarship for politics and had won the opportunity
to do menial service for a political machine hated the man who had
chosen scholarship, for whatever motive, and come out with the
Presidency. You hate the man you might perhaps have been if you had
chosen more boldly, more according to your heart--if you are like
Mr. Lodge.

A life of demeaning himself to politicians, of waiting for dead
men's shoes in the Senate, had, however, brought some compensations
to Lodge, among others an inordinate capacity to hurt. The
Massachusetts Senator could get under the President's skin as no
other man could. Washington is a place where every whisper is heard
in the White House.

Mr. Lodge's favorite private charge uttered in a tone of withering
scorn was that the President failed to respond as a man would to
the national insult offered by Germany in sinking the Lusitania
because there was something womanish about him and he would tell,
to prove it, how Wilson went white and almost collapsed over the
news that blood had been shed through the landing of American
marines at Vera Cruz.

The President hardly failed to hear this. Perhaps it reminded him
of that something in him which he was always trying to forget, that
something which diverted his life toward failure at the outset,
which once betrayed him, with a strange mixture of the arrogance
and inferiority, into his famous words "too proud to fight."

At any rate mutual comprehension and hatred between these two men
was instinctive, each having the opposite choice in the beginning
and neither in his heart perhaps ever having forgiven himself
wholly for his choice. Mr. Wilson could never get Mr. Lodge wholly
out of his mind in the last two years of his Presidency, a
disability which prevented him from looking quite calmly and sanely
at public questions.

The story of the President's appeal for a Democratic Congress in
1918 which has never been fully told, illustrates the bearing this
Lodge obsession had upon Mr. Wilson's later fate. When the
Congressional election was approaching ex-Congressman Scott Ferris,
then acting as Chairman of the Democratic National Committee, went
to the President and told him that there was danger of losing both
houses of Congress, the lower house not being important, but the
Senate as a factor in foreign relations, Mr. Ferris suggested, was
indispensable to the Democratic party. Mr. Wilson was more hopeful
but agreed to take under advisement some sort of appeal to the
country. It was not desired that this should be anything more than
a letter, perhaps to Mr. Ferris, intended for publication, and
pointing out the need of support for the President's policies in
the next Congress.

Shortly afterward Mr. Tumulty, the President's Secretary, brought
to the Shoreham Hotel in Washington an appeal to the country for a
Democratic Congress and read it to several Democrats gathered there
for the purpose, including Homer S. Cummings, who, by that time,
had become acting Chairman of the Democratic National Committee and
was in charge of the campaign. Mr. Cummings doubted the wisdom of
an appeal, couched in such terms as the one Mr. Tumulty read. He
took it to Vance McCormick, Chairman of the Democratic National
Committee, who, because he was Chairman of the War Trade Board, was
not taking part in the election. Mr. McCormick agreed with Mr.
Cummings that the appeal as written would do more harm than good to
the Democratic party, saying that the war had not been conducted on
a partisan basis, that some of his own associates on the War Trade
Board were Republicans and that Mr. Wilson should ask for the
reelection of all who had been loyal supporters of the war, whether
Republicans or Democrats.

The appeal to the country as it then stood contained a bitter
denunciation of Senator Lodge. What Wilson chiefly saw in a
Republican victory was himself at the mercy of the man he hated
worst, the Massachusetts Senator. Mr. McCormick thought that if the
President was going to name names he must, at least, denounce
Claude Kitchen, the Democratic leader of the House, as well as
Senator Lodge. If Mr. Wilson would ask for the reelection of those
who had been loyal, of whatever party, listing the offenders, of
both parties, including Mr. Lodge if he must, Mr. McCormick
believed that the impression on the country would be favorable and
thus a Democratic Congress might be elected.

Being agreed, Mr. Cummings and Mr. McCormick went to the White
House and argued for a less partisan appeal. All they accomplished
was the striking of Mr. Lodge's name out of the appeal by
convincing Mr. Wilson that he could not attack the Republican
Senator while ignoring the worse offenses of Mr. Kitchen and Champ
Clark in his own party.

For the rest, the President made the appeal more purely personal
and more partisan than before. He could not get the Lodge obsession
out of his mind. He could not bring himself to ask for the election
of members of Mr. Lodge's party. The wisdom of Mr. Cummings and Mr.
McCormick was soon vindicated. The appeal with Mr. Lodge's name out
was only a shade less impolitic than it would have been with his
name in. It gave Mr. Lodge his majority in the Senate and turned
the peace into a personal issue between the two "scholars in
politics."

By this time Mr. Wilson had lost his sense of actuality. He could
ask the nation for a Congress to his liking as a personal due. He
could condemn Mr. Lodge as an enemy of those purposes with which we
entered the war, simply because Mr. Lodge could hurt him as no
other man could. The President had been talking for some months to
the whole world and the whole world had listened with profound
attention. His mission had taken, unconsciously perhaps, a
Messianic character. His enemies were the enemies of God. The
ordinary metes and bounds of personality had broken down. The state
of mind revealed in the appeal as originally written was the state
of mind of the Peace Conference and of the fight over the Treaty
and the League which succeeded the Peace Conference. All that
happened afterwards, including the pitiful personal tragedy, had
become inevitable.

For a while at Paris amid the triumphs of his European reception
and the successes of the first few months up to the adoption of the
League covenant Mr. Wilson forgot Mr. Lodge, forgot him too
completely.

It was my fortune to see him at the apex of his career. He was
about to sail for America on that visit which he made here in the
midst of the treaty making. His League covenant had just been
agreed to. The world had accepted him. Fate had led him far from
those paths of defeat and obscurity into which his sensitiveness
and shyness had turned him as a youth. He was elated and confident.
He looked marvelously fresh and young, his color warm and youthful,
his eye alive with pleasure.

He talked long and well, answered questions freely, told stories of
his associates at the peace table, especially of one who never read
the memoranda his secretaries prepared, who was so deaf that he
could not hear a word spoken in conference and who spoke so loudly
that no one could interrupt him. "What could one do," Mr. Wilson
asked, "to penetrate a mind like that?" M. Clemenceau, who unlike
this other commissioner, had eyes and saw not, had ears and neither
would he hear, had said to him once, in response to a firm
negative, "You have a heart of steel!" "I felt like replying to
him," flashed Mr. Wilson, "I have not the heart to steal!"

So well poised, so sure of himself he felt that he could do an
extraordinary thing. He could laugh off a mistake. Robuster natures
accept mistakes as a child accepts tumbles. Mistakes for Mr. Wilson
were ordinarily crises for his arrogancy.

You may judge, then, how confident he was at that supreme moment.
He could brush aside a great mistake lightly. Someone asked him,
"What about the freedom of the seas?"

"The freedom of the seas!" he answered, "I must tell you about
that. It's a great joke on me. I left America thinking the freedom
of the seas the most important issue of the Peace Conference. When
I got here I found there was no such issue. You see the freedom of
the seas concerns neutrals in time of war. But when we have the
League of Nations there will be no neutrals in time of war. So, of
course, there will be no question of the freedom of the seas. I
hadn't thought the thing out clearly."

From that moment the decline began. Mr. Wilson had unwisely chosen
to have his victory first and his defeats afterward, always bad
generalship.

Compromise followed compromise, each one destructive. The fourteen
points were impaired until Mr. Wilson hated to be reminded of them
by Lloyd George, in the case of Dantzig and the Polish corridor.
The dawn of a better world grew dubious. The ardor of mankind
cooled. They were at first incredulous, then skeptical.

The President saw only slowly the consequences of that chaffering
to which Mr. Lloyd George and M. Clemenceau led him. He was a poor
merchant. He dealt in morals and could cast up no daily balance. He
was busy with details for which his mind had no sufficient
curiosity or energy. Mr. Keynes, in his remarkable description of
Mr. Wilson making peace, says that his mind was slow.

Doubtless it was slow in political trading about the council table,
just as a philosopher may be slow in the small talk of a five
o'clock tea.

Mr. Wilson was out of his element in the conference; Mr. Lloyd
George and M. Clemenceau were in theirs. Gradually the conviction
entered Mr. Wilson's soul that what was being destroyed at Paris
was Mr. Wilson. The figure of Senator Lodge began to rise across
the Atlantic, malevolent and evil, the Lodge against whom he had
wanted to appeal to the American people.

The strain was telling upon him. He had to sit beside his
destroyers with that smiling amiability which Mr. Lansing records
in his book. He had to deal with men on a basis of equality, a
thing which he had run away from doing in his youth, which all his
life had made too great demands upon his sensitive, arrogant
nature.

One whose duty it was to see him every night after the meetings of
the Big Three reports that he found him with the left side of his
face twitching. To collect his memory he would pass his hand
several times wearily over his brow. The arduousness of the labor
was not great enough to account for this. M. Clemenceau at nearly
eighty stood the strain and an assassin's bullet as well. Mr. Lloyd
George thrived on what he did. But the issue was not personal with
them. Neither was assisting, with difficult amiability, at his own
destruction. The time came when he might have had back some of the
ground he had given. Mr. Lloyd George offered it to him. He would
not have it. What it was proposed to amend was not so much the
peace treaty as Mr. Wilson himself, and he could not admit that he
needed amendment.

The issue had become personal and Mr. Lodge, upon Mr. Wilson's
return, with malevolent understanding, kept it personal. The
Republicans made their fight in the one way that made yielding by
the President impossible. They made it nominally on the League but
really on Mr. Wilson. The President might have compromised on the
League, but he could not compromise on Mr. Wilson. Of such
involvement in self there could be only one end.

Like a poet of one poem, Mr. Wilson is a statesman of one vision,
an inspiring vision, but one which his own weakness kept him from
realizing. His domestic achievements are not remarkable, his
administration being one in which movements came to a head rather
than one in which much was initiated. He might have cut the war
short by two years and saved the world much havoc, if he had begun
to fight when the Lusitania was sunk. Once in the war he saw his
country small and himself large; he did not conceive of the nation
as winning the war by sending millions of men to France; he saw
himself as winning the war by talking across the Atlantic. At the
Peace Conference he did not conceive of his country's winning the
peace by the powerful position in which victory had left it; he saw
himself as winning the peace by the hold he personally had upon the
peoples of Europe. Like Napoleon, of whom Marshal Foch wrote
recently, "Il oublia qu'un homme ne peut etre Dieu; qu'au-dessus de
l' individu, il y a la nation," he forgot that man can not be God;
that over and above the individual there is the nation.

In politics he knew at first better than any other, again to quote
Foch, that "above men is morality." This knowledge brought him many
victories. But at critical junctures, as in his 1918 appeal to the
voters and in the treaty fight, he forgot that morality was above
one man, himself. He excelled in appeals to the heart and
conscience of the nation, a gift Mr. Harding has not; the lesser
arts of the politician, tact and skill in the handling and
selecting of men, were lacking.

He forgot in his greatness and aloofness the national passion for
equality; which a more brilliant politician, Mr. Roosevelt,
appeased by acting as the people's court jester, and which a
shrewder politician, Mr. Harding, guards against by reminding the
country that he is "just folks"; and in the end the masses turned
upon him, like a Roman mob on a defeated gladiator.




GEORGE HARVEY


There is something inscrutably ludicrous in the anxiety, bordering
upon consternation, that lurks in the elongated and grotesque
shadow that George Harvey casts upon Washington. The Republican
fathers, who now feel a sense of responsibility, after a lapse of
many years, for the future of party and country, do not yet know
how to take him.

As a campaign asset his value could be expressed in intelligible
terms. But as a party liability, or asset,--many a good Republican
wishes he knew which,--he remains an enigma. There is not one of
the array of elders of either political persuasion who, while
laughing at his satirical sword-play, does not watch him covertly
out of the corner of the eye, trembling at the potential ruin they
consider him capable of accomplishing.

With all his weaknesses,--principally an almost hilarious political
irregularity,--but two Republican hands were raised against him in
the Senate when he was nominated for the Court of Saint James. When
he rather unbecomingly filliped John Bull on the nose in his maiden
speech as the premier ambassador, incidentally ridiculing some of
his own countrymen's war ideals, President Harding and Secretary
Hughes, gravely and with rather obvious emphasis, tried to set the
matter aright as best they could. But there was no hint of
reprimand; only a fervent hope that the mercurial Harvey would
remain quiescent until the memory of the episode passed.

The quondam editor, now the representative of his country on the
Supreme Council, in which capacity he is even more important than
as Ambassador, represents a new strain in American politics. His
mental habits bewilder the President, shock the proper and somewhat
conventional Secretary of State, and throw such repositories of
national divinity as Senators Lodge and Knox into utter confusion.

Harvey plays the game of politics according to his own rules, the
underlying principle of which is audacity. He knows very well that
the weak spot in the armor of nearly all politicians of the old
school is their assumption of superiority, a sort of mask of
benignant political venerability. They dread satire. They shrink
from ridicule. A well-directed critical outburst freezes them.
Such has been the Harvey method of approach. Having reduced his
subjects to a state of terror, he flatters them, cajoles them, and
finally makes terms with them; but he always remains a more or less
unstable and uncertain quantity, potentially explosive.

There is not much of the present Harvey to be gleaned from his
earlier experiences, except the pertinacity that has had much to do
with his irregular climb up the ladder. He was born in Peacham,
Vermont, where as a boy after school hours he mounted a stool in
his father's general store and kept books. At the end of the year
his accounts were short a penny. Because of this he received no
Christmas gift not, as he has said, because his father begrudged
the copper more than any other Vermont storekeeper, but because he
was meticulously careful himself and expected the younger
generation to be likewise.

This experience must have been etched upon Harvey's memory; no one
can be more meticulous when his interest is aroused. To money he is
indifferent, but a misplaced word makes him shudder. Writing with
him is an exhausting process, which probably accounts for the fact
that his literary output has been small. But the same power of
analysis and attention to detail have been most effective in his
political activities. In these his divination has been prophetic
and in his manipulation of contending elements he shows a dexterity
that has baffled even the professional politicians.

Harvey began his journalistic career upon the Peacham Patriot.
Thence, with a borrowed ten dollar bill, he went to Springfield,
serving his apprenticeship on the Republican, the best school of
journalism in the country at that time. Later, on the Chicago
Evening News, on the staff of which were Victor Lawson, Eugene
Field, and Melville Stone, he completed his training.

When he joined the staff of the New York World at the age of
twenty-one he was a competent, if not a brilliant newspaper man.
His first important billet was the New Jersey editorship. This
assignment across the river might very easily have been the first
step toward a journalistic sepulcher, but not for Harvey. He made
use of the post to garner an experience and knowledge of New Jersey
politics that were to have an important bearing upon the career of
Woodrow Wilson later. At the same time he attracted the attention
of Joseph Pulitzer who appointed him managing editor of the World
before he was thirty.

While directing the World's policy during the second Cleveland
campaign, Harvey met Thomas F. Ryan and William C. Whitney, the
financial backers of the Democratic party. This prepared the way
for his step from Park Row to Wall Street after his break with
Pulitzer.

But the ways of Wall Street were not for Harvey. Nevertheless he
was cautious enough to help himself to some of the profits that
were forthcoming in those days of great amalgamations. With
commendable foresight, however much he might have despised the
methods then prevalent in the fields of high finance, he acquired
enough to make him independent, to follow his own bent, and
strangely enough, in the acquiring he came to the conclusion that
the Republic could not survive if the plundering of the people by
the "interests" continued as it was proceeding at that time.

He withdrew from the Street and eventually purchased The North
American Review. In the meantime J. P. Morgan and Company had
underwritten the bonds of the Harper publishing house and the elder
Morgan asked Harvey to take charge of the institution. This he
agreed to do with the understanding that he should be permitted to
direct the policy of Harper's Weekly, one of the assets of the
firm, without interference from the bankers.

With his peculiar faculty for detecting the weaknesses of
financiers and politicians, Harvey now had before him an
opportunity which was not afforded by the sedate old North American
Review and he promptly took advantage of it. He had seen enough of
the union of finance and politics to place little faith in either
of the old parties. One was corrupt and powerful; the other was
weak and parasitical. In both organizations money was a compelling
consideration. Not being accustomed to think in terms of party
allegiance Harvey decided that the only remedy for a very bad
situation was a militant Democracy. He had the organ; next he
needed the leader.

About this time, quite accidentally, he was present at Woodrow
Wilson's inauguration as president of Princeton University. The
professor appealed to the editor,--why, one can only conjecture.
Perhaps it was a common abhorrence of machine politics, a passion
for phrase turning, for there is a similarity in the methods of the
two which separates them from the rank and file of ordinary
politicians. Harvey scrutinized Wilson more carefully, making a
political diagnosis by a careful examination of his works, and
decided that he was the man to turn the trick.

But the gap between the presidency of Princeton and the Presidency
of the United States was too wide to be taken at one leap. Harvey
concluded that the governorship of New Jersey must be the
intermediate step. The Democratic year of 1910 provided the
opportunity.

The New Jersey politicians did not care about the college
professor. They had already chosen a candidate, but Harvey induced
them to change their minds. How this was accomplished is an
absorbing political tale, too long to be narrated here. The New
Jersey political leaders of that period will tell you that if Mr.
Wilson's "forward-looking" men had controlled the convention he
never would have been nominated. They will also tell you how Joseph
Patrick Tumulty opposed the nomination. They will even whisper that
the contests were settled rather rapidly that memorable evening.
After the nomination was announced, Mr. Wilson's managers escorted
him to the convention hall where he addressed a group of delegates
who were none too enthusiastic.

As they motored back to the hotel Mr. Wilson is reported to have
asked: "By the way, gentleman, what was my majority?"

To which Mr. Nugent replied cryptically: "It was enough."

The question, at least in the presence of these gentlemen, it is
said was never asked again.

Much has been said about the break between Mr. Harvey and Mr.
Wilson. The published correspondence gives a fairly accurate
picture of what happened at the Manhattan Club on the morning of
the parting. I do not believe that Mr. Wilson dropped Colonel
Harvey because he feared he was under Wall Street influence. The
Harvey version sounds more plausible. According to this the
erstwhile university professor had learned the technique of
political strategy. He no longer felt that he was in need of
guidance.

"I was not surprised at the excuse he gave a little later when the
break came," said Harvey. "I would not have been surprised at any
excuse he offered."

Mr. Harvey retired from the campaign. Harper's Weekly had been
wrecked, whether or not by the espousal of the Wilson cause, and he
sold it to Norman Hapgood who buried it in due course. George
Harvey might or might not have had visions of an appointment to the
Court of St. James at that time. It is at least certain that his
disappointment was keen, taking a form of vindictiveness which will
survive as a distinct blot upon his career. In the preconvention
campaign he aligned himself with the Champ Clark forces, but it was
too late to undo the work he had done.

This episode is necessary to an understanding of what happened
later. His transfer from the Democratic to the Republican party was
a characteristically bold move. How genuine his later allegiance
may be is a question which more than one Republican would like to
have answered, but there is no doubt of the success of his coup. He
is, at least where he wanted to be, occupying the post which he
considers, in point of importance, next to the presidency itself,
Mr. Hughes notwithstanding.

When the United States entered the war Harvey found himself in the
secluded position of editor of the North American Review. This did
not suit his disposition at all and he was very unhappy. He was too
old to fight and it was not likely that he would be invited to
Washington. In the meantime stories of mismanagement in the conduct
of the war began to trickle out of the capital in devious
undercurrents. The press, in a passive spirit of patriotism, was
silent. Here was the opportunity.

In January, 1918, the first edition of the "North American Review
War Weekly" appeared. Its editor announced that its purpose was to
help win the war by telling the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth. He defied the Creels, the Daniels, and the
Burlesons, adopting the motto, "To hell with the censors and
bureaucrats."

The journal was an instant success. Not only was it read with
avidity but the Washington politicians were flabbergasted at the
audacity of a man who dared to print what the press associations
and the dailies would not touch. I do not think there can be any
doubt of the genuineness of Harvey's motives at this time. His
journal was rigidly non-partisan. He spared no one whom he
considered as an encumbrance in the winning of the war.

The most striking evidence of his attitude toward the Republican
party at this time is found in the edition of the "Weekly" of March
9, 1918. Will H. Hays had just been elected chairman of the
Republican National Committee. He made a speech extolling the
virtues of his party. Of this Harvey made a stinging analysis
denouncing Hays for invoking partisan spirit at so perilous an
hour, concluding with this paragraph:

"As for Mr. Hays, with his insufferable claptrap about absolute
unity as a blanket under which to gather votes while the very
existence of the nation is threatened more ominously than anybody
west of the Alleghanies--or in Washington, for that matter,--seems
to realize, the sooner he goes home and takes his damned old party
with him, the better it will be for all creation."

Surely no uncertain language! One might have supposed that the
Chairman of the Republican Committee would have done nothing of the
kind, but he did. Again the Harvey method was effective. Hays
instead of resenting the denunciation wrote Harvey a rather abject
letter, expressing the fear that he might have made a mistake in
discussing politics during the war and asked for an interview.

Here another Harvey characteristic came into play. He did not
assume the lofty role of mentor or prophet; he very tactfully and
gently tucked the young Indianian under his wing. Thenceforth there
were no more oratorical blunders.

Mr. Hays began to exhibit some capacity for leadership; his
speeches improved. From that day until the election of 1920 he
never made one without George Harvey's counsel and approval.

This is as typical of Harvey as his audacity. He has a gentleness
and charm quite unexpected in so savage a commentator. He will
discuss and advise but he will not argue; and all of the time he
will probe with uncanny accuracy for the weaknesses of those with
whom he is dealing. It is rather by the weaknesses of others than
by his own strength that he triumphs.

Eight months after his meeting with Hays, Harvey came to Washington
where his shadow was cast over the destinies of the Republican
party, which at that time consisted of a dozen elements with little
in common except a hatred of Woodrow Wilson.

It was an ideal situation for the exercise of Harvey's peculiar
talents. He met various factional leaders and before many weeks his
house became their rendezvous, the G. H. Q. of the forces who were
to encompass the defeat of Wilson. Harvey flattered and cajoled and
counselled, enjoying himself immensely all of the time. This
diversion was much more to his liking than the academic dignity of
the editorship of the "North American Review".

When President Wilson sailed away on his disastrous mission to
Paris, Harvey's "Weekly" threw aside all restraint. It cut and
slashed indiscriminately the President's policies. For the first
time Harvey took on the guise of a Republican among Republicans. He
even aided and abetted, with amused cynicism, the groping and
fumbling of Republican leaders who were dazzled at the sudden break
in the political clouds which had so long enshrouded them. He
helped raise the funds used to counteract the league propaganda and
toured the country in opposition to it.

The next shift in scenes was as much beyond Mr. Harvey's power of
manipulation as it was beyond most of the Republicans who now
sagaciously give the impression that their hands were on the ropes.
Stories have been told of the great part Mr. Harvey played in the
nomination of Mr. Harding. Mr. Harvey did not go to Chicago with
the intention of supporting Mr. Harding any more than any other of
the candidates, except Wood and Hiram Johnson, whom he despised.

He and the Senate oligarchy that coyly took the credit for
nominating Mr. Harding turned to him when it was manifest that the
machinery was stalled. Mr. Harding owes his nomination to a mob of
bewildered delegates. It was not due to a wisely conceived nor
brilliantly executed plan.

I doubt very much that George Harvey and President Harding had much
in common until Harvey was invited to Marion. At that time the
"irreconcilables" were beginning to be afraid that Elihu Root and
William H. Taft were about to induce Mr. Harding to accept a
compromise on the League of Nations. Harvey served the purpose of
restoring the equilibrium. At the same time it is quite probable
that the President was impressed by a mind so much more agile than
his own. It was reasonably certain that it would not be diverted or
misled by the intricacies of European diplomacy. And there was
never any doubt of Harvey's Americanism.

The President's selection of Mr. Harvey for the London post is, of
course, accounted for in other ways. There are some persons who
profess to believe that Mr. Harding preferred to have the militant
editor in London and his "Weekly" in the grave rather than to have
him as a censor of Washington activities under the new regime. It
can be said definitely that a sigh of relief went up from many a
Republican bosom when the sacrilegious journal was brought to a
timely end. And this did not happen, it is to be observed, until
the nomination of George Harvey to the Court of St. James was duly
ratified and approved by the Senate of the United States.

But if the "Weekly" has passed, the Republicans are still acutely
conscious that Mr. Harvey is alive,--has he not reminded them of it
in his first ambassadorial utterances?--and the journal is not
beyond resuscitation. That is why Washington does not know whether
to be chagrined or angry, whether to disavow or to condone. The
discomfited Republicans frankly do not know what to think of it and
probably will not so long as the amazing ambassador makes his own
rules.




CHARLES EVANS HUGHES


"Mais resiste-t-on a' la vertu? Les gens qui n'eurent point de
faiblesses sont terribles," observed Sylvestre Bonnard of the
redoubtable Therese.

This fearsomeness of the good is an old story. Horace remarked it,
when, walking about near Rome, pure of heart and free from sin, he
met a wolf. The beast quailed before his virtue and ran away,--to
bark at the statue of the she wolf giving suck to Romulus, by way
of intelligent protest.

A similar prevalence of virtue and a similar romantic quality,
where it is least to be expected, was disclosed in a recent
encounter between Charles Evans Hughes, Secretary of State, and one
of the irreconcilables, when Mr. Hughes, integer vitae scelerisque
purus had just commissioned Colonel George Harvey to take the seat
once occupied by Woodrow Wilson in the Supreme Council.

When the news of this appointment reached the Capitol, Senator
Brandegee, of Connecticut, hurried down to that structure across
the street from the White House whose architectural style so
markedly resembles the literary style of President Harding, the
State War and Navy Building, official residence of Mr. Hughes.

Harvey being, in a sort, Brandegee's ambassador to the Court of
Saint James, the Senator's object was to tell Mr. Hughes what
Harvey should do in the Supreme Council. Mr. Brandegee has the gift
of direct and forceful speech. In his earnestness, he dispenses
with the elegancies and amenities. The upper ranges of his voice
are not conciliatory.

In this tone, he developed views regarding this country's foreign
relations with which Mr. Hughes could not agree. The Secretary of
State combatted the Senator from Connecticut precisely as he
combats counsel of the other side when a $500,000 fee is at stake.
The discussion was energetic and divergent.

Mr. Brandegee hurried back to the Capitol and summoned other
senators to his office, all those who were especially concerned
about the exposure of Colonel Harvey to European entanglements.

He was excited. His voice was nasal. His language, in that select
gathering, did not have to be parliamentary. He told the senators
that they could expect the Versailles treaty by the next White
House messenger; that "that whiskered,"--but nothing lies like
direct quotes,--that "that whiskered" Secretary of State would soon
get us into the League of Nations, being able for his purposes to
wind President Harding about his little finger!

His excitement in such an emergency naturally communicated itself
to his hearers. What to do? It was unanimously decided that the
only adequate course was for Senator Henry Cabot Lodge to resign as
Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, by way of
protest.

Henry Cabot Lodge running away from his chairmanship would be Henry
Cabot Lodge behaving as romantically as Horace's wolf. The good are
terrible, as Anatole France said in the words with which this
sketch begins. It is not so much that you can not resist them, as
that they lead you to make such fools of yourselves.

Mr. Hughes prevails, however, not merely by his virtue, but by his
intelligence. His is the best mind in Washington; to this everyone
agrees, and it is not excessive praise, for minds are not common in
the Government.

Mr. Harding has not a remarkable one, the people having decided by
seven million majority that it was best not to have one in the
White House, choosing instead, a good heart, excellent intentions,
and reasonable common sense. Mr. Hoover has a fine business
instinct, great but diffused mental energy, but hardly an organized
mind. From this point the Cabinet grades down to the Secretary of
Labor, who, when Samuel Gompers, Jr., his Chief Clerk, addressed
him before visitors as, "Mr. Secretary," said, "Please don't call
me, 'Mr. Secretary,' Sam. Call me, 'Jim.' I'm more used to it."

"Call me Jim" is the mental sea level of the Administration, by
which altitudes are measured, so let us not exalt Mr. Hughes' mind
unduly, but merely indicate what its habits are. Its operations
were described to me by a member of the Cabinet, who said that no
matter what subject was up for discussion at a Cabinet meeting, it
was always the Secretary of State who said the final convincing
word about it, summing it all up, saying what everyone else had
been trying to say but no one else had entirely succeeded in
saying, simplifying it, and all with an air of service, not of
self-assertion.

Mr. Harding, speaking to an intimate friend, said he had "two
strong advisers,--Hughes and Hoover."

It is a satisfaction, even though it is not a delight, to come in
contact with a mind like Mr. Hughes'; it is so definite, so hard
and firm and palpable. You feel sure that it rests somewhere on the
eternal verities. It is never agnostic. It has none of the malaise
of the twentieth century. Mr. Justice Brandeis, when Mr. Hughes was
governor of New York and a reformer and progressive, said of him,
"His is the most enlightened mind of the eighteenth century."

I think the Justice put it a century or two too late, for by the
eighteenth century skepticism had begun to undermine those firm
foundations of belief which Mr. Hughes still possesses. For him a
straight line is the shortest distance between two points,--Einstein
to the contrary, notwithstanding.

Conclusions rest upon the absolute rock of principle, as morality
for his preacher father rested upon the absolute rock of the Ten
Commandments. There is no doubt, no uncertainty, no nuance, no on
the one hand, on the other, no discursiveness, no yielding to the
seductions of fancy, but a stern keeping of the faith of the
syllogism; a thing is so or it is not so. Mr. Hughes never
hesitates. He never says, "I must think about that." He has thought
about it. Or he turns instantly to his Principle and has the
answer.

You speak of Mr. Hughes to ten men in the Capitol, and nine of them
will say to you, "Of course it is easy to understand; his is the
one real mind in Washington."

Everyone is impressed, for, starting with no other initiation into
the mysteries of foreign relations than having had a father born in
Wales and having spent his vacations in England, probably in the
lake region studying the topography of Wordsworth's poetry,--a
certain oft detected resemblance to Wilson must make Wordsworth his
favorite poet, as he was Wilson's,--in ten days was he not a great
Secretary of State; and in three months the greatest Secretary of
State? To be sure, back of him was the strongest nation on the
earth, left so by the war, the one nation with resources, the
creditor of all the others, to which a successful foreign policy
would be naturally easy if it could only decide what that policy
should be.

It was left to Mr. Hughes to say what it should be. His discovery
of the word "interests," amazed Washington; it was so obvious, so
simple that no one else had thought of it. Mr. Hughes' mind works
like that;--hard, cold, unemotional, not to be turned aside, it
simplifies everything, whether it be a treaty fight that has
confused everyone else in the land, or a rambling Cabinet
discussion; whether it be the mess in which the war left Europe, or
the chaos in which watchful waiting left Mexico. His is a mind that
delights in formulae. He has one for Europe. He has one for Mexico.
It is an analytical, not a synthetical mind, a lawyer's mind, not a
creator's, like Wilson's, with, perhaps it may turn out, a fatal
habit of over-simplification. Life is not a simple thing after
all.

But effective simplification is instantly overwhelming; and he made
his brief announcement, a few days after taking office, that the
United States had won certain things as a belligerent, that it had
not got them, that he was going after them, that other countries
could expect nothing from us until they had recognized our rights
and our interests; he had completely routed the Senate, which had
been opposing Wilson's ideals with certain ideals of its own,
pitting Washington's farewell address against "breaking the heart
of the world," in a mussy statement of sentimentality.

Mr. Hughes talked of islands and oil and dollars; and the country
came to its senses. Mr. Wilson had pictured us going into world
affairs as an international benefactor; it was sobby and suggested
a strain on our pocketbooks. The Senate had pictured us staying out
of them because our fathers had warned us to stay out and because
the international confidence men would cheat us; it was
Sunday-school-booky and unflattering. Mr. Hughes said we should go
in to the extent of obtaining what was ours, and that we should stay
out to the extent of keeping the others from obtaining what certainly
was not theirs. It sounded grown-up; as a Nation we belonged not to
the sob-sisterhood, neither were we tied to the apronstring of the
Mothers of the Constitution.

Our national self-respect was restored. Truly, it required a mind
to discover "interests" in the cloud of words that Mr. Wilson and
the Senate had raised. Of course, it is all clear now, when
everybody scorns idealism and talks glibly of interests. "Hobbs
hints blue, straight he turtle eats; Nobbs prints blue, claret
crowns his cup." But it was Hughes who "fished the murex up," who
pulled "interests" out of the deep blue sea of verbal fuddlement.

And thinking of our dollars, thanks to Mr. Hughes, we are made sane
and whole, clearsighted and unafraid, standing erect among the
nations of the earth asking lustily for Yap.

Our foreign relations had been the subject of passion. Mr. Hughes
made them the subject of reason. Mr. Wilson could think of nothing
but his hatred of Lodge, which rendered an agreement with the
Senate impossible, and his hatred of Lloyd George and Marshal Foch,
which rendered cooperation with the Allies and through it
achievements in the foreign field that would have reconciled the
public to his policies, equally impossible.

Mr. Hughes looked at his task objectively. He saw the power of the
United States. He saw how easy it was to exert that power
diplomatically. He saw the simple and immediate concerns of the
United States. Foch says that he won the war, "by smoking his
pipe," meaning by keeping cool and regarding his means and ends
with the same detachment with which he would study an old campaign
of Napoleon. I do not know on what sedative Mr. Hughes wins his
diplomatic victories, as he does not smoke a pipe;--perhaps by
reading the Sunday School Times. But like the French Marshal, he
knows the secret of keeping his head. It is a great quality of mind
not to lose it when you most need it. Mr. Hughes has it. Perhaps
this is why Washington remarks his mind; he always has it with him.

"I am not thinking of myself in my work here," he said once. "I
don't care about immediate acclaim. I am counsel for the people of
this country. If a generation from now they think their interests
have been well represented, that will be enough."

He is coldly objective.

Mr. Hughes comes by his coolness naturally. He was born to it,
which is the surest way to come by anything. Men have hated him for
it, coolness being a disconcerting quality, ever since he emerged
from obscurity in New York during the insurance investigation,
calling it his "coldness" and adding by way of good measure the
further specification, his "selfishness."

If the last characterization is to stand, it should be amended to
read, his "enlightened selfishness." He has a good eye for his own
interests. Roosevelt disliked him for it, because when governor and
again when candidate for president, he refused to gravitate into
the Roosevelt solar system, taking up his orbit like the rest of
them about the Colonel. But think what happened to that system when
the great sun of it went out!

His political associates in New York hated him, accused him of
being "for nothing but Hughes," when he quit them in the fight "to
hand the government back to the people" and went, on the invitation
of President Taft, upon the Supreme Bench. But it was his only way
out. If he had gone on working with them, he would still be
"handing the government back to the people" along with,--but who
were the great figures of 1910? He knows an expiring issue and its
embarrassments by an unerring instinct. He finds a new one, such as
"our national interests," with as sure a sense.

It is worth while casting a glance at him "smoking his pipe," when
other real and false opportunities presented themselves to him; one
finds discrimination. He refuses a Republican nomination for Mayor
of New York City when there is not a chance of electing a
Republican Mayor of New York City. He accepts a Republican
nomination for Governor of New York State, when the putting up of
Hearst as the Democratic candidate makes the election of a
Republican as Governor of New York State morally certain. He
refuses the Republican nomination for President, in 1912, when
another, viewing himself and his party less objectively, through
vanity perhaps, might have believed that his own nomination was the
one thing needed to prevent that year's Republican cataclysm. Four
years later he accepts the Republican nomination for President,
when as the result showed, there is at least a reasonable chance to
win. He takes the post of Secretary of State when neglected
opportunities lie ready to his hand and when the force of world
events requires little more than his intelligent acquiescence to
bring him diplomatic success.

His discovery of "interests" was no accident. It sprang from that
hard unemotional simplifying habit of his mind.

When one writes of Mr. Hughes, men ask, pardonably, "Which Mr.
Hughes? The old Mr. Hughes, or the new Mr. Hughes?" for he has had,
as the literary critics would say, his earlier and his later
manner.

But it is chiefly manner, a smile recently achieved, a different
way of wearing the beard, a little less of the stern moralist, a
little more of the man of the world. A connoisseur of Hughes, who
has studied him for nearly twenty years, after a recent
observation, pronounced judgment: "It's the same Hughes, a trifle
less cold, but just as dry." And the Secretary of State himself,
when one of the weeklies contained an article on "The New Mr.
Hughes," remarked, "People did not understand me then, that is
all."

These two eminent authorities being substantially agreed for the
first time during many divergent years, there must be something in
it. Mr. Hughes must be a gradually emerging personality. You take
that new warmth, recently detected; Mr. Hughes himself knows it was
always there. It is like the light ray of a star which has needed a
million years to reach the earth; it was always there but it
required a long time to get across.

Then the beard:--when Mr. Hughes was "handing the government back
to the people" in New York, it was a preacher's beard; you might
have encountered its like anywhere among the circuit riders. Now it
is a foreign secretary's beard; you might encounter it in any
European capital,--a world statesman's beard. The change of beard
reveals the smile, which was probably always there, and the
splendid large teeth. The nose, standing out in bolder relief, is
handsomer and more distinguished. You see more of Mr. Hughes than
you used to and you gain by the improved vision.

Something has dropped from him, however, beside the ends of the
whiskers. I met him first when he was about to run for President in
1916. An icy veil, like frozen mist, seemed to hang between us. We
talked through it ineffectively. When I saw him again as Secretary
of State, that chill barrier had fallen away; to recur to my
figure, he gradually emerges.

Mr. Hughes of the later manner is, however, I am persuaded after
long familiarity with his career, more truly Hughesian than the
Hughes of the earlier manner; just as the Henry James of the later
manner is more explicitly Jamesian than the James of the earlier
manner, and the Cabot Lodge of the present is much more
irretrievably Cabotian than the Cabot Lodge who years ago stood
with reluctant feet where the twin paths of scholarship and
politics meet,--and part.

I should say that Mr. Hughes was Bryan plus the advantages, which
Mr. Bryan never enjoyed, of a correct Republican upbringing and a
mind. The Republican upbringing and the mind have come of late
years to preponderate. Looking at Mr. Hughes to-day, you could not
tell him from a Republican, except perhaps by his mind, though such
esoteric Republicans as Brandegee, Cabot Lodge, and Knox profess an
ability to distinguish.

But when he was "handing the government back to the people" in New
York, there was too much Bryan about him. The Republicans would
have none of him, except as a choice of evils,--the greater evil
being defeat. They called him ribald names. They referred to him
scornfully as "Wilson with whiskers," when they ran him,
reluctantly, for the Presidency in 1916. His opponent being also of
the Bryan school, and a minister's son at that, Hughes striving for
an issue, failed to make it clear which was which, a doubt that
remained until the last vote from California was finally counted
after the election. This was the Mr. Hughes of the earlier manner.

Latterly, Mr. Hughes has succeeded in establishing the distinction
which he did not succeed in making during that campaign. When he
confronted the task of Secretary of State, he carefully studied the
international career of Woodrow Wilson, as a sort of inverse
Napoleon, a sort of diplomatic bad example.

"This," he said to himself, "was a mistake of Wilson," and he noted
it. "And this," he observed thoughtfully, "was another mistake of
Wilson. I shall avoid it." "This," he again impressed on his
memory, "was where Lloyd George and Clemenceau trapped him. I shall
keep out of that pit."

His head, like a book of etiquette, is full of "Don'ts," diplomatic
"Don'ts," all deduced from the experience of Wilson.

The former President met Europe face to face. Mr. Hughes thanks his
stars for the breadth of the Atlantic. The former President put his
League of Nations first on his program. Mr. Hughes puts his League
of Nations last, to be set up after every other question is
settled.

The former President tried to sell the Country pure idealism. Now
as a people we have the habit of wars in which we seek nothing, but
after which, in spite of ourselves, a little territory, a few
islands, or a region out of which we subsequently carve half a
dozen States, is found adhering to us. Mr. Wilson offered us a war
in which, of course, we sought nothing and found, at the end of it,
not the customary few trifles of territory, but the whole
embarrassing, beggarly world adhering to us. The thumbscrew and the
rack could not wring from Mr. Hughes the admission that we are
after anything more lofty than our interests.

One of the present Secretary's "Don'ts" of similar derivation is
"Don't have a fight with the Senate unless you make sure first that
you have the public with you."

Mr. Hughes does not run away from fights; he likes them. But
believing God to be on the side with the most battalions, and
intending scrupulously to observe this last "Don't," in order to
secure the necessary popular support, he is as Secretary of State,
"handing the government back to the people," just as he did when
governor,--a little less self-consciously, perhaps, a little less
noisily, but still none the less truly.

He is the most democratic Secretary of State this Country has ever
had, and this includes Bryan to whose school, as has just been
remarked, he originally belonged. If we are ever to have democratic
control of foreign relations, it will be by the methods of Mr.
Hughes, because of the training and beliefs of Mr. Hughes, and as a
consequence of the most undemocratic control of foreign relations
which our Constitution attempted to fasten upon us.

A successful foreign policy requires public understanding and
support. The makers of the Constitution established in our
government a nice balance of powers between the various
departments, beautifully adjusted until someone thought of putting
a stone into one side of the balance. That stone is the people. The
Fathers of the Constitution had not noticed it. The executive put
it into its end of the balance some years ago, and the legislative
has been kicking the beam ever since. One nice bit of balancing was
that between the Senate and the Executive on treaty making. In
foreign relations, the President can do everything, and he can do
nothing without the approval of two thirds of the Senate. It is a
nice balance, which broke the heart of John Hay, frittered away the
sentimentalities of Mr. Bryan, and destroyed Mr. Wilson.

No one ever thought of putting the stone into it until the Senate
did so two years ago, by discussing the Versailles treaty in the
open, right before the public. The people got into the scale, and
Mr. Wilson hit the sky.

Mr. Hughes observed what happened. He is determined that the stone
this time shall go in on his end of the balance. He talks to the
country daily. He takes the people into his confidence, telling all
that can be told and as soon as it can be told. He makes foreign
relations hold front pages with the Stillman divorce case. He makes
no step without carrying the country with him. He comes as near
conducting a daily referendum on what we shall do for our
"interests" as in a country so big as ours can be done; and that is
democratic control of foreign relations, initiated by the Senate,
for its own undoing.

Into that balance where he is placing the stone, he will put more
of mankind's destinies than any other man on earth holds in his
hands to-day. His has been a long way up from the shy, sensitive
youth that one who knew him when he was beginning the law describes
to me. He was then unimaginably awkward, incapable of unbending, a
wet blanket socially. An immense effort of will has gone into
fashioning the agreeable and habitual diner-out of to-day, into
profiting by the mistakes of the New York governorship, of the
campaign of 1916.

One sees still the traces of the early stiffness; the face is
sensitive; the eyes drop, seldom meeting yours squarely; when they
do, they are the mild eyes of the Church! I suppose the early
experiences of the Church help him.

His attitude toward Colonel Harvey's and other of the President's
diplomatic appointments takes its color from his good father's
attitude toward the problem of evil. God put evil in the world, and
it is not for man to question. The President sends the Harveys
abroad; they are not Mr. Hughes', but his own personal representatives.
It is not for Mr. Hughes to question.

He grows a better Republican every day. And the Republicans of the
Senate are not reconciled. They feel like the man who saw the
hippopotamus:

    If he should stay to tea, I thought,
    There won't be much for us.

There won't be much for them. Enthusiasm grows among them over his
admirable fitness for reinterment on the Supreme Bench.




EDWARD M. HOUSE


The nature of Colonel Edward M. House was fully revealed by a story
of his youth, which he told me at Paris in the concluding moments
of the Peace Conference. He was elated and confident. The
compromises in which he delighted had been made. The gifts had all
been bestowed--of territory which men will have to fight for to
keep, of reparations which will never be paid, of alliances which
will never be carried out, of a League of Nations which the
Colonel's own Nation will never enter.

Looking the work over with that blindness with which men are struck
who are under the dominion of another and stronger man's mind, his
gentle soul was flooded with happiness. He was as near boasting as
one of his modest habits could be, as his mind turned to the wisdom
of his youth which had brought forth this excellent fruit.

"I got my first real sight of politics," he said, "when I was a boy
in Cornell University. My great chum there was young Morton, a son
of the Republican war governor of Indiana. The Hayes-Tilden
contest over the Presidency was being decided. Morton and I used to
run away from Ithaca to Washington during that absorbing fight. By
reason of his father's position in the Democratic party, he could
get in behind the scenes as few young men could; and he took me
with him. I saw the whole amazing thing. I made up my mind then and
there that only three or four men in this country counted, and that
there was little chance of rising to be one of those three or four
by the ordinary methods."

He was, when he said this, at the apex of his career, behind the
scenes of the greatest World Congress ever held, following the
greatest War the world had ever known. And he had been behind the
scenes as had no other man, in Europe as a privileged onlooker with
both belligerents, and in America as the confidant of tremendous
events.

He was there, as in his college days, at the Hayes-Tilden contest,
by grace of a friend whose influence had been sufficient to secure
him his opportunities. The parallel was in his mind, and he
regarded it with self-approval. He had chosen his course and chosen
it wisely. It had led him to the greatest peace-making in history.

There was a little more self-revelation. He and Morton had prepared
for college with Yale in view. But Morton had flunked his entrance
examinations at Yale and afterward succeeded in passing the Cornell
tests. House had gone to Cornell to be with his friend, an early
indication of a capacity for self-effacement, for attachment to the
nearest great man at hand who could take him behind the scenes.

The mystery of Colonel House is that he has been possessed all his
life, almost passionately, with that instinct which makes boys run
to fires. His fastening upon the favorably placed, whether it was
Morton in his youth, or Wilson in his maturity, was not ordinary
self-seeking, not having for its object riches or power or
influence. It was merely desire to see for the pure love of seeing.

His is a boundless curiosity about both men and events. His eyes
are the clue to his character. Boardman Robinson, with the
caricaturist's gift for catching that feature which exhibits
character, said to me one day during the War, "I just passed
Colonel House on the street. The most wonderful seeing eyes I ever
saw!"

Nature had made Colonel House all eyes--trivial in figure,
undistinguished, slightly ludicrous, almost shambling, shrinking
under observation so that he gained a reputation for mystery, with
only one feature to catch your attention, a most amazingly fine
pair of eyes. It was as if nature had concentrated on those eyes,
treating all the puny rest of him with careless indifference. They
are eyes that delight in seeing, eyes to seek a place in the first
row of the grand stand of world events, eyes that turn steadily
outward upon objective reality. Not the eyes of a visionary--House
got his visions of the brotherhood of man and the rest of it at
second-hand from Wilson--eyes that glow not with the internal fires
of a great soul, but with the intoxication of the spectacle.

And with the eyes nature had given House an unerring instinct for
getting where, with his small figure, he could see. The ego of the
passionate spectator is as peculiar as that of the book collector
or the curiosity hunter. Given a shoulder tall enough the
diminutive House perches upon it, like a small boy watching a
circus parade from his father's broad back, whether the shoulder be
Morton's in his youth, or Wilson's in his maturity.

Some have tried to explain House by saying that he had the vanity
of loving familiarity with the great; but I doubt if House cared
for kings, as kings, any more than a bibliomaniac cares for jade.
He wanted to see; and kings were merely tall objects on which to
perch and regard the spectacle.

He remained simple and unaffected by his contacts with Europe, did
none of the vulgar aping of the toady, coming away from the Peace
Conference an unconscious provincial, who said "Eye-talian" in the
comic-paper way, and Fiume pronouncing the first syllable as if he
were exclaiming "Fie! for shame!"--an unspoiled Texan who must have
cared as little what kings and potentates thought of him as a
newsboy watching a baseball game cares for the accidental company
of a bank president.

The world has been good to Colonel House, according to his
standards. He has realized his ambition to the fullest. Life has
given him all he wanted, the privilege of seeing, more abundantly
than to any other in his generation, perhaps in all time; for he is
history's greatest spectator.

He is glad. His heart is full. He wishes to give in return. He is
the kindest-hearted man who has ever had empires at his disposal.
He wants to give, give, give. He wants to make happy. He was the
fairy godmother of Europe, the diplomatic Carnegie, who thought it
a disgrace to die diplomatically rich.

For many months I saw him almost daily at Paris. His was a heart of
gold, whether in personal or international relations; but a heart
of gold does not make a great negotiator. Perverse and nationalistic
races of men, incredulous of the millenium, keep their hearts of gold
at home when they go out to deal with their neighbors.

It was difficult for Colonel House to say no. He might go so far as
to utter the first letter of that indispensable monosyllable; but
before he accomplished the vowel, his mind would turn to some happy
"formula" passing midway between no and yes. He was fertile in
these expedients. Daily he would talk of some new "formula," for
Fiume, for Dantzig, for the Saar Valley, for the occupation of the
Rhine, for Shantung, always happily, always hopefully. The amiable
William Allen White hit off his disposition perfectly when he said
House's daily prayer was, "Give us this day our daily compromise."

When he split a hair between the south and southwest side, it was
not for logistic pleasure; it was to divide it with splendid
justice and send each of two rival claimants away happy in the
possession of exactly half of the slender filament, so that neither
would be empty handed. I never saw a man so overjoyed as he was one
day late in April or early in May when M. Clemenceau had left his
rooms in the Hotel Crillon with the promise of Franco-American
defensive alliance.

"The old man," he said, "is very happy. He has got what he has been
after. I can't tell you just now what it is. But he has got it at
last."

He had been the donor, for Mr. Wilson, of the exact southwest side
of a hair, the promise to submit, without recommendations, an
alliance to the United States Senate, which had little prospect of
ever being accepted by this country. The sight of the French
Premier's happiness made him radiant.

It was not merely because representatives of foreign governments
found Colonel House easy to see when they could not gain access to
President Wilson that kept a throng running to his quarters in the
Crillon; it was because there they found the line of least
resistance. There was the readiest sympathy. There was the greatest
desire to accommodate. He sought always for a formula that would
satisfy the claims of all.

A man so ready to compromise is actuated by no guiding principle.
Mr. Scott, the editor of the "Manchester Guardian", said when
President Wilson was in England; "Yes, Lloyd George is honestly for
the League of Nations. But that won't prevent him from doing things
at Paris which will be utterly inconsistent with the principle of
such a league. It isn't intellectual dishonesty; but Lloyd George
hasn't a logical mind. He doesn't understand the implications of
his own position."

Neither did Colonel House at Paris. The League of Nations was an
emotion with him, not a principle. It was a tremendous emotion. He
spoke of it in a voice that almost broke. I remember his glowing
eyes and the little catch in his throat as he said, at Paris, "The
politicians don't like the League of Nations. And if they really
knew what it would do to them, they would like it still less."

But, for all that naive faith in the wonders it would do, Colonel
House had not thought out the League of Nations, and was quite
incapable of thinking it out, for he is not a man of analytical
mind; and what mental power he had was inhibited by the glow of his
feelings. His temperature was above the thinking point. Thus, like
Mr. Lloyd George, he could make compromises that played ducks and
drakes with his general position, since he had no real
understanding of the League, which was not an intellectual
conviction with him, arduously arrived at, but which possessed his
soul as by an act of grace, like an old-fashioned religious
conversion.

He was loyal at heart to Mr. Wilson and to everything that was Mr.
Wilson's, his mind being absorbed into Mr. Wilson's, and having no
independent existence. There are natures which demand an utter and
unquestioning loyalty in those to whom they yield their confidence,
and Mr. Wilson's was of that sort, as a remark of his about
Secretary Colby will indicate.

When Mr. Lansing was removed from office, the country was astounded
to learn that he was to be succeeded by Bainbridge Colby. The
President communicated his decision first to one of the few who
then had access to his sick room. This adviser ventured to
expostulate.

"Mr. Colby," he said, "is brilliant, but he is uncertain. His whole
career has lacked stability. He is not known to have the qualities
which the Nation has been taught to expect in a Secretary of
State."

"At any rate," replied the President sharply, "he is loyal."

At any rate, Colonel House was loyal.

The ego of Mr. Wilson demanded and received utter loyalty from him,
a loyalty that forbade thinking, forbade criticism, forbade
independence of any sort. Moreover, Colonel House was in contact
with a mind much stronger than his, with a personality much more
powerful than his. He was caught into the Wilson orbit. He revolved
about Mr. Wilson. He got his light from Mr. Wilson, who had that
power, which Colonel Roosevelt had, of irradiating minor
personalities. Colonel House was nothing until he gravitated to Mr.
Wilson. He is going back to be nothing to-day, nothing but a kind,
lovable man, a gentle soul rather unfitted for the world, with an
extraordinary capacity for friendship and sympathy, and that fine
pair of eyes.

I remember at Paris the affecting evidences of the little man's
loyalty to his great friend, of whom he could not speak without
emotion. He was never tired of dilating upon the wonder of
President Wilson's mind:

"I never saw," he would say, "so quick a mind, with such a capacity
for instant understanding. The President can go to the bottom of
the most difficult question as no one else in the world can."

House's endless "formulae" always bore the self-effacing condition,
"if Mr. Wilson approves." "If Mr. Wilson approves" was the D. V. of
Colonel House's religion. Too much awe of another mind is not good
for your own, or carries with it certain implications about your
own.

Colonel House's loyalty to Mr. Wilson did not, however, make him
hate the men at Paris who stood across the President's path. The
personal representative's heart was too catholic for that. He--

  Liked what e're he looked on
  And his looks went everywhere.

He had a kindly feeling for the "old man," Clemenceau. He was a
warm friend of Orlando, with whom Mr. Wilson had his quarrel over
Fiume. He though well of Lloyd George, whom Mr. Wilson went abroad
hating.

The Peace Conference was to him a personal problem. Peace was peace
between Wilson and Clemenceau and Lloyd George and Orlando.
Compromises were an accommodation among friends.

I never saw a man so utterly distressed as he was when President
Wilson threatened to break up the Peace Conference and sent for the
George Washington to take him home from Brest. It was as if his own
dearest friends had become involved in a violent quarrel. He did
not see the incident in terms of the principles involved, but only
as the painful interruption of kindly personal relations. Men speak
of him sometimes as the one of our commissioners who knew Europe;
and Europeans, appreciating his sympathy, have fostered this idea
by referring to his understanding of European problems.

But the Europe Colonel House knew was a personal Europe. The
countries on his map were Lloyd George, Clemenceau, and Orlando.
The problems of his Europe were Lloyd George, Clemenceau, and
Orlando. He knew what Lloyd George wanted. He knew what Clemenceau
wanted. He knew what Orlando wanted. That was enough.

His kindness of heart, his desire for pleasant personal relations,
his incapacity to think in terms of principles, whether of the
League of Nations or not, betrayed him in the matter of Shantung.
Whether the Peace Conference should return Shantung to China, or
leave it to Japan to return to China was to him, he often said,
"only a question of method. There is no principle involved." The
Japanese were a sensitive people, why should a kind heart question
the excellence of their intentions with respect to China? Shantung
would of course be returned. It was only a question of how.

The simple heart of Colonel House did not save him, either as a
diplomat or as a friend. The failures at Paris plunged Mr. Wilson
into depression in which he went as far down into the valley as he
had been up on the heights during his vision--of a world made
better by his hand. In his darker moments he saw nothing but enmity
and disloyalty about him--even, a little later, "usurpation" in the
case of the timorous and circumspect Mr. Lansing.

Colonel House says that he does not yet know what caused the breach
between the President and himself. Relations stopped; that was all.

This is what occurred: Shortly after Colonel House had convinced
the President that the disposal of Shantung was only a question of
method he disappeared from Paris "to take a rest"; and it became
known that after all he was not to sit in the Council of the League
of Nations representing America, as Mr. Wilson had originally
intended.

At this time, a close friend of President Wilson and one of his
most intimate advisers, said to me, "The most insidious influence
here is the social influence."

British entertainment of members of the House family had been
marked and assiduous, and the flattery had had its effect, though
not probably upon the Colonel, who remained unspoiled by social
contacts to the last. Nevertheless, a member of Mr. Wilson's family
had called the President's attention to the social forces that the
British were bringing to bear. The President by this time was in a
mood to be made angry and suspicious. Doubt was lodged in his mind.
And when he found this country critical of the Shantung settlement,
that doubt became a conviction; the British through social
attentions, had wheedled House into a position favorable to their
allies, the Japanese. The loyal House was convicted of the one
unforgivable offense, disloyalty.

When the casting off of House became, later, in this country
unmistakable, I inquired regarding it of the friend and adviser of
the President whom I have just mentioned, and he repeated to me,
forgetting that he used them before, the exact words he had said at
Paris, "The most insidious influence at the Peace Conference was
the social influence."

The most insidious influence with Colonel House was the kindness of
his own heart. He had too many friends. His view of international
relations was too personal. Principles will make a man hard, cold,
and unyielding, and Colonel House had no principles, or had them
only parrot-like from Mr. Wilson. He was the human side of the
President, who for those contacts which his office demanded had
found a human side necessary and accordingly annexed the amiable
Texan.

Wilson's human side had offended him, and he cut it off,
accordingly to the scriptural injunction against the offending
right hand. The act was cruel, but it was just, as just as the
dismissal of Mr. Lansing; for House failed Wilson at Paris, being
one of Wilson's greatest sources of weakness there. His excessive
optimism, his kindheartedness, his credulity, his lack of
independence of mind, his surrender of his imagination to a
stronger imagination, his conception of politics not as morals but
as the adjustment of personal differences, left Wilson without a
capable critical adviser at the Conference.

When House talked to Wilson, it was a weaker Wilson talking to the
real Wilson. Colonel House in retirement and since the breach, is
still Colonel House, kindhearted and unobtrusive. He has seen, and
he is satisfied. He has a fine and perhaps half-unconscious loyalty
to the great man from whose shoulders he surveyed the world. His is
an ego that brushes itself off readily after a fall and asks for no
alms of sympathy.

He does not, like Mr. Lansing, fill five hundred octavo pages with
"I told you so," and you can not conceive of his using that form of
self-justification.

I hope to see him some day playing Santa Claus in a children's
Christmas celebration at a village church!




HERBERT HOOVER


One reads in the press daily of Hughes and Hoover, or Mellen and
Hoover, or Davis and Hoover, or Wallace and Hoover. If it is a
question of foreign relations, it is the Secretary of State and
Hoover. If it has to do with using our power as a creditor nation
to compel the needy foreigners to buy here, in spite of the tariff
wall we are going to erect against their selling here, it is the
Secretary of the Treasury and Hoover. If strikes threaten, it is
the Secretary of Labor and Hoover. If the farmers seek more direct
access to the markets, it is the Secretary of Agriculture and
Hoover.

It is always "and Hoover." What Mr. Hughes does not know about
international affairs--and that is considerable--Mr. Hoover does.
What Mr. Mellen does not know about foreign finance--and that is
less--Mr. Hoover does. What Mr. Davis does not know about labor--and
that is everything--Mr. Hoover does. What Mr. Wallace does not
know about farm marketing--and that is nothing--Mr. Hoover does.

Herbert Hoover is the most useful supplement of the administration.
He possesses a variety of experiences, gained in making money
abroad, in administering the Belgian relief, in husbanding the
world's food supply after our entrance into the War, in helping
write the peace treaty, which no one else equals. He is as handy as
a dictionary of dates or a cyclopedia of useful information,
invaluable books, which never obtain their just due; for no one
ever signs his masterpiece with the name of its coauthor, thus, by
"John Smith and the Cyclopedia of Useful Information."

A bad particle to ride into fame behind, that word "and," begetter
of much oblivion! Who can say what goes after the "and" which
follows the name McKinley, or Hayes, or Cleveland, or even
Roosevelt? Who has sufficient "faith in Massachusetts" to remember
long the decorous dissyllable connected by "and" with the name
Harding? The link, "and," is not strong enough to hold. You recall
the "and"; that is all; as in the case of that article of food,
origin of many "calories," to use Mr. Hoover's favorite word, in
the quick-serve resorts of the humble, where it supplements ably
and usefully, but without honorable mention, slender portions of
beef, pork, and ham.

To describe briefly, in a phrase, what has happened to Hoover; two
years ago, it was "Hoover"; to-day, it is "and Hoover."

Why the connective? Because, to put it bluntly, however great his
other gifts are--and they are remarkable--he lacks political
intelligence. He reminds one now of a great insect caught in the
meshes of a silken web. He struggles this way and that. He flutters
his wings, and the web of politics fastens itself to him with a
hundred new contacts.

Facing possible elimination from public life, he accepted a dull
and unromantic department under President Harding. He was told that
he could "make something of it." Modern Greeks bearing gifts always
bring you an opportunity which "you, and you alone, can make
something of." He is trying to make something of it, something more
than Mr. Harding and the party advisers intended when they gave him
the Secretaryship of Commerce. He is trying to dramatize some turn
of fate and be once more a "big figure." He is tireless. He arrives
at his office fabulously early. Clerks drop in their tracks before
he leaves at night. He has time to see everyone who would see him;
for he can never tell when "the man with the idea" will knock at
his door. Unlike the British naval officer charged with the duty of
examining inventions to win the War, who is described by Guedalla as
sitting like an inverted Micawber "waiting for something to turn
down," he is waiting for something to turn up. He does more than
wait; he works twenty hours a day trying to turn something up.

And he will turn something up. The chances are that he will do as
much for the infant foreign trade of this country as Alexander
Hamilton did for the infant finances of this country. He promises
to be the most useful cabinet officer in a generation. But this is
less than his ambition. If he were an unknown man, it would be
enough; but you measure him by the stature of Hoover of the Belgian
Relief. Like the issue of great fathers, he is eclipsed by a
preceding fame. As well be the son of William Shakespeare as the
political progeny of Hoover, The Food Administrator!

The War spoiled life for many men; for Wilson, for Baruch, for
Hoover. After its magnificent amplifications of personality, it is
hard to descend to every day, and be not a tremendous figure, but a
successful secretary of an unromantic department.

He might concentrate with advantage to his future fame. A brief
absence from front pages, under the connective "and," would cause
the public heart to grow fonder when he did "make something" of his
own department.

But two disqualifications stand in his way;--his lack of political
intelligence, and his consequent inability to make quick decisions
in a political atmosphere. His present diffusion of his energies
springs, I think, from indecision; for in politics he can not make
up his mind, as he can in business, where the greatest profit lies.

I first heard of this weakness of his when he was Food
Administrator in Washington, and when other members of the Wilson
War Administration, equal in rank with him and having to cooperate
with him, complained frequently of his slowness. He had able
subordinates, they said, the leading men in the various food
industries, and they had to make up his mind for him. I set this
charge down, at the time, to jealousy and prejudice, Mr. Hoover
being always an outsider in the Wilson administration; but the long
delay and immense difficulty he made over deciding, although all
his life a Republican, whether he was or was not a Republican in
the campaign of 1920, seemed all the proof of indecision that was
needed.

It sounds like heresy about one who has been advertised as he has;
but remember that we know little about him except what the best
press agents in history have said of him. He achieved his
professional success in the Orient, far from observation, and his
financial success far from American eyes. His public career in the
relief of Belgium and in the administration of food was the object
of world-wide good will. And, moreover, indecision in politics is
common enough among men who are strong and able in other activities.
Mr. Taft was a great judge but wrecked his administration as
President by inability to make up his mind. Senator Kellogg was a
brilliantly successful lawyer; but in public life he is so hesitant
that Minnesota politicians speak of him as "Nervous Nelly," and
even Mr. Taft, during the Treaty fight, rebuked him to his face
for lack of courage.

Mr. Hoover's face is not that of a decisive character. The brow is
ample and dominant; there is vision and keen intelligence; but the
rest of the face is not strong, and it wears habitually a wavering
self-conscious smile. This smile, as if everybody were looking at
him, makes him remind one as he comes out of a Cabinet meeting of a
small boy in a classroom carrying a bouquet of flowers up to his
teacher. He has, moreover, a strain of pessimism in his nature,
which may account for his indecision. You catch him in moods of
profound depression. He was in one just before his appointment to
the Cabinet, when his European relief work was not going to his
liking, and when the politicians, he felt, were forcing him into a
position of little scope and opportunity.

In politics, he has enough vanity and self-consciousness to be
aware constantly of forces opposed to him, covert, hostile,
unscrupulous, personal forces--forces that he does not understand.
Give him a mining problem, he can reckon with the forces of nature
that have to be overcome. Give him a problem of finance, he knows
the enmities of finance. He is in his element. In politics he is
not. He is baffled.

An illustrative incident occurred in the spring of 1920, when both
parties were talking of him as their candidate for President and he
was uncertain whether he was a Republican or not. Mr. Hearst, in
his newspapers, published an attack upon him, saying that he was
more Briton than American, and to prove it printed a list of
British corporations of which he was a director.

All his suspicions were aroused over this everyday occurrence of
politics. Where had Mr. Hearst obtained the unfortunate
information? He saw plots and treachery. Someone in his confidence
must have betrayed him for money. A careful investigation was made,
and it was discovered that the editor had drawn upon "Who's Who,"
to which Mr. Hoover himself had furnished the information before he
began thinking of the Presidency.

The politicians tricked him so completely in the preconvention
campaign of 1920 that he has the best reasons for distrusting
himself. He was always, during that campaign, a candidate for the
Republican nomination to the Presidency. At the very time when his
spokesman, Julius Barnes, was saying for him that he could not
choose between the two parties until he had seen their candidates
and read their platforms, and when the Democrats were most
seriously impressed with his availability, the manager of his paper
in Washington said to me, "This talk of Hoover for the Democratic
nomination is moonshine. He won't take it."

"Why not," I asked him.

"Because," he replied, "he does not think it is worth having," a
quite practical reason which differed wholly from the official
explanation that Mr. Hoover was waiting to see which party was
progressive so that he might oppose reaction.

His subsequent support of the more conservative candidate and the
more conservative party bore out the truth of what his newspaper
manager had said. And in reality, Mr. Hoover is as conservative as
Mr. Harding himself, being a large capitalist with all the
conservatism of the capitalist class.

A little while ago, Mr. Roosevelt had made it unfashionable to
admit that you were conservative. You wished it to be understood
that you were open-minded--"forward looking," as Mr. Wilson, who
turned reactionary at the test, called it; that you were broad,
sympathetic, free from mean prejudices, progressive, in short. Our
very best reactionaries of to-day all used to call themselves
progressive. Some still do.

The young editor of a metropolitan newspaper, born to great wealth,
and imbibing all the narrowness of the second generation, once
asked me in those bright days when everybody was thrilling over his
"liberality," "Would you call me a radical, or just a progressive?"
He was "just a progressive." In a somewhat similar sense, Mr.
Hoover was quite unconsciously "just a progressive"--a belated
follower of a pleasant fashion, having lived abroad too long when
he made his announcement to note the subtle changes that had taken
place in our thinking--the rude shock that Russia had given to our
"liberality."

But living abroad, it is only fair to add, has created a difference
between his conservatism and that, let us say, of Judge Gary. He
has grown used to labor unions and even to labor parties, so that
they do not frighten him. His is conservatism, none the less,
definite conservatism, if more enlightened than the obscurant
American variety.

His hesitation and indecision in the spring of 1920 thus did not
spring from doubt of the Republican party's progressiveness. He
always desired the Republican nomination; but his vanity would
suffer by the open seeking of it and the defeat which seemed
likely; and his sensitiveness would suffer from the attacks, like
that of Mr. Hearst, which an open candidacy would entail; for he is
at once vain and thin-skinned.

Springing thus from reluctance to make up his mind, the
announcement was received as the evidence of a very large mind.
Among the public, Mr. Hoover was taken for a man who cared more for
principle than for party or for politics. Among the politicians, he
assumed the proportions of a portent, with a genius for politics
second only to that of Roosevelt himself, who in a difficult
situation could take the one position and say the one thing that
might force his nomination.

The Democrats pricked up their ears. Mr. Wilson, sick and
discouraged, began to entertain hopes of a candidate who would save
the Democracy from ruin. Homer Cummings, National Chairman of Mr.
Wilson's party, began to regard Mr. Hoover's possible nomination
favorably. The Republican managers became alarmed. They knew from
Mr. Hoover's friends that he, as his Washington newspaper manager
had said, thought the Democratic nomination not worth having; but
they feared lest by the course he was pursuing he might make it
worth having, might take it, and might rob them of the election
which they felt safely theirs. If they could induce him to declare
his Republicanism, the Democrats would drop him, the public would
cease to be interested in him as a dramatic personality too big for
party trammels, and they themselves could ignore him.

It was decided to have him read out of the Republican party as a
warning to him of how he was imperiling his hopes of the only
nomination he valued, and at the same time have Republican leaders
go to him or his friends and advise him and them that if he would
only declare his Republicanism, a popular demand would force his
nomination at Chicago.

Senator Penrose was chosen as the Republican whose pontifical
damnation would most impress Mr. Hoover. The late W. Murray Crane,
whom I have heard described at Mr. Roosevelt's dinner table as "the
Uriah Heap of the Republican party," was the emissary who would
advise Mr. Hoover to confess the error of his ways and seek the
absolution of Penrose. A diary kept at Republican National
Headquarters in New York reveals the visits there at the time the
plan was made of Mr. Crane and others who took part in the
enterprise. Mr. Penrose got up from a sick bed and thundered: under
no circumstances would he permit the nomination of Mr. Hoover.

The plot succeeded. In a few days, Mr. Hoover declared that he
would not take the Democratic nomination. The Democrats dropped
him. The public was bewildered by his finding out that he was a
Republican after saying that he could not tell whether he was one
or not until he had seen the Republican candidate and the platform.

At the Chicago Convention he received the support of Mr. Crane,
Governor Miller, of New York, and, on the last ballot, of William
Allen White, who having voted for Harding on the just previous
ballot, said he wanted to "leave the bandwagon and ride with the
undertaker."

This guilelessness of Mr. Hoover in politics will prevent him from
realizing his larger ambitions; but is a source of strength to him
in his present position, with American business men who have
learned to distrust politicians. At any rate, he is no politician;
he thinks as business men think; his interests are their interests;
and when he comes to them bearing gifts,--the aid and cooperation
of the United States Government in their efforts to win foreign
trade,--they do not take him for a Greek.

He possesses great special knowledge which they desire: he knows
much about economics and enjoys the advantage of believing that he
knows all; he has immense prestige, as a result of all the
advertising he received during the War; they come to Washington and
sit at his feet like children; he gives them fatherly lectures,
even upon the morals of their business, which must be clean, to
enter this foreign trade of his, with the Government behind it.
They make mental resolutions of reform. To no politician, to no
one, even with an instinct for politics, would they listen as they
listen to him. He speaks to American business with immense
authority. His selection is an example of that unusual instinct for
putting the right man in the right place which President Harding
has, when he chooses to exercise it.

The post was disappointing to Mr. Hoover; but it was the one in
which he will be most useful. Not a lawyer, he would hardly have
done for Secretary of State, in spite of his exceptional knowledge
of foreign conditions. Not a banker, he lacked the technical
equipment for Secretary of the Treasury. Not a politician, he
should have, and he has a place in which there are the least
possible politics. Mr. Harding denatured him politically by giving
him the one business department in the Cabinet. Even Hiram Johnson
may come no longer to hate him.

For his present task, besides his special knowledge, his remarkable
industry, his tireless application to details, he has one great
gift, his extraordinary talent for publicity. There is no one in
Washington, not even Mr. Hughes, who knows so well as he does how
to advertise what he is doing.

As business recovers and foreign trade develops, the magazine pages
will blossom with articles about what American enterprise is
achieving in foreign lands, about the cooperation between American
business and the American government, and, once more, about Mr.
Hoover. Finding markets for American wares all over the earth will
be made a romance only second in interest to the feeding of
Belgium.

It was not an accident that he was better advertised than any
general, admiral, or statesman of the War. It was not all due to
the good will of the public, to the work which he did in Belgium
and in this country, nor to the extraordinary press agents whose
services he was able to command because of that good will. Back of
it all was his own instinct for publicity, his sense of what
interests the people, his assiduous cultivation of editors and
reporters. He has magazine and newspaper contacts only exceeded by
those of Roosevelt in his time, and a sense of the power of
publicity only exceeded by Roosevelt's.

When he was threatening to win the Democratic nomination for the
Presidency in spite of the fact that he was not a Democrat, a
supporter of McAdoo complained bitterly to me, "Confound him! He
has a genius for self-advertising. He is not half the man McAdoo
is. He hasn't McAdoo's courage, optimism, force, or general
statesmanship; but he has this infernal talent for getting himself
in the papers. There is not much to him but press agenting; but how
can you beat that?"

But though his own name has come to count for more than the causes
he represents, so that the best way to obtain aid is to ask for it
with "Hoover" in big letters and with the suffering children of
Central Europe in small letters, still he remains only a name to
the American people. They know that he always wears a blue suit of
clothes cut on an invariable model, which he adopted years ago.
They know that he worked his way through college as a waiter. They
know that he grew rich as a mining engineer in the East. That is
all. They think of him as a symbol of efficiency, as one who may
save their money, as one who may find markets for them and develop
their trade, as one who may help the world upon its feet again
after the War, as a superman, if you will; but not as a man, not as
a human being.

All his advertising has made him appeal to the American
imagination, but not to the American heart. He is a sort of
efficiency engineer, installing his charts and his systems into
public life,--and who loves an efficiency engineer? There are no
stories about him which give him a place in the popular breast. It
is impossible to interest yourself in Hoover as Hoover; in Hoover
as the man who did this, or the man who did that, or the man who
will do this or that, yes,--but not in Hoover, the person.

The reason is that he has little personality. On close contact, he
is disappointing, without charm, given to silence, as if he had
nothing for ordinary human relations which had no profitable
bearing on the task in hand. His conversation is applied efficiency
engineering; there is no lost motion, though it is lost motion
which is the delight of life. At dinner, he inclines to bury his
face in his plate until the talk reaches some subject important to
him, when he explodes a few facts, and is once more silent.

Had he a personality with his instinct for publicity, he would be
another Roosevelt. But he is a bare expert.

I doubt if he really thinks of human beings as human beings; on the
contrary, some engineering graph represents humanity in his mind.
It is characteristic of him that he always speaks of the relief of
starving populations not in terms of human suffering, but in terms
of chemistry. The people, of whatever country he may be feeding,
have so many calories now, last month they had so many calories; if
they had ten calories more, they could maintain existence. Many
times have I heard this formula. It is a weakness in a democracy to
think of people in terms of graphs, and their welfare in terms of
calories; that is, if you hope to be President of that democracy--
not if you are content to be its excellent Secretary of Commerce.

When he came to Washington as a Food Administrator, he brought with
him an old associate, a professor from California. A few days later
the professor's wife arrived and went to live at the same house
where Mr. Hoover and her husband resided. Mr. Hoover knew her well.
She and her husband had long been his friends. He met her in the
hall, shook hands with her, welcomed her and then lapsed into
silence. After some moments, he said, "Well,--" and hesitated.

"Mr. Hoover," she said, "I know you are a busy man. You don't have
to stand here trying to think of something to say to me. I know you
well enough not to be offended if you don't talk to me at all while
I am here."

He laughed and took her at her word. He had the habit of too great
relevancy to be human. If he could have said more than "Well" to
that woman, he might have been President.




HENRY CABOT LODGE


When Henry Cabot Lodge was elected to Congress thirty-four years
ago there were no portents in the heavens, but there was rejoicing
in his native city of Boston and in many other places. It was
hailed as the dawn of a new era. Young, he was only thirty-seven,
well educated, a teacher of history, and with six serious books to
his credit, he was a new figure in politics; Providence, moving in
its mysterious way, had designed him to redeem politics from its
baseness and set a shining example.

Everything was in his favor; he was not only learned, so learned,
in fact, that he was promptly dubbed the "scholar in politics," but
he was rich, and therefore immune from all sordid temptation; he
was a gentleman. Mr. Lodge's forbears had been respectable
tradesmen who knew how to make money and to keep it--and the latter
trait is strongly developed in their senatorial descendant. From
them he inherited a fortune; he had been educated in a select
private school and then gone through Harvard, whence he emerged
with an LL.B. and a Ph.D. attached to his name. By all the
established canons he was a "gentleman" as well as a scholar. In
the intervals between teaching and writing he had found time to be
admitted to the Boston bar.

With that equipment it could be safely predicted Mr. Lodge would go
far. He has. To-day he is the leader of the Republican party in the
Senate of the United States.

He early justified the promise. While still a Congressional
freshman he drafted and introduced into the House the "Force Bill,"
which came to a violent death in the Senate. That Bill was not only
a prophecy but it is a resume of Mr. Lodge's career. It is
partisanship gone mad.

On the pretense that it was intended to secure fair elections in
the South, but actually, as described by a member of the House at
the time, to prevent elections being held in several districts, it
placed the election machinery in the control of the Federal
Government, which, through the Chief Supervisor of Elections, to be
appointed by the President, and his Praetorian Guard of Deputy
Marshals, would have controlled every election and returned an
overwhelming Republican majority from the Southern States.

The Bill was typical of Mr. Lodge and the way he plays politics.
The Force Bill would probably have ended ingloriously the political
career of any other man, but Mr. Lodge had the luck of being a
gentleman born in Boston. Boston is slow to forget. A quarter of a
century after the Civil War, Boston still remembered that conflict,
its heart still bled for the negro deprived of his vote; and a
Boston gentleman could do no wrong--to the Democratic Party.

The House amused Mr. Lodge, but it was too promiscuous for a person
of his delicate sensibilities who shrank from intimate contact with
the uneducated and the socially unwashed. Henry Cabot Lodge always
creates the impression that it is a condescension on his part to
God to have allowed Him to create a world which is not exclusively
possessed by the Cabots and the Lodges and their connections.

All that is only an unfortunate manner. He is really the friend of
the people, abominating snobbishness and aristocratic pretensions;
in his younger days, when he was campaigning for Congress, he was
known to have slapped a constituent on the back and called him
familiarly by his first name; even now, although he has long ceased
to be a politician and has been canonized as a statesman, the old
impulses are strong in him. When the time draws near for his
reelection to the Senate, he goes back to Massachusetts, there to
take part with the common people in their simple pleasures, and
affably to extend a cold and clammy hand to voters, who still
venerate him as a scholar in politics and a gentleman. So it will
be easily understood why one of Mr. Lodge's temperament should
early have cast his covetous eye on the Senate, and at the first
opportunity moved over to that more select atmosphere, which he did
in 1893.

When Senator Lodge entered public life the flagrant spoils system
was rampant. A little band of earnest men was fighting to reform
the civil service so as to make it a permanent establishment with
merit and fitness the tests for appointment instead of political
influence. It was a cause naturally to appeal to the "best people"
of Boston, and Mr. Lodge, being one of them, having inflexible
principles and a high code of honor, threw himself eagerly into the
reform movement and became its apostle. His principles were so
stern and unyielding, he demanded such an exalted standard of
private and public morality, that, although he worshipped the
Republican Party with a devotion almost as great as the memory of
that grandfather who laid the foundation of the family fortunes,
with a sorely stricken heart he was compelled to differ with Mr.
Blaine and to flirt with those Ruperts of American politics, the
Mugwumps.

"The man who sets up as being much better than his age is always to
be suspected," says a historian, "and Cato is perhaps the best
specimen of the rugged hypocrite that history can produce."

As a summary of the character of Cato, this is admirable, but no
one would call Mr. Lodge "rugged."

Mr. Lodge's principles, it has been observed, are inflexible and
rest on solid foundation, but like good steel they can bend without
breaking. An ardent civil service reformer, a champion of public
morality, so long as offices were being awarded to the faithful, he
saw no reason why he should be the victim of his own self denying
ordinance. Early in his career he became a very successful purveyor
of patronage, developing a keen scent for vacant places or a post
filled by a Democrat. As a theoretical civil service reformer Mr.
Lodge left nothing to be desired; as a practical spoilsman he had
few equals. A Senator's usefulness to his friends is much greater
than that of a member of the House, and if a Senator works his pull
for all that it is worth he can accomplish much. Mr. Lodge was not
idle.

With his grandfathers and his fortune Mr. Lodge inherited a violent
and bitter dislike of England. Probably no man--not even the most
extreme Irish agitator--is more responsible for the feeling
existing against England than Mr. Lodge; because the outspoken
Irish agitator is known for what he is and treated accordingly;
carrying out Mr. Roosevelt's thought, he will be execrated by
decent people; but Mr. Lodge, posing as the impartial historian and
the patriotic statesman, is applauded.

Just as Mr. Lodge gained a certain fame when he was a member of the
House from the Force Bill, which his own party repudiated, so he
signalized his admission into the Senate by proposing to force
England to adopt free silver. It was an opportunity to strike at
England in a vital spot; it was as statesmanlike and patriotic as
his attempt to deprive the South of their representatives.

Mr. Cleveland was fighting with splendid courage to save the
country from free silver, caring nothing for politics and animated
solely by the highest and most disinterested motives, and Mr. Lodge
was thinking only of his spite. President Cleveland, said a Boston
paper, deserved and had the right to expect Mr. Lodge's support,
instead of which "we find our junior Senator introducing a
legislative proposition intended to appeal at once to the
anti-British prejudices of a good many Americans, and to the desire
of the then preponderating sentiment of the country to force a silver
currency upon the American people. It was an effort to strike at
England."

Mr. Lodge proposed that all imports from Great Britain or her
colonies should pay duties double those of the regular rates, and
any article on the free list should be made dutiable at thirty-five
per cent; these additional and discriminating duties were to remain
in force until Great Britain assented to and took part in an
international agreement "for the coinage and use of silver."

Mr. Lodge's free silver amendment shared the same tomb with his
Force Bill; in the Senate fortunately there were men with broader
vision and less passion.

In his biography in the Congressional Directory (written by
himself) and in the numerous biographies and sketches which have
been published with such frequency (Mr. Lodge has a weakness for
seeing himself in print) curiously enough no mention can be found
either of the Force Bill or the attempt to coerce England with a
silver club. One can only explain this reticence by excessive
modesty.

Two years later Mr. Lodge deserted his silver allies and was as
enthusiastic in support of the gold standard as he had previously
been zealous for the purification of the civil service. A Boston
paper said that he "was made to realize, by the influences brought
to bear upon him, that he must advocate the gold standard or else
provoke the active hostility of the prominent business men of this
State." That perhaps is as infamous as anything ever written. That
any influences, even those "of the prominent business men of
Massachusetts," could cause Mr. Lodge to swerve from his
convictions no one will believe. He must have had convictions when
he sought to drive England to a silver standard, he must have been
convinced that it was for the good of the United States as well as
the whole world, he must have satisfied himself, for Mr. Lodge
never permits his emotions to control his intelligence, that his
action was wise and patriotic. But although Mr. Lodge will not
surrender his convictions he has no scruples about consistency.

Mr. Lodge's principles are so stern that he refused to consent to
Colombia being paid for the territory seized by President
Roosevelt. Mr. Lodge made a report (this was when Mr. Wilson was
President, and I mention it merely as an historical fact) in which
he denounced Colombia's claim as blackmail, resented it as an
insult to the memory of Mr. Roosevelt, and declared in approved
copybook fashion (being fond of platitudes), that friendship
between nations cannot be bought. Later (this was when Mr. Harding
was President, and I mention it merely as an historical fact) as
Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Relations, he brought in a
report urging the ratification of the treaty, and discovered that
Mr. Roosevelt had really been in favor of the treaty, expunged the
unpleasant word blackmail from his lexicon, and sapiently observed,
so impossible is it for him not to indulge in platitudes, that
sometimes a nation has to pay more for a thing than it is really
worth; a reflection that would have done credit to the oracular
wisdom of Captain Jack Bunsby.

Mr. Lodge attacked the treaty of peace with Germany while it was
still in process of negotiation and severely criticised Mr. Wilson
for not having consulted the Senate. That the Senate has no right
to ask about the details of a treaty before the President sends it
in for ratification is a constitutional axiom which Mr. Lodge, with
his customary mental infidelity, caressed at one time and spurned
at another.

When the treaty with Spain was before the Senate (that was when Mr.
McKinley was President, and I mention it merely as an historical
fact) it was attacked by some of the Democrats. To silence these
criticisms Mr. Lodge said, "We have no possible right to break
suddenly into the middle of a negotiation and demand from the
President what instructions he has given to his representatives.
That part of treaty making is no concern of ours."

The Democrats attempted to defeat the ratification of the treaty,
and if that was done, said Mr. Lodge, "we repudiate the President
and his action before the whole world, and the repudiation of the
President in such a matter as this is, to my mind, the humiliation
of the United States in the eyes of the civilized world." The
President could not be sent back to say to Spain "with bated
breath" (even in his most solemn moments Mr. Lodge cannot resist
the commonplace) "we believe we have been too victorious and that
you have yielded us too much and that I am very sorry that I took
the Philippines from you."

But that was precisely what Mr. Lodge demanded should and must be
done when Mr. Wilson brought back the peace treaty. Inconsistency,
as I have before remarked, Mr. Lodge cares nothing about, but his
patriotism and partisanship are so inextricably intertwined that it
is always difficult to discover whether in his loftiest flights it
is the patriot who pleads or the partisan who intrigues.

Thus, in the debate on the Spanish treaty, Mr. Lodge delivered
himself of these noble sentiments: "I have ideals and beliefs which
pertain to the living present, and a faith in the future of my
country. I believe in the American people as they are to-day and in
the civilization they have created," and many more beautiful words
to the same effect. It was the language of a statesman with
aspirations and convictions. It sounded splendidly. Mr. Lodge is a
classical scholar, and one wonders whether he remembers his
Epictetus: "But you utter your elegant words only from your lips;
for this reason they are without strength and dead, and it is
nauseous to listen to your exhortations and your miserable virtue;
which is talked of everywhere."

It was the late Senator Wolcott, one of the most brilliant orators
of his day, who explained why Mr. Lodge's oratory left men cold.
Wolcott was commenting on a speech delivered by Lodge a few days
earlier and someone said to him that men listened to Lodge with
eyes undimmed.

"To bring tears from an audience," said Wolcott, "the speaker must
feel tears here (and he pointed to his throat), but Lodge can speak
for an hour with nothing but saliva in his throat."

Mr. Lodge's dislike of Mr. Wilson was almost malignant. Rumor
ascribes it to professional jealousy. Before Mr. Wilson came into
prominence Mr. Lodge was the only scholar in politics, but Mr.
Wilson was so far his superior in erudition, especially in Mr.
Lodge's chosen profession of history, that he resented being
deprived of his monopoly. Perhaps there is another reason. Mr.
Lodge has cherished two ambitions, neither of which has been
gratified. The Presidency has been the ignis fatuus he has pursued;
he was the residuary legatee of Mr. Roosevelt's bankrupt political
estate in 1916, it will be recalled; last year, after his fight on
the treaty, he considered himself the logical candidate and
believed he had the nomination in his grasp. He has longed to be
Secretary of State, and it was a bitter disappointment when Mr.
Harding did not invite him to enter the Cabinet.

Mr. Lodge is a curious and not uninteresting study in psychology.
He has no great talent, but he is not without some ability; in his
youth he was an industrious plodder and fond of study. He has read
much but absorbed little; he is well educated in the narrow sense
of the schoolmaster, but he has no philosophic background; his is
the parasitic mind that sucks sustenance from the brains of others
and gives nothing in return. He is without the slightest
imagination and is devoid of all sense of humor; and without these
two, imagination, which is the gift of the poet, and humor, which
is the dower of the philosopher, no man can see life whole.

He has genius almost for misunderstanding public sentiment. To him
may be applied Junius' characterization of the Duke of Grafton: "It
is not that you do wrong by design, but that you should never do
right by mistake."

With all these defects, the defects of heritage and environment and
temperament, so much was expected from Mr. Lodge, and so much he
might have done, that it is a disappointment he has accomplished so
little. He has been thirty-four years in Congress, and his career
can be summed up in three achievements--the Force Bill, the attempt
to wreck England by driving her to silver coinage, and the part he
took in defeating the treaty of peace with Germany. The Force Bill
and the silver amendment his biographers have charitably forgotten;
will the future biographer deal as gently with the closing years of
his life? And if so, what material will the biographer have?

Macaulay, reviewing Barere's Memoirs--and allowing for the
difference in time and manners and morals there is a strange
similarity between the leader of the French Revolution and the
leader of the Senate--said, "We now propose to do him, by the
blessing of God, full and signal justice."

We think we may say, with proper humility, that, by the blessing of
God, we have done Senator Henry Cabot Lodge full and signal
justice.




BERNARD M. BARUCH


A clever woman magazine writer once asked Bernard M. Baruch for
some information about the peace treaty. The question was not in
his special field, the economic sections of the treaty, and he told
her so.

"It took him one sentence to say that he could not tell me what I
wanted to know," she described the interview afterward. "And then
he talked to me for two hours about himself. He told me of his
start in life as a three-dollar-a-week clerk, how rich he was, his
philosophy of life; how you should recognize defeat when it was
coming, accept it before it was complete and overwhelming and start
out afresh, how liberal and advanced were his social views, how
with all his wealth he was ready to accept a capital tax as perhaps
the best way out of the bog in which the war had left the world,
how democratic he was in his relations with his employees and his
servants. It all seemed as amazing to him as if he were describing
someone else, or as if it had just happened the day before."

Perhaps it is only to women and to journalists that men talk so
frankly about themselves, to the most romantic and best trained
listening sex and profession, who perforce survey the heights from
below. But this young woman's experience was, I have reason to
believe, a common one.

Is it vanity? You say that a man who talks so much about himself
must be vain. To conclude that he is vain is not to understand Mr.
Baruch. Is a child vain when it brings some little childish
accomplishment, some infantile drawing on paper, and delightedly
and frankly marvels at what he has done? It is given to children
and to the naive openly to wonder at themselves without vanity,
with a deep underlying sense of humility, and in Mr. Baruch's case
the unaffected delight in himself proceeds from real humility.

After twenty-five years in the jungle of Wall Street, there
is--contradictions multiply in his case--much of the child about Mr.
Baruch, simple, trustful--outside of Wall Street,--incapable of
concealment,--outside of Wall Street--of that which art has taught
the rest of us to conceal. His humility makes him wonder; his
naivete makes him talk quite frankly, unrestrained by the
conventions that balk others. After all, is not wondering at
yourself a sign of humility? A vain man, become great by luck, by
force of circumstances, by the possession of gifts which he does
not himself fully understand, would still take himself for granted.
He would not be a romance to himself, but a solid, unassailable
fact.

For Baruch the great romance is Baruch, the astonishing plaything
of fate, who started life as a three-dollar-a-week broker's clerk;
made millions, lost millions, made millions again, lost millions
again; finally, still young, quit Wall Street with a fortune that
left the game of the market dull and commonplace, seeking a new
occupation for his energies; became during the war next to the
President, the most powerful man in Washington; emerged from the
war, which wrecked most reputations, with a large measure of
credit, prepared by the amazing past for an equally amazing future.
A career like that makes it impossible for the man who knows it
best not to expect anything. Why not the "Disraeli of America?"--a
phrase he once, rather confidentially, employed concerning his
anticipated future.

Did you ever see a portrait bust smiling, not softly with the eyes
or with a slight relaxation of the mouth, but firmly, definitely,
lastingly smiling, with some inward source of satisfaction? Look at
Jo Davidson's bust of Baruch, among the famous men at the Peace
Conference.

I once saw the various sketches in clay that went to the making of
that portrait--the subject was proving elusive to the sculptor.
There were two obvious traits to be represented; the unusual knot
in the brow between the eyes and the smile, without which it was
evident that you had not Baruch. The extraordinary concentration in
the forehead was easy enough to transfer to clay; but the smile
kept defying the artist. When a smile was traced in the clay it
softened the face out of character, destroyed that intensity which
the central massing of the brow denoted; and when the smile was
deleted the face lost all its brilliance, became merely intense,
concentrated, racial, acquisitive perhaps, clearly not Mr. Baruch's
face. Ultimately the sculptor succeeded in wedding a smile to that
brow, and the bust went on exhibition with those of Wilson, Foch,
House, Clemenceau, and the others; but the union was never more
than a compromise, a marriage of convenience for the artist.

That smile is as inevitable a part of Baruch as his engaging
naivete in talking about himself. It is always there, brilliant,
unrelated to circumstances. It does not spring from a sense of
humor,--Mr. Baruch, like the rest of the successful, has not a
marked sense of humor; a sense of the irony of fate he has,
perhaps, but not more. It does not denote gaiety, nor sympathy, nor
satire; it is not kind nor yet unkind; it does not relax the
features, which remain tense as ever even when smiling; it suggests
satisfaction, self-confidence, and a secret inner source of
contentment. It is with Mr. Baruch when he is tired, or ought to be
tired; the romance of Baruch is an internal spring of refreshment.
It does not leave him when he is angry, if he is ever angry; the
romance of Baruch diverts him. Though always there, it is not a
fixed smile, a mask, something worn for the undoing of Wall Street;
it is a real smile. Somewhere subconsciously there abides the
picture of the poor clerk become amazingly rich, of power in
Washington, of a beckoning future with possibilities as
extraordinary as the wonders of the past. Life is not logical,
dull, commonplace, a tissue of cause and effect; it proceeds
delightfully by daily miracles. The American Disraeli is no further
away to-day than was the Baruch of to-day from the Baruch of
yesterday. Enough to account for a smile in marble, bronze, or in
whatever metal the human face is made of.

Take the miracle of the War Administration. It was not vanity but
humility, the kind of humility that would have saved Wilson, that
served Mr. Baruch there. He came to Washington out of Wall Street
and Wall Street is always anathema. More than that he came out of
that part of Wall Street which is beyond the pale; he did not
belong to the right monied set there; which is to be anathema with
that part of the community to which Wall Street itself is not
anathema; moreover he had been unjustly accused in connection with
the famous Wall Street "leak." And he entered an administration
which was the center of much prejudice and hatred. Yet he was
modest enough, however, to assume that his personality did not
count, that it was the work to be done which mattered, and that he
could depend upon the friendliness both of the Republicans and of
the great industrial interests of the country to that work if it
should be properly done.

The belief Mr. Wilson has and a much lesser man, Hiram Johnson,
has, that men are thinking exclusively about them personally and
not about the causes they advocate or the measures they propose is
a more dangerous form of vanity than the habit of admiring oneself
audibly. It requires colossal egotism to imagine the existence of
many enemies and Mr. Baruch is genuinely humble in the matter of
enmity. After watching him during the war, in an administration
which was enemy mad, I fancy he counts his genuine foes on the
fingers of one hand. Moreover he was quite impersonal about his
task. He did not do everything himself on the theory that no one
else was quite big enough to do it. There is no practical snobbism
about him. His knowledge of the industries of the country was that
of the speculator; it was not that of the practical industrialist,
and he knew it.

He surrounded himself with the best men he could find. He trusted
them implicitly, his habit being not to distrust men until he finds
that they can be trusted but to trust them unless he finds that
they cannot be trusted--also a modest and naive trait. He was never
tired of praising Legg, Replogle, Summers, and the other business
men whom he brought to Washington, praising himself, of course, for
his skill in choosing them--he never achieves self-forgetfulness--but
giving them full credit for the work of the War Industries Board.
And he inspired an extraordinary loyalty among his associates, big
and little. He treated the Republicans as he treated big business
as if all had only one interest, above politics and personalities,
and that was to win the war. And when President Wilson, in response
to Republican criticism of the war organization, gave him real power
to mobilize American industry, the Republicans applauded the bestowal
of authority as constructive and took credit to themselves for
accomplishing it.

Baruch and Hoover, alone of the business men who came to Washington
during the war achieved real successes in the higher positions, and
he showed vastly the greater capacity of the two to operate in a
political atmosphere. A man who was nothing but a Wall Street
speculator, not an industrial organizer, organized successfully the
biggest industrial combination the world has ever seen; a man who
was suspect of American business got on admirably with American
business, and a man who had not been in politics accomplished the
impossible task of adjusting himself to work under political
conditions. It is another chapter in the romance of Baruch.

He cannot explain it, so why should not he wonder about it quite
openly and quite delightedly, with all his engaging naivete? That
inability to explain anything is one of the characteristics of Mr.
Baruch. When you begin to apprehend it you begin to see why he is a
romance to himself. He cannot explain himself to himself, nor to
anyone else, no matter how much he tries. And even more, he cannot
explain his opinions, his conclusions, his decisions to anyone in
the world with all the words at his command. He can never give
reasons. Mentally nature has left him, after a manner, incommunicado.
His mind does not proceed as other men's minds do.

The author of the "Mirrors of Downing Street" describes Lord
Northcliffe's mind as "discontinuous." If I had never talked to
Lord Northcliffe I should be led to suppose that his mind resembled
Mr. Baruch's. But the British journalist's mental operations are a
model of order and continuity compared to those of the former
American War Industries Chairman. Like the heroes of the ancient
poems Mr. Baruch's mind has the faculty of invisibility. You see it
here; a moment later you see it there, and for the life of you
cannot tell how it got from here to there, a gift of incalculability
which must have been of great service in Wall Street, but which does
not promote understanding nor communication. And the more Mr. Baruch
tries to give you the connecting links between here and there the
worse off you are, both of you.

The ordinary mind is logical and is confined within the three
dimensions of the syllogism. You watch it readily enough shut in
its little cage whose walls are the major premise, the minor
premise, and the conclusion. There is no escape as we say, from the
conclusion. There is no escape anywhere.

But Mr. Baruch's mind escapes easily. It possesses the secret of
some fourth mental dimension, known only to the naive and the
illogical, or perhaps supralogical. He has brilliant intuitions,
hunches, premonitions, the acute perceptions of some two or three
extra senses that have been bred or schooled out of other men.

Perhaps he is like Lloyd George, who is not logical but achieves
his successes through two or three senses which ordinary men have
not; however, unlike Lloyd George, he cannot simulate logic and,
after jumping to his conclusions, reduce them to the understanding
of the three-dimensional mind. It is a grief to him that he cannot;
for if he could make a speech, that is to say, translate himself,
that figure of Disraeli would, he thinks, be less remote. But when
your mental operations are a succession of miracles, you may have
brilliant intuitions and extraordinary prevision about the mineral
supplies necessary to win the war,--which he had--you may have
wonder, like the naive and the poets, about that extraordinary
thing yourself, or about that still more extraordinary thing which
is life or destiny, but you cannot move the masses.

Still there are compensations. A perfectly logical mind would have
explained all the wonder away, reduced the miracle of personality
to a stolid operation of cause and effect, quite self-approbatively
no doubt, and made Mr. Baruch talk of himself as the rest of the
great do, modestly, after this fashion: "Behold me! I am what I am
because when I was nine years old I saved nine cents and resolved
then and there always to save as many cents each year as I was
years old. Young man, SAVE!"

There is no fun in being not a wonder but a copy book. And a
perfectly logical mind would flirt with Disraeli warily. It would
say, "One does not at fifty change from business to politics with
success. Disraeli didn't start out in Wall Street. As the Germans
say, 'what will become vinegar sours early.'"

Mr. Baruch slips easily through the three sides of this reasoning.
Life is not logical. Fate is not logical. He is not logical.

He has had his taste of public life under Wilson and he wants more.
I venture to say that he would give every one of his many millions
and be as poor, well, poorer than any member of the present
cabinet, to be in the place Mr. Hughes occupies to-day.

Everyone who knows him has heard him say that when he entered
office he resolved to quit business because he learned so much as
head of the War Industries Board that it would be improper for him
ever to go into the market again. There is more to it than that;
public life has given him a profound distaste for mere money-making.
He wrote to Senator Kenyon the other day that he had not
made a dollar since he went to work for the government. I believe
that to be true for I have found him an extraordinarily truthful
and honest man. He has that desire for public distinction which is
so often characteristic of his race. He has the idealism, a
characteristic also of the race which gave to the world two great
religions. He has the same passion for public service now that he
once had for the market. And he belongs to a race, which, in spite
of all our national catholicity on the subject of races, has never
yet produced its Disraeli in America, and to a party out of power,
perhaps for a long time, and he spent his youth learning a trade
which is not the trade he would follow now.

All of this accounts for his restlessness. He is still youthful and
has enormous energies and no occupation for them. He loves personal
publicity and has an instinct for it, not so keen as Hoover's or
Will H. Hays', but still keen.

Whither shall he turn? To the organization of his party? There he
may buy the right to be lampooned and in the end, if his party
succeeds, to be introduced into the Cabinet apologetically, as Hays
and Daugherty were, on the plea that the President must appoint a
number of party workers. To the Senate? It is a body which affords
escape from the boredom of small town life for men who have grown
rich on the frontier or in the dull Middle West. It carries with it
an excuse to live in Washington, some social position there, and a
title envied in Marion, Reno, Butte, or Salt Lake City. Senators
who start young serve long and obediently, suppressing all their
natural instincts for self-expression, and attain if they are
lucky the scant distinction of a committee chairmanship in a
legislature that has steadily tended toward submergence. To the
House? Individuals are lost in the House. And the Presidency comes
to few, and by chance.

Knowing his ambition for public distinction and his wealth, men go
to him every day to sell him the road to power and influence, and,
if you will, public service. Let him have the Democratic
organization on condition of paying its debts and financing its
activities. One faction of the Democratic party recently sought
control, spreading the understanding that Mr. Baruch would, in the
event of its success, open wide his pocket book. After the meeting
of the National Committee at which this faction met its defeat I
said to a prominent member of the victorious group: "Now that you
have won you will probably get Baruch's money. He is restless,
eager to find an outlet for his energies, less interested in any
personality than in his party. Hang on and wait and he must come to
you."

"Do you know," he replied, lowering his voice confidentially, "That
is just the way I diagnose it."

And at this very time the Republicans, hearing much of Mr. Baruch's
money and its use to build up such an intensive organization for
the Democrats, as Chairman Hays with a million or two at his
disposal had erected for them, considered seriously whether or not
it would not be wise themselves to occupy Mr. Baruch's energies and
divert his ambitions away from party organization. They debated
putting Mr. Baruch on the commission to reorganize the executive
departments of the government. All had their eyes on the same
ambition and the same wealth!

Several daily newspapers in New York, and I know not how many
magazines and weeklies, have been offered at one time or another to
Mr. Baruch, for it is known that one of his ideas of public service
is to own and edit a great liberal journal, a "Manchester Guardian"
of America. But an opportunity to buy a newspaper in New York is an
opportunity to invest $3,000,000 or $4,000,000, to lose $500,000 or
more for several years thereafter and to become the national figure
that Mr. Ochs is, or Mr. Reid is, or Mr. Munsey is, certainly
something far short of the American Disraeli or even the Baruch of
the War Industries Board.

Mr. Baruch, you will observe, has no vulgar illusions about what
money will buy. He likes money. It brings with it a certain
personal enlargement. It adds to the romance of himself in his own
eyes, as well as in the eyes of others. It procures the flattering
ears of journalists, and a place on front pages, and, if one
inclines toward ostentation, even the ownership of a newspaper
itself.

But money will not buy a commanding place in public life. And even
if it would buy such a place he would not be content to do other
than earn one. He wants to repeat the thrills of his youth in the
market, in the thrills of a second youth in Washington. He is
incurably romantic.

To sum him all up in a sentence--he has an extraordinary sense of
wonder and an unequalled sense of reality, the sense of wonder
directed toward himself, the sense of reality directed largely but
not exclusively elsewhere.




ELIHU ROOT


Elihu Root might have been so much publicly and has been so little
that a moral must hang somewhere upon his public career.

He might have been many things. He might have been President of the
United States if his party ever could have been persuaded to
nominate him. He might have been one of the great Chief Justices of
the Supreme Court if a President could have been persuaded to
appoint him. He might have given to the United States Senate that
weight and influence which have disappeared from it, if he had had
a passion for public service. He might have been Secretary of State
in the most momentous period of American foreign relations if a
certain homely instinct in Mr. Harding had not led him to prefer
the less brilliant Mr. Hughes. He might have made history. But he
has not. Out of his eight years in the Cabinet and six years in the
Senate nothing constructive came that will give his name a larger
place in history than that of Rufus Choate, another remarkable
advocate who was once Attorney General.

Distrust has always barred his way, distrust of a mind and
character to which problems appear as exercises in ingenuity rather
than questions of right and justice. His greatest opportunity for
constructive statesmanship was offered in the making of the New
York State constitution. But when it became known that Mr. Root had
dominated the Constitutional Convention, that the proposed
constitution was Mr. Root's constitution, that was enough; the
voters rejected it in the referendum.

Distrust spoiled the mission to Russia during the war. The Russians
distrusted him while he was with them. President Wilson distrusted
his report when he returned. And Mr. Wilson's successor equally
distrusted him when he chose a man to finish the work which Mr.
Wilson had badly done or to correct the work that Mr. Wilson had
left undone at Paris.

Light on President Harding's attitude toward Mr. Root is thrown by
an incident at Marion during the campaign. The Republican candidate
had made his speech of August 28th in which he indicated his views
upon the League of Nations. Two days later a newspaper arrived in
Marion containing a dispatch from abroad where Mr. Root then was,
at work upon the international court.

The correspondent represented Mr. Root as "amazed" at the position
Mr. Harding had taken.

The candidate came to the headquarters early that morning. One of
the headquarters attaches handed him a copy of the paper. Mr.
Harding read the dispatch and was angry.

"That man Root," he exclaimed, "has done more harm to the
Republican party than any other man in it! He is always pursuing
some end of his own or of some outside interest." He started away;
then turned back, still angry, and added: "You remember the Panama
Canal tolls incident. That was an example of the kind of trouble he
has always been making for the party."

Many reasons have been given why the President passed over the
obvious man for Secretary of State. Mr. Root himself, who would
have taken the place gladly as an opportunity for his extremely
keen intelligence, but who did not seek it, thinks that the Senate,
flushed with its recent victory over Mr. Wilson and desiring itself
to dominate foreign relations, conspired to prevent his choice. The
Senators did oppose Mr. Root, but their lack of influence with the
President has been sufficiently exposed by events.

The real obstacle to Mr. Root's appointment was Mr. Harding's
distrust of him, the instinctive feeling of a simple direct nature
against a mind too quick, too clever, too adroit, too invisible in
many of its operations. Mr. Harding, being commonplace himself,
likes a more commonplace kind of greatness than Mr. Root's. Those
who were close to him said the President feared that Mr. Root would
"put something over on him." A certain moral quality in Mr. Hughes
outweighed Mr. Root's special experience and wider reputation.

Mr. Roosevelt used to tell a story boastfully of his own
practicality which throws much light on Mr. Root and upon the
reason for Mr. Root's comparative failure as a public man.

"When I took Panama," he would say, "I found all the members of my
Cabinet helpful except one. Mr. Root readily found numerous
precedents. Mr. Taft was sympathetic and gave every assistance
possible. Mr. Knox alone was silent. At last I turned to him in the
Cabinet meeting and I said, 'I should like to hear from the
Attorney General on the legality of what we are doing.' Mr. Knox
looked up and said, 'Mr. President, if I were you I should not have
the slightest taint of legality about the whole affair.'"

Such was Mr. Root. Public questions always were likely to occur to
him first as exercises in mental adroitness rather than as moral
problems. His extremely agile mind finds its chief pleasure in its
own agility. Then he was always the advocate, always instinctively
devoting himself to bolstering up another man's cause for him.

"He is a first class second," said Senator Penrose, objecting to
him as a candidate for President at the Republican Convention of
1916, "but he is not his own man."

He is always someone else's mouthpiece and publicly he is chiefly
remembered as Mr. Roosevelt's mouthpiece. When he came to New York
and made the speech that elected Hughes Governor and made possible
Hughes as Secretary of State he said, "I speak for the President."
He equally spoke for the President when he delivered that other
remembered address, warning the States that unless they mended
their ways the Federal Government would absorb their vitality.

The law is a parasitic profession and Mr. Root's public career is
parasitic. He lacks originality, he lacks passion--there is no
place for passion in that clear mind--he lacks force. He elucidates
other men's ideas, works out or puts into effect their policies,
presents their case, is, by temperament, by reason of gifts
amounting almost to genius, of defects that go with those gifts
always and everywhere, the lawyer. His public career has been
controlled by this circumstance.

I doubt if he ever had a real love of public life. He turned to it
late, after he had made his success in the profession of his
choice, and he carried over into it the habits of the law. He
always seemed to be taking cases for the public. He took a case for
Mr. McKinley as Secretary of War because the War Department needed
reorganization and the case promised to be interesting. He took a
case for Mr. Roosevelt as Secretary of State because Mr. Roosevelt
was the most interesting client in the world. He took a case for
New York State, to remodel its constitution, a case that ended
disastrously. He took a case for Mr. Wilson in Russia and another,
the League of Nations, to form its international court for it. He
was willing to take a case for Mr. Harding to make a going concern
of the world for him following the smash-up of the war, something
like the task of counsel of a receivership, the most interesting
receivership of all time.

For a few years Mr. Roosevelt made public life interesting to Mr.
Root who, it looked then, might devote the rest of his career to
national affairs.

It was a sparkling period for America. We have never had an "age"
in the history of this country like the age of Elizabeth or the age
of Louis XIV, or the age of Lorenzo, the Magnificent; time is too
short and democracy too rigid for such splendors; but the nearest
equivalent to one was the "age," let us call it that, of Theodore
Roosevelt. There was the central figure--an age must have a central
figure--a buoyant personality with a Renaissance zest for life, and
a Renaissance curiosity about all things known, and unknown, and a
boundless capacity for vitalizing everyone and everything with
which he came in contact.

Dull moments were unknown. Knighthood was once more in flower,
wearing frock coats and high hats and reading all about itself in
the daily press. Lances were tilted at malefactors of great wealth,
in jousts where few were unhorsed and no blood spilled. Fair
maidens of popular rights were rescued; great deeds of valor done.
Legends were created, the legend of Leonard Wood, somewhat damaged
in the last campaign, the legend of the Tennis Cabinet, with its
Garfields and its Pinchots, now to be read about only in the black
letter books of the early twentieth century, and the legend of
Elihu Root, still supported in a measure by the evidences of his
highly acute intelligence, but still like everything else of those
bright days, largely a legend.

Roosevelt, the Magnificent, made men great with a word, and his
words were many. His great were many likewise, great statesmen,
great public servants, great writers, great magazine editors, great
cowboys from the West, great saints and great sinners, great
combinations of wealth and great laws to curb them; everything in
scale and that a great scale. Mr. Root acquired his taste for
public life in that "age" just as Mr. Hoover, Mr. Baruch and a
dozen others did theirs in the moving period of the Great War. It
is easy to understand how.

Like all remarkable ages this age was preceded by discoveries. The
United States had just fought a war which had ended in a great
victory, over Spain. The American people were elated by their
achievement, aware of their greatness, talked much and surely of
"destiny," the period in Washington being but a reflection of their
own mood. Their mental horizon had been immensely widened by the
possession, gained in the war, of some islands in the Pacific whose
existence we had never heard of before.

Until that time there had been for us only two nations in the
world, the United States and England, the country with which we had
fought two wars, and innumerable national campaigns. Historically
there had of course been another country as friendly as England had
sometimes been inimical, France, but France had ceased to be a
nation and became a succession of revolutions.

Manila Bay had been a series of revelations, besides teaching us
that Philippines is spelled with two "ps" and only one "l." We had
there discovered Germany, a country whose admirals had bad sea
manners. We knew at once that our next war would be with Germany,
although the day before Dewey said, "You may fire when you are
ready, Gridley," we would as soon have thought that our next war
would be with Patagonia.

There too we had an interesting and surprising experience with
England, hitherto known chiefly for her constant designs on the
national dinner pail. She behaved in striking and pleasing contrast
with Germany. Blood, on that bright day, May 1, 1898, began to be
thicker than water. Learning once more had come out of the East.
From Manila Bay flowed such a tide of new ideas, such a
reassessment of old conceptions as had not visited the world since
the discovery of Greek and Latin letters put an end to the Middle
Ages.

Perceiving our widened interest, John Hay, as Secretary of State,
took our foreign relations on a grand Cook's tour of the world. He
showed us Europe and the Orient. In honor of Manila Bay he invented
that brilliant fiction, the "open door" in the East. Turning our
attention to the world we discovered the General Staff. Hitherto
our army had fought mostly with the scattered Indian tribes of the
West and you cannot use a General Staff in conducting six separate
wars at once, each no bigger than a good-sized riot. But as Admiral
Perry had opened the eyes of the Hermit Kingdom of Japan, so
Admiral whatever-his-name-was who consented to be sunk by Dewey,
the unremembered hero of this great enlightenment, had opened the
eyes of this Hermit Republic of the West to the world across the
seas.

We had to have a General Staff. Mr. Root, as Secretary of War, gave
us one, faithfully copied from the best European models. Roosevelt,
the Magnificent, stood by and said "Bully." Everything was of this
order; so it was to a tremendously interesting job that Mr. Root
succeeded when he took the place of John Hay as Secretary of State.
The mood of the hour was expansive and a luminous personality
pervaded the national life.

But public service cannot always be so interesting as it is at its
fullest moments. The luminous personality went out. And Mr. Root's
next experience, in the United States Senate, was disillusioning.

The Senate is a body in which you grow old, ungracefully waiting
for dead men's shoes. The infinite capacity for taking pains which
Senators have is not genius. If the gods have been good to you, as
they were to Henry Cabot Lodge, you enter the upper house young, a
scholar and idealist, with the hope of the Presidency as the reward
of generous service. Where the race is to the slow you lay aside
your winged gifts one by one and your ambition centers finally not
on the Presidency but on some committee chairmanship clung to by a
pertinacious octogenarian.

Hope deferred makes you avaricious of little favors, until when a
British journalist writes of you as one did of Henry Cabot Lodge,
making his speech before the last Republican national convention at
Chicago, that you "looked like an elderly peer addressing a labor
gathering," your cup of happiness, is full to the brim, as Henry
Cabot Lodge's was,--whether because you are compared to a lord or
because other people, lesser than Senators, are put into their
proper inferior place. Mr. Lodge is the perfect flower of the
Senate. It is a flower that does not bloom in a night. It is almost
a century plant.

Into this Senate came Mr. Root, full stature, as he might walk into
the Supreme Court of the United States, preceded by his reputation.
On Olympus one may spring full grown like Minerva from the head of
Jove. But not in the Senate, where strong prejudice exists against
any kind of cerebral generation. A young Senator from Ohio, Mr.
Harding, arrived in the upper House early enough to see the portent
of Mr. Root there. He keeps to this day a sense of its unbecomingness.

From his desk on the floor Mr. Root talked to the country, but the
Senate did not listen. One does not speak in the Senate by the
authority of intellect or of personality. One speaks by the
authority of dead men's shoes.

Not being a big committee chairman, Mr. Root was not of counsel in
the big cases. He tried to associate himself with counsel but the
traditions of the Senate and the jealousy of Senators were against
him. He had not the passion for public service that makes Reed
Smoot and Wesley Jones miraculously patient with the endless
details of legislation. After six years he quit.

"I am tired of it," he said to Senator Fall, "the Senate is doing
such little things in such a little way." It was different from
public life under Roosevelt where one did not notice size of what
they did--one has not yet noticed the size of what they did--for
the grandeur of the way they did it.

I have said that Mr. Root's mind with its advocate's bent always
occupied itself with the justification of other men's views, his
chief's or his party's. There was one notable exception, his break
with the Republicans while he was in the Senate on the question of
discriminating in favor of American shipping through the Panama
Canal. A clever lawyer's argument can be made that when the United
States said "all nations" in its treaty with Great Britain
regarding the Canal it meant all nations except itself. But Mr.
Root declined to make it, holding that plain morality and a greater
respect for the obligations of a treaty than Bethman Hollweg
expressed when he called them scraps of paper required this country
to charge just the same tolls for American ships using the canal as
for British ships or any other ships using it.

The general Republican argument is that thus interpreted, the
Hay-Pauncefote treaty is so foolish and so inconvenient a treaty that
Mr. Hay must not have meant what he said when he wrote it, and
really did mean something that he wholly failed to say. The reasons
for contending that Mr. Hay meant no tolls for the United States
and tolls for England, when he wrote the same tolls for everybody
are highly ingenious and as it was a Democratic President who was
asserting that Mr. Hay used language in its ordinary sense, Mr.
Root as a Republican might have been expected to declare that Mr.
Hay used it in quite the reverse of its ordinary sense. But he did
not. He supported the Democratic President and treated the
Republican position as if it had not the slightest taint of
legality in it, to the lasting shock of Mr. Harding, on whose side
the precedents are, for nations do say "all nations," and are later
found to mean all nations but themselves when their virtuous
promises to make no exceptions in their own favor turn out to be
inconvenient.

When Mr. Root took a high moral stand on the treaty it was said
among Republican Senators that he was thinking more of the
transcontinental railroads which were fighting competition by water
than he was of the sanctity of international engagements. The
probability is that he was probably thinking more of John Hay and
Elihu Root than he was of either. He was in the Cabinet when John
Hay as Secretary of State made the treaty. Senator Lodge, the only
other Senator to agree with Mr. Root and disagree with his party
about the meaning of all nations, was John Hay's closest friend.
Probably both of them, intimately associated with Mr. Hay, had
their part in the making of the treaty. They had perhaps the
sensitiveness of authors about their capacity to say exactly what
they meant. They wanted to recognize their own international piece
when it was put on the stage by the commercially minded producers
of the Senate.

The history of the Hay-Pauncefote treaty is interesting and
unfamiliar. Attaching Pauncefote's name to the treaty was a
delicate act of international courtesy since there is Pauncefote's
word for it, privately spoken, that he had nothing to do with the
writing of it.

Hay draughted the treaty by himself probably with the cognizance of
Root and Lodge, the great lawyer who was his associate in the
Cabinet and his closest personal friend in the Capitol. Hay then
handed it to Pauncefote, the British minister here. Pauncefote
transmitted it to the foreign office in London which received it
with surprise and probably with satisfaction, for the Clayton-Bulwer
treaty which it in a sense revived, had been forgotten for nearly
half a century. Delay is the rule of foreign offices.

Perhaps Mr. Hay's treaty was not so generous as it seemed on first
reading, a suspicion which seems to have been justified by the
interpretation put upon it by the final authority upon international
engagements, the Republican National Convention at Chicago. And if
it was as generous as it seemed let not America think Great Britain
too eager in accepting it, let America pay a little to overcome the
reluctance of Great Britain in setting her approval upon the new
contract.

At last, after much apparent hesitation, the foreign office agreed
to the new treaty in consideration of America's throwing in, with
it an arbitration of the Bering Sea dispute. President Roosevelt
interpreted Mr. Hay's arbitration contract much as the Republican
National Convention interpreted Mr. Hay's treaty, by appointing
American arbitrators who promised beforehand, in giving a fair and
impartial hearing to the Canadian claims, always to vote for the
American position and to resign and be succeeded by others if they
found that they could not do so.

Why, then, the prevailing distrust of Mr. Root? His public morals
regarding the Hay-Pauncefote treaty were better than those of his
party, even if we accept the view that they were dictated by
nothing more than a certain mental integrity, a certain consistency
with himself. He was as virtuous in the taking of the Panama Canal
as the virtuous Mr. Roosevelt. He had the advocate's honesty of
being true to his client, whether his client was the public or the
great corporations. Mentality was uppermost in him, so that he took
primarily a logical rather than a moral view of all questions; but
also so much that he could not pretend, could not act, and thus he
was more honest than the politicians.

His statesmanship was discontinuous, being an interesting avocation
rather than a career. Of it little has been permanent. His General
Staff soon lapsed into incompetence; if it had not, it might have
been the danger to American national life that the German General
Staff was to German national life. Recently it was merged with the
high command. As Secretary of State he was not creative, Mr.
Harding turning back to the solid ground of American international
policy, rested upon John Hay's open door and Knox's dollar
diplomacy. Root in foreign relations merely succeeded with the
Senate where Hay had failed. Always the advocate, he takes other
men's ideas, Hay's or Wilson's and justifies them or makes them
practical. His New York constitution failed, being unjustly
suspected. His world court has little better hope of acceptance,
for Mr. Hughes is not a voluntary sharer of glory.

In spite of it all, some greatness remains, the impression of a
powerful though limited intelligence. His career was to give us a
moral. It is: if you have an adroit and energetic mind you will
find public affairs uninteresting; except in their occasional
phases. If you have such a mind and must enter politics, hide it;
otherwise democracy will distrust you. Whatever you do, be dull.




HIRAM JOHNSON


Hiram Johnson would have enjoyed the French Revolution, if accident
had made him radical at that time. He would have been stirred by
the rising of the people; he would have given tongue to their
grievances in a voice keyed to lash them to greater fury. He would
have been excited by it as he never has been by the little risings
of the masses which he has made vocal. In all the noisy early
phases of it, he would have made the loudest noise. And he would
have gone to the block when the real business of the revolution
began with the fanatics at its helm.

In the Russian Revolution, he would have been a Kerensky; and he
would have fled when the true believers in change arrived. He is
the orator of emeutes, who is fascinated by a multitude in a
passion.

Johnson is not a revolutionary. Not in the least, not any more than
Henry Cabot Lodge is. But revolution has a fierce attraction for
him. He once said to me, speaking bitterly during the campaign, of
Mr. Harding's prospective election, "The war has set back the
people for a generation. They have bowed to a hundred repressed
acts. They have become slaves to the government. They are
frightened at the excesses in Russia. They are docile; and they
will not recover from being so for many years. The interests which
control the Republican party will make the most of their docility.
In the end, of course, there will be a revolution, but it will not
come in my time."

That "it will not come in my time" was said in a tone of regret. It
was not so much that the Senator wanted revolution. I do not
believe he did. But he wanted his chance, that outburst of popular
resentment which would bring him to the front, with the excitement,
the sense of power that would come from the response of the nation
when his angry voice translated into words its elemental passion.

Turbulent popular feeling is breath in Johnson's nostrils. Twice he
has thoroughly enjoyed its intoxication.

His political life was blank paper when the tumult of popular
indignation swept California at the time Francis J. Heney, who was
prosecuting the San Francisco grafters, was shot in the court room.
He had thought nothing politically, he had felt nothing
politically. He had neither convictions, nor passions, nor morals,
politically speaking. He grew up in soil which does not produce
lofty standards. Something of the mining-camp spirit still hung
over California, which had been settled by adventurers, forty-niners,
gold seekers, men who had left the East to "make a new start" where
there was pay dirt. The State had a wild zest for life which was
untrammeled by Puritanism. San Francisco had its Barbary Coast
and in every restaurant its private dining rooms for women.
Johnson himself was sprung from a father who was a "railroad
lawyer," the agent of privileges in procuring special favors, by
methods once well known, from the state legislature. The atmosphere
of his youth was not one to develop a sensitive conscience or a
high conception of public morals.

Johnson at this time was a practicing attorney, not noted for the
quality of his community service. The administration of San
Francisco had been a scandal for years. Few cared. It was a
"corrupt and contented" city. The corruption grew worse. Lower and
meaner grafters rose to take the place of the earlier and more
robust good fellows who trafficked in the city o' shame. Graft lost
class, and lost caste. It was ultimately exposed in all its
shocking indecency. The light and licentious town developed a
conscience. Public indignation arose and reached its height, when
the grafters ventured too far in the shooting of the attorney
charged with their prosecution.

Johnson then felt for the first time something he had never felt
before--the stirring of the storm of angry popular feeling. It woke
something in him, something that he did not know existed before--his
instinct for the expression of public passion; his love of the
platform with yelling multitudes in front of him.

He threw himself into the fray on the side of civic virtue. The
disturbance to the complacency of San Francisco disturbed the
complacency of the State, which had calmly endured misgovernment
for many years. Misgovernment procured by the railroad, the public
utility corporations, the other combinations of wealth, through
their agents, and through the corrupt politicians. Johnson became
the spokesman of public protest and the reform governor of the
State.

After that came battling for the Lord at Armageddon--the most
intoxicating experience in American political history, for a man of
Johnson's temperament. It was a revolution, not in a government,
but in a party. Bonds were loosed. Immense personal enlargement
came to those who had known the ties of regularity. It was an hour
of freedom, unbridled political passion, unrestrained political
utterance. Docility did not exist. Vast crowds thrilled with new
hopes yelled themselves hoarse over angry words.

Association with Roosevelt on the Progressive ticket lifted Johnson
from a local to a national importance. The whole country was the
audience which leaped at his words. It was a revolution in tittle,
a taste, a sample of what the real thing would be, with its
breaking of restraints, its making of the mob a perfect instrument
to play upon, its unleashing of passion to which to give tongue.
Johnson has felt its wild stimulation and like a man who has used
drugs the habit is upon him.

Moreover, his one chance lies that way. I have said that he is, by
accident, radical. Let us imagine a great outburst of popular
passion for reaction. And suppose that Johnson was, when it
arrived, a political blank, as he was when Heney was shot. Johnson
would have raised his angry voice against radicalism, just as
readily as for it.

The essential thing with him is popular passion, not a political
philosophy. He has no political philosophy. He has no real
convictions. He does not reason or think deeply. His mentality is
slight. He is the voice of many; instinctively he gives tongue to
what the many feel; that is all.

Suppose the strong-lunged Californian were a political blank, just
reaching the national consciousness, when the reaction against
Wilson began and when the public swung to conservatism.

You know those vast tin amplifiers employed in big convention
halls, or in out-door meetings, to carry the voice of the speaker
to the remotest depths of the audience; Johnson is a vast tin
amplifier of the voice of the mass. When the people had become
"docile" he would have thundered "docility" to the uttermost bounds
of the universe, if he had not by earlier utterances been
definitely placed on the side opposed to docility.

But he had been definitely placed in the battle of Armageddon. A
thousand ennuies located him for all political time. No convictions
hold him where he is in case there be profit in changing sides;
other men habitually conservative would have the preference over
him on the other side. In this sense he is accidently radical,
accidently because he happened to emerge in politics at a radical
moment. That takes into account only the mental background of his
political position. There is an element that was not chance. Public
passion is almost invariably radical, springing as it does from the
resentment of inequality, and Johnson is the tongue of public
passion.

Is he dangerous? He is, only if public passion becomes dangerous
and only up to the point where the speakers of revolution pass from
the stage and the doers of it rig up their chopping blocks. At
present he furnishes the words, the ugly words, which men throw
instead of stones at the objects of their hate. He is the safety
valve of gathering passion. Men listen to him and feel that they
have done something to vindicate their rights. They applaud him to
shake the roof, and vote for Mr. Harding.

It is customary to speak of his magnetism over crowds. He has no
magnetism in personal contact. He walks toward you as if he were
about to deliver a blow, an impression that is strengthened by his
square menacing figure. His voice is unpleasant. His smile is wry.
He not unusually has a complaint to make against the public,
against the press, against fate, against you personally. He is not
interested in people, as Roosevelt was to so an amazing degree, and
as magnetic persons usually are. He is cold, hard, and selfish. His
quarrels are numerous, with the campaign managers of the Armageddon
fight, with his own campaign manager of 1920, with the newspaper
correspondents. He is habitually pessimistic, and pessimism and
magnetism do not go together.

His complaint that the people were docile and would not recover
their confidence and self-assertion in his time, was a bit of his
inevitable gloom. His dark habit of thought hung over his campaign
for the presidential nomination of 1920, preventing his making a
real effort in many states, and lay in the way of his success. He
has few friends, love having been left out of his make-up. I do not
speak of family affection--but love in its larger implications.
Those who surround him--clerks and secretaries--have the air of
repressed, starving personalities.

That which gathers the crowds and sets them shouting is not his
magnetism but the perfect expression of their passion. For them and
for it he is a sounding board. His voice with its hard angry tone,
its mechanical rise and fall, has the ring of a hundred guillotines
in operation. Having little culture, unintellectual, he is
primitive as the mass before him. He talks their language and an
instinct all his own gives him an exact sense of their emotions.

And what he says leaves the impression of tremendous sincerity. His
sincerity does not arise from reasoned convictions but from hatred;
deep and abiding hatred.

Senator Borah once said, "The difference between Johnson and me is
that I regard questions from the point of view of principles while
he regards them from the point of view of personalities. When a man
opposes me I do not become angry at him. On the next issue he may
agree with me. When a man opposes Johnson he hates him. He feels
that the opposition is directed personally against him, not against
the policy that separates them."

Johnson's opponents are the elements of reaction, the malefactors
of great wealth, the supporters of that social inequality which the
crowd resents. They stood in his path in California. They made
impossible his nomination at Chicago. When the bitter enders,
during the treaty fight, planned to send him on a tour of the
country, these monied men closed their pocketbooks, exclaiming to
Senator Knox, "What do you mean to do? Advertise this man Johnson
and make him the Republican candidate for President? Not with our
money."

Only the raising of a fund by Senator McCormick and some of the old
Progressives, gave him his chance to speak. He hates them and when
he attacks them it is with all the force and sincerity of his soul.
It is no mere question of hatred, such as Roosevelt would employ to
dramatize and make personal the issues he was representing to the
people; it is bitter, revengeful detestation. It makes Johnson the
most sincere man before the country to-day. And that pessimistic
strain in his nature causes the darkness of his diatribe to seem
all the more true.

But he swallows for expediency as other men swallow their
convictions for it, and wrath is the bitterer dose. During the 1920
campaign he trafficked with Senator Penrose, the representative of
hated wealth, for support at Chicago, offering, it has not been
disclosed what considerations, for his aid.

He was ready at that time to take back his speech advocating the
government ownership of railroads, a gesture against "the
interests," made at the bidding of Hearst, at the beck of whose
agents he is prone to bestir himself.

It must be an irksome livery, that of Hearst, for he hates all
service and overshadowing. Equally irksome is his service to
regularity under the rod of the Republican party. But he bows to
it, and supports Harding whom he hates. He bobs up like a
Jack-in-the-box and makes his laudatory speech whenever the name of
Roosevelt comes up, though in his heart he must reverence none too
deeply that overshadowing personality.

He has no roots except in the mob and no hope except in its aroused
resentment against inequality. Not being interested in individuals
he has not that personal organization possessed by Roosevelt, with
his army of correspondents, friends and idolators, in every hamlet.

And of course he has little hope of ever controlling his party
organization. He is curiously alone.

"There are only three men in the world whom I trust," he once said
to a friend. There is no reason to regard this as an exaggeration.
His attitude toward his associates in the Senate is this: "If I
were crossing a desert with any one of them and there was only one
water bottle, I should insist upon carrying that bottle."

On such pessimism and distrust it is impossible to build political
success. It can come only when his pessimism and distrust coincide
with like pessimism and distrust in the masses. He waits the day,
but gloomily, without confidence.




PHILANDER CHASE KNOX


"I like Knox and I admire him tremendously, but I will not ask him
to be my Secretary of State. He is too indifferent."

This characterization of the junior Senator from Pennsylvania,
attributed to his late colleague President Harding, summarizes very
aptly his strength and his weakness. One can very easily admire him
and, when he drops the mask of dignity, which seems almost pompous
in so diminutive a figure, one cannot help liking him. But in spite
of his successes,--which his enemies attribute to luck, and he
probably attributes to intellectual superiority,--he has never
quite achieved greatness and will probably go down in history as
one of the lesser luminaries in the political heavens.

Knox IS indifferent, especially to those who do not know him
intimately. It is not because he has been without ambition. On the
contrary he has longed to soar like the eagle but he has the wings
of the sparrow and whatever exertion he has made has ended in a
feeble and futile fluttering.

I doubt if any man in public life has had so many honors thrust
upon him. He has held three great offices of the Republic without
so much as raising a hand for any of them. Unlike most men he did
not travel the mucky road of politics to reach Washington nor
compromise with circumstance to gain distinction. Three Presidents
invited him to sit at their cabinet tables. Three times the
Republican machine in Pennsylvania invited him to sit in the
Senate. With graceful dignity he accepted all of these invitations
not, indeed, unconscious of the fact that the selection in each
case was a very happy one.

I do not mean by this that he is conceited. He is merely conscious
of the fact that intellectually he is somewhat superior to his
colleagues, most of whom, strangely enough, quite agree with him.
They consult him and accept his counsel with almost childlike
faith. To the mediocre politicians and provincial lawyers who
constitute the bulk of the Senate and House of Representatives, he
is a figure apart, who looks upon their antics with a kindly, but
never amused, tolerance.

"I know nothing of politics," he said to me a short time ago. "I
have never been interested in politics as such."

This remark is rather enigmatical to the average member, who would,
ordinarily, look upon the author as a dolt or pretender. They do
not dare to do either in the case of Mr. Knox; therefore, the
conclusion that he is indifferent. Never have the men associated
with Mr. Knox questioned his capacity.

Robert Lansing, when he was Secretary of State, said of him;
"Senator Lodge will not understand the treaty but he will fight for
it for political reasons. Senator Knox will understand it
thoroughly."

The observation seems almost prophetic in the light of what has
since been disclosed. Mr. Lansing's faith in Mr. Knox's judgment
seems to have been fully justified. I know of no one who has held
more steadfastly the respect of colleagues in the Senate or at the
Cabinet table, nor who has been more easily successful up to a
certain point or so singularly unsuccessful beyond it. He has done
valiant service for his country but he has failed lamentably to
reach the heights from which he could look upon broader horizons.

In the early days of his career no one strove more whole heartedly.
Destiny smiled upon him and the White House seemed to beckon. He
was not unaware of the opportunity nor was there anyone more eager
to grasp it. But he discovered that he could not stir the
enthusiasm that begets political power. The secret, which enabled
many other men, many of whom he despised, to succeed, was not his.

A temperamental dislike of the methods of politicians was followed
by a strong animosity towards those who crossed his political path
and some of those who went along beside it. He became hypercritical
of those with whom he associated and allowed a natural germ of
cynicism to develop and flourish within him. Little by little he
has withdrawn from the active combat, a philosopher in politics
enamored of public life but unwilling to suffer the inconveniences
it involves.

It is no wonder then that his colleagues in the Senate, especially
the younger members, are somewhat in fear of the incisive tongue,
for he wields it frequently and contemptuously. When after his
election, Mr. Harding went South with Senator Frelinghuysen,
Senator Davis Elkins, and Senator Hale, the older Senators, not,
perhaps, without a tinge of disappointment at having been left out,
marveled at the entourage the President had selected for himself,
but Knox was cynically undisturbed.

"It is quite simple," he said, "I see nothing mysterious about it
at all. The President wants relaxation--complete mental
relaxation."

No less biting was his comment on Robert Lansing when that
gentleman started on the high road of public service as Counselor
of the State Department. The bandy-legged messenger who guards the
door of the Secretary of State is the negro, Eddie Savoy. Eddie, in
his way, is a personage. For forty years he has ushered
diplomatists in and out of the Secretary's office; his short bent
figure gives the only air of permanence to an institution which
seems to be in a constant state of flux. When the Lansing
appointment was announced Mr. Knox observed: "I would as soon ask
Eddie Savoy an opinion on foreign affairs as Robert Lansing."

The roots of Mr. Knox's superciliousness dip down deep into the
relationships begun a score of years ago. To understand him as he
is it is necessary to understand him as he was when his career was
before him. William McKinley asked him to become Attorney General
in his Cabinet. He was then forty-two years old, a political
nobody. What reputation he had was confined to Pittsburg and a
selected few of the steel millionaires in Wall Street, but among
the selected few were names to be conjured with, such as Andrew
Carnegie and Henry C. Frick. Whether President McKinley's interest
in Knox was spontaneous or prompted by Mr. Frick I do not know. Mr.
Knox likes to believe that Mr. Frick did not enter into the
equation. Mr. Knox declined, saying that he could not sacrifice his
lucrative practice but that in four years he would accept the
invitation if the President cared to renew it.

It was renewed. At the age of forty-six, Mr. Knox quit the bar for
politics, or, as he would say, statecraft. His appointment evoked a
storm of protest from such immaculate journals as the New York
World. They dubbed him, "Frick's man," and predicted that the
Department of Justice would be turned into a Wall Street anteroom
for the convenience of the capitalistic combinations then flouting
the Sherman anti-trust law. The charges, of course, were as wide of
the mark as most of the ebullitions of the yellow journals.

Mr. Knox began his public career by attacking the Northern
Securities merger, against the judgment of some of the highest-paid
lawyers of the country. The Supreme Court sustained him. It was the
greatest victory the government ever won under the Sherman law.
Thereafter Mr. Knox, who had been labeled a corporation lawyer, was
proclaimed a trust buster. By the time he was fifty he had become
the greatest Attorney General in a half century. Certainly the mark
he set has never been reached by any of his successors.

When Mr. Roosevelt came into the White House Mr. Knox was at the
pinnacle of his career and was as much admired by his new chief as
by his martyred predecessor. In ability Mr. Roosevelt considered
him next to Elihu Root, for which Mr. Root was never quite
forgiven. It is generally known that President Roosevelt believed
that Mr. Root was the best qualified man in the country to succeed
him, but at the same time, being an astute politician, he knew that
he could not be elected. His attitude to his Secretary of State was
the same as Senator Lodge's toward himself, when he said in 1920:
"I know that I would make an excellent President, but I realize
that I would make a poor candidate."

Root being out of it because of this obvious defect, President
Roosevelt proceeded to groom Mr. Knox for the nomination. Mr. Knox
at the President's suggestion, prepared and delivered several
speeches in the hope that he would awaken popular enthusiasm. The
attempt failed dismally.

There was not a responsive throb, not even a vague echo. Mr. Knox
knew that he possessed not the merest shred of the leadership
necessary to a presidential candidate.

He went back to the Senate, where he had succeeded Matthew Quay
upon his resignation from the Cabinet, sadder if wiser, while
William H. Taft draped upon his broad shoulders the mantle of
Roosevelt.

Mr. Knox has never quite recovered from that disappointment, but he
did not altogether abandon hope. He accepted a place in the Taft
Cabinet as Secretary of State, more for the opportunities it
offered than for the pleasure of the associations, for Mr. Knox's
attitude toward President Taft was never more than passive
tolerance tinged with contempt. This new venture was no more
successful than the old. He made it quite evident that a new regime
was to be established in the State Department. The policies
originated by John Hay and developed with singular brilliancy by
Mr. Root were shunted into the background and a new era was
proclaimed. It is unnecessary to comment on the dismal essay at
"dollar diplomacy" and the Mexican policy of that period. The
simple fact is that Mr. Knox's name is not associated with a single
successful foreign policy. Some might have succeeded but
unfortunately the energy displayed at the outset of his career in
this new field was soon dissipated. Mr. Knox disliked the methods
of diplomacy. He lacked both the patience and the finesse. He went
to the Department, over which he was supposed to preside, but
rarely. For weeks at a time Washington saw nothing of him. The
administration of the Department was left largely to Huntington
Wilson, whose ineptitude was colossal.

Fortunately for Mr. Knox the extent of his failure was somewhat
screened from public view by the dust and clatter of the collapse
of the Taft Administration, but it left its mark on him. He had
failed dismally to eclipse his predecessor, Elihu Root. He had
eliminated himself from all consideration as one of the very great
statesmen of his period. He was a bitterly disappointed man. Not
only his associates but the members of the diplomatic corps were
made to feel the sting of his resentment against overwhelming
circumstances. Such references as that directed at the French
Ambassador, M. Jules Jusserand, now dean of the diplomatic corps,
whom he called "the magpie," cost him many friends.

Upon the inauguration of President Wilson Mr. Knox slipped quietly
away to Valley Forge. Public life, however, still had for him its
attractions, and when Senator Oliver retired, he returned to the
Senate. During the war his great talents were dormant. He merely
came and went, a curious little detached figure apparently quite
unresponsive to the emotions which swept the country during that
eventful period.

With the signing of the armistice he aroused himself from his
apparent torpor. Although he was quite without feeling during the
stress and storm, the situation created by the presentation of the
Treaty of Versailles with its interwoven League of Nations stirred
his intellectual interest. He became the leader of the little band
of "irreconcilables" who girded their armor to prevent what they
regarded as a catastrophic sacrifice of American interests. At the
same time Mr. Knox narrowly missed another opportunity to lift
himself conspicuously above the heads of stump speakers who, for
the most part, to-day comprise the Senate.

During that memorable fight Senator Lodge incurred the enmity at
one time or another of every faction in the Senate. He could not be
trusted to maintain the same position over night, shifting as
expediency demanded until most of his colleagues, particularly the
irreconcilables, were exasperated beyond endurance. At one of the
most critical periods Senator Borah appealed to Senator Knox to
wrest the leadership from the Massachusetts Senator, with
intimations that he would have the support of the "bitter enders"
at the forthcoming convention at Chicago. Mr. Knox does not love
Mr. Lodge but he refused to consider the proposal. He was
indifferent. His last great political opportunity went glimmering.

As I have said Mr. Knox can be very charming but I doubt that he
sincerely admires any of the public men with whom he has been
associated, or can call any of them, from the purely personal
viewpoint, his friends, with the possible exception of Andrew
Mellon, whom he caused to be appointed Secretary of the Treasury.
Of course, he likes many of his colleagues, after a fashion,
especially those who admire him, but that is another matter. The
intimacy usually implied in the term friendship does not enter into
such relations.

For some of the more important men he has known, he has shown a
very distinct dislike. It is said of him that he thought President
Harding overlooked a real opportunity when he failed to invite him
to become Secretary of State, but his disappointment was somewhat
mollified by the fact that Mr. Root was not asked to take the post.

Mr. Knox prefers to look upon Mr. Root as a lucky lawyer who has
taken to himself much of the credit of John Hay's great work. He
shows an even less regard for Mr. Lodge's talents. And he is
doubtful of Mr. Hughes.

His attitude towards the Secretary of State dates back to the
insurance scandals. At that time Mr. Frick asked Mr. Knox to make
an investigation and suggest a course of action to avert a national
disaster. This Mr. Knox did in his thorough and painstaking way. A
little later, when Mr. Hughes was appointed to make a public
inquiry, the Knox report was laid before him, and according to the
author of it, he followed precisely the lines therein indicated
creating for himself a national reputation and laying the
foundation of a public career. Credit was not given Mr. Knox. It
has been suggested that the incident might have been an
illustration of two great minds seeking the same channel. Mr. Knox
does not think so.

In spite of his disappointments and failures, the dignified little
Senator from Pennsylvania who has been so many times on the verge
of greatness, seems to think that he could have done just a little
better than any of those who have achieved it, had circumstance
given him the opportunity. Perhaps he might. It is a compliment
that few men merit to be called merely indifferent.




ROBERT LANSING


He who believes in luck should study the career of Robert Lansing.
Mr. Lansing probably thinks that the goddess of chance played him a
scurvy trick, after having admitted him to the Olympian heights, to
break him as suddenly as she made him.

Robert Lansing's real misfortune was not knowing how to play his
luck. It is curious the fear men have of death. The former
Secretary of State's only hope of immortality was to commit
political suicide, and he lacked the courage or the vision to fall
upon his sword.

When Woodrow Wilson was elected President for the first time he
appointed Mr. Bryan Secretary of State. The opinion Mr. Wilson
entertained of Mr. Bryan we all know. Mr. Wilson was not given to
letting his thoughts run wild, but on one occasion, with pen in
hand, he permitted himself the luxury of saying what he thought and
expressed the pious hope that somebody would knock the distinguished
Nebraskan into a cocked hat and thus dispose of the perpetual
candidate who was the Old Man of the Sea to the Democratic Party.

Circumstances alter cases; Mr. Wilson as a private citizen could
say and think what he pleased; as President he was compelled to
make Mr. Bryan Secretary of State. As Mr. Bryan knew nothing of
history and less of European politics and had a superb disdain of
diplomacy--diplomacy according to the tenets of Bryanism being an
unholy and immoral game in which the foreign players were always
trying to outmaneuver the virtuous and innocent American--he was
provided with a political nurse, mentor, and guardian in the person
of John Bassett Moore, who had a long and brilliant career as an
international lawyer and diplomatist. Mr. Bryan busied himself with
finding soft jobs for deserving Democrats, preaching and
inculcating the virtues of grape juice to the diplomatic corps, and
concocting plans whereby the sword was to be beaten into a
typewriter and war become a lost art. Meanwhile Mr. Moore was doing
the serious work of the Department.

No two men were more unlike than Mr. Bryan and Mr. Moore; Mr. Bryan
a bundle of loosely tied emotions to whom a catchy phrase or an
unsound theory is more precious than a natural law or the wisdom of
the philosopher; Mr. Moore an intellect who has subordinated his
emotions, and to whom facts are as important as mathematics to an
engineer. It was an incompatible union; it could not last. Mr.
Moore became impatient of his chief's vagaries and, about a year
later, returned to the dignified quiet of Columbia University.

This was early in 1914. Now for the random way in which chance
weaves her skein. Mr. Moore went out of the Department and left the
office of Counselor vacant, an office, up to that time, so little
known that the public, if it gave the matter any thought, believed
its occupant was the legal adviser of the Department, while, as a
matter of fact, he is the Under Secretary, which is now the
official designation.

At this stage of his career Mr. Lansing was connected with the
Department as an adviser on international affairs and had
represented the United States in many international arbitrations.
He was known to a small and select circle of lawyers specializing
in international law, but to the public his name meant nothing. He
had always been a good Democrat, although he was married to the
daughter of the late John W. Foster, who wound up a long and
brilliant diplomatic life as Secretary of State in President
Harrison's Cabinet after Mr. Blaine's resignation.

Mr. Lansing had made Washington his home for many years, and when
the new Democratic Administration came into power he believed his
services to the party entitled him to recognition, and he sought
the appointment of Third Assistant Secretary of State. The Third
Assistant Secretary is the official Social Secretary of the
Government. When royalty or other distinguished persons come to
this country as the guests of the nation the Third Assistant
Secretary is the Master of Ceremonies. He has to see that all the
forms are properly complied with and nothing happens to mar the
visitors' enjoyment; he sends out invitations, in the name of the
State Department, to the funerals of Ambassadors or the
inauguration of the President. But for some reason Mr. Lansing's
praiseworthy ambition was defeated.

Mr. Moore had knowledge, learning, and experience, but he was
denied the gift of divination. Had he known that a few months later
a half crazed youth in an unheard of place was to be the
unconscious agent to set the whole world aflame, undoubtedly he
would have put up with Mr. Bryan's curious ideas and peculiar
methods and stuck to his desk at the State Department, and Mr.
Lansing would never have been heard of. But at the turning point in
Mr. Moore's career his luck deserted him and Mr. Lansing became the
beneficiary. Mr. Lansing, who would have been satisfied with the
appointment of Third Assistant Secretary of State, a minor place in
the hierarchy, was appointed by Mr. Wilson Counselor of the
Department of State.

The appointment created no excitement. In March, 1914, foreign
affairs had little interest for the American people. There was
Mexico, of course, and Japan; there were the usual routine
questions to form the customary work of the department; but the
skies were serene; murder, rape, and sudden death no one thought
of; Lloyd's, which will gamble on anything from the weather to an
ocean tragedy, would have written a policy at a ridiculously low
premium on the maintenance of the peace of Europe; any statesman
rash enough to have predicted war for the United States within
three years would have aroused the concern of his friends and the
professional solicitude of his physician. Apparently Mr. Lansing
had tumbled into an easy and dignified post which would not unduly
tax his physical or mental strength. He could congratulate himself
upon his good fortune.

A few months later the situation changed. The State Department
became not only the center about which the whole machinery of the
Government revolved but on it was focused the attention of the
country and the thoughts of Europe. The Counselor of the Department
was lifted out of his obscurity; despatches to the belligerents
signed "Lansing" were published in the newspapers, statements were
issued by him, he was interviewed; he received Ambassadors, and
when an Ambassador visited the State Department the nerve centers
of the whole world were affected. Again, a few months later, in
June, 1915, Mr. Bryan kindly accommodated Mr. Wilson by knocking
himself into a cocked hat, and Mr. Lansing was appointed Secretary
of State. Few men had risen so rapidly. He had no reason to
complain of his luck.

Mr. Wilson made some extraordinary appointments--a close observer
has said he could read motives but not men--and his appointment of
Mr. Lansing at a time of crisis would have been inexplicable were
it not logical as Mr. Wilson reasoned. Mr. Wilson did not invite as
his associates his intellectual equals or those who dared to oppose
him; it was necessary that the State Department should have a
titular head, but Mr. Wilson was resolved to be his own Secretary
of State and take into his own hands the control of foreign policy.
No great man, no man great enough to be Secretary of State when the
world was in upheaval, would have consented to that indignity; no
man jealous of his own self-respect could have remained Mr.
Wilson's Secretary of State for long. A Secretary of State or any
other member of the Cabinet must of course subordinate his judgment
to that of the President, for the President is the final court of
appeal. But Mr. Wilson went further than that; he heaped almost
unparalleled affront upon Mr. Lansing; he made the great office of
Secretary of State ridiculous, and he invested its incumbent with
no greater authority than that of a copyist.

Perhaps Mr. Wilson reads men better than his critics believed;
perhaps Mr. Wilson had fully taken the measure of Mr. Lansing and
knew how far he could go.

Nature never intended Mr. Lansing to be a leader of men, to fight
for a great cause, or to engage in physical or intellectual combat.
His life has been too soft for that, and he is naturally indolent.
He is fond of, and has more than the amateur's appreciation for,
music, painting, poetry, and the classics of literature. He has
dabbled in verse, he sketches and he has written, but without
brilliancy. Accident made him a lawyer, but he was really intended
to be an artist; he would have produced no masterpiece, for genius
is not in him, but he would have been happy in his work and perhaps
have given inspiration to men of greater talent. Without being a
fanatic or dogmatic, he is strongly religious; religion to him has
a meaning and is not merely a convention; he has a code which he
has always observed and ideals which he has preserved; he is
charitable in his judgments and has never allowed his prejudices to
influence his actions; he is, to use a word so often misapplied, a
gentleman, and his motto is Noblesse oblige. Typical of the
standard he sets for himself was the admirable restraint he showed
after his abrupt dismissal from the Cabinet. He neither sought
vindication through the newspapers, nor posed as a victim, nor
soothed his feelings by denunciations of the President; he did not
make a nuisance of himself by inflicting the recital of his
grievances upon his friends or hinting darkly at revelations. He
kept quiet and went about his affairs as a gentleman should.

Why, it may be asked, should a man with so many fine qualities have
cut such a sorry figure? The answer perhaps is that he suffers from
the defects of his qualities, fine as we must admit them to be; too
fine, perhaps, for a coarser world.

When a weak and somewhat easy-going man, immensely pleased with his
own exalted position, has to deal with a man of iron will, ruthless
in his methods, he is necessarily at a disadvantage. Considering
Mr. Lansing's temperamental defects and the effect of his training,
his failure is no mystery.

Until Mr. Lansing became Secretary of State he had never known
responsibility. Practically his entire life had been spent as a
subordinate, carrying out with zeal and intelligence the tasks
assigned to him, but always in obedience to a stronger mind.
Nothing more weakens character or intellect than for a man
habitually to turn to another for direction or inspiration; always
to play the part of an inferior to a mental superior. For years Mr.
Lansing had been connected with many international arbitrations
which, theoretically, was a magnificent training for a future
Secretary of State, and actually would have destroyed the creative
and administrative usefulness of a much stronger man than Robert
Lansing.

In the whole mummery of international relations there is nothing
more farcical than an international arbitration. It is always
preceded by great popular excitement. A ship is seized, a boundary
is run a few degrees north or south of the conventional line,
something else equally trivial fires the patriotic heart. The flag
has been insulted, the offending nation is a land grabber, national
honor must be vindicated. Secretaries of State write notes,
ambassadors are instructed, the press becomes rabid, speeches are
made; the public is advised to remain calm, but it is also assured
there will be no surrender. After a few weeks the public forgets
about the insult or the way in which it has been robbed; but the
responsible officials who have never allowed themselves to become
excited, continue the pleasing pastime of writing notes.

Months, sometimes years, drag on, then a new Secretary of State or
a Foreign Minister, to clean the slate, proposes that the childish
business be ended by an international arbitration. More weeks, more
often months, are spent in agreeing upon the terms of reference,
and finally the dispute goes before an "impartial arbitral
tribunal." Both sides appoint agents and secretaries, an imposing
array of counsel, technical experts; and as the counsel are always
well paid they have a conscientious obligation to earn their fees.

More months are required to prepare the case, which frequently runs
into many printed volumes; and the more volumes the better pleased
everybody is, as size denotes importance. The arbitrators, although
they are governed by principles of law, know what is expected of
them, and they rarely disappoint. Almost invariably their decision
is a compromise, so nicely shaded that while neither side can claim
victory neither side suffers the humiliation of defeat. As by that
time both nations have long forgotten the original cause of the
quarrel their people are quite content when they are told the
decision is in their favor. As junior counsel Mr. Lansing's name
appears in many international arbitrations, and it was precisely
the work for which he was fitted.

If Mr. Lansing had been a man of more robust fiber, he would have
returned his portfolio to Mr. Wilson as early as 1916, for the
President was writing notes to the belligerents and did not, even
as a perfunctory courtesy, consult his Secretary of State; he made
it only too patent he did not consider his advice worth asking. Mr.
Lansing was too fond of his official prominence to surrender it
easily, and that is another curious thing about the man. Somewhat
vain, holding himself in much higher estimation than the world did,
few men have so thoroughly enjoyed office as he. But he remained
the quiet and unassuming gentleman he had always been; and he
certainly could not have deluded himself into believing that there
was a still higher office for him to occupy.

Mr. Lansing could not screw up his courage to resign in 1916. The
following year the United States was at war and he naturally could
not desert his post; but in 1919 Mr. Lansing was given another
opportunity, and still he was obdurate. He has told us in his
public confession that he tried to persuade the President not to go
to Paris. Mr. Wilson, as usual, remained unpersuaded, and Mr.
Lansing humbly followed in his train.

Then, of course, Mr. Lansing could not resign, but in Paris he was
even more grossly humiliated; he was completely shut out from the
President's confidence; he wrote letters to Mr. Wilson which the
President did not deign to answer; so little did Mr. Lansing know
what was being done that he sought information from the Chinese
Delegates! It sounds incredible, it seems even more incredible that
a Secretary of State should put himself in such an undignified
position, and having done so should invite the world to share his
ignominy. But he has set it down in his book as if he believed it
was ample defense, instead of realizing that it is condemnation.

Curious contradictions! One might expect a sensitive man, a man who
has never courted publicity, who has none of the genius of the
self-advertiser, to crave forgetfulness for the Paris episode, to
shrink from publicly exposing himself and his humiliations, but Mr.
Lansing seemingly revels in his self-dissection. The President
slaps his face; in his pride he summons all the world to look upon
the marks left by the Executive palm. He feels the sting, and he
enters upon an elaborate defense to show it is the stigmata of
martyrdom. A treaty was framed of which he disapproved, yet he
could sign it without wrench of conscience. Unreconciled to
resignation in Paris, he returned to Washington as if nothing had
happened, again to resume his subservient relations to the
President.

Opportunity, we are told, knocks only once at a man's door, but
while opportunity thundered at Mr. Lansing's portal "his ear was
closed with the cotton of negligence."

Early in 1920 Mr. Wilson dismissed him, brutally, abruptly, with
the petulance of an invalid too tired to be fair; for a reason so
obviously disingenuous that Mr. Lansing had the sympathy of the
country. He should either have told the truth then and there or
forever have held his peace; and had he remained mute out of the
mystery would have grown a myth. The fictitious Lansing would have
become an historical character. But he must needs write a book. It
does not make pleasant reading. It does not make its author a hero.

It does, however, answer the question the curious asked at the time
of his appointment: "Why did the President make Mr. Lansing
Secretary of State?"




BOIES PENROSE


The most striking victim of the American propensity for
exaggeration is the senior Senator from Pennsylvania, Boies
Penrose. He has a personality and contour that lend themselves to
caricature. Only a few deft strokes are needed to make his
ponderous figure and heavy jowl the counterpart of a typical boss,
an institution for which the American people have a pardonable
affection in these days of political quackery. For, when the worst
is said of the imposing array of bosses from Tweed down to the
present time, they could be forgiven much because they were what
they were. That is why, perhaps, the altogether fanciful picture of
Penrose, propped on his pillows with his telephone at his bedside
directing the embattled delegates at Chicago, who in sheer
desperation turned to Warren G. Harding, is dwelt upon fondly by a
deluded public.

Penrose does not despise the appurtenances of bossism. If the truth
were told he probably likes the idea of being represented as the
hard-fisted master of party destinies. He knows that such a
reputation inspires awe if not respect, on the part of the rank and
file, from the humble precinct worker to the gentleman of large
affairs who provides the necessary campaign funds. It has its
value, sentimental as well as practical, for the American people
likes to set up its own political idols. The politicians who for
the moment guide the destinies of the nation are so misdrawn, so
illuminated with virtues and endowed with vices quite foreign to
them, that they frequently achieve a personality quite fictitious,
but which, none the less, passes current in the popular mind as
genuine.

Nothing could be more grotesque, for example, than the picture of
Senator Smoot, who is merely a sublimated messenger boy, as one of
the arbiters of the Republican policies; or of Senator Lodge, by
sheer strength of leadership, restraining the discordant Republican
elements in the Senate from kicking over the traces. This is
journalist "copy" written for a popular imagination which finds the
truth too tepid.

Boies Penrose serves the purpose of appeasing national appetite for
what the magazine editors call "dynamic stuff."

But the real Boies Penrose is not all as he is pictured. At a
cursory glance he might appear to be a physiological, psychological,
and political anachronism. At least he is sufficiently different
from his colleagues to be, if not actually mysterious, not easily
understandable. There is something fundamental about him. He
inspires a certain awe which may not be magnetic but has the same
effect upon those who surround him; where he sits is the head of
the table.

I doubt if Lodge or Knox or Hughes could ever fathom the secret of
his power; they are not cast in the same mould. His colleagues
smile at his idiosyncracies--behind his back--but they approach him
with the respect due to a master. Many of them admire him, not a
few hate him, but all of them fear him. It is rather a singular
thing that Senator La Follette, himself at the pinnacle of his
championship of the Wisconsin progressive idea, was probably on
friendlier terms with the senior Senator from Pennsylvania than any
of the other leaders of those reactionary forces with whom he was
tilting. He knew where Penrose stood and it is not at all
improbable that behind the Penrose reticence there was a modicum of
admiration for the methods of the redoubtable little colleague, who
in his way, was a more inexorable boss than Penrose himself ever
dreamed of being. The mutual understanding was there, even if it
never became articulate.

Penrose has peculiarities which put him in a niche quite his own.
He eschews conversation as an idle affectation. He dislikes to
shake hands, preferring the Chinese fashion of holding his on his
own expansive paunch. When he finds it necessary to talk at all he
speaks the precise truth as he sees it without consideration for
the feelings of those he happens to be addressing. The results are
frequently so ludicrous, particularly when he enters a colloquy on
the Senate floor, that he is given credit for a much more
pronounced sense of humor than he actually possesses. I doubt that
he is always conscious of the element of humor and I suspect that
if he realized that his observations were to evoke laughter he
would deliberately choose a less satirical or flippant method of
expression.

This temperamental characteristic was illustrated by an episode in
the Senate chamber not long ago. Penrose, entering, found his chair
occupied by a Democratic colleague who had overestimated his
capacity for the doubtful stuff that is purveyed in these days of
Volsteadism and whose condition was apparent to everyone on the
floor and in the galleries. Penrose is, perhaps, the most widely
known personage in the Senate. His towering figure makes him
conspicuous. But the most of the myriads of trippers who visit the
Capitol do not know one senator from another. They rely for
identification upon little charts showing the arrangements of the
seats on the floor each one of which is labeled with a senator's
name.

Now Penrose, might or might not have suspected that these trippers
following their charts, would pick out the snoring recumbent figure
as his own. He decided to remove all possibility of error and
addressing the chair with usual solemnity said, "Mr. President, I
desire the chair to record the fact that the seat of the senior
Senator from Pennsylvania has not been occupied by himself at the
present session. It is occupied by another." The galleries roared;
the somnolent Senator shambled over to his own side of the aisle
and Senator Penrose was given credit, by the unwise, for humor
quite unintended.

Life with Mr. Penrose is a much more serious business than most
people imagine. And it became even more serious a little while ago
when illness laid hold of him and his brother, a physician,
prescribed dietary rules restricting the freedom that he had once
exercised without restraint. There was something lion-like in the
gaunt figure in the rolling chair which he occupied when he
returned to the Senate from his sick bed. It was amazing that he
recovered; it was even more amazing that he should have submitted
to the rigorous rules laid down by his doctor, even if that doctor
was his own brother. The bated breath with which Pennsylvania
politicians awaited bulletins from his bedside was a striking
acknowledgment of the power he wields.

The evolution of Boies Penrose is an amusing commentary upon
American politics in more ways than one. Three years after he was
graduated from Harvard College he was elected to the Pennsylvania
State Legislature on a reform ticket. His election was made the
occasion for great rejoicing on the part of the good people of
Philadelphia. And well might they rejoice. They had at last driven
a wedge into the sinister political machine that had brought the
city of brotherly love into disrepute as a boss-ridden municipality.

Their young leader had wealth, which has its advantages, and social
position, which to a Philadelphian is as dear as life itself.
Moreover he had ability and all that makes for success. His fame as
a reform leader spread throughout the land and across the seas.
James Bryce, in his first edition of his American Commonwealth
cited him as an example of the sterling type of young Americans who
were arousing themselves at that time to rescue the municipal and
state governments from the grip of the vicious boss system.

In the subsequent editions of the American Commonwealth you will
find no reference to Mr. Penrose. Something had happened to him and
to the reform movement. Whether he was struck by a bolt from the
heavens or a bolt from Matthew Stanley Quay is immaterial. The fact
is that after a few years' residence in Harrisburg, the seat of the
government of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania, he counseled with
himself and solemnly decided that Providence had never selected him
to be the apostle of the political millenium.

Most men are born radicals and die conservatives. The development
is gradual and represents the result of years of experience. But
Penrose repented while there was time to make amends for his error.
He sought a very short cut. He went directly from the legislature
to the Republican organization of Philadelphia and stood as its
candidate for mayor. But his late friends, the reformers, happened
to be in the ascendency that year and he was defeated.

The story told of him at that time, whether true or not, that he
announced his willingness to take as his bride any estimable young
lady the organization might select, since the fact that he was a
bachelor was given by his henchmen as the reason of his defeat, is
typical of him. The "organization," the Republican Party,
constitutes his political creed and philosophy. He has devoted his
life to it. The "party" is his life, his religion, his family, his
hobby. Down in his soul he believes that the destiny of the
American people is so inextricably interwoven with its fortunes
that its destruction would be nothing less than national hari kari.

He does not believe that the Republican Party is perfect, but he
believes that it is as perfect as any political organization is
ever likely to be. He has no illusions concerning the men it
chooses for high places. He is never disturbed by stories of
political corruption or graft unless they are serious enough to
jeopardize forthcoming elections. Otherwise they are merely
unpleasant incidents that arise in the life of every business
organization.

If he were supreme he would not tolerate political corruption, any
more than he would tolerate murder; but since he is not supreme and
cannot dictate to all men, he accepts their efforts in the interest
of the organization even though their hands may be slightly soiled.
Like the wise general who raises a volunteer army he is not
meticulous in the choice of his privates, providing they are
capable of performing the tasks assigned to them. No seeker after
souls ever believed the end justifies the means more sincerely than
Boies Penrose believes his vote-seekers are justified in stretching
the code a bit for the benefit of the organization--particularly if
it is actually endangered.

Just as he believes in the Republican Party he believes in a high
tariff--the higher the better. Prosperity without protection is
inconceivable. During a Washington career of more than twenty years
he has been constantly caricatured as the tool of the interests--the
man upon whom they could rely to raise the tariff wall an inch
or two for their personal benefit.

He has raised it whenever he has had the opportunity to do so, but
not for the reason assigned. He is no man's tool. The suggestion
that Boies Penrose personally has ever profited financially through
politics is too absurd to be entertained for a moment. Of course,
he expects the interests, whom the party serves with tariff
protection, to save the party at the polls and they usually do so.
But that in the opinion of the senior Senator from Pennsylvania is
the essence of sound politics.

Unbelievable as it may sound in these days, Senator Penrose
actually thinks that most men are dependent for their daily bread
upon the success of a very small group of financiers, magnates, or
whatever you care to call the great leaders of the world of
business.

Years of experience has convinced him that the human race is
composed, for the most part, of hopelessly improvident people and
that a great part of the globe would be depopulated through
starvation and disease if it were not for the foresight, ability,
and thrift of the handful of leaders whom Divine Providence has
provided. He looks upon himself as one of the instruments of
Providence and he sincerely believes that the policies which he has
supported since his early experience with the reformers are
responsible for the happiness and prosperity of many a family. He
would consider it the height of absurdity for any of these poor,
worthy, but ignorant people to expect the comforts which they have
enjoyed without the protection afforded their employers by the
Republican Party.

By this somewhat unpopular method of reasoning, he believes that he
of all the men in public life has made the most persistent and
consistent fight for the masses. It is undoubtedly this calm faith
and sincere belief in his own rectitude which has enabled him to
hold the tremendous power he has exerted since Nelson Aldrich
retired from the Senate.

I have presented his political philosophy in some detail because he
is probably the most misjudged man in Washington. People are
inclined to look upon him as a glorified boss who deals in politics
as other men deal in commodities;--it is hardly a fair estimate of
the man. He considers himself the chosen leader of the most
intelligent people of a great commonwealth who is rendering
tremendous service to the country. I do not agree with that
estimate either. But taken all and all it seems to me that the
country owes him a debt of gratitude for having been sincere when
another course would have been more profitable. It is a relief to
find one at least who has never been called a hypocrite.

Senator Penrose does not hate Democrats; he does not consider them
important enough for that; he merely despises them. They are to his
mind an inferior class of human beings who should not be intrusted
with the affairs of the nation. Reformers irritate him. They are
either self-seeking hypocrites or deluded. In neither case has he
the time nor inclination to listen to their suggestions or heed
their maledictions.

He had an abiding hatred for Theodore Roosevelt when he was in the
White House, but he supported him loyally so long as he was the
leader of the Party. When Colonel Roosevelt bolted the hatred ran
the last gamut. He was classed as an arch criminal for having
smashed the organization.

Penrose is an enigma to those who know him only casually,
especially those who view life through the rose glasses of culture.
They marvel at the extent to which he has been able to dictate to
men who appear to be his superiors. I have heard him called a cave
man by some, by others a boor; but he is neither. He observes the
amenities of life so far as they are necessary, but only so far. He
is impatient of mediocrity; he will not tolerate stupidity and he
loathes hypocrisy. I would not say that he has bad manners; he has
none at all.

Throughout the recent eclipse of the Republican Party, which began
with the Roosevelt default, no member remained more steadfast than
the Pennsylvania leader. He accepted the inevitable and bided his
time like the politicians of the old school of which he is one of
the few conspicuous surviving examples. Expediency does not enter
into his make-up; he made no effort to keep himself in the
limelight, for he is by the Party, of the Party, and for the Party.

Now that the Party is back again, in power, more than one of his
colleagues suspect that Penrose, if his health permits, will emerge
from the background as the real leader of the Senate majority. His
political past is against him. But he knows men and his tutelage
under Aldrich has not been forgotten.




WILLIAM E. BORAH


Taken at its best, life, to William E. Borah, is little more than a
troublesome pilgrimage to the grave.

This does not mean that he is a misanthrope or a seer of distorted
vision. On the contrary his sympathies are broad and he has an
elusive charm, more apparent in the early years of his political
career than now. But, for some reason, probably temperamental, he
is in the habit of dwelling upon the dangers that beset the
republic--dangers which are sometimes very real. Nevertheless an
hour in his presence is more often than not depressing; it leaves
one with a sense of impending calamity. There are few bright spots
on his horizon.

It is not altogether to his discredit that his more venerable
colleagues look upon him as a young man--he is fifty-six; nor does
it imply merely arrested political development. For all of his
pessimism he maintains a certain freshness, if belligerency, of
spirit which is puzzling not only to those who have long since
accustomed themselves to the party yoke but to those whom
experience has taught the art of compromise. For Borah hates the
discipline that organization entails, in spite of his respect for
organization, and he dislikes compromise however often he is driven
to it.

This may be accounted for by the fact that he was not obliged to
fight his way laboriously upward on the lower rungs of politics--he
landed in the Senate from an Idaho law office in one pyrotechnical
leap when he was only forty two--and by the fact that in his make-up
he is singularly unpolitical. Disassociating him from his
senatorial environment it is much easier to imagine him as a
devotee of academic culture, a university professor, a moral
crusader, even a poet, than as a politician.

There is in his make-up an underlying Celtic strain which may
account for his moodiness, his emotionalism, and his impulsiveness.
These characteristics are constantly cropping up. For many years he
has buried himself in a somber suite of rooms in the Senate office
building as far away from his colleagues as he could get. There he
lives in an atmosphere of academic quiet. There he reads and
studies incessantly, far from the maddening crowd of politics. This
detachment has probably bred a suspicion that marks his actions. He
has no intimates, no associates who call him "Bill." He is not a
social being. He is rarely seen where men and women congregate. He
is virtually unknown in that strange bedlam composed largely of
social climbers and official poseurs called Washington society. He
neither smokes, drinks, nor plays. What relaxation he gets is on
the back of a western nag in Rock Creek Park where he may be seen
any morning cantering along--alone. He does not ride for pleasure;
his physician ordered it and it is a very businesslike matter. If
he experiences any of the exhilaration that comes to men in the
saddle he contrives to conceal it.

On the floor of the Senate he is quite a different person. There
his unmistakable genius for oratory is given full sweep and when he
speaks his colleagues usually listen, not because they agree with
what he says but because they are charmed by the easy and melodious
flow of his words. There is a hint of Ingersoll in his speeches
which are full of alliteration and rhythmic phrases. He has a sense
of form sadly lacking in his stammering and inarticulate
colleagues, for oratory in the Senate is probably at its lowest
ebb. But, strangely enough, it is only occasionally that he makes a
lasting impression. His eloquence ripples like water and leaves
scarcely more trace.

Mr. Borah's entire political career has been characterized by an
impulsiveness which has given him a halo of popularity but has
never enabled him to garner the fruits of plodding labor. At one
time or another this has led him to break with nearly every faction
with which he has been identified. The "regular" Republicans have
felt that they never could rely upon him; the "progressive" element
has found him inconstant and at intervals he has threatened to pull
down the party house of the Republicans and to bring destruction to
one or other of the leaders whom he dislikes.

This was illustrated by an observation he made to me one spring
morning in 1919 when the Republican attitude toward the League of
Nations was still in the formative process. Borah was "convinced"
that Elihu Root and Will H. Hays were conspiring to induce the
Republicans to accept the League and he said, quite seriously, that
he had about come to the conclusion that it would be necessary to
wreck the Republican Party to save the country. Root, he told me,
was pro-British to the last degree and Hays, he said, was cajoled
by the great international bankers who trembled at the delay of
peace.

"If such men are to lead the Republican Party," he declared, "the
sooner it is destroyed the better." Of course, he did not take the
stump. He has failed so often to carry out his threats of rebellion
that they no longer inspire the fear they once did. Although he has
repeatedly turned against the organization he has managed to escape
being an outlaw. This singular trait of political conservatism came
conspicuously into play in 1912 when Roosevelt turned upon the
machine. All through the stormy days of that stormy Chicago
convention Senator Borah could be found at the side of that one
leader for whom he had a consistent regard. He was with him up to
the very last moment before the die was cast. He was almost
successful at the eleventh hour in inducing Mr. Roosevelt to
abandon his mad project. They were closeted together on the evening
of the clamorous meeting of the progressives in a hotel across the
street.

"We have come to the parting of the ways, Colonel," Borah said to
his chief. "This far I have gone with you. I can go no further." He
urged Roosevelt not to take the step which would mean the
disruption of the party and defeat. Roosevelt wavered. But before
he could reach the decision Borah sought a committee from the
outlaw meeting, burst into the room, and enthusiastically announced
that the stage was set for the demonstration that was to mark a new
political era.

Roosevelt, hat in hand, turned to Borah and said, "You see, I can't
desert my friends now." The ex-President went his way and Borah
came back to the old Republican fold.

From that time to this he has followed his own way which,
fortunately for the Republican Party, has been within organization
limits, but his relations with his fellows are neither intimate nor
serene. Some of the Republicans, who can be forgiven for not
understanding a man who respects neither party decrees nor
traditions, feel that Borah is so American that he possesses one of
the characteristics of the aboriginal Indian--in other words, that
he is cunning, that he will not play the game according to
organization rules. He has a habit of making too many mental
reservations. I am not quite sure that these allegations could be
supported before an impartial tribunal. I am rather inclined to the
belief that to maintain his position in the Senate Borah has had to
become a shrewd trader.

Fortunately for himself he is too much of a personage to be ignored
or suppressed, and manages to be a power in a party which has no
love for him.

He is virtually a party to himself. He cannot be controlled by the
ordinary political methods. His constituency is small and evidently
devoted to him and his state is remote; he is not compelled to do
the irksome political chores that cost Senators their political
independence. However doubtful he might be as a positive asset his
dexterity and power of expression are such that he would be very
dangerous as a liability. A report that Borah is on the rampage
affects Republican leaders very much as a run on a bank affects
financial leaders. They are not quite sure when either is going to
stop. Borah knows that most of the men with whom he is dealing are
clay and estimates with uncanny accuracy the degree to which he can
compel them to meet his demands.

This method has not always been successful. It was singularly
unsuccessful in the case of Senator Penrose. Borah is the
antithesis of Penrose, whom he dislikes intensely. Several years
ago he interpreted a remark made by the Senator from Pennsylvania
to another Senator as a thrust at his own political ethics, or lack
of them. It was a petty affair at most and Penrose never admitted
the accuracy of Borah's construction, but Borah has had nothing to
do with him since. When the present Congress was in process of
organization Borah announced that he would bolt the party caucus if
Penrose were slated for the chairmanship of the Finance Committee
to which he was entitled according to the rule of seniority. It was
a ticklish situation. The Republicans had a bare majority in the
Senate and if any of them deserted the organization it might mean
Democratic control. The leaders were disturbed and tried to mollify
the defiant Senator from Idaho with every means at hand even giving
assurance that the Senator from Pennsylvania would vote against the
Peace Treaty and the League of Nations which was supposed to
represent his vital interest at that time. He refused to compromise
and announced that Penrose must go. He was offered every committee
assignment that he or his friends wanted, and accepted them, but as
a matter of right.

Penrose was determined not to be displaced to satisfy what he
regarded as a colleague's whim. He sat silent in his office
receiving reports from hour to hour on Borah's state of mind. On
the day before the caucus Borah whispered that he intended to make
charges against the Pennsylvania leader that would provide a
sensation regardless of any effect they might have upon the party
or the country. The report was brought to Penrose. Instead of
trembling he sent word to Borah that he might say what he pleased
concerning his political career but that if he made any personal
charges he would regret them to his dying day. Borah appeared to
understand. He did not even attend the caucus and Penrose was duly
elected. Whether he was trading for committee assignments or
initiated the fight on political grounds is a question he alone can
answer, if anyone should have the temerity to ask it.

The same violence of his likes and dislikes is shown in his
attitude toward the British and his espousal of the Irish cause. At
the time of the visit of the British mission to Washington,
Vice-President Marshall designated Senator Borah a member of the
committee appointed to escort the British visitors into the
chamber. This Borah resented as a personal affront.

"Marshall has a distorted sense of humor," he said. "He knows I
dislike the British and that I despise the hypocrite Balfour." This
feeling was probably due in large measure to the Irish lineage
which Borah can trace in his ancestry as well as a temperamental
dislike of the British methods of maintaining control over subject
peoples.

It is difficult to label Senator Borah from a political standpoint.
His most striking characteristic is his inconsistency. For a long
time in the early days of the progressive movement he displayed a
marked inclination to be "irregular" and he is to be found voting
for most measures for which the "progressives" claimed sponsorship,
but when the more radical leaders began to advocate the recall of
the judiciary, Borah rose up and delivered an invective the memory
of which lingers in the Capitol. It was one of the few speeches he
has made that had a permanent effect and, strangely enough, it was
the kind of speech that might have well been delivered by Root or
Knox.

There has always been reason to believe that Borah was never more
enamored of La Follette in his prime, or of Hiram Johnson, than he
has been of the "reactionary" leaders with whom he has been
oftentimes in open conflict. When the latter deluded himself with
the hope of securing the Republican nomination, Borah was supposed
to be his chief supporter. When Johnson had eliminated Lowden and
Wood, and seemed to have eliminated Harding, Borah showed more
interest in the Knox candidacy. He wanted Knox at the head of the
ticket mainly because he knew that Knox was an implacable foe of
the League of Nations. On that fateful Friday night in Chicago when
the signs of the trend toward Harding had begun to appear, the
Senator from Idaho was anxious and prepared to place Knox's name in
nomination and begged Johnson to swing his delegates in that
direction.

Borah has succeeded very well in concealing his own ambitions,
possibly because he is more cautious than some of his impetuous
colleagues, or because the opportunity has never come for an
avowal. But among those who have followed his career there is a
very strong suspicion that his one great desire was to be the
successor of Roosevelt. This might be one reason for his antagonism
toward the politicians of the old regime, such as Penrose, who have
barred his way in that direction, and his fitful devotion to
progressivism championed by others. The failure to realize this
ambition might account in some measure for his later reticence and
his suspicion of politicians in general. He has shown a pronounced
distrust of them. The only exception has been the audacious
Ambassador to the Court of Saint James who in his REVIEW and in his
WEEKLY flattered the Senator from Idaho with an absence of
restraint that might have made a more trusting person skeptical.

The Senator from Idaho has too many years before him to justify
predictions concerning his career. Whatever faults he might have
they do not entirely obscure his virtues. It is possible that the
occasion might arise for him to serve as the spokesman of a popular
cause, which he would do with undoubted earnestness and eloquence,
in which event he might still become a dominating figure in
American politics.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mirrors of Washington, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MIRRORS OF WASHINGTON ***

***** This file should be named 3812.txt or 3812.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/1/3812/

Produced by Charles Franks, Robert Rowe and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team. HTML version by Al Haines.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
