The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Hundred and Sixty Books by Washington
Authors, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Hundred and Sixty Books by Washington Authors
       Some Other Writers Who are Contributors to Periodical
       Literature, Lines Worth Knowing by Heart

Author: Various

Release Date: November 25, 2011 [EBook #38132]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A HUNDRED AND SIXTY BOOKS BY ***




Produced by David E. Brown, Bryan Ness and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









  A Hundred and Sixty Books
  by Washington Authors

  Some other writers who are contributors to
  periodical literature

  Lines worth knowing by heart


  In paper thirty-five cents

  In cloth fifty cents

  Printed for the Compiler


  Copyright 1916 by
  SUSAN WHITCOMB HASSELL
  Everett, Wash.

  Printers
  Lowman & Hanford Co.
  Seattle




CONTENTS


                                       Page

  A Hundred and Sixty Books

    History                            6-10

    Travel and Description            10-13

    Scientific and Technical          14-16

    Fiction                           16-20

    Juvenile                          20-21

    Poetry                            22-23

    Unclassified Prose                23-26

  Other Writers                       27-28

  Lines Worth Knowing by Heart        29-36

  Index to Writers                    37-40




FOREWORD


Our state literature is strongest in local lines. First in early history
and narration of personal adventure. Fortunately our most important
histories are written by men who have long been residents. Meany, Lyman,
Durham, Snowden and Bagley have themselves been a part of the story and
have learned much at first-hand. Their pages have a flavor of personal
interest which some histories lack.

The adventures of today become the history of tomorrow. Even the most
commonplace narration of experience in a new country has its value.
Those original documents, whether diary, letters, memoir or
autobiography are the delight of one who has the true historian's
instinct.

The mythology of the tribes that eighty years ago held possession of
this territory is native romance, a literary asset which has been well
developed. Lyman has collected the myths and legends of the peoples on
the Columbia. Williams tells those that cluster about Mount Rainier.
Meany, Curtis and other historians have enlivened their text by these
romances and Miss Judson has made the field her own.

A second treasure supply of the state lies in its natural wonders and
beauties. What other state can boast of charms so varied? No other
country has scenery surpassing in grandeur our mountains and forests, or
more beautiful than our inland sea with its emerald shores and islands.

Williams is not alone in exploiting this rich treasure. A score of
others have found in it the source of mood for their songs or the frame
for a story or romance.

In philosophic essay and the higher forms of pure belles-lettres the
proportion of writings is not so large as in the old literary centers.
Thought and time are still requisitioned for the founding of
institutions. Few are the leisure-class people who pursue writing as an
art. Yet one who cares to investigate will discover that no other state
while so young has shown a richer output of literature, in content, in
scope or in character.

Perhaps this first published list will add to the number of those who do
care to investigate. Perhaps too it will result in a wider acquaintance
among those who are following the same undying art. Some day Washington
writers will band together for mutual benefit.




HISTORY

=1. Blazing the Way.= (1909.) Emily Inez Denny. Pioneer home-life
  pictured by the daughter of the early settler who wrote No. 21.


=2. Columbia River, Its History, Its Myths, Its Scenery, Its Commerce.=
  (1909.) William Dennison Lyman. Fully descriptive and reciting
  personal adventures. Professor Lyman, long-time teacher of history in
  Whitman College, has lived his whole life in the country he describes.
  The book contains many Indian legends. Eighty illustrations.


=3. The Conquerors.= (1907.) Rev. A. Atwood. Dedicated to Jason Lee and
  the pioneer missionaries who laid the foundations of American
  institutions in old Oregon. Much about Lee whose missionary labors
  antedated Marcus Whitman's by two years. To some extent it touches the
  so-called Whitman controversy, a discussion due in part to the fact
  that the admirers of Whitman claimed too much for a patriot whose
  services needed no exaggeration. It has the endorsement of the
  Washington State Historical Society.

=4. Glimpses in Pioneer Life on Puget Sound.= (1903.) Same author. A
  history of the Methodist Episcopal Church on the Pacific Coast.


=5. David S. Maynard and Catherine T. Maynard.= (1906.) T. W. Prosch.
  Biography of two of the immigrants of 1850. Mrs. Maynard is honored in
  Seattle as the founder of a free reading room which grew into the
  Young Men's Christian Association of the city.


=6. Gettysburg.= (1911.) Captain R. K. Beecham. An account of the great
  battle. Acknowledged to be most complete and accurate as to facts and it
  is written with the fire of a patriot and a poet. The veteran returns to
  visit the battle-field where as a youth half a century before he
  fought for the flag. Through his eyes and memories the reader sees
  events.


=7. History of Puget Sound Country.= (1903.) Colonel William Farland
  Prosser. The late president of the State Historical Society compiled
  this work in two large volumes, a painstaking and valuable reference
  work.


=8. History of Seattle.= (1916.) Clarence B. Bagley. Three large
  volumes. Very comprehensive. The third volume is wholly biographical.

=9. In the Beginning.= (1905.) Same author. A sketch of events in
  Western Washington while it was still a part of old Oregon. Published
  separately, also in the 1909 edition of Meeker's "Pioneer
  Reminiscences."


=10. History of the State of Washington.= (1909.) Edmond S. Meany. The
  most accurate and complete history of the state. In some measure it
  covers the whole Pacific slope. It is intended for school use but will
  interest any one who likes to study or read history. The story is
  divided into discovery, exploration, occupation, territorial days and
  statehood, each treated clearly and fully. The author, professor of
  history in the University of Washington, is a hero-worshipper and
  extolls the daring of the adventurer and the patience and courage of
  the pioneer.

=11. Vancouver's Discovery of Puget Sound.= (1907.) Same author. Largely
  the journal of the discoverer with extensive notes, many portraits and
  biographies of the men whose names were given to geographic features
  of the Northwest. A most important piece of historic research. A
  fitting supplement to this work is

=12. A New Vancouver Journal on the Discovery of Puget Sound, by a
  Member of the Chatham's Crew.= (1915.) Edited by Professor Meany.

=13. United States History for Schools.= (1912.) Shows the development
  of America as part of world history. This has met with general
  approval as a text-book.


=14. History of Washington, The Rise and Progress of an American State.=
  (1909-1911.) Clinton A. Snowden. Four elegant volumes in half-leather
  and rich in illustrations. Two later volumes issued as supplements are
  wholly biographical.


=15. The Iron Way.= (1907.) Sarah Pratt Carr. The story of the building
  of the Central Pacific, the first transcontinental railway.

=16. The Cost of Empire.= Same author. The record of the Whitman
  massacre. It was made the basis of the opera "Narcissa" of which Mrs
  Carr's daughter, Mary Carr Moore, wrote the music.


=17. Life of Isaac Ingalls Stevens.= (1900.) Hazard Stevens. The two
  volumes contain much information about the early Indian wars, councils
  and treaties. They show the simplicity of official form during the
  life of the first Governor of the Territory.


=18. Marcus Whitman, Pathfinder and Patriot.= (1909.) Rev. Myron Eells.
  The author is son of Rev. Cushing Eells, founder of Whitman College
  and personal friend and co-worker with Whitman.

=19. Fathers Eells, or the Results of 55 Years of Missionary Labor in
  Washington and Oregon=, by the same author, is a biography of the
  father.


=20. Memoirs of Orange Jacobs.= (1908.) Written by himself after a life
  of eighty years, fifty-six of them spent in Oregon and Washington. It
  contains a good account of the Seattle fire of 1889.


=21. Pioneer Days on Puget Sound.= (1888 and 1908.) Arthur A. Denny. An
  interesting autobiography and valuable for its story of the founding
  of Seattle.


=22. Pioneer Reminiscences of Puget Sound, The Tragedy of Leschi.
  (1905.) Ezra Meeker. An account of the coming of the first whites,
  their encounters with the red race, the first treaties with the
  Indians, the war that followed, and the cruise of the author on
  Puget Sound fifty years ago. One edition contains Bagley's In the
  Beginning.

=23. The Ox Team; or The Old Oregon Trail.= (1906.) The story of a slow
  and eventful journey by ox team from the Middle West to this territory
  more than sixty years ago. Mr. Meeker and his oxen have been a
  conspicuous feature of several western expositions and are a
  picturesque relic of the fast-fading pioneer life. Today, Ezra Meeker,
  eighty-four years old, is crossing the continent in a
  "schoonermobile," a motor car built on the lines of the old-time
  prairie schooner. It contains a bed, a stove and a hunting outfit. He
  is retracing the journey of the ox cart.


=24. Russian Expansion on the Pacific, 1641-1850, An Account of the
  Expeditions Made by the Russians Along the Pacific.= Frank Alfred
  Golder. In January 1914 the author was sent to St. Petersburg to
  catalogue the materials in the Russian archives relating to America.
  The work was done for the Carnegie Institute, department of historical
  research. Professor Golder is one of the few American historians who
  are familiar with the Russian language and his selection was
  complimentary to him and to the State College.


=25. The Siwash, Their Life, Legends and Tales.= (1895.) J. A. Costello,
  an old resident of Puget Sound. The material was gathered chiefly from
  the Indians themselves. This book contains a good description of Chief
  Seattle. Out of print.


=26. Spokane and The Inland Empire.= (1912.) Mr. N. W. Durham. In three
  large volumes.


=27. Syllabus of Continental European History from Fall of Rome to
  1870.= (1904.) Oliver Huntington Richardson.


=28. Tillicum Tales of Thurston County.= (1914.) Mrs. George
  Blankenship. Full of historical material of more than local value and
  interest.


=29. Washington and Its Swedish Population.= (1905.) Ernst Teofil
  Skarsteadt. The author has been a resident of the state fourteen
  years. As newspaper man and contributor to Eastern journals he has
  well covered the life of his fellow-countrymen in this state. He has
  written on subjects sociological, historical, agricultural and
  biographical.

=30. Our Heroes of the Pen.= Mr. Skarsteadt considers this his most
  valuable work.


TRAVEL AND DESCRIPTION

Books on Alaska would fill a long shelf. Three are particularly
entertaining and rich in description.

=31. Alaska, an Empire in the Making.= (1913.) John Jasper Underwood.
  Written after fourteen years continuous residence in Alaska and the
  Yukon Territory. The writer, a newspaper man, sees things from the
  impersonal viewpoint of the journalist with a keen appetite for news.
  For a time he ran the "farthest north" newspaper, which sold for
  "ivory, gold-dust and skins." These words are characteristic of his
  wide-sweeping vision: "Here is a land of 25,000 miles of coastline and
  with 6,000 miles of navigable waterways." The United States bureau of
  education has put this on the list as a standard work on Alaska.


=32. Alaska, Its Meaning to the World, Its Resources, Its
  Opportunities.= (1914.) Charles R. Tuttle. A good deal of space is
  given to the history of the Government railway legislation. It lauds
  the energy of the Seattle Chamber of Commerce which conducted a
  successful lobby in Washington city during the anxious months while
  the Alaska railway bill hung fire in Congress.


=33. Alaska, the Great Country.= (1908.) Ella Higginson. This third book
  is by a lady whom many love to call "our foremost story-teller and
  sweetest singer." It is most personal, crowded with real adventures,
  some of them humorous, which the reader shares vividly. Mrs. Higginson
  says, "No one writer has ever described Alaska. No one writer can ever
  describe it, but each must do his share according to the spell the
  country casts upon him." Her description is bright and fascinating.
  She is now revising it and bringing it up to date for a new edition.

=34. American Fur Trade of the Far West.= (1902.) Hiram Martin
  Chittenden.

=35. Yellowstone National Park, Historical and Descriptive.= Same
  author.

  No. 34 is a history of the pioneer trading posts and early fur
  companies of the Missouri River and Rocky Mountains and of overland
  commerce.

  No. 35 is the author's best known work. A fifth edition was published
  in 1905. No man has had a better opportunity to know the Yellowstone
  than Gen. Chittenden who was in charge of the government work there
  and no writer more evenly combines the scientific mind of the
  practical engineer with the charm of a poetic and artistic observer.
  To read this is next best to seeing the park.


=36. The City That Made Itself; A Literary and Pictorial Record of the
  Building of Seattle.= (1914.) Welford Beaton. Printed in a choice
  leatherbound silk-lined finely illustrated edition of three hundred
  copies which readily found their way to the libraries of the
  well-to-do. The book tells of the hills that have been laid low, of
  the valleys that have been filled, the tide flats that have been
  redeemed, of the street car lines and electric development. One
  chapter on the "Ladies Library Association" shows how women laid the
  foundation of the public library. Another chapter describes the
  architecture of the metropolis "from log cabin to sky scraper."


=37. Fifteen Thousand Miles by Stage.= (1911.) Carrie Adell Strahorn. A
  woman's unique experience during thirty years of pathfinding and
  pioneering from the Missouri River to the Pacific and from Alaska to
  Mexico. An unusually interesting narration of the days when travel was
  beset with different if not more dangers than today. The book is put
  out attractively with 350 illustrations.


=38. Guardians of the Columbia.= (1912.) John H. Williams.

=39. The Mountain That Was God.= (1910.) Same author.

=40. Yosemite and the High Sierras.= (1914.) Same author. They are books
  of rare value, occupying a field by themselves. They are full of
  fascinating word pictures of mountain scenes. The first is of Mt.
  Hood, Mt. Adams and Mt. St. Helens. The city librarian of a
  Massachusetts city wrote to Mr. Williams "We have a radiopticon in our
  library. I shall mount the illustrations from your book and use the
  text for short talks on the mountains." No. 39 pictures Rainier which
  is called "Rainier-Tacoma." John Muir wrote "The glorious mountain is
  indebted to you for your magnificent book and so is every
  mountaineer." This contains the "flora of the mountain slopes" by
  J. B. Flett. The third book is dedicated to the Sierra Club with an
  introductory poem by Robert Service.


=41. The North American Indian.= (1908-1915.) Edward S. Curtis. It is
  doubtful if any book which has to do with our state has attracted to
  it so much notice as these ten volumes of Indian lore illustrated by
  superb photographs taken by the author. He spent years in getting
  first hand acquaintance with some of the tribes and in securing the
  pictures which have made him famous. Theodore Roosevelt wrote the
  preface and J. Pierpont Morgan subscribed $3,000 as an advance
  guarantee.


=42. Rambles in Colonial Byways.= (1900.) Rufus Rockwell Wilson.


=43. Romance of Feudal Chateaux.= (1900.) Elizabeth Williams Champney.
  This is one of a delightful series written in part before the author
  was a resident of the state. The others are

=44. Romance of French Abbeys.= (1905.)

=45. Romance of Italian Villas.= (1906.)

=46. Romance of Renaissance Chateaux.= (1907.)

=47. Romance of Bourbon Chateaux.= (1907.)

=48. Romance of Roman Villas.= (1908.)

=49. Romance of Imperial Rome.= (1910.) Mrs. Champney also wrote Great
  Grandmothers' Girls in New France and Three Vassar Girls.

=50. Romance of Old Belgium, from Caesar to Kaiser.= (1915.) Elizabeth
  Williams Champney and Frere Champney. A choice story full of the
  romance of truth. The illustrations are from Rubens' paintings,
  photographs and original pen and ink drawings.


=51. Seven Weeks in Hawaii.= (1913.) Minnie Leola Crawford.

=52. Seven Weeks in the Orient.= (1914.) Same author. Vacation letters,
  written by a business girl who was enjoying her trip to the full, were
  sent to the mother at home. They were passed on to be read by friends
  who saw that there was more than a personal interest in them and
  insisted on their publication. A Chicago publisher readily accepted
  them. Another vacation trip led to the second volume. The style is
  sprightly and original and photographs of the author's own taking
  illustrate both books.


=53. Seven Years on the Pacific Slope.= (1914.) Mrs. Hugh Fraser and
  Hugh C. Fraser. The writers lived in Okanogan County in a little
  village on the Methow River near its junction with the Columbia. They
  tell of ordinary events but give a clear picture of the development of
  that region from 1905 to 1912.

=54. Reminiscences of a Diplomatist's Wife.= (1912.) Either alone or in
  collaboration Mrs. Fraser has published ten volumes.


SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL

=55. Birds of Washington.= William Leon Dawson and John Hooper Bowles.
  Two elegant volumes describing 372 species. There are three hundred
  original halftone illustrations. An analytical key for identification,
  by Lynds Jones.


=56. Digest of the Decisions of the Supreme Court of Washington.= Arthur
  Remington. Two volumes and supplement.

=57. Remington and Ballinger's Annotated Codes and Statutes of
  Washington.= Two volumes and supplement. (1913.)

=58. Remington's 1915 Codes and Statutes of Washington.= (1916.) Two
  volumes.


=59. Elementary Flora of the Northwest.= (1914.) Theodore Christian Frye
  and George B. Rigg.


=60. Encyclopaedia of Practical Horticulture.= (1915.) Granville Lowther
  and William Worthington. Three large volumes.


=61. English Literature from Widsith to the Death of Chaucer. A Source
  Book.= (1916.) Allen Rogers Benham. It pictures the literary world in
  which Englishmen lived from early times to the year 1400 and
  represents ten years' work by the author.


=62. Essentials of Character.= (1910.) Edward O. Sisson. A practical
  study of education in moral character.


=63. Flora of the State of Washington.= (1906.) Charles V. Piper.
  Published by the Smithsonian Institution. Based on study of plants of
  the state during a period of twenty years. The most complete and
  accurate outline of the flora of the state.


=64. Flora of the Northwest Coast.= (1915.) Charles V. Piper and Rolla
  Kent Beattie.


=65. Forests and Reservoirs in Relation to Stream-flow.= Hiram M.
  Chittenden.

=66. Law, Legislative and Municipal Reference Libraries.= John B.
  Kaiser. An elaboration of lectures delivered before library classes in
  the University of Illinois. Valuable to the student of library work
  and to library investigators.


=67. Memorabilia Mathematica.= (1914.) Robert Edouard Moritz. It
  contains no mathematics at all but a remarkable collection of facts
  and sayings and incidents about mathematics and mathematicians. Of its
  2160 selections a surprising number are interesting and many are even
  humorous.


=68. Multiple Money Standard.= (1896.) J. Allen Smith.

=69. Spirit of the American Government.= (1907.) Same author.


=70. Outlines of General Chemistry.= (1915.) Horace G. Byers.


=71. Parliamentary Procedure.= (1898.) Adele M. Fielde.

=72. Political Primer for New York City and State.= (1900.) Same author.
  The first book, which had been used by many classes in parliamentary
  law, was reprinted in Seattle in 1914. Chinese Fairy Stories has also
  been reprinted. Miss Fielde has issued more than 200,000 pieces of
  literature intended for the education of Washington women. The most of
  them have been distributed without cost. Her chosen subjects were
  social hygiene, temperance, and direct legislation. In earlier years
  she wrote on the life of the ant.


=73. Practical treatise on Sub-Aqueous Foundations.= (1914.) Charles
  Evan Fowler.


=74. Principles of Education.= (1911.) Frederick Elmer Bolton.


=75. Refutation of the Darwinian Theory of the Origin of Mankind.= John
  C. Stallcup.


=76. Regulation.= (1913.) W. G. Barnard. A series of essays on political
  economy. An optimistic view of the difficulties of the economic
  situation, encouraging the student to believe that "there is a remedy
  for every evil." There are chapters on land, wages, interest, profits
  and money.


FICTION

=77. Black Bear.= (1910.) William H. Wright.

=78. Grizzly Bear.= (1909.) Same author.


=79. The Bridge of the Gods.= Frederick Balch. The writer grew up in
  Klickitat county. When a boy he resolved to write about the Indians of
  the Columbia and began collecting material by haunting their camps for
  days at a time. A lady who has lived in the state sixty-four years
  says "It is the only story that tells accurately of the early life of
  those Indians."


=80. Chaperoning Adrienne; Through the Yellowstone.= (1907.) Alice
  Harriman. This lady has distinguished herself in several ways, first
  as poetess and contributor to magazines, then as book publisher. Other
  books she wrote are Stories of Montana, Men Two Counties, besides
  poems and one juvenile work. Her house has a number of first class
  books to its credit. She brought out Lafcadio Hearne's Temptations of
  St. Anthony. She took special pride in bringing out books on western
  topics, as the narratives of the two Dennys and the story which become
  the opera Narcissa.


=81. Club Stories.= (1915.) Members of federated clubs. Written in
  competition for a prize offered by the State Federation of Women's
  Clubs. Of twenty-two stories submitted the twelve receiving highest
  rank were published. The scene of each is laid in Washington so they
  are full of local color and have a value apart from their literary
  merit. First prize was won by Mrs. Robert J. Fisher.


=82. Every Child.= (1915.) Gertrude Fulton Tooker. The author had
  previously published a few poems but when she was busier than ever
  before in her life, caring for two children, she found time to write
  this pleasing allegory. It deserves a welcome by all people who
  remember the visions and dreams of child-life.


=83. Forest Orchid and Other Stories.= (1902.) Ella Higginson.

=84. From the Land of the Snow Pearls.= (1897.) Same author.

=85. Mariella of Out-west.= (1902.) Same author. These are the stories
  of one who is widely known as our first story writer. Her name became
  known when she won, over a thousand competitors, a McClure prize for
  five hundred dollars. That story was "The Takin' in of old Miss Lane,"
  1894. Since then she has written scores of stories which have appeared
  in many different magazines. She has handled some types which are
  accepted in the far east as representative of the west and are not
  complimentary to the good taste and social polish of this longitude.
  But no author of the state has been ranked so high by the reviewers
  and critics. All her literary work has been done in this state. She
  shows constantly increasing strength.


=86. Ginsey Krieder.= Sarah Endicott Ober, nom de plume, Huldah Herrick.

=87. Little Tommy, or Ma'am Duffy's Lesson.= (1891.) Same author.

=88. Stacy's Room, or One Year's Building.= (1888.) Same author.


=89. Happy Valley.= Ann Shannon Monroe. Tells of homesteading
  experiences in the sage-brush country where the author lived the life
  of a settler. She first attracted attention by her story, Making a
  Business Woman, which appeared in Saturday Evening Post. It is said
  that she has a hand in the editorial columns of the Ladies Home
  Journal.


=90. Heart of the Red Firs.= (1908.) Ada Woodruff Anderson.

=91. Strain of White.= (1909.) Same author.

=92. Rim of the Desert.= (1914.) Same author. The last of these three
  has scenes laid in Alaska, on the Sound, at Scenic and in the
  Wenatchee valley. The development of the desert by irrigation into the
  fertile fields and the productive orchard, the tragedy of homesickness
  and starvation in Alaska, the fatal avalanche in the Cascades in the
  winter of 1909-1910 at Wellington, all are woven into the story. It
  includes also an attack on the Roosevelt-Pinchot conservation policy
  which reflects the sentiment somewhat widely held on the Pacific
  Coast. These features have helped to give the story a wide reading
  near home but it is a good seller the country over. Very speedily it
  reached a fourth edition and in its first year sales reached fifty
  thousand. Mrs. Anderson is the daughter of a Washington pioneer.
  Those who know her tell us that her home-making and family-raising are
  as successful as her story-writing. Some one said "She is good for
  several things and good at them all."


=93. The Hired Man.= Florence Roney Weir.

=94. Busher's Girl.= Same author.


=95. In Hampton Roads.= (1899.) Charles Eugene Banks. A novel of the
  Civil War.

=96. Child of the Sun.= (1900.) Same author.


=97. Man with a Scar.= Ella Holly and Jessie Hoskins; noms de plume,
  Warren and Alice Fones. A little story from the Christian Science
  viewpoint.

=98. Mary of Magdala.= (1909.) Harriette Gunn Roberson. A fascinating
  story of Rome and Alexandria and Jerusalem. Told with real dramatic
  power. Mrs. Roberson has for two years edited a page in one of the
  publications of the Baptist Church under the title, Heart Talks to
  Girls on Making the Most of Life. As speaker on the Chautauqua
  platform she has made many friends through the Northwest.


=99. Preliminaries and Other Stories.= (1912.) Cornelia Atwood Pratt
  Comer.

=100. The Daughter of a Stoic.= (1896.) Same author, before marriage.

=101. A Daughter of Martyrs.= (1906.) Same author. These are short story
  collections. Mrs. Corner has of late done a good deal of magazine work
  of a high order, her contributions usually appearing in the Atlantic.
  Once when asked for a biography she replied, "I really haven't any. I
  doubt if any one ever got along so comfortably with so little
  biography since the world began." Of the town where she used to live
  she said, "It was a kind of a town which drives one into the inner
  world in search of excitement." When a publisher asked for a
  photograph she wrote "I have no photographs of myself except some very
  old ones in storage and no time to get any new ones."


=102. A Rocky Mountain Sketch.= Lou Gertrude Diven. It introduces some
  characters drawn beautifully and clearly as by a master of fiction,
  yet there is evidence that compels the reader to feel that it is a
  true narrative. Many stories and essays by Mrs. Diven are in print.


=103. Tillicum Tales.= (1907.) Seattle Writers' Club. A collection of
  short stories contributed by members of the club.


=104. Unrest, a Story of the Struggle for Bread.= (1915.) W. R. Parr. A
  tale of industrial order, the subject treated from a socialistic
  standpoint.


=105. The Woman Who Went to Alaska.= Mrs. Mary L. Kellogg. She has
  written several books on Alaska under the nom de plume May Kellogg
  Sullivan. Her home is near Matanuska in Southwestern Alaska where she
  has spent seven seasons.


JUVENILE

=106. Billy Tomorrow.= (1909.) Sarah Pratt Carr.

=107. Billy Tomorrow in Camp.= (1910.) Same author.

=108. Billy Tomorrow Stands the Test.= Same author. The scene of each of
  the series is laid in Washington.


=109. Fingers That See.= (1914.) Nancy Buskett. Dedicated to her blind
  friends all over the world. It is the story of a blind girl. One
  learns to love the child who asks, "Can people who see, see 'round
  corners?" and says, "Lovin' isn't just feelin'. Its sometimes doin'
  things for people." The author was once musical director in a school
  for the blind. At another time she edited the Cynthia Grey department
  in four northwestern dailies.


=110. His Tribute.= (1909.) Florence Martin Eastland. Illustrates the
  value of good cheer.

=111. Matt of the Waterfront.= (1909.) Same author. A story of
  patriotism. Both have a Seattle setting.


=112. Montana the Land of Shining Mountains.= (1909.) Katherine Berry
  Judson. The early history of Montana, intended for school children.

=113. Early Days in Old Oregon.= (1916.) This, Miss Judson's latest
  book, contains much material from sources never before made
  accessible.


=114. Mrs. Spring Fragrance.= (1912.) Edith M. Eaton (Sui Sin Far, nom
  de plume). Chinese stories told in a charming way.


=115. Redcoat and Redskin.= Alice Harriman. A boy's story of the early
  days of the Royal Northwest mounted police of Canada.


=116. The Yankee Doodle Book.= (1914.) Gertrude D. Best. (Nom de plume
  Gertrude Optimus.) For very little people. When the author wanted to
  buy some Christmas books for her little friends she did not find what
  she liked. She was not pleased with the idea of filling children's
  heads with nonsense rhymes, good only to be forgotten, and the crazy
  pictures of children's books were not all of them to her liking. Like
  the president of a California University, she too made a book for
  little people. He did it by writing rhymes still more nonsensical and
  impossible. She did it by putting into jingle form some facts of
  United States history. The pictures are attractive and true to period.
  The rhymes are as catchy as Simple Simon and Jack Horner, but when a
  child has sung these over for a few weeks he knows for keeps some
  people and some happenings in American history.


POETRY

=117. Blue Grass Ballads.= William Lightfoot Visscher.

=118. Harp of the South.= Same author.


=119. In Childland Straying.= (1895.) Carrie Shaw Rice. Her most popular
  poems are Where the Rhododendrons Grow, and The Rare Old, Fair Old
  State of Washington, read before the State Press Association.


=120. Lyrics of Fir and Foam.= Alice Rollit Coe.


=121. Quiet Music.= (1892.) Charles Eugene Banks.

=122. Where Brooks Go Softly.= (1896.) Same author. Mr. Banks is more
  than "the poet." He is a polished writer of essays, and a
  discriminating critic of the drama and the stage.


=123. The Silesian Horseherd.= (1903.) A translation by Oscar Augustus
  Fechter from the German of Max Mueller.

=124. Songs from Puget Sea.= (1898.) Herbert Bashford. Written while Mr.
  Bashford was state librarian.


=125. Song of the City.= Anna Louise Strong.

=126. Storm Songs.= Same author. These volumes contain poems revealing a
  strong character and a finely trained mind. Miss Strong has written
  many other verses and many essays, among them On the Eve of Home Rule
  and Psychology and Prayer. She has been director of Child Welfare
  exhibits in American cities and in Dublin, Ireland. At present,
  1915-1916, she is exhibit expert connected with the Children's Bureau,
  U. S. Department of Labor.


=127. Songs o' the Sound.= Alice Harriman.

=128. Songs of the Olympics.= Same author.


=129. Told in the Garden.= (1902.) Alice Lockhart Hughes. Lyrics by Mrs.
  Hughes have been set to music by Mrs. H. H. A. Beach, Sans Souci and
  de Koven.


=130. Voice of April Land.= Ella Higginson.

=131. When the Birds Go North Again.= Same author. This contains the
  Four-Leaf Clover, her best known poem, which has been set to music by
  several composers and sung the country over.


UNCLASSIFIED PROSE

=132. Among Student Friends.= (1914.) Martha E. Libby.


=133. Alaskaland, A Curious Contradiction.= (1914.) Mrs. Isabel Ambler
  Gilman. Now a practicing lawyer in Alaska. A collection of prose and
  poetry some of which had appeared in Northwest Journal of Education,
  Westerner, Post-Intelligencer, Alaska-Yukon Magazine and Alaska
  papers.


=134. By Order of the Prophet, A Tale of Utah.= (1902.) Alfred Hylas
  Henry.

=135. The Danger in the Movement Toward Direct Legislation.= Same
  author.


=136. Clean and Strong.= Rev. E. A. King.


=137. Friendship.= Margaret Goodrich.

=138. Life's Common Way.= Same author. These are collections of well
  chosen sentiments. The first was re-published a few months ago.


=139. George Dana Boardman Pepper.= (1914.) A biography. Frederick
  Morgan Padelford. The life of a New England college president. It is
  one of many works which have earned for Professor Padelford a high
  place in the list of authors of pure literature.

=140. Samuel Osborn, Janitor, A Sketch.= (1913.) Same author.

=141. Early Sixteenth Century Lyrics.= (1907.) Same author.

=142. Greek Essays on the Study and Use of Poetry.= Same author.

=143. Translations from Scaliger's Poetics.= (1905.) Same author.

=144. Old English Musical Terms.= (1900.) Same author. The Atlantic
  Monthly published the Pedigree of Pegasus; Cornhill Magazine, Browning
  Out West and Did Browning Whistle or Sing?; Suwanee Review published
  The Simple Life as Shakespeare Viewed It; and American Journal of
  Sociology the Civic Control of Architecture.


=145. Hawaiian Idylls of Love and Death.= (1908.) Herbert H. Gowen.
  Eleven myths, beautifully told "In the hope that the sketches may show
  that touch of nature which makes the whole world kin, which
  obliterates the distinction between white and black, between East and
  West, between the man of yesterday and the man of today." Dr. Gowen is
  a thorough scholar and a literary artist. During twenty years'
  residence in the state he has written oriental history, theology,
  travel, biography, fiction, (Chinese), and poetry.

=146. Outline History of China.= (1913.) Covers the country from the
  earliest times to the recognition of the Republic.


=147. The Life of Adele M. Fielde=, in preparation by Helen Norton
  Stevens. As a permanent memorial to Miss Fielde, four thousand copies
  will be placed in public and college libraries, women's headquarters,
  and educational centers for girls and young women. The remaining one
  thousand copies will be sold by subscription.


=148. The Mark in Europe and America.= Dr. Enoch A. Bryan.


=149. Myths and Legends of the Pacific Northwest.= Catherine Berry
  Judson. The author is first authority in this romantic field, at least
  as a collector. This book treats especially of the legends of
  Washington and Oregon.

=150. Myths and Legends of Alaska.= (1911.) Same author.

=151. Myths and Legends of California and Old Southwest.= (1913.) Same
  author.

=152. Myths and Legends of the Great Plains.= (1914.) Same author.

=153. When Forests Are Ablaze.= Same author. Is dedicated to the
  Mountaineers, whose aim it is "to preserve the beauties of the Pacific
  Northwest and who are yearly appalled by the havoc of forest fires."


=154. The Old Home.= (1912.) Susan Whitcomb Hassell. Memories of home
  and village life in the early years of Iowa and of Grinnell College.


=155. Prophets of the Soul: the Pioneers of Life.= (1915.) Dr. Lester L.
  West. Sermons, like editorials and addresses and quantities of other
  good literature, are not included in these outlines even when
  published in book form. Here is an exception. One Christmas some
  friends of Dr. West brought out a volume of his sermons,--five of
  them--under this title. They are the work of a poetic mind, choice in
  literary finish and with a strong spiritual appeal.


=156. Story of a Mother-love.= (1913.) Annette Fitch-Brewer. This tells
  a remarkable experience. When Mr. and Mrs. Brewer were divorced the
  court gave the custody of their one child to the father. The mother
  fought, not the divorce, but for a share at least in the care of her
  boy. While he was spending a few days with her she fled. For five
  years she evaded the father's efforts to trace them while he spent
  large sums in detective work posting photographs of the two all over
  the country as "fugitives from justice." Finally the arm of the law
  reached her, living in a little village under an assumed name. The law
  took the boy from his mother and in her loneliness she wrote this
  book. It is the experience of a bright observer who wandered thousands
  of miles with all her senses on the alert.


=157. That Something.= (1914.) William Witherspoon Woodbridge. A
  progressive form of mental science put in a new and original style.
  The writer believes in himself. What is rarer, he is teaching other
  people to believe in themselves. The book has met with great results.
  The publisher reports sales to every state in the union but three and
  a larger sale than any book ever published west of Chicago.

=158. Skooting Skyward.= (1912.) An earlier book by the same writer met
  with moderate success, perhaps because of the atrocious Josh Billings
  spelling which should have been buried with its originator.


=159. War or Peace.= (1911.) Hiram Martin Chittenden. A philosophical
  treatment of the theme. A splendidly optimistic, logical and sane
  chapter is on "the future hope."


=160. Ye Towne Gossip.= (1914.) Kenneth C. Beaton. A sparkling book, the
  first publication in book form by "K. C. B." He made a wide
  acquaintance by fourteen years of newspaper work in the state. Then in
  the daily Post-Intelligencer developed this form which gave him fame.
  Many readers turned first each morning to his column on the third page
  to see what "K. C. B." had to say. That little morning story was
  always an appeal to the heart, sometimes as a fountain of tears,
  sometimes as a wellspring of joy. A friend writes of him "He is a
  temperamental freak in that he is an emotional Britisher and is not
  the least bit ashamed of his emotions."




OTHER WRITERS


Throughout the state are men and women whose pens have brought them
distinction though their names have not appeared on the back of a book.
Some are contributors, occasional or regular, to periodical literature.
Some are regular staff-writers. The three we name first are on the P.-I.

Tom Dillon wrote for Mother's Day an exquisite prayer which was widely
copied and was read into the Congressional Record of 1914. Full of fine
feeling.

Joseph Blethen has published many short stories and wrote the libretto
for "The Alaskan," an opera produced in New York City.

Jack Bechdolt has had boys' adventure stories in the Youth's Companion,
articles in Technical World, Popular Mechanics and Leslie's. From
general editor of a Sunday edition and author of feature stories in this
state he has recently been called to become feature editor of the Kansas
City Star.

Frederick Ritchie Bechdold has had articles in McClure, American
Magazine and Harpers Weekly.

Bernice E. Newell, a newspaper woman of many years experience, has
written exquisite bits of prose and verse. The Mountain, a poem first
published in Review of Reviews was later bound constituting the first
book published in Tacoma. She was regular contributor to the Northwest
Magazine and has been in Sunset, Woman's Home Companion and The
Kindergarten.

Bertha Knatvold Mallett has written for Colliers and Century.

I. Newton Greene has done feature and special stories for Harpers
Weekly, Success, Life, Technical World, Smart Set, and Pacific Motor
Boat. Human interest stories. Editorials.

R. P. Wood has appeared in Life and in the London Daily Mail.

Warren Judson Brier, who has done substantial literary work before
coming to the West, recently had published in the National Magazine The
Incarceration of Ambrose Broadhead, a strong appeal for needed reform.
He has now in preparation an American literature designed for class-room
use.

Adele M. Ballard, of Town Crier staff, has won an enviable reputation as
art and music critic and is often quoted by Chicago and New York
journals. Writes short stories, verses and special articles which have
appeared in The Lady, (London), Collier's and Reedy's Mirror. Her poems,
Pierrot and The Concert, are of high order.

Ruth Dunbar, formerly on Seattle Times, has contributions in Woman's
Home Companion and Vogue, and is now on the staff of Every Week, New
York City.

M. Pelton White has contributed to over fifty publications, Collier's
and various magazines, women's and children's periodicals, farm journals
and religious publications. An order for forty children's stories was
recently finished. Last year's sales numbered fifty-three.

Goldie Funk Robertson has been most successful in her articles on child
problems and home economics. She is now on the staff of the Mothers'
Magazine, and has made frequent contributions to Woman's Home Companion,
Life, Table Talk, Etude and Modern Priscilla, sometimes using the names
Jane Wakefield and Louise St. Clair.

Sara Byrne Goodwin, in competition with hundreds of story writers, took
a Ladies Home Journal prize.

Rosalind Larson won an American Magazine prize.

Elizabeth Young Wead has contributed articles to Lippincott's, The
Independent, and Country Gentleman. She has just ready for publication a
lineage book of the Van Patten family.

Anna Brabham Osborne won a prize in the Club Stories contest. In ten
years she has sold sixty-four short stories, seven serials, and nine
feature articles. They appear in the Youths' Companion, Overland
Magazine, New England Magazine, American Magazine, Christian Endeavor
World and the various church publications for young people.

Harry L. Dillaway, lover of birds and bears, has contributed to Shield's
Magazine, Recreation, and Pacific Sportsman. For a syndicate of papers
he edited "Bird-lore," creating an interest which culminated in a great
bird-house building contest by children. Pictures of this enterprise
were shown in the Ladies Home Journal of July, 1916.

Harry J. Miller's humorous verses easily find their way into many
newspapers of the state.




Lines worth knowing:


THE EVERGREEN PINE

  The rivers to the ocean flow,
      The sunsets burn and flee;
  The stars come to the darkling sky,
      The violets to the lea;
  But I stay in one lone sweet place
      And dream of the blue sea.
  The harebell blooms and is away,
      The salmon spawns and dies;
  The oriole nests and is on the wing,
      Calling her sweet good-bys....
  But I, when blossom and fruit are gone,
      Yearn, steadfast, to the skies.

  I am a prayer and a praise,
      A sermon and a song;
  My leaf-chords thrill at the wind's will
      To nocturnes deep and strong;
  Or the sea's far lyric melodies
      Echo and prolong.
  When April newly decks my form
      In silken green attire,
  I light my candles, tall and pale,
      With holy scarlet fire--
  And straight their incense mounts to God,
      Pure as a soul's desire.

  My branches poise upon the air,
      Like soft and level wings;
  My trembling leaves the wind awakes
      To a harp of emerald strings--
  Or thro' the violet silences
      A golden vesper sings.
  I am a symbol and a sign....
      Thro' blue or rose or gray;
  Thro' rain and dark; thro' storms of night;
      Thro' opaline lights of day--
  Slowly and patiently up to God
      I make my beautiful way.

                                          --Higginson.


ENSHRINED

  "My son" ....
  Her tone was soft with wistfulness--
  "Would now be twenty-one ...
  If he had lived."

  A silence fell ...
  And thought sped swiftly back
  Through years of fulness and content--
  Save for one gray thread of loneliness.
  For she had never parted company
  With him,
  Who left her arms bereft
  Of her man-child.

  "And so,"
  Again she spoke,
  "I watch the youths
  Who grow apace with him in years,
  And all their winning traits
  I seize upon, invest my son with them,
  And love all youth the more
  Because I too
  Hold in my heart
  A vivid memory."

  Again the silence fell ...
  I turned away--
  For I had glimpsed the sanctuary
  Of a mother's soul,
  In which a spirit was enshrined
  For all Eternity.

                                    --Adele M. Ballard


  Long hours we toiled up through the solemn wood,
    Beneath moss-banners stretched from tree to tree;
  At last upon a barren hill we stood,
    And, lo, above loomed Majesty.

                                    --Herbert Bashford


NIGHT ON THE MOUNTAIN

  Thou hear'st the star songs clear,
  When all is silent here,
    And I, asleep.
  Spheres, ringing music rare
    Through upper realms of air,
  'Round thy crowned head, may dare
    Their vigils keep.

                                   --Bernice E. Newell


  "Great Mountain, who once to a pagan race meant God,
    Make us to realize our shame,
  That, failing to sing praises to thy wondrous form,
    We stoop to quarrel o'er a name."

                                               --Anon.


  "The mountain-lover does not always gaze at Rainier and Olympus.
  He has learned that the foot-hills have a charm and an interest of
    their own. And they too point upward."

                                        --Club Stories


UP, MY HEART

  The dark, dark night is gone,
  The lark is on the wing,
  From black and barren fields he soars,
  Eternal hope to sing.

  And shall I be less brave,
  Than you sweet lyric thing?
  From deeps of failure and despair
  Up, up, my heart, and sing.
  The dark, dark year is gone;
  The red blood of the spring
  Will quicken nature's pulses soon,
  So up, my heart, and sing.

                                      --Ella Higginson


THAT SOMETHING

A man's success depends alone on That Something. That Something of his
soul. Abraham Lincoln found it and it warmed the cold floor on which he
lay and studied. It added light to the flickering glow of the wood fire,
that he might see to read.

It spurred him on and on and on.

That Something is an awful force.

It made of a puny Corsican the Ruler of the World.

It made of a thin-chested bookkeeper the money king of his age.

It made of Edison the great man of a great country.

It made Carnegie. It made Woodrow Wilson. It made Roosevelt.

It can make you.

And it is now in your soul. Awake it now. "That Something."

"No, it can't be done, it can't be done," murmured the professor. "I
have drunk deeply of the cup of life, and I am now drinking of the
dregs. The cup is filled but once, and when it's gone there's nothing
left but old age and poverty."

"You fool," cried Randolph, leaning forward and shaking the little man
roughly. "You almost had That Something within your power, and now you
sing it back to sleep with your silly song of pessimism. It's the false
philosophy, that such as you sing, which has kept men in the ruts of
their own digging for centuries past.

Wake man, wake That Something within your soul."

                                    --W. W. Woodbridge


THE GAME

  "I win," cried Death with a triumphant grin.
    "My body, yes, but not the soul within."

                                            --Harriman


MY MOTHER--A PRAYER

For the body you gave me, the bone and the sinew, the heart and the
brain that are yours, my mother, I thank you. I thank you for the light
in my eyes, the blood in my veins, for my speech, for my life, for my
being. All that I am is from you who bore me.

For your smile in the morning and your kiss at night, my mother, I thank
you. I thank you for the tears you shed over me, the songs that you sung
to me, the prayers you said for me, for your vigils and ministerings.
All that I am is by you who reared me.

For the faith you had in me, the hope you had for me, for your trust and
your pride, my mother, I thank you. I thank you for your praise and your
chiding, for the justice you bred into me and the honor you made mine.
All that I am you taught me.

For the times that I hurt you, the times I had no smile for you, the
caresses that I did not give you, my mother forgive me. For your lessons
I did not learn, for your wishes I did not heed, for the counsels I did
not obey, my mother, forgive me. Forgive me my pride in my youth and my
glory in my strength that forgot the holiness of your years and the
veneration of your weakness,--for my neglect, for my selfishness, for
all the great debts of your love that I have not paid, mother, sweet
mother, forgive me.

And may the peace and the joy that passeth all understanding be yours,
my mother, forever and ever. Amen.

                                          --Tom Dillon


It is not too much to believe that a permanent organization can be
formed which will take over to itself the whole business of the
regulation of international affairs.

                                          --Chittenden


  "Why should we ridicule, think very droll,
    Indian legends and carved totem pole,
  When we, in blindness are equally odd
    In misconception of life and of God?"

                                            --Harriman


A NEW LEAF

  He came to my desk with a quivering lip,--
      The lesson was done,
  "Dear Teacher, I want a new leaf," he said,
  "I have spoiled this one."
  I took the old leaf, stained and blotted,
  And gave him a new one, all unspotted,
      And into his sad eyes' smiled;
      "Do better now, my child."

  I went to the throne with a quivering soul,--
      The old year was done,
  "Dear Father, hast thou a new leaf for me?
      I have spoiled this one."
  He took the old leaf, stained and blotted,
  And gave me a new one all unspotted,
  And into my sad heart smiled,
      "Do better, now, my child."

                                    --Carrie Shaw Rice


THE TOILER'S FEAR

  There is one thing I fear.
  Not death, nor sharp disease,
  Nor loss of friends I hold most dear,
  Nor pain nor want,--not these.
  But the life of which men say,
  "The world has given him bread,
  And what gives he to the world as pay
  For the loaf on which he fed?"

                                  --Anna Louise Strong


The only territory the United States has ever acquired by discovery,
exploration and settlement; the only territory that cost us nothing in
cash by way of purchase, or by the use of military, or naval force.

                                             --Snowden


DON'T WORRY

  Don't hurry or worry;
    Be still and keep cool,
  For hurry and worry
    But make you Time's fool.

  Don't b'lieve what they tell you
    'Bout Time's flowing stream,
  'Tis Eternity now, dear,
    All else is a dream.

  Don't seek for a heaven
    In far distant skies.
  It lies all around you
    Just open your eyes.

                                  Henry Victor Morgan.


  Toot, toot, toot,
    Everything a-quiver
  Toot, toot, toot,
    Look up the North River.
  Toot, toot, toot,
    Something new afloat.
  Toot, toot, toot,
    The first steamboat.

                                   Yankee Doodle Book.


"If we believe that people are mostly dishonest, ungenerous, selfish,
gossiping, troublesome, we would better be looking at ourselves and
trying to find out what is the matter with us."

                                        --Lou G. Diven


"I venture to say that if there is one lesson written more plainly than
any other across the pages of human history it is this, that God cannot
be forgotten with impunity,--but for all that the popular tendency is to
leave God out of account. I plead for the bringing of God back into
touch with human life."

                                              --Keator


OPTIGRAMS


The good we can think of is always possible.

To dole out a few turkeys at Christmas is good; but to have a social
order where every man can buy his own turkey is vastly better.

Real sympathy is motional as well as emotional; energetic, as well as
pathetic, taking no pleasure in "tears, idle tears."

Some people seem to enjoy giving publicity to their disappointments.

Women understand men better than men understand women.

The only personalities who hold permanently the devotion and admiration
of humanity are the idealists.

You can preach the gospel through a handshake, a glance, a laugh, a
lifting word.

What we don't know, never frightens us; it is what we half-know which is
the fertile seed-plot of fear.

Golf is an artificial substitute for man's native need for work in the
open air.

What we really care for in people is not their social standing nor the
fashionableness of their haberdashery, but their kindness, reliability
and integrity.

God has no stepchildren.

Naked, brutal force has never settled anything yet. Stoning Stephen to
death only gave him a more distinguished immortality.

We do not want "peace at any price." We want to pay justice, truth,
trust and good will for it.

                                    --Hugh Elmer Brown


  A little cloud of blue came out
    And settled on the sod.
  Then one cried "Oh, forget-me-nots."
    One bowed and murmured, "God."

                                           --Higginson




AUTHORS NAMED IN TEXT

Place where part or all of literary work was done


  Anderson, Ada Woodruff, Seattle, 18

  Atwood, Rev. A., Seattle, 6


  Bagley, Clarence B., Seattle, 5, 7, 8

  Balch, Frederick H., 16

  Ballard, Adele M., Seattle, 28, 30

  Ballinger, Richard A., Seattle, 14

  Banks, Charles Eugene, Seattle, 19, 22

  Barnard, W. G., Seattle, 16

  Bashford, Herbert, Tacoma, 22, 30

  Beaton, Kenneth C., Seattle, 26

  Beaton, Welford, Seattle, 11

  Beattie, Rolla Kent, Pullman, 15

  Bechdolt, Frederick Ritchie, Seattle, 27

  Bechdolt, Jack, Seattle, 27

  Beecham, R. K., Everett, 6

  Benham, Allen Rogers, Seattle, 14

  Best, Gertrude D., Everett, 21, 35

  Blankenship, Mrs. George, Olympia, 9

  Blethen, Joseph, Olympia, 27

  Bolton, Frederick Elmer, Olympia, 16

  Bowles, John Hooper, Tacoma, 14

  Brier, Prof. Warren Judson, Everett, 27

  Brown, Hugh Elmer, Seattle, 36

  Bryan, Dr. Enoch A., Pullman, 24

  Buskett, Nancy, Seattle, 20

  Byers, Horace G., Seattle, 15


  Carr, Sarah Pratt, Seattle, 8, 20

  Champney, Elizabeth Williams, Seattle, 13

  Champney, Frere, Seattle, 13

  Chittenden, General Hiram Martin, Seattle, 11, 15, 26, 33

  Club Women of Washington, 17

  Coe, Alice Rollit, Seattle, 22

  Comer, Cornelia Atwood Pratt, Seattle, 19

  Costello, J. A., 19

  Crawford, Minnie Leola, Tacoma, 13

  Curtis, Edward S., Seattle, 5, 12


  Dawson, William Leon, Seattle, 14

  Denny, Arthur A., Seattle, 8

  Denny, Emily Inez, Seattle, 6

  Dillaway, Harry, Everett, 28

  Dillon, Thomas J., Seattle, 27, 33

  Diven, Lou Gertrude, Olympia, 19, 35

  Dunbar, Ruth, Olympia, 28

  Durham, N. W., Spokane, 5, 9


  Eastland, Florence Martin, Seattle, 20

  Eaton, Edith M., Seattle, 21


  Eells, Myron, Twana, 8

  Fechter, Oscar Augustus, North Yakima, 22

  Fielde, Adele M., Seattle, 15, 24

  Fisher, Mrs. Robert J., Seattle, 17

  Fitch-Brewer, Annette, Lake Stevens, 25

  Flett, E. B., Longmire's, 12

  Fones, Warren and Alice (noms de plume), 19

  Fowler, Charles Evan, Seattle, 16

  Fraser, Mrs. Hugh, Winthrop, 13

  Fraser, Hugh C., Winthrop, 13

  Frye, Theodore Christian, Seattle, 14


  Gilman, Isabel Ambler, Olympia, 23

  Golder, Frank Alfred, Pullman, 9

  Goodrich, Margaret, Seattle, 23

  Goodwin, Sara Byrne, Seattle, 28

  Gowen, Herbert H., Seattle, 24

  Greene, I. Newton, Everett, 27


  Harriman, Alice, Seattle, 16, 21, 22, 32, 33

  Hassell, Susan Whitcomb, Everett, 25

  Henry, Alfred Hylas, North Yakima, 23

  Herrick, Huldah (nom de plume), 18

  Higginson, Ella, Bellingham, 10, 17, 23, 29, 31, 36

  Holly, Ella, Spokane, 19

  Hoskins, Jessie, Spokane, 19

  Hughes, Alice Lockhart, Seattle, 23


  Jacobs, Orange, Seattle, 8

  Judson, Katharine Berry, Seattle, 5, 21, 24, 25


  Kaiser, John B., Tacoma, 15

  Keator, Rt. Rev. F. W., Tacoma, 35

  Kellogg, Mary L., Seattle, 20

  King, Rev. E. A., North Yakima, 23

  Knatvold, Bertha (Mallett), Tacoma, 27


  Larson, Rose, North Yakima, 28

  Libby, Martha E., Spokane, 23

  Lowther, Granville, North Yakima, 14

  Lyman, William Dennison, Walla Walla, 5, 6


  Mallett, Bertha Knatvold, Tacoma, 27

  Meany, Edmond S., Seattle, 5, 7

  Meeker, Ezra, Puyallup, 8, 9

  Miller, Harry J., Everett, 28

  Monroe, Ann Shannon, Tacoma, 18

  Morgan, Henry Victor, Tacoma, 35

  Moritz, Robert Edouard, Seattle, 15


  Newell, Bernice E., Tacoma, 27, 31


  Ober, Sarah Endicott, 18

  Optimus, Gertrude (nom de plume), 21

  Osborne, Anna Brakham, Puyallup, 28


  Padelford, Frederick Morgan, Seattle, 23, 24

  Parr, W. R., Granite Falls, 20

  Piper, Charles V., Pullman, 14, 15

  Prosch, T. W., Seattle, 6

  Prosser, Colonel William Farland, Seattle, 7


  Remington, Arthur, Olympia, 14

  Rice, Carrie Shaw, Tacoma, 22, 34

  Richardson, Oliver Huntington, Seattle, 9

  Rigg, George B., Seattle, 14

  Roberson, Harriett Gunn, Spokane, 19

  Robertson, Mrs. Goldie Funk, Olympia, 28


  Seattle Writers' Club, 20

  Sisson, Edward O., Seattle, 14

  Skarsteadt, Ernst Teofil, East Sound, 10

  Smith, J. Allen, Seattle, 15

  Snowden, Clinton A., Tacoma, 5, 7, 34

  Stallcup, John C., Tacoma, 16

  Stevens, Hazard, 8

  Stevens, Helen Norton, Seattle, 24

  Strahorn, Carrie Adell, Spokane, 11

  Strong, Anna Louise, Seattle, 22, 34

  Sui Sin Far (nom de plume), 21

  Sullivan, May Kellogg (nom de plume), 20


  Tooker, Gertrude Fulton, Seattle, 17

  Tuttle, Charles R., Seattle, 10


  Underwood, John Jasper, Seattle, 10


  Visscher, William Lightfoot, Tacoma, 22


  Washington State Federation of Women's Clubs, 17

  Wead, Elizabeth Young, Orting, 28

  Weir, Florence Roney, Seattle, 18

  West, Dr. Lester L., Everett, 25

  White, M. Pelton, Seattle, 28

  Williams, John H., Tacoma, 5, 12

  Wilson, Rufus Rockwell, Seattle, 12

  Wood, R. P., Everett, 27

  Woodbridge, William Witherspoon, Tacoma, 26, 32

  Worthington, William, North Yakima, 14

  Wright, William H., Spokane, 16

  Writers' Club of Seattle, 20




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES:


  Text in bold is surrounded with equals signs: =bold=.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Hundred and Sixty Books by
Washington Authors, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A HUNDRED AND SIXTY BOOKS BY ***

***** This file should be named 38132.txt or 38132.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/1/3/38132/

Produced by David E. Brown, Bryan Ness and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
