Project Gutenberg's The Gentleman's Model Letter-writer, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Gentleman's Model Letter-writer
       A Complete Guide to Correspondence on All Subjects, with
       Commercial Forms

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: December 6, 2011 [EBook #38235]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GENTLEMAN'S MODEL ***




Produced by Delphine Lettau, Matthew Wheaton and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    THE GENTLEMAN'S MODEL LETTER-WRITER


    A Complete Guide to

    _CORRESPONDENCE ON ALL SUBJECTS_

    WITH COMMERCIAL FORMS

    LONDON AND NEW YORK:
    FREDERICK WARNE & CO.




PREFACE.


Though the number of existing "Letter Writers" is many, the publishers
feel that there is yet a want which this little Manual, it is hoped,
will supply.

It has been compiled with great care from several sources, and
contains much original matter, for which experience assures them there
is a necessity.




CONTENTS.


    A Book-keeper and Accountant applying for Employment

    Acknowledging a Letter of Congratulation on the Birth of a Child

    A Father applying to the Principal of a School to ascertain Terms,
          &c.

    A Gentleman applying for a Loan on the Insurance of his Life

    A Gentleman applying to an Agent at a Watering-place for Lodgings
        Reply

    A Gentleman having visited a Property, making an Offer for it
        Reply

    A Gentleman in the Corn Trade to another

    A Gentleman regretting he cannot Accept an Invitation

    A Gentleman to a Friend relative to a Bill

    A Gentleman ordering a Set of Harness from a Saddler
        Saddler in reply
        Gentleman in reply, objecting to Price
        Saddler in reply

    A Gentleman's Servant applying for a Situation

    A Gentleman to a Friend, speaking of Kindness received at another
          Friend's House
        Reply

    A Letter from a Father to a Son at School, on the necessity of
          Attention to his Studies

    A Letter from a Marine Engineer, seeking an eligible Partnership

    A Letter of Condolence

    A Letter to a Gentleman who has been making Enquiries about a
          Lady's Horse

    An Application for a Donation to a Charitable Institution in the
          Country, such as Coal and Blanket Clubs, and Soup Kitchen
        Reply, enclosing Donation
        Reply, unfavourable

    An Application for an Appointment on a Railway

    An Estate Agent, relative to a House of which his Client is
          anxious to dispose

    Answer from a Landlord in reply to a Tenant, relative to
          Non-payment of Rent

    An Application for a Situation in the Police

    A Parent to his Daughter at Service

    A Person desirous of entering into Partnership in a Lucrative
          Profession

    Application for a Debt some time owing

    Application for a House, Furnished, desiring Lowest Terms

    Application for an outstanding Account

    Application for Employment in an Auctioneer's and Estate Agent's
          Office

    Application to Borrow Money
        Reply granting the Loan

    Applying for a Clerkship

    Applying for an Account, and furnishing Particulars

    Applying for a Situation as a Gardener

    Applying to a Friend for a Recommendation, by a Young Man desirous
          of obtaining an Appointment

    Appointing an Interview relative to a Loan

    A Reply to an Advertisement for an Appointment as Secretary to an
          Institution

    A Sailor to his Sweetheart

    A Sugar Refiner applying for a Situation

    A Tenant to a Landlord, requesting time to Pay Rent

    Commercial Forms
        Form of Cheque to "Bearer"
        Form of Cheque to "Order"
        Form of Ordinary Bill of Exchange
        Form of Promissory Note
        Form of Foreign Bill of Exchange
        Form of Ordinary Receipt
        Form of Receipt for Rent
        Form of Agreement for Taking a House
        Form of Notice to Quit, from Landlord to Tenant
        Form of Notice to Quit, from Tenant to Landlord
        Form of Will
        Form of Bill of Sale

    Directions for Addressing Persons of Rank, &c. 85
        The Royal Family
        The Nobility
        Official Members of the State
        Ambassadors and Governors under Her Majesty
        Judges
        The Parliament
        The Clergy

    From a Child acknowledging the Receipt of the Present of a Book

    From a Coachman, requiring a Place
        Reply
        Coachman's reply

    From a Father to a Son, relative to his Expenditure

    From a Father to his Son beginning the World

    From a Father to his Son, who has been complaining of the Severity
          of his Master

    From a Father who has lately lost his Wife, to his Daughter at
          School

    From a Friend at Bradford, to his Friend in London, on Business
          (Wool)

    From a Gentleman accepting an Invitation, though suffering from
          Illness (temporary)

    From a Gentleman applying for Sittings, or a Pew in a Parish
          Church, in the Country

    From a Gentleman, enclosing a Certificate of Illness from a
          Medical Man, excusing himself from attending at his office
        Medical Attendant's Certificate

    From a Gentleman in India to a Relation in England

    From a Gentleman in Town to another in the Country, enclosing a
          Wedding Gift

    From a Gentleman to a Lady with whom he is in Love

    From a Gentleman to a Young Lady

    From a House and Estate Agent, acknowledging Receipt of a
          Communication relative to Sale or Letting of Property

    From a Husband, Absent on Business, to his Wife

    From a Husband to his Wife, on Sailing from England

    From a Man with a small Capital intending to go into Business,
          asking for Advice
        Reply

    From a Merchant abroad to his Brother forwarding Goods for Sale,
          and requesting others
        Brother, answering his Brother or Friend, relative to receipt
          of Goods

    From an Agent who has been engaged in endeavouring to arrange a
          Matter of Importance, applying for Remuneration

    From a Person desirous of Employment as a Manager of a Wholesale
          or Retail Business

    From a Soldier abroad to his affianced Bride

    From a Shopkeeper in the Country to a Wholesale Dealer
        Answer

    From a Son who has misconducted himself towards his Employer, to
          his Father
        The Father's Answer

    From a Young Man who has taken his late Employer's Business, to an
          old Customer
        Reply

    From a Young Tradesman asking Advice in Difficulties
        Reply

    From one Brother to another, on having unexpectedly amassed a
          Fortune

    From one Gentleman to another, relative to a Dog
        Reply

    From one Gentleman to another, explaining the Cause of not
          replying to a Letter from a Gentleman abroad

    From the Secretary of a Convalescent Hospital applying for
          Expenses of Patient

    Gentleman's reply to a Lady, imagining he was indifferent to her

    Giving Information about Trains

    In reply to a Gentleman asking the Loan of a Book relative
          to German Spa Waters

    In reply to a Gentleman inquiring for a Solicitor who may be
          moderate in his charges

    Invitation to a Gentleman to Row in a Boat
        Accepting

    Invitation to a Bachelor Party
        Accepting

    Invitation to a Croquet Party
        Accepting
        Declining

    Invitation to a Dinner (Bachelor's)
        Accepting

    Invitation to a Family Dinner
        Accepting

    Invitation to a Family Dinner

    Invitation to a Gentleman to a Friendly Dinner

    Invitation to "Best Man" at a Wedding
        Same
        Accepting

    Invitation to Join a Party to the Derby
        Same
        Accepting
        Refusing

    Letter from a Traveller at Manchester, to his Employers in London

    Letter urging Payment of a Debt

    Love Letter from a Gentleman to a Lady

    Postponing a Visit
        Same

    Regretting being unable to give an Appointment to a Situation

    Relative to an Advertisement requesting a Copy

    Reply from Landlord to a Tenant, relative to Non-payment of Rent

    Reply to a Gentleman Recommending a Young Man for Employment as a
          Porter

    Reply to a Gentleman requiring a Situation as Clerk and Foreign
          Correspondent

    Reply to a Gentleman who wishes to claim an Estate in Chancery

    Reply to a Letter from a Young Man informing his Uncle he had
          Contracted Debts

    Reply to an Advertisement for the Appointment of Medical Officer
          to an Union Division

    Reply to an Application relating to an Advertisement

    Reply to Question as to Rent of, and permission to View, a House

    Requesting the Renewal of a Bill

    To a Child who has been Guilty of telling a Falsehood

    To a Gentleman in reply as to an Agency for a Bordeaux Firm

    To a Gentleman whose Brother is dangerously Ill, offering him
          Consolation and Comfort

    To a Relieving Officer, by a Neighbour of a Poor Woman taken Ill

    To a Theatrical Manager

    To a Young Man, relative to his late Employer's Business which he
          proposes to carry on

    Urging a Son to relinquish the Naval Profession
        Reply




  THE GENTLEMAN'S MODEL LETTER-WRITER.


  _Invitation to Dinner_ (_Bachelor's_).


  The Albany, June 10th.

  DEAR BROWNE,


  Will you dine with me at eight o'clock to-morrow? Some of our
  fellows are coming, and we mean to have a quiet game of whist in the
  course of the evening. Come if possible.

  Yours truly,


  ----


  _Accepting._

  Gower Street, June 18th.

  DEAR ----,


  I will come without fail, and win your money if I can.

  Yours truly,


  ----


  _Invitation to Family Dinner._

  Camden Town, March 4th.

  DEAR SMITH,


  Will you dine with us to-morrow? It is the old lady's birthday, and
  I can offer her no greater pleasure, I am sure, than your pleasant
  company. Do come if you can, there's a good fellow.

  Yours ever,


  ----


  _Accepting._

  Russell Square, March 4th.

  DEAR ----,


  I shall be delighted to accept your kind invitation for to-morrow,
  and offer my good wishes to your charming wife on her birthday.

  Yours ever,


  ----


  _Invitation to Family Dinner._

  Medway Villas, June 8th.

  DEAR CAPTAIN MAURICE,


  Will you favour Mrs. Trevor and myself with your company at dinner
  on Monday next at 6 o'clock? We expect General Hill and his wife,
  and think you may like to make their acquaintance.

  With our united regards,

  Believe me,

  Yours truly,


  ----


  _Invitation to a Croquet Party._

  Havant, May 17th.

  DEAR HOWARD,


  The girls talk of having a croquet party on Thursday next. Will you
  join it? We shall be delighted to see you if you can come. Little
  Totty desires me to add, that you must play on her side, because
  then she will be sure to be one of the winners.

  Ever yours most truly,


  ----


  _Accepting._

  Havant, May 18th.

  DEAR ----,


  I shall be delighted to join your croquet party. Pray offer my best
  respects to Miss Totty, and tell her I will do all I can to prove
  myself her obedient servant.

  Believe me, ever yours truly,

  HOWARD.


  ----


  _Declining._

  Havant, May 18th.

  DEAR ----,


  I regret extremely that I cannot accept your invitation, and put
  myself at Miss Totty's disposal for a game of croquet; but,
  unluckily, I am obliged to go to town to-morrow, and shall not
  return till Monday week.

  Yours ever,


  ----


  _From a Gentleman, accepting an Invitation, though suffering from
  illness_ (_temporary_).

  Hampstead, May 4th.

  DEAR MRS. THURGOOD,


  I have been laid up with neuralgia for some days, and have not yet
  recovered from it. I will, however, accept your kind invitation for
  Saturday next, and hope to be able to come.

  With kind regards to yourself and sister,

  I remain,

  Yours very truly,

  WALTER BOSSORA.


  ----


  _A Gentleman regretting he cannot accept an Invitation._

  The Albany, February 1st, 187--

  MY DEAR MADAM,


  Thank you very much for thinking of me on Saturday. I should have
  liked to have joined your party immensely, but I go to Ventnor that
  afternoon, and am therefore unable to have the pleasure of accepting
  your very kind invitation.

  My mother and sisters have gone to Beaumaris; they left on
  Wednesday, and on the same day our friends the Boscawens returned to
  Ventnor. I hope to reach that truly lovely place on Saturday.
  Although a month has elapsed since the last year left us, I must
  send you and your sister all good old-fashioned New Year's wishes,
  hearty and sincere; will you both accept them? And with many thanks,
  repeated, for your kind note,

  Believe, me,

  Dear Mrs. B----,

  Your sincere friend,

  HENRY ROSS.


  ----


  _Invitation to a Gentleman to Row in a Boat._

  Chester, June 18th, 187--

  DEAR GEORGE,


  Will you join three friends and myself on Saturday next for a row up
  the river? You are a capital stroke, and we wish to get into the way
  of pulling a longer stroke than we have at present: little Jerry
  will steer us. Do not say No. We will finish the evening at the
  ----, where I have ordered supper.

  Yours sincerely,

  BEDFORD PRICE.


  ----


  _Accepting._

  Rock Terry, June 19th, 187--

  DEAR BEDFORD,


  I fancy you have formed too good an idea of my performance as a
  stroke oar; however, if you think I can be of any use to your crew,
  I will readily do my best. I shall sleep in Chester, so we need not
  hurry in returning from our practice.

  Yours sincerely,

  GEORGE SHEEPSHANKS.


  ----


  _Invitation to a Bachelor Party._

  Kidderminster, February, 187--

  DEAR FELLOWS,


  Yesterday I met Donovan and our four other old friends, who are here
  for a few days; they are coming to dine with me to-morrow at seven.
  I know it is some years since you met them; I hope you will make one
  of our party.

  Believe me,

  Yours sincerely,

  F. CUNNINGHAM.


  ----


  _Accepting the same._

  Hill House, Kidderminster, Feb. 187--

  DEAR CUNNINGHAM,


  It will afford me the very greatest pleasure to dine with you
  to-morrow at seven. It is many years since I met those you mention,
  but I have a vivid recollection of passing many pleasant hours in
  their society and companionship.

  Believe me,

  Yours sincerely,

  HARRY FELLOWS.


  ----


  _Invitation to a Gentleman to a Friendly Dinner._

  Dunland Place, Oct. 1st, 187--

  DEAR HINDMARSH,


  I heard by the merest accident, yesterday evening, that you were in
  town. Will you come and dine with us to-morrow? You know our time,
  but I may as well remind you that it is seven o'clock. I met J.
  F----, and our intimate friend from the north, yesterday. They will
  be here, and we shall have a little music in the evening, when I
  hope your tenor voice will be in its usual power and sweetness. All
  join in best regards.


  Yours very sincerely,


  ----


  _Postponing a Visit._


  Greenfield, October 10th.

  MY DEAR GEORGE,


  I regret extremely that we are obliged to ask you to postpone your
  visit till next month.

  We can not get the house at Brighton for which we were in treaty,
  till that time, and our present abode is so small that we are unable
  to offer a bedroom to a friend.

  I trust this delay will not inconvenience you. It is a great
  disappointment to us, as we longed equally for the sea and your
  company.

  My wife unites with me in kind remembrances.


  I am ever,

  Yours very truly,


  ----


  _Same._


  The Beeches, Sydenham, November 6th.

  MY DEAR TOM,


  I am sure you will be truly grieved to hear that the sudden and
  dangerous illness of my mother will oblige me to postpone our dinner
  party fixed for the 17th.

  I hope to give you better news shortly, and renew my invitation.


  Truly yours,


  ----


  _Invitation to be "Best Man" at a Wedding._


  Reading, May 6th.

  DEAR TOM,


  I intend to be "turned off" next Tuesday week! Will you attend on
  the mournful occasion as "best man?"

  _Seriously_, I am to be married to my charming little Ada on the
  ----, and I look for your presence at our bridal as the completion
  of my happiness, for then the man and woman I love best will unite
  in confirming my happiness.


  Always yours,


  ----


  _Same._


  Liphook, May 6th.

  DEAR JOHN,


  Julia has consented to our marriage on the 15th inst., and I
  scribble a line to remind you of your promise to be "best man" on
  the occasion. Marriage is supposed sometimes to separate bachelor
  friendships, but such will not be the case in my instance, my dear
  fellow. Julia has a great regard for you, and is too sensible and
  good to interfere between us with petty jealousies.

  I am awfully happy, Jack! Wish me joy, and

  Believe me

  Ever your true friend,


  ----


  _Accepting._

  The Albany, May 7th.

  DEAR ----,

  I shall be delighted to assist at the important event fixed for the
  ----, and beg to offer my best congratulations to Miss ---- and
  yourself on your approaching happiness.

  I intend to offer as my wedding gift a drawing-room clock. My object
  in naming this intention to you is that, if you are likely to
  receive a similar gift from any other friend, you will tell me so,
  and I will exchange it for something else, as duplicate gifts are a
  great bore.

  Ever, dear Hal,

  Your true old friend,

  JOHN.


  ----


  _Invitation to join a Party to the Derby_.

  Knightsbridge, May 22.

  DEAR NORRIS,

  Three of our fellows have agreed to go to the Derby together in a
  drag, and we shall be very glad if you will make a fourth. Jervis
  drives.

  Don't refuse, old fellow; we shall have a jolly day, and I shall
  enjoy it doubly if you go with us.

  Yours truly,


  ----


  _Same._

  Green Bank, May 23rd.

  DEAR REID,

  Will you accompany a party of us to-morrow to the Derby?

  Let me have an answer by bearer, and take care that it is in the
  affirmative.

  Yours ever,


  ----


  _Accepting_.

  London, May 23rd.

  DEAR GEORGE,

  I shall have much pleasure in accompanying you to the Derby. Let me
  know, please, the hour at which you start.

  I am, ever,

  Yours truly,

  J. REID.


  ----


  _Refusing_.

  London, May 23rd.

  DEAR BOB,

  It is awfully unlucky, but I am obliged to go to Chester on the
  Derby day, and _can't_ do as I desire. I wish you a pleasant trip.

  I am ever, yours truly,


  ----


  _Love-letter from a Gentleman to a Lady._

  The Temple, June 4th.

  DEAREST,

  Days have passed by now since we have had the pleasure of a few
  moments' conversation even; how these hours have dragged their slow
  pace along you and I alone can tell. It is only when we are left to
  the peaceful enjoyment of our own society that time flies. It may be
  that to-morrow at Mrs. E.'s we shall have a little time alone. We
  all dine there; she told me she should have a dance also, and that
  your mamma had promised her your sister and yourself should be of
  the party. May I ask for the first waltz? I send a few flowers, but
  I imagine you will only wear one, the rose in your hair; your sister
  is always pleased with a bouquet, so I shall not be very angry if
  you let her have them, only wear my rose.

  Your own

  EDWARD.


  ----


  _A Sailor to his Sweetheart._ H.M.S. Centaur, June 14th, 187-

  MY DEAR FANNY,

  You are never out of my mind. If you only think of me half as much,
  I shall be satisfied. Sleeping or waking it is all the same, Fanny,
  you are my only thought. What have you done with your piece of the
  half-sovereign we cut in halves? I have bored a hole in mine, and
  wear it round my neck on a bit of blue ribbon, to show that your
  William is true blue. Do you wear yours the same, my dearest Fanny?
  When I come home we will splice the halves, and Fanny and her
  William will be one--will we not, darling girl? Our cruise will now
  soon be over; I only hope, Fanny, you have been as true to me as I
  have been to you; never have I ceased thinking of you. Bear in mind
  your faithful William, who loves you as fondly as ever.

  Your devoted lover,

  WILLIAM.


  ----


  _Gentleman's reply to the Lady, imagining he was indifferent to
  her._

  Gillingham, April 16th, 187-

  DEAREST LOVE,

  Such I must and will, with your permission, always call you. Your
  letter really caused me much uneasiness. But, Dr. B., who came in
  just as it arrived, strictly forbade me to excite myself in any way,
  and would not allow me to reply to it immediately, as he feared an
  immediate return of my old heart complaint. Who can have been so
  mischievous, so ungenerous, so determined to make two hearts
  miserable, as to invent this wicked story of my flirtation with Miss
  G.? You name Mrs. G. On inquiring of her this morning I find she
  heard it somewhere spoken of, she says, but cannot recall to her
  mind the person who mentioned it. Let me at once and for ever
  disabuse you of such a suspicion. My affection for you is unchanged
  and unchangeable; often and often I have by letter and verbally too,
  pledged myself that you alone, Katie dearest, were my only thought,
  my only joy. Banish all vain suspicions from your mind. Trust in me;
  I will never deceive you; my love is inviolably yours; for you I
  breathe, for you I live, without you I should die. Believe me,
  dearest, night and day you are uppermost in my thoughts, and a sad,
  sad day it would be for me if for one moment you withdrew that
  confidence in me that I have so long happily possessed. Believe no
  aspersions against one who loves you madly. The time, I trust, will
  soon arrive when I can call you mine alone, and no breath of
  suspicion shall ever fall upon my fidelity. Love me then, my
  dearest, as your own heart dictates; have no cares in future as to
  any attention even in the least degree being shown by me to any one,
  further than due civility, or what is required from the usages of
  society, exacts. To-morrow I will do myself the pleasure of calling,
  and trust then to succeed (if not successful now) in fully
  explaining away any doubts or fears you may entertain.

  Believe me,

  Dearest Katie,

  Your ever affectionate,


  ----


  _From a Gentleman to a Lady with whom he is in love._

  Braintree, Essex.

  DEAR MISS ----,

  As no opportunity has presented itself of speaking to you lately
  alone, I venture to address you by letter, and I assure you my
  happiness greatly depends on the reply with which you may deign to
  favour me.

  I love you, dear Miss ----, very sincerely, and if you can return my
  affection and become my wife, I shall consider myself the most
  fortunate of men.

  The income which I can place at your disposal is not large, but in
  my family you will find the most tender and affectionate connexions.
  My mother (to whom alone I have confided my secret) is rejoiced at
  the hope of having you for a daughter. Do not, best beloved Miss
  Johnstone, disappoint her and myself! Should you not reject me--if I
  am ever so happy as to call you my wife--the tenderest and most
  affectionate devotion shall be yours, and the principal and only
  study of my future days shall be to render your life as happy as you
  deservedly merit it should be. Your reply is most impatiently
  awaited by one whose life is wrapped up in yours. My aunt has just
  called, and it appears that some years since she was very intimately
  acquainted with your father, to whom I have written, enclosing this
  note for you, and stating to him the purport of its contents.

  I remain,

  Dear Miss Johnstone,

  Yours very truly,

  HARRY CLINTON.


  ----


  _From a Soldier ordered Abroad, to his affianced Bride._

  Portsmouth, April 15th, 187-

  DEAREST JULIA,

  I can scarcely compose myself to write, for this very morning, at
  mid-day parade, a telegram was received by our commanding officer
  directing the regiment to hold itself under orders for immediate
  foreign service; so that of course I shall be prevented seeing you
  before our departure, as all leave is stopped for officers as well
  as for the non-commissioned officers and men. Where our future
  destination may be no one can at present conjecture, but we think it
  may be Canada. How blighted now are our hopes! where all seemed
  bright and joyous, nothing is left but separation and blank despair.
  Julia, you love me; you are mine, are you not, dear Julia? Although
  separated for a time, we shall love each other faithfully; no doubts
  must arise, no feelings of suspicion or fear between us; but firm in
  the knowledge that we are devotedly attached to each other, and that
  nothing can change the ardent feelings we entertain, we must wait
  and hope. I trust in a few short years, my darling Julia, to call
  you mine. Your Ronald will be true to his promise and his love, and
  in faith that his Julia will bear up bravely, as a soldier's
  destined wife should do, he obeys his country's call in anguish but
  not in despair. Accept the little present I send you (forwarded by
  registered letter by this evening's post), and with most
  affectionate and enduring love,

  Believe me,

  My dearest Julia,

  Your ever devoted,

  RONALD DUGAN.


  ----


  _From a Gentleman to a Young Lady._

  Snow Hill, January 1st, 187-

  DEAR ROSY,

  On returning from skating yesterday afternoon, and reflecting alone
  on the pleasant morning we had passed, I was more than ever
  impressed with my wretched solitary existence. Will you break for me
  this monotonous routine of life by saying, "It need not be,
  Charlie."

  I have loved you fondly and long; your parents and mine are intimate
  friends; they know my private character. Will you accept me as your
  husband, dearest Rosy?

  Believe me,

  Your ever fondly attached,

  CHARLIE BYERS.


  ----


  _From a Husband to his Wife, on sailing from England._

  H.M.S. Psyche, June 8th.

  MY DEAREST WIFE,

  I take the opportunity of the pilot's return to send you a hurried
  and last farewell. Oh, my dearest, what but duty could reconcile me
  to leaving you? What but the certainty that we are both protected by
  our Heavenly Father could support me through the weary days and
  nights which I am destined to spend far from you? Ah! the waves that
  are now washing the sides of our vessel will soon cease to beat upon
  that shore where my wife, where my friends are all thinking of me.

  Farewell my dearest wife; be assured I am in good health and
  tolerable spirits.

  Comfort yourself, my dearest! we shall all meet soon and happily
  again. I have not time to write to my mother, but pray tell her she
  is always in my thoughts. God bless you, dearest!--my heart is full
  of you.

  Ever your devoted husband,

  H. P.


  ----


  _From a Husband absent on Business to his Wife._

  The Fens, Lincolnshire, June 1st, 187-

  DEAREST ISABELLA,

  This is the first time, my darling, we have ever experienced the
  bitterness and misery of separation, and the few days I have
  already been absent from you appear like years. What my state of
  mind will be at the expiration of another two or three weeks I will
  let your little affectionate heart conjecture. But I must not be
  selfish, my dearest Isa. You share my trial, but do not be
  down-hearted, the time will soon pass away. You must go out and
  visit the nice friends near you. Your dear kind mother also is
  within an easy walk, I am glad to think.

  Roger Hughes is going to stay with his family for some little while;
  I do not care much about him (you remember we met him at ----). He
  is certain to call upon you, but it will be just as well not to be
  at home to him always. Hoping to return in a fortnight, I remain,
  with very best love to your mother and yourself,

  Your ever affectionate husband,

  JOSIAH WEBB.


  ----


  _From a Father to his Son beginning the World._

  Hampstead, May 6th, 187-

  MY DEAREST SON,

  Separated as you will shortly be from your childhood's home--for
  many years, perhaps--and not having your poor old father to consult
  and obtain advice from, when any difficulties may arise, you will
  naturally be inclined to appeal to those among your acquaintances
  whom you may consider from intimate association as entitled to the
  name of friends.

  Now this is a matter in which you must observe the very greatest
  caution and discrimination; a mistake made in selecting a friend and
  acting up to his advice, is a fatal one, and no one can for a moment
  form an idea of the consequences which may arise from it. In the
  first place, do not seek the friendship of the "fast young man"
  whose sole thought is to gratify himself in the enjoyment of this
  world's pleasures, without any regard to the misery or disgrace his
  conduct may be entailing on a happy, innocent family. Make friends
  of those who, by their actions, have raised themselves in the
  estimation of their superiors, and are regarded with eyes of jealous
  admiration by their equals. Remember the old proverb, "Tell who are
  your friends, and I will tell you what you are."

  I hope, dear boy, your own good sense will lead you to avoid bad
  companions. Should you ever (which I trust may never be the case) be
  tempted to do anything contrary to the laws of honour or of duty,
  question yourself thus: "Should I do this in my father's house?
  should I act thus in my mother's presence?" The answer will be the
  best talisman to keep you from falling in your combat with the
  world.

  We have great hopes in you, my dear son. Never omit to write to your
  dear mother and myself, when you possibly can; and with our best and
  fondest love,

  Believe me,

  Ever your affectionate father,


  ----


  _From a Son who has misconducted himself towards his Employer, to
  his Father._

  Eastcheap, November 18th, 187-

  DEAR FATHER,

  I am in such distress I scarcely know how to commence my letter.
  Without the least reason, without the least provocation, I left my
  master at the most busy season, just for a temporary, trifling
  amusement. He--the best of masters--for the moment was forgotten by
  me: self predominated. I ran away from my service, and here I find
  myself disgraced and miserable, and grieve to think how
  indescribably shocked you will be when Mr. Evans communicates with
  you relative to my absence. However, dear father, there is one
  consolation: I cannot be accused of dishonesty; so I hope my
  character is not irretrievably ruined. Will you see my master, and
  tell him how deeply I regret my fault, and entreat him to forgive
  me? It shall hereafter be my constant study to perform my duty in
  the most upright manner, and with the most assiduous attention. Let
  me hear also, dear father, in sending me Mr. Evans's reply, that you
  also forgive

  Your erring, but heartbroken son,

  H. H. H.


  ----


  _The Father's Answer._

  Bedhampton, November 21st, 187-

  MY DEAR SON,

  Words cannot express my grief at the receipt of your letter. How can
  you so soon have forgotten all the home lessons of duty you have
  learned? What society can you have mingled in to have caused you to
  be guilty of such folly? I have seen your master, and read him your
  letter; and he agrees with myself that from the manner you have
  acted in immediately informing me of your position, it is probable
  you may, in an untoward moment, have been induced to commit an act
  which you will never cease to regret. It is your first offence, and
  he bids me say he rejoices that you are sensible of your grievous
  error, and he will allow you to return, and never mention what has
  occurred to you. Never, dear son, forget yourself again, be grateful
  to your master, who is charity itself, and

  Believe me,

  Your affectionate father,


  ----


  _A Father applying to a Principal of a School to ascertain Terms,
  &c._

  Hopwood House, June 16th, 187-

  SIR,

  Being desirous of sending my son, aged thirteen, to school, my
  friends have strongly recommended me to apply to you on the subject.

  I should be glad to learn your terms, and to be informed as to your
  plan of tuition.

  Will you favour me with a prospectus of your School, and also inform
  me whether you have a vacancy?

  I remain,

  Yours faithfully,


  ----


  _To a Child who has being guilty of telling a Falsehood._

  Brecon, May 14th, 187-

  MY DEAR SAMUEL,

  I was much grieved to find after you had left us in the early part
  of the week, that the replies you gave me relative to your
  acquaintance with the L----s were utterly at variance with the
  truth. Little did I think you would ever deceive us, when such
  confidence has been always placed in you. Why did you try to
  deceive me by a falsehood?

  Let me entreat of you never again to deviate from the truth; should
  you do so you will soon obtain a character as an untrustworthy
  person, and no one will believe you, even when you speak the truth.
  Every one will shun you, as they will always suspect that you are
  trying to deceive them; even when you are acting rightly they will
  look upon you with suspicion.

  Have you forgotten that Truth is the point of honour in a gentleman,
  and that no one can tell a falsehood and retain the character of
  one?

  I cannot tell you the shame I felt when I discovered your untruth; I
  felt degraded by it.

  Strive to retrieve your character in the future, by perfect
  truthfulness and a high sense of what honour requires from you.

  Till I believe that you feel the enormity of your fault I cannot
  sign myself other than

  Your afflicted father,


  ----


  _Urging a Son to relinquish the Naval Profession._

  Upton, June 12th, 187-

  DEAR FREDERICK,

  Your letter of the 1st, informing me that you had determined to
  remain in your present profession, caused me great distress. If you
  wish to add some little portion of comfort to the last years of a
  father's life, which your headstrong passions have already greatly
  embittered, you will immediately relinquish it. Remember you are the
  only representative of our family. Why then persist in remaining in
  a profession wherein you are exposed to constant and imminent
  danger?

  I wish you to marry, and hope to see you settle down and discharge
  the duties of your position in society as a country gentleman; you
  have ample means at your disposal now, as the whole of your late
  uncle's property is yours. Concede a little to your father, whose
  only desire is to see his name honourably upheld, his family
  perpetuated, in the county in which we are now so much respected.
  Age is creeping on me, Frederick, I am widowed and alone. I trust
  this appeal will not be made in vain. You know my deep and lasting
  affection for you; do not wound it by a refusal. Awaiting with great
  anxiety your determination,

  Believe me,

  Your affectionate father,


  ----


  _Reply._

  H.M.S. Psyche, June 19th.

  MY DEAR FATHER,

  Dearly as I love my noble profession, I am unable to resist your
  last earnest appeal, and agree therefore to give up my commission,
  and return to a life on land. The pang this resolution costs me is
  softened by the remembrance that I may thus hope to ensure the
  happiness of so good a father.

  I shall shortly return to you, and will endeavour in all things to
  prove

  Your most dutiful and affectionate son,


  ----


  _A Letter from a Father to a Son at School, on the necessity of
  attention to his Studies._

  Mudiford, January 28th, 187-

  MY DEAR BOY,

  Now you have returned to school it is my duty to point out to you
  how absolutely necessary it is for your future success that you
  should persevere in your studies, more especially if you wish to
  leave college (for which you are destined) with honour. Do not be
  carried away with the natural love of ease and pleasure, but
  accustom yourself at once to really hard work. If you cannot
  reconcile yourself to do so in your youth you will be unable to do
  so as you grow older, and you will become incapable of achieving
  anything great. Application may be difficult at first, but when once
  you have accustomed yourself to it you will find study pleasant,
  easy, and agreeable, and in years to come you will be well repaid
  for the toil and trouble you now undergo. What can be pleasanter
  than to find yourself at the head of your school, leaving all
  competitors behind? what more gratifying than to give pleasure to
  your father and mother, and to obtain the admiration and approval of
  your teachers? That, dear boy, will be your reward if you study
  constantly and patiently; but if you neglect the opportunities
  offered to you now, your future life will be nothing but
  disquietude, and you will grow up ignorant, and be despised. Pay
  attention to my advice, and work in the morning of your days. With
  your mother's best love and mine,

  Believe me,

  Your ever affectionate father,

  R. R.


  ----


  _Reply to a Letter from a young Man informing his Uncle he had
  contracted Debts._

  Soltney, March 4th, 187-

  MY DEAR NEPHEW,

  I was indeed deeply grieved on the receipt of your letter to find
  you had forgotten, or at least not acted up to the advice I gave
  you--to pay for everything you purchased at once, and not to go into
  debt on any account. I must put things before you now in a plain
  unvarnished manner, and give you my opinion, formed after many
  years' experience. The man who contracts debts which he is unable to
  pay, more especially for articles of useless luxury, is much more
  culpable than the poor creature who, distracted by all the miseries
  of his starving family at home, rushes into the first shop he sees
  and steals something to relieve their necessities.

  When men find themselves encumbered with debts which they are unable
  to pay, mean subterfuges are resorted to; applications for delay of
  payment are made--and granted, without any good result; the final
  crash comes at last: the patience and temper of the tradesmen become
  exhausted, they have recourse to their legal remedy, and
  wretchedness and beggary are the result.

  It may be that you have been endeavouring to keep pace with some
  young man of greater fortune than your own. Be not led away by such
  absurd vanity. The largest income will be and has been squandered,
  unknown as it were to its possessor, solely from the crime (and a
  great one too it is) of running into debt. I regret that I cannot
  assist you at present with the loan you request, and remain

  Your affectionate uncle,

  T. H. P.


  ----


  _Acknowledging a Letter of Congratulation on the Birth of a Child._

  Duke Street, St. James's, Dec. 24th, 187-

  DEAR ----,

  Thanks for your kind letter and good wishes. I am happy to say that
  my wife and the baby are going on well. I have told Mrs. Compton
  about Mr. Denville; she is glad to hear so good an account of him.
  Wishing you all a merry Christmas and a happy New Year,

  Believe me,

  Yours sincerely,

  D. W.


  ----


  _From a Child, acknowledging the receipt of the Present of a Book._

  Ramsden Hall, January 18th, 187-

  MY DEAR MRS. ----,

  Thank you very much for the beautiful book you have sent me. It is
  very pretty and nice, and I like it very much. I long to see you
  again. I have been out driving this morning in the pony carriage.
  There is a hard frost. With best love to Dr. G. and yourself

  I remain,

  Your most affectionate little friend,

  R. D. A.


  ----


  _From a Father to a Son, relative to his Expenditure._

  Hackney, March 5th, 187-

  MY DEAR SON,

  Your last letter gave us pleasure not unmixed with pain: pleasure to
  learn that you were well, and held in esteem by your superiors, and
  on friendly terms with those of your own standing; and pain from the
  request which it contained. Your mother, like myself, feels grieved
  that you should ask for an additional allowance. You should consider
  that you have brothers and sisters for whom I have also to make a
  provision, and that if the allowance I now give you (which is
  considered large) be increased, it must deprive us all of some of
  our necessary comforts. You must reflect on this, dear boy, and then
  I am well assured that you will not urge your request. I will,
  however (for this once alone, understand me), make you a present of
  Thirty Pounds. Your own good sense, I am certain, will show you the
  necessity of retrenchment, so I shall not allude to the matter
  further. The presents you sent us each by last mail are much
  appreciated and treasured by us.

  We are going to move from this neighbourhood, as we find it too
  expensive; when next you write, therefore, address to Durnford
  Street.

  Your brother Fred is going to be married, but will live near us. His
  future wife is a daughter of Mr. Passmore, and at his death she will
  have about 2000_l_.; at present he will make her an allowance of
  80_l_. per annum.

  All your pets are well, and we guard them jealously for your sake.
  Trusting you will remain some time at Shopoo, as it agrees with you
  so well, and that we may constantly hear from you,

  Believe me, with our united kindest love,

  Your affectionate father,

  H. V. ROSSITER.


  ----


  _From one Brother to another, on having unexpectedly amassed a
  Fortune._


  Natal, S. Africa, February 1st, 187--

  DEAR WILLIAM,


  You are well aware that when I sailed from England a few years ago,
  after paying my passage out I had but a very few pounds left; but I
  soon got good employment, and saved out of my wages all that I
  possibly could. I never was very fond of company, and have no
  expensive habits; so at the end of two years I found myself with
  30_l._ to my credit in the bank. When the report came here of
  diamonds being found up the country, I started off, bag and baggage,
  and on my arrival got an allotment, and went to work with a hearty
  good will. For many a weary day I toiled, giving myself little time
  for rest. At last I was rewarded: among the washings I found a
  diamond, a small one, yet what a treasure I thought it! On and on I
  toiled--some weeks with success, and others with none; however, my
  labours have been successful: I have been fortunate enough to find
  diamonds, which, when valued, have realized the handsome sum of
  L----.

  Tell my dearest mother that now she will never want. I am coming
  home, and shall invest for her sole use during her lifetime L----.

  Will you, dear William, look out for a good school for my little
  sister? She must be nine years of age now. Ask the clergyman's wife
  to recommend you one. I wish her to be educated as a lady, and she
  shall have the L---- at my mother's death. How I wish our poor
  father had lived to derive some comfort from my fortune! You shall
  have 100_l._ paid to your credit to provide the things Jane will
  require on going to school, and to pay for the first half-year's
  expenses there. I hope to be home in six months, when I will take a
  suitable house for our dear mother. If you will accept it from me, I
  make you a present of L----; with the remainder of my earnings I
  shall purchase a nice property, so that I may be certain my money
  will be secure, for were I to speculate I might lose all.

  With best love, and hoping shortly to see you happy and well,


  Believe me,

  Your affectionate brother,

  ANGUS M'DONALD.


  ----


  _From a Gentleman in India to a Relation in England._


  Camp, Booltan, Feb. 1st, 187--

  MY DEAR ----,


  Many thanks for your last letter, which arrived some three weeks
  ago. We never received the letter to which you allude, containing
  the photographs; and I am very sorry it went astray, for we should
  have liked so much to have them. I hope, if you have other copies,
  that you will kindly send them to us when you next write.

  We both desire to thank you for your kind and cordial reception of
  dear Richard. He wrote and told us how warmly you received him, and
  how pleased and gratified he was to see you. I trust he will come to
  see you again on his return from Devon, where he was when we last
  heard from him. We miss him terribly, and look forward anxiously to
  meeting him out here again next year, if, please God, we are all
  spared. James, his wife, and children are living down at
  Cheltenham. I wonder if there is any chance of your meeting? Sarah
  Maria is in Cornwall, but they took a house for a term of years near
  Watford, and will be back there, certainly before Christmas; she had
  no idea you were in London, and I must tell her of it when I next
  write to her. We are now in camp, marching about the district; of
  course I do my office as usual in tents every day--a happy, gipsy
  kind of life--and dearest Sophie and the little ones always enjoy
  it. Give my kindest love to Emma and Blanche. I have been intending
  to write to Emma, and I will really write soon; but in the hot
  weather one feels terribly indisposed for letter-writing, and I have
  quite quill-work enough to do every day. Our kindest love to
  yourself and Horace, and to Jane and Sophia; and many kisses from
  our little darling.


  Always your very affectionate cousin,

  HAROLD SOTHERN.


  ----


  _A Father, who has lately lost his Wife, to his Daughter at School._


  Woburn, July 20th.

  MY DARLING CHILD,


  I was very pleased and comforted by your last affectionate letter.
  Bitterly indeed do I miss you! Had I given way to my own selfish
  wishes, I think I should not have allowed you to return to school.
  Your dear aunt, however, who is now looking carefully after my
  domestic affairs, showed me so plainly that by keeping you at home I
  should be depriving you of the advantages of education, that I
  sacrificed my feelings for your sake. On reflection, also, I hoped
  that you would find some little consolation and comfort from
  association with young ladies of your own age, for here all is
  cheerless and dreary. The void caused by your dear mother's death
  can never be refilled; my home is truly desolate. It would have been
  wrong to keep you at home to share my grief, and thus uselessly add
  bitterness to your younger years. Do not grieve too long and
  bitterly, my child, for your dearly loved mother; imitate her in
  every action of her life; and when Time has slightly moderated your
  poor father's sorrow, and you are in charge of his home and your
  own, things may be brighter and more cheerful again.

  Pray write to me soon, and


  Believe me,

  Your ever affectionate father,


  ----


  _A Parent to his Daughter at Service._


  Farndon, March 1st, 187--

  MY DEAR DAUGHTER,


  When you left home for service, you were so young and inexperienced
  that we were most anxious as to your welfare. We are truly thankful
  to find from your letter, received a few days ago, that you are in a
  place that is likely to prove comfortable. I need not give you much
  advice as to obedience, for you have always been, both to your
  mother and myself, a most obedient and dutiful child. Your mistress
  is very kind in showing you how to perform your duties. Be
  attentive, and grateful to her for such kindness.

  Do not make acquaintances too hurriedly; never stay out later than
  the hour appointed for you to be at home; and on no account whatever
  admit any one into the house, without first obtaining leave from
  your mistress. Never miss an opportunity of attending Divine
  worship. Write to us as often as you can; and with the love of your
  mother and myself,


  Believe me, your affectionate father,

  JOSEPH HODGES.


  ----


  _From a Father to his Son, who has been complaining of the severity
  of his Master._


  Putney, March, 187--

  MY DEAR FREDERICK,


  I was very sorry indeed to find from your last that you were not
  satisfied with your place, and that your master was always finding
  fault with you. You must not imagine that in doing so he is at all
  cruel or severe; but, having a great interest in your future
  welfare, he wishes, whilst there is yet time, to correct the faults
  he sees you commit. It is not with you that he is angry; it is with
  the faults and errors he sees you fall into. It is for your good,
  believe me, my dear Fred, that he speaks; and in after years you
  will look with gratitude and respect on Mr. C----, who now appears
  to you to be harsh and unkind. With our fondest love, hoping you are
  well, and that you will become more contented soon,


  Believe me,

  Your ever affectionate father,


  ----


  _A Letter of Condolence._


  Hampton Road, April 4th, 187--

  MY DEAR J----N,


  I sincerely commiserate you in this your fearful and awful
  visitation. Sad indeed it is to lose your wife and your expected
  child in one short moment! Your dear wife, we are well aware (as far
  as human beings can form a judgment of the lives of their fellow
  creatures) was in every act, deed, and word a true Christian. Your
  account of her death is deeply touching; but how grateful you must
  have felt to have seen her so resigned and happy in the thought
  that, although her loss would cast a shadow on your life on earth,
  you would meet her hereafter in that better world, where no trouble
  or sorrow is to be found. She was good in every acceptation of the
  term: her charities (so unostentatiously dispensed), her cheerful
  willingness to relieve any real distress, her talents and charms,
  endeared her to all. Naturally you must deeply grieve for the loss
  of one so dear and excellent. You have again another source of grief
  in the loss of your child; dear J----, and at present all
  consolation must seem to you impossible; but God has ordained that
  Time shall bring comfort and soothing for all earthly sorrows, and
  to its healing influence we must leave you. As soon as you feel
  equal to the journey, come to us, and stay as long as you feel
  inclined. We will walk and ride together. There is great healing in
  Nature, and open-air exercise--I speak from experience--does as much
  as reason and philosophy in soothing a great grief.

  My wife unites with me in best regards and truest sympathy.


  I am ever,

  Dear J----,

  Yours most truly,


  ----


  _To a Gentleman whose Brother is dangerously Ill, offering him
  Consolation and Comfort._


  MY DEAR ----,


  Every morning we listen for the post with the greatest anxiety,
  trusting that it will bring us better news of your dear brother. The
  accounts yesterday gave us a very lively idea of your situation,
  while you are expecting so critical and dangerous an hour as that
  which you have in view. We deeply feel for you, yet we know you are
  and will be supported. We pray for you and your brother, and we know
  and believe that He on whom we call is rich in mercy and mighty to
  save. We see many around us who have been restored from the very
  gates of the grave when every human effort has proved ineffectual.
  This gives us hopes that our supplications may terminate in praises
  for your dear brother's restoration to health.


  Yours most truly,


  ----


  _Giving Information about Trains._


  Chatham, June 3rd.

  MY DEAR ----,


  We were all very glad to find on Martha's return yesterday that you
  would come on Saturday, and we trust we may induce you to stay until
  Monday.

  I enclose you a list of the departure and arrival of the trains. The
  launch takes place at three o'clock, but (if you can manage it) you
  had better come early, that you may have a rest after your journey.
  Let us know at what time you propose leaving London, and we will
  meet you at the station. It appears to me the one leaving at 10.30,
  and arriving at 11.30, is the best, as you will only be an hour on
  the road. However, let us know.

  We unite in kindest love to all, and best regards to A----


  Your affectionate brother,


  Leave Victoria.   Arrive at Chatham.
      9.15               11.20
     10.30               11.30
     11.35                1.15
     12.30                1.36


  ----


  _From a Gentleman applying for Sittings or a Pew in a Parish Church,
  in the Country._


  Wales, October 18th, 187-

  DEAR SIR,


  I should feel much obliged if you would use your influence with the
  churchwardens to procure me a pew or sittings for myself and family
  in the Parish Church. I need not point out to you the inconvenience
  arising from not having one allotted to me. I purposed making a
  formal application to the churchwardens, but being a stranger to
  them all, I believe a word from you would procure them for me. For
  some weeks I have been confined to the house from indisposition, or
  I would have done myself the pleasure of making my request in
  person.


  I remain,

  Dear Sir,

  Very truly yours,

  The Rev. ----


  ----


  _A Gentleman applying to an Agent at a Watering-place for Lodgings._


  Thickset Lodge, Howbury, May 1st, 187--

  SIR,


  Wishing to leave my house in the country for some months in the
  summer, I should feel obliged if you would inform me whether there
  would be much difficulty in obtaining furnished apartments at ----.
  I am well aware that at some of the towns on the South Coast
  (especially at this time, when a demonstration of our naval forces
  is to be made) it may be difficult to find them. You know the place
  well, and also about the terms I generally give.

  If you have received my rent from Dr. ----, please forward it at
  your convenience, and let me know if any repairs are required at the
  house.


  Yours faithfully,


  ----


  _Reply._


  Marchsea, May 4th, 187--

  SIR,


  In reply to your letter, I beg to inform you that all the best
  lodgings here are occupied, and I fear that I cannot find any which
  would suit you.

  I enclose a cheque for your rent, and am happy to inform you that no
  repairs are required at present at Bellevue.


  I remain,

  Sir,

  Your obedient servant,


  ----


  _An Application for a Donation to a Charitable Institution in the
  Country, such as Coal and Blanket Club and Soup Kitchen._


  Hampton, December 1st, 187--

  SIR,


  Having taken great interest in forming a club for providing coals
  and blankets, and also in establishing a soup kitchen for the poor
  in this town, I venture to request your charitable co-operation. I
  enclose you a prospectus, which will enable you at one glance to see
  to what extent any donation you may send will entitle you to
  recommend families who by misfortune or sickness are unfortunately
  compelled to solicit relief.


  I remain,

  Yours obediently,


  ----


  _Letter in reply, enclosing a Donation._


  Hampton, December 4th, 187--

  SIR,


  I am much pleased to find the interest you take in the suffering
  poor at this inclement season is so great. Your prospectus is very
  satisfactory; but as I am well assured that all cases of a really
  deserving nature must be fully known to you, I must request you to
  distribute as you please the number of tickets to which I am
  entitled for the cheque for 10_l._ which I enclose.


  I remain,

  Sir,

  Yours obediently,


  ----


  _Reply, unfavourable, to an application for a Donation._


  Belfield, January 1st, 187--

  DEAR SIR,


  In acknowledging the receipt of your letter of the 22nd, soliciting
  a subscription to assist you in your charitable efforts for
  relieving the many distressed poor in your neighbourhood, I regret
  extremely to have to reply that it is out of my power to help you.
  Prior to the receipt of your application I had made arrangements to
  supply some poor families with soup three days in each week for the
  next six weeks. I cannot afford to devote more money to this object.


  I remain,

  Dear Sir,

  Yours faithfully,

  JOHN ELLIS.


  ----


  _A Gentleman to a Friend, speaking of kindness received in another
  friend's house._


  Stalybridge, May 1st, 187--

  DEAR GEORGE,


  You will, I am certain, be very sorry to hear that for the last six
  weeks I have been confined to the house with a severe attack of
  rheumatic gout. You, who so well know my active habits, can
  thoroughly enter into my feelings at being a prisoner for so long a
  time. The agony I have suffered has been excruciating; I was unable
  to move without assistance, and was as feeble as an infant, being
  unable to do the most trifling thing for myself. But you will be
  glad to hear that I received the greatest kindness and attention
  from our friends. I was unable to hold a book or a newspaper, but
  every morning one or the other of this kind family with whom I am
  staying tried to relieve the monotony of my life by reading to me;
  in the afternoon some of them would come and tell me the news; and
  in the evening, whilst I sat propped up on a sofa, the charming
  daughters would sing and play. I feel grieved to remember the
  inconvenience and annoyance I must have been to them all, and shall
  be happy indeed when I can be moved; as, although they are so
  extremely kind, I feel what a tremendous amount of additional labour
  I must cause to all the household. Never can I forget the attention
  and kindness shown me. I shall be very glad to see you when you come
  home. Have you had much civility shown you at P----? It used to be a
  very nice place when I lived there.


  Believe me,

  Yours very sincerely,

  JAMES TURNER.


  ----


  _Gentleman in reply._


  Preston, May 6th, 187--

  DEAR JAMES,


  I am sorry to hear you have had such a severe attack. Nothing is so
  trying to a man of active habits, like yourself, as confinement to
  the house. It was fortunate for you that you were not laid up during
  the best part of the hunting season, as I am afraid your patient
  spirit would have utterly rebelled against your privation from one
  of the only things you really enjoy. We are very snug indeed here,
  and are made a great deal of. We need never be at home unless we
  choose. Your friends the Ducrows have a very nice house near, and
  they have introduced me to some very pleasant people. One of their
  daughters is a very charming girl. We sing duets together; and as we
  have to practise for some musical parties, I see a great deal of
  her. You would like her, I think. I hope we may remain here some
  time longer, as it is not often one meets with such real friendship
  as the people here have shown us. I send you a few papers which may
  amuse you. I hope to hear soon that you are better. When you are
  able to travel I shall be glad to see you here; I can put you up
  very comfortably.


  Believe me,

  Yours very sincerely,

  GEORGE MILNER.


  ----


  _From a Gentleman to another, explaining the cause of not replying
  to a Letter from a Gentleman Abroad._


  Poonah House, December 14th, 187--

  MY DEAR JOHN,


  You must not measure the real pleasure and gratification it afforded
  me to receive your letter by the time I have taken to answer it. I
  have meant many times to sit down and write to you, but one thing or
  the other has prevented me. The chief cause of my silence, I grieve
  to say, has been the fresh sorrows we have lately had, in the loss
  of our dear little pet, a boy of nearly one year old, during
  teething, and then the break-up of our little comfortable home in
  consequence of this--for my dear wife was quite broken by it, in
  health and spirits; and requiring change of air, I sent her and our
  eldest girl to Dawlish, where they are now comfortably established
  with my brother's family, and I sincerely hope the change will
  prove beneficial to them both. There are many of our old Durham
  friends residing there, which will be pleasant for her. I shall be
  so completely tied by business here for some weeks, or it may be
  longer, that I can scarcely fix the time I shall join them. I shall
  be dull enough alone, you may well imagine. Forgive my apparent
  neglect, and if you should be passing near be good enough to give me
  a call. We are a party of about seven in this boarding-house. The
  terms are very moderate, and if you know any friend requiring
  accommodation in one, I can vouch for their being comfortable here.
  Best regards to your wife and daughters.


  Yours very sincerely,

  H. D.


  ----


  _From a Gentleman in Town to another in the Country, enclosing a
  Wedding Gift._


  United Hotel, Waterloo Place, January 18th, 187--

  MY DEAR JONES,


  I am sorry I have not been able to run over to see you lately, but
  some friends of ours from the country have been in Town, and I have
  had to go about with them constantly. I am just off for a fortnight
  into Warwickshire, but shall call as soon as I return. I hope you
  are now free from bronchitis, and I trust that Mrs. J----s and the
  young ladies are well. I had a very quiet Christmas with my dear old
  mother. I suppose you are busy in preparations for the wedding. I
  enclose a small present; it may be more useful than any ornament I
  can at present think of, and your daughter can purchase with it
  whatever she may consider best. I wish her every happiness. Are any
  of you going to see the opening of Parliament? If so I can secure
  you a very advantageous seat. With kind regards and good wishes,


  I remain, yours sincerely,

  H. W. B.


  ----


  _A Letter to a Gentleman who has been making inquiries about a
  Lady's Horse._


  Hithrun, March 26th, 187--

  DEAR MARDEN,


  Mr. Somes, of B----, has requested me to tell you that he will sell
  his mare for thirty-five guineas. She is aged about eight or nine;
  has been as you know regularly hunted for the last two or more
  seasons, and is a safe and beautiful hack, and goes well in harness.
  I need not say more than to observe that he is perfectly indifferent
  about selling her, though much obliged to you for recommending her.
  I think she is well worth fifty pounds.


  Yours very truly,

  J. L----T.


  ----


  _Regretting being unable to give an Appointment to a Situation._


  Oakham, December 1st, 187--

  DEAR MR. ----


  I am exceedingly sorry at having to return your enclosures without
  being able to offer you the appointment in question.

  Regretting the trouble you have had, and with my best wishes,


  Believe me,

  Yours very truly,

  H. H. V.


  ----


  _From one Gentleman to another, relative to a Dog._


  Rochester, March 6th, 187--

  DEAR FELLOWES,


  As you are well up in everything relating to diseases in dogs, I
  wish for your advice about my puppy. Some people tell me that by
  vaccinating him I shall ward off the distemper. Do you think it
  would prove efficacious? I should be sorry to lose him. Perhaps you
  will drop me a line when you have time. You are generally so
  occupied that it is scarcely fair to trouble you, but I think you
  will in this case excuse your old friend. Have you seen anything of
  Doxman lately? He was here last week.


  Believe me,

  Yours very sincerely,

  H. M. E.


  ----


  _Reply to Letter relative to a Dog._


  Tipnor, 10th March, 187--

  DEAR PURCHASE,


  I have always leisure to give a friend a hint if I think it possible
  to be useful, so I lose no time in replying to you about your pup
  and the distemper. I have tried vaccination and found it a perfect
  fallacy, and many of my friends, real judges of dogs, and one of
  whom is frequently appealed to on matters of dispute with regard to
  their treatment, decidedly says he has no faith in it, and that the
  effects are nothing. One of my friends had some dogs which all
  escaped distemper, but that was attributed to his never giving them
  any animal food. I rarely have a case (among my dogs) of distemper,
  and if I do it is generally very mild, and I account for it from my
  mode of feeding them. Until they reach the age of twelve months I
  keep them entirely, or nearly so, on bread and milk, potatoes,
  cabbage, meal, and milk, with the very slightest quantity imaginable
  of flesh food. Do not keep your dog too closely confined; feed him
  as I advise, and he may escape distemper altogether. Should he not,
  it will not be so severe as if you had fed him entirely on meat. I
  shall be coming into your neighbourhood shortly, and will pay you a
  visit.


  Believe me,

  Yours sincerely,

  H. M. FOX.


  ----


  _In reply to a Gentleman inquiring for a Solicitor who may be
  moderate in his charges._


  Sheffield, December 29th, 187--

  MY DEAR SIR,


  When I retired from business I relinquished my connexion in favour
  of my former partner, Mr. ----, and I have much pleasure in giving
  you his name and address:--4, Boland Street, close to the newly
  erected Sessions Hall. He will, I am sure, be glad to attend to your
  friend's business, and make only fair charges.

  I am much obliged for your kind inquiries, and am happy to say my
  wife and children are all well, and unite with me in kind
  remembrances. When you write to your sister-in-law, will you be so
  good as to present our kind regards to her? If you find time and
  opportunity to come so far north as this, we shall be extremely glad
  to see you.

  Thank you very much for your kind offer of a welcome, and believe me
  to be,


  Yours truly,

  H. F.


  ----


  _Application for a House, Furnished, desiring Lowest Terms._


  The Limes, Hampstead, May 1st, 187--

  SIR,


  Being in want of a furnished residence, the enclosed order to view
  yours has been sent to me. Please let me know, before I go to view
  it, what will be the lowest rent. Please return the order.


  Yours faithfully,

  H. D. T.


  ----


  _To a Relieving Officer, by a Neighbour of a Poor Woman taken Ill._


  Tapton, March 17th, 187--

  SIR,


  Mrs. Waterson, a neighbour of mine, whom I have known for more than
  fifteen years as an industrious woman, is now ill and unable to
  work. She has no relations who can assist her in any way. Would you,
  next Thursday, on your way to the board of guardians' meeting, call
  and see her? Her house is at the corner of Sedgwood Lane. I will see
  that her wants are attended to until then.


  I am, Sir,

  Your obedient servant,

  GEORGE NEWNS.


  ----


  _Reply to a Gentleman recommending a young Man for Employment as a
  Porter._


  Hitchin, June 12th, 18--

  SIR,


  I have received your communication relative to John ----. From the
  accounts you give of his general good conduct, his honesty, and the
  respectability of his family, I think he will be just the person I
  require to take the place of the porter I have lately lost by death.
  If the young man will call to-morrow, he can commence his duties.


  I remain,

  Sir,

  Yours obediently,

  J. D. S----.


  ----


  _Application to Borrow Money._


  Ashmead, January 11th, 187--

  DEAR ROGERS,


  Having been rather unfortunate in some speculations of late, I find
  I am unable to meet the demands of a tradesman, who positively says
  he cannot remain longer without a settlement of his account. He
  threatens proceedings, which just at present would prove very
  disagreeable. Could you, without inconvenience, oblige me with the
  loan of 20_l._ for a month?


  Yours ever,

  SETH JONES.


  ----


  _Reply, granting the Loan._


  18, Stanhope Gardens, January 11th, 187--

  DEAR JONES,


  There is nothing so annoying as to be threatened with proceedings.
  Perhaps you have not replied civilly to your tradesman's demand for
  payment; generally speaking, if you do so, they are not pressing. I
  enclose you a cheque for 20_l._, and shall be glad if you will dine
  with me this evening. Bring your I. O. U.


  Yours ever,

  SAML. ROGERS.


  ----


  _Reply to a Gentleman who wishes to claim an Estate in Chancery._


  Strand, June 14th, 187--

  DEAR SIR,


  In reply to your letter of the 11th inst. relative to the Pulwood
  estate, in Chancery, I think that your first step is to ascertain in
  whose Court the suit is pending. You can discover this by searching
  at the Record and Writ Clerks' Courts, in Chancery Lane. You must
  then ascertain by search in Chambers of the Judge to whose Court the
  suit is attached, to what stage the proceedings have advanced, and,
  if no certificate has issued finding the heir or heirs, you must
  make out your pedigree, by searching parish and other registers, old
  family Bibles, &c., and obtain also all the evidence you possibly
  can in support of it; but you had better employ a solicitor. I trust
  you will be successful.


  Believe me,

  Yours truly,

  JOSIAH WEBB.


  ----


  _In reply to a Gentleman asking the Loan of a Book relative to
  German Spa Waters._


  Harrow, May 4th, 187--

  DEAR FRANCIS,


  I was heartily glad to hear from you again, as I was beginning to
  fancy you had forgotten me. So you are thinking of going abroad to
  try the German waters? I have a very useful book, called "The Baths
  of Europe," and also a small pamphlet on the "German Waters." I will
  lend them both to you. There are some others written by English
  physicians, but I forget their titles at this moment. Any
  bookseller, however, would supply you with the information; but let
  me advise you, if you intend trying a course of water-drinking or
  bathing at the foreign spas, not to select any particular place or
  bath merely from a description given in a book, however good or
  reliable it may be, so much depends on individual cases and
  constitutions. Consult first some physician who has made the foreign
  baths his particular study.

  Trusting you will derive benefit from the change,


  Believe me, yours ever,


  ----


  _A Gentleman applying for a Loan on the Insurance of his Life._


  Chelsea, S.W., May 14th, 187--

  SIR,


  Having seen an advertisement in the _Evening Standard_, stating that
  advances are made by you on life policies at the rate of 5 per cent.
  per annum, I should feel obliged if you would inform me what amount
  would be advanced on my life policy. I have insured in the
  G---- office for nearly eighteen years. The policy is No. 18,723. The
  annual premium is 50_l._ A reply at your earliest convenience will
  oblige,


  Yours faithfully,

  S. H. BOLT.

  To J. H., Esq.,
  E. I. Office, Trade Street.


  ----


  _Appointing an Interview relative to a Loan_.


  Trade Street, May 16th, 187--

  SIR,


  In reply to your note of the 14th, I have to request you will be
  good enough to favour me with a call to-morrow at about 11 A.M. Will
  you kindly bring your policy with you, and the last receipt?


  Yours faithfully,

  GEORGE SIMMS,

  _Secretary_.

  S. H. Bolt, Esq.


  ----


  _A Letter from a Marine Engineer, seeking an eligible Partnership._


  Ipswich, March 14, 187--

  SIR,


  From an intimate friend of your family with whom I have spent a few
  days, I am led to suppose you have some desire to join in a
  desirable partnership. I beg to inform you that for some years I
  have been engaged in iron ship-building, and I am prepared to take a
  partner, active or otherwise. The business in which I am at present
  engaged is connected with an extensive graving dock, now in
  formation; attached to which will be marine engine and boiler works,
  so that we may be able to attend, not only to the lengthening and
  requisite repairs of the hulls, but be able to uphold and renovate
  their engines, boilers, &c. &c., a combination which is now
  specially demanded by the greatly increased employment of steam
  vessels.

  If you will favour me with a call, I will enter more fully into
  particulars.


  I remain, Sir,

  Yours faithfully,

  H. B. C.


  ----


  _A Gentleman having visited a Property making an Offer for it._


  The Elms, Whitchurch, Feb. 15th, 187--

  DEAR SIR,


  I am this moment returned from Nantwich, having travelled part of
  the way last night from B----. The house there did not quite satisfy
  me, but if the trustees of the late owner will do what is required,
  the place may be made suitable. I looked over the house, grounds,
  and furniture, and my chief objection is to the want of finish about
  the grounds. With the house itself I am quite satisfied, and the
  furnishing of the ground floor requires no special remark; but the
  bedrooms appear rather defective. Some rooms I could not see, on
  account of the indisposition of the present tenant. On the whole my
  notion of the value is about L-- per annum, which, if entertained, I
  should be disposed to give, supposing the trustees will do all I
  require.

  I should prefer renting the house for a twelvemonth's occupancy,
  with option to make it five years. I shall be in London next week,
  and will fix a day for calling on you if you think it likely we may
  come to terms. I of course assume that the house would be fully
  furnished in every respect, excepting plate and linen. I should wish
  some inexpensive matters done to the grounds which I will explain if
  we meet. Should you wish any further references I shall be happy to
  furnish you with them.


  Yours truly,

  A. B. H.


  ----


  _Reply to a Gentleman who has been treating for a House._


  Westwood, February 16th, 187--

  DEAR SIR,


  I am glad to find by your letter of yesterday's date that you like
  the house. I only wish you could have seen it when I occupied it
  myself--there would have been no cause of complaint as to the
  out-door appearance then. I shall be very glad indeed to see you in
  London on Monday, Tuesday, or Wednesday next (on Thursday I go
  Axminster), but should those days be inconvenient, pray name your
  own. I think it likely we may come to terms. Strange to say, I had
  an application from Mrs. Eglamon's solicitor yesterday, asking
  permission for her to remain a few months longer. I shall not reply
  until I have seen you.


  Yours truly,

  H. ----.


  ----


  _From a Young Man who has taken his late Employer's Business, to an
  old Customer._


  Romsey, July 4th, 187--

  SIR,


  I doubt not that you have heard of the death of my late employer. I
  have managed his business during the whole of his illness, and as
  his widow declines to carry it on, I have taken the shop and
  stock-in-trade, and shall be glad to keep up the connexion with you.
  I have sent the enclosed bills, which are due, and you may depend on
  punctuality and attention if you honour me with your orders.


  I remain,

  Yours respectfully,


  ----


  _To a Young Man, relative to his late Employer's Business, which he
  proposes to carry on._


  Portsmouth, July 7th, 187-

  SIR,


  I received yours of the 4th inst., and am extremely sorry to hear of
  the death of my old friend, your late employer, but at the same time
  very much pleased to find that his business has fallen into such
  good hands as yours. You have double advantages over a stranger, as
  you are well acquainted with your late employer's trade and
  customers, which, by his transactions with me, appear to be very
  extensive. I have sent your order in ten bales marked D.P., by the
  8.40 train, and you will find them as good as your best customers
  can desire. I am very glad you wish to keep up the old connexion.
  Wishing you every success,


  I remain,

  Yours faithfully,

  JOHN BACON.


  ----


  _From a Young Tradesman, asking Advice in Difficulties._


  Commercial Road, June 12th, 187--

  DEAR SIR,


  I am encouraged by my knowledge of your kindness to ask your advice
  with regard to the difficulties which at present surround me.

  On commencing business, about four years since, everything looked
  bright and prosperous, but the pressure put upon me now, in
  consequence of the many bankruptcies that have lately taken place,
  has brought me to the very brink of misery and ruin. I see no
  prospect before me but to compound with my creditors, and _that_ I
  would by any possibility avoid. Knowing the interest you have always
  taken in me, and being well aware that your advice and assistance
  are most valuable, I now venture to apply to you. I have dreaded to
  do so, as it appeared to me that I was, as it were, imposing upon
  your too compassionate heart. However, now, dear sir, you know the
  whole of my circumstances, and exactly the position in which I find
  myself, through no fault of my own. I shall anxiously await your
  reply. With many thanks for past undeserved kindness,


  I remain,

  Dear Sir,

  Yours most respectfully,

  H. S. F.


  ----


  _Reply to Young Tradesman's Letter, relative to Difficulties._


  St. Mary Axe, London, June 19th, 187--

  DEAR SIR,


  Having admired you for your upright dealings ever since you
  commenced business, I am sorry to hear of your present difficulties.
  There are but two courses open to you--bankruptcy or composition.
  Compound with your creditors, as the best and only means of showing
  your honesty of purpose, and also because it will save them the
  expenses caused by bankruptcy. I will do all in my power to arrange
  matters for you. My own claim I will not at present press, and very
  possibly when everything is settled you may find yourself in a much
  less distressing position than you at present imagine. Let me see
  you as soon as you can. Keep nothing back from me.


  Yours truly,

  H. T. G.


  ----


  _From a Man with a small Capital intending to go into Business,
  asking for Advice._


  Penge, April 5th, 187--

  DEAR MR. MATTHEWS,


  Having within the last few weeks received a very handsome legacy, I
  am thinking of endeavouring to increase it by going into business.
  For some years, you are aware, I was with Messrs. Piper and Co., and
  I imagine I might derive benefit from their connexion. I am well
  convinced, from your practical knowledge, you will give me such
  information as will prevent my getting into difficulties. I presume
  I must be cautious, in starting in business, not to sink too much of
  my funds in a large stock at first, as there may be a doubt that the
  return would not be sufficiently speedy to cover my outlay, and
  consequently I should be obliged to draw upon my capital for
  household expenses. There is another point on which I wish your
  advice, and that is as to the locality in which I should take a
  business. Do you recommend a new neighbourhood, or not? Will you
  also give me some hints as to the sort of connexion I should
  endeavour to obtain? and doubtless you will oblige me in giving me a
  few general directions as to the best mode of succeeding in my
  undertaking.


  I remain,

  Dear Sir,

  Yours respectfully,

  D. T----.


  ----


  _Reply to Young Man intending to go into Business._


  Tarnham, May 4th, 187--

  DEAR MR. THOMAS,


  I was glad to receive your letter, and glad to find you have
  confided in your father's old friend for advice, under the
  circumstance of your starting in business. You do not tell me the
  amount of your capital; but whether large or small, the same rule
  should be adopted;--you must be very careful in the matter of
  investing your money, for without great precaution and judgment you
  may be a considerable loser. Do not lay in too large a stock. Should
  trade prove slack, the rent and taxes of your premises must be paid;
  the stock lies idle and deteriorates in value; and when once you dip
  into your capital there will be little prospect of your recovering
  yourself again.

  With regard to a locality, you must be guided very much by the
  number of the inhabitants, the nature of the neighbourhood, the
  requirements and the customs of the resident population; and if
  possible you should ascertain whether there is any one in the same
  business who may already have obtained the best connexion. Many
  small capitalists, in going into a new neighbourhood, have been
  bitterly disappointed in their expectations of making a good
  connexion. It is really a fact, that the first shops established in
  a new place generally fail. Should your neighbourhood be a poor one,
  guard against laying in a supply of luxuries. Necessaries will be
  certain to sell. Being agent to one of the large wine firms that
  supply grocers is a great advantage, as many a customer coming for
  wine is induced to purchase another article. There is one thing
  necessary to success in business, and that is civility, an amount
  of which in stock will cost nothing. And by treating all your
  customers, rich and poor, with due deference but not servility, you
  will find your custom very much increase. Let your customers see
  that it is a pleasure for you to oblige, and that it is not done
  with a view only of selfish greed or gain. Should you require advice
  at any future time, I shall be very glad indeed to give you any
  information you may require.

  I will close my letter with one more word of counsel, which is
  this--do not get into debt. Wishing you every success,


  Believe me,

  Your sincere friend,


  ----


  _From a Merchant abroad to his Brother, forwarding Goods for Sale,
  and requesting others._


  Leghorn, May 4th, 187--

  DEAR FRED,


  According to promise by last mail, I send you by first steamer
  twelve bales of raw silk, marked R. N. I need not tell you to
  dispose of them to the best advantage; they are in first-rate
  condition, warranted good; I examined each bale myself before
  shipping. I enclose an order for several different articles of
  British manufacture, to be sent at an early date; let them be as
  good and as _cheap_ as you can possibly procure. That class of goods
  is in great demand at present.


  Your affectionate brother,

  J. T.


  ----


  _Brother answering his Brother or Friend, relative to receipt of
  Goods._


  London, May 16th, 187--

  DEAR JOHN,


  Yours of the 4th was duly received, and the goods therein mentioned
  have since been delivered at the Custom-house. I immediately
  advertised them for sale in twelve different lots, but they were all
  bought up by one of the principal manufacturers in Spitalfields for
  a good sum, which I have lodged in the bank to your credit. I
  forwarded last week, by the _Orion_, the different articles you
  ordered. There are twenty bales, marked "A. X." I am told, by judges
  in the trade, that they are the best and cheapest that can be had. I
  shall be glad to hear they have realized your expectations.


  Your affectionate brother,

  FRED.


  ----


  _A Gentleman in the Corn Trade to another._


  Petersfield, January 31st, 187--

  DEAR ----,


  We had a tolerable supply of wheat at market to-day; there was
  rather a limited attendance, however, and business on the whole
  proceeded slowly. Most of the samples exhibited were in poor
  condition; and this, coupled with the sluggish demand, caused prices
  to give way from one to two shillings per quarter. Foreign wheat had
  but a dull inquiry. In the flour market there was a moderate
  consumptive business done, at about late terms; best descriptions of
  malting and grinding barleys were held for rather higher terms,
  with a quiet demand. I shall be in your neighbourhood on Sunday, and
  will give you a call.


  Yours very truly,

  J----N D----R.


  ----


  _From a Friend at Bradford to his Friend in London, on Business
  (Wool)._


  Bradford, January 17th, 187--

  DEAR ----,


  We are looking up, as there is a very good tone prevailing in the
  wool market, and a very fair amount of business has been done during
  the past week. The late advancing rates, consequent upon the high
  prices of country dealers, tend to check operations, which are quite
  of a consumptive character. Very good wethers continue in demand.
  Hogs are rather more in favour. Skin wool is also in fair request;
  pieces are very stiff. Hughes' sale the other day fully sustained
  the tendency of the market, both as respects demands and quotations.
  I will not lose an opportunity, believe me.


  I remain,

  Yours sincerely,

  JAMES BOLTON.


  ----


  _From a Shopkeeper in the Country, to a Wholesale Dealer._


  Cefnmawr, October 1st, 187--

  SIR,


  I was very sorry, on the last receipt of a parcel forwarded by you,
  to be obliged to find fault with some of the goods, which were not
  at all up to sample that was sent about two months since. You
  assured me, at the same time, that in future there should be no
  cause for complaint. Since then I have received my last order, and
  there is, if possible, a greater inferiority in some of the articles
  than on the previous occasion. I do not, believe me, complain
  without cause; my customers are disposed, I fear, to leave me, not
  being satisfied with the quality of the articles I sell. If you will
  make some reduction in price, I will retain those I have now;
  otherwise, however unwilling I may be to do so, I must return them.
  Awaiting an early reply,


  I remain, Sir,

  Yours truly,

  H. N----.


  ----


  _Wholesale Dealer, to Tradesman in the Country._


  London, October 4th, 187--

  DEAR SIR,


  We were sorry to find, on receipt of yours of the -- inst., that you
  had occasion again to find fault with the goods lately furnished.
  Some parcels forwarded to you were done so by inadvertence. We
  should be sorry to lose your custom, and also grieved to hear you
  had suffered any pecuniary loss. We are perfectly willing to agree
  to such a reduction in price as you, in your integrity, think fairly
  just.


  We remain,

  Sir,

  Yours obediently,

  A. O----.


  ----


  _To a Theatrical Manager._


  Shoreham, September, 187--

  SIR,


  Having seen in the _Era_ of last week that your theatre opens in a
  fortnight, and that a "General Utility Man" and "First Walking Lady"
  are wanted, I beg to offer the services of Mrs. A. and myself. We
  have filled the same places in many theatres (our last engagement
  was in the North). We have also been very frequently employed in
  arranging and conducting amateur performances. I trust to hear in a
  few days, as I leave this next week.


  I remain, Sir,

  Your obedient servant,

  H. ADAIR.


  ----


  _From a House and Estate Agent, acknowledging receipt of a
  Communication relative to Sale or Letting of a Property._


  84, Crane Street, London, Nov. 14th, 187--

  MADAM,


  I am obliged by your favour of yesterday's date, notifying that
  Treverne House will be vacant next month. I am sorry to say, things
  remain very bad here, and I find few purchasers at high prices. See
  my last letter respecting the offer made by Mr. Townsend. I gave you
  information about selling prices, and I do not see much improvement
  in the ideas of buyers at present. By the way, there is a small
  account of 4_l._ outstanding against you on my books, which
  doubtless you have overlooked. Will you kindly remit it? and please
  say if I am to take any step beyond placing Treverne House on my
  list, to sell or let.


  I remain, Madam,

  Yours faithfully,

  THOMAS OLIVER.

  Mrs. A. Morgan,
  18, St. George's Road, Hanover Square.


  ----


  _A Gentleman to a Friend, relative to a Bill._


  Tangel Lane, May 25th, 187--

  DEAR ROBSON,


  I had a note from Mr. B---- this morning relative to our bill for
  50_l._ I am very anxious about the matter. Will you call to-morrow,
  and bring as much money as you can collect? I am afraid he is
  inclined to be very disagreeable. I will do all I can.


  Yours ever,

  J. F. T.


  ----


  _Reply to Question as to Rent of, and permission to View, a House._


  Wandsworth, May 5th, 187--

  SIR,


  As we are about to go abroad, we wish to let our house quickly, and
  for this purpose have consented to reduce our terms from ---- guineas
  to ---- guineas, furnished. We are quite convinced this is a very
  cheap rental for the style and accommodation of the place, which we
  think you will be pleased with, if you will favour it with a visit.
  The scenery is beautiful; the parish church is close at hand, as
  also the station; the neighbourhood is excellent. There is a good
  market town within easy reach. Trusting to hear from you shortly,


  I remain,

  Yours faithfully,

  H---- H----.


  ----


  _From the Secretary of a Convalescent Hospital, applying for
  Expenses of Patients._


  Denbigh, July 20th, 187--

  SIR,


  I am directed by the committee of management to request you will
  remit the sum due for the maintenance of the sick people introduced
  by you during the last quarter. The amount due, I believe, was
  furnished you by the house surgeon a week or two since.


  I remain, Sir,

  Your obedient servant,

  H---- H---- I----.


  ----


  _From a Gentleman, enclosing a Certificate of Illness from a Medical
  Man, excusing himself from attending at his Office._


  Brompton, May 28th, 187--

  DEAR SIR,


  I enclose, as you wish, a certificate from Dr. R. P----, who has
  been attending me for the last few weeks. I hope most sincerely I
  shall be able to resume my duties about the middle of the week,
  particularly if I go on improving as I have done the last few days.

  I trust you will tender my best thanks to all for their forbearance
  and assistance during my illness.


  Believe me,

  Yours very truly,

  H. B. H.


  ----


  _Medical Attendant's Certificate._


  Brompton, May 28th, 187--


  I beg to certify that Mr. J. W---- is unable to attend to his
  duties. For some weeks past he has suffered greatly, but I think in
  a week or ten days he will be in a position to resume his post.


  B---- O----, M.D.


  ----


  _Reply to an Advertisement for the Appointment of Medical Officer to
  an Union Division._


  Bromley, May 14th, 187--

  GENTLEMEN,


  Herewith I enclose my testimonials, with an application for the
  appointment of Medical Officer to the Upton Division of your parish.
  I am duly qualified, as a reference to the "Medical Register" will
  show. Should you be pleased to elect me to the vacant post, I can
  assure you that no pains on my part shall be wanting to alleviate
  the sufferings of the poor, with due regard to the interests of the
  ratepayers.


  I remain,

  Gentlemen,

  Your obedient Servant,

  P---- A----.


  ----


  _To a Gentleman in reply as to an Agency for a Bordeaux Firm._


  Strand, London, March 6th, 187--

  SIR,


  I have received your letter of the 4th inst. If you feel confident
  that you are in a position to do a good and safe private trade for
  my firm I shall be pleased to hear from you with regard to
  references, &c. The commission we allow to our agents is 15 per
  cent., the cheapest qualities excepted, on which we allow only 10
  per cent. commission. Letters for me to be addressed "Care of
  Messrs. F----t and F----k, Strand, London." I shall be returning to
  Bordeaux shortly, and await your early reply


  Yours truly,

  JAMES MORTINE.

  _One of the Firm of Mortine & Co._


  ----


  _Letter urging Payment of a Debt._


  Doncaster, April 10th, 187--

  SIR,


  I have made several applications to you for the settlement of your
  account, now a long time over due. Our clerk has frequently called
  for it, but has not been fortunate enough to have an interview with
  you. I have a very large amount to make up by the end of this month,
  and must beg of you to give attention to it before that time. You
  must be aware that the account has already run far beyond my usual
  term of credit. Awaiting an early settlement,


  I am, Sir,

  Your obedient Servant,

  H. H. C.


  ----


  _A Tenant to a Landlord, requesting Time to Pay Rent._


  14, Steel Street, January 21st, 187--

  DEAR SIR,


  From most unexpected and distressing circumstances, of which perhaps
  you may, by report, have become acquainted before this, I regret
  that I have been unable to pay my rent for the past half-year. But
  as up to this time the payment has always been punctually made, I
  hope I may request your kind forbearance a short time longer.
  Trusting that you will accede to my request,


  I am, dear Sir,

  Yours respectfully,

  ADAM JONES.

  C. Douglas, Esq.


  ----


  _Answer from a Landlord in reply to a Tenant, relative to
  Non-payment of Rent._


  Lansdowne Place, April 14th, 187--

  SIR,


  As you assume, I have heard reports of your distressing
  disappointments. I think you have known me long enough to be sure I
  would not willingly distress any one, more especially a tenant who
  up to this time has been so punctual in his payments. When you can
  conveniently pay the last half-year's rent, do so; I shall not--rest
  assured--make any demand upon you for it. Trusting that your
  difficulties will soon be satisfactorily arranged,


  I remain,

  Yours faithfully,

  JOHN SAVAGE.


  ----


  _Reply from Landlord to a Tenant, relative to Non-payment of Rent._


  Hood's Place, Waverton, January 21st, 187--

  SIR,


  I regret to hear of the difficulties and disappointments which you
  tell me in your letter of the 19th inst. you are at present
  experiencing. Were it in my power to grant you time to pay the rent
  now overdue, I would most willingly do so; but I have heavy and
  serious calls upon me at this moment, and must therefore request you
  to forward me the amount by return of post.


  I remain,

  Sir,

  Yours obediently,

  JAMES GOODCHILD.


  ----


  _A Sugar Refiner applying for a Situation._


  Shoreditch, July 19th, 187--

  GENTLEMEN,


  Being out of employment at present, and hearing you required a
  sober, steady, active, and pushing man to superintend your business
  upstairs, I write to inform you that for years I was head upstairs
  man at Messrs. ---- and Co. You will see by the enclosed copy of a
  testimonial from them that the duties of filling out the goods up to
  the stoving, were carried out in such a manner as to convince them I
  thoroughly understood the business. A reply at your convenience will
  much oblige,


  Yours respectfully,

  O. ----

  Messrs. Sweet and Sharp.


  ----


  _An Application for an Appointment on a Railway._


  Chatham, January 1st, 187--

  SIR,


  Having received my discharge from the army after completing ten
  years' service, and being desirous of obtaining employment as a
  porter on a railway, I take the liberty of enclosing a copy of my
  discharge to you, understanding you have great influence in the
  appointment of the Company's servants. I have never filled such an
  appointment before, but I lived as footman for some years with a
  gentleman whose testimony as to character I also enclose. I trust
  you will favourably consider my case. Should my application prove
  successful I will always endeavour, by diligent discharge of my
  duty, to show my sense of your kindness.


  I remain, Sir,

  Your most obedient Servant,

  JAMES MAURICE.

  Samuel Stevens, Esq.,

  Secretary Tavistock Railway.


  ----


  _Reply to a Gentleman requiring a Situation as a Clerk and Foreign
  Correspondent._


  Austin Friars, July 14th, 187--

  DEAR SIR,


  I am glad to be able to offer you the position you sought. Your
  testimonials are excellent. Although you had many competitors, your
  knowledge of languages (more especially German) had great weight,
  and we have decided to appoint you. The gentleman who has held the
  appointment up to this time is, I find, residing in your
  neighbourhood. He may be known to you; if so, he would I dare say
  tell you we are extremely particular as to punctuality. You can
  commence your duties on Monday next.


  I remain,

  Dear Sir,

  Yours obediently,

  J. JONES.


  ----


  _Applying for a Clerkship._


  GENTLEMEN,


  Being desirous of obtaining a clerkship, and seeing by advertisement
  that your firm is in want of a confidential clerk, I beg to offer
  myself as a candidate for the situation. I held a similar
  appointment for some years with Messrs. Turine and Medei of San
  Paulo. I can write, speak fluently, interpret, and translate French,
  Spanish, and German.

  I enclose copies of my testimonials. Should you be pleased to
  appoint me, no exertion on my part shall be wanting to give you
  satisfaction.


  I remain,

  Gentlemen,

  Your obedient servant,


  ----


  _A Reply to an Advertisement for an Appointment as Secretary to an
  Institution._


  London, May 31st, 187--

  "_Wanted immediately, a Secretary._"

  SIR,


  With reference to the above advertisement I beg to enclose copies of
  testimonials, received within the last few months, by which you
  will see my capability for management. My friends, you will observe,
  are gentlemen of position and influence, with whom I am and have
  been for years on terms of the greatest intimacy. I need not say
  that, should I obtain the appointment in question, my interest with
  them and many other very influential friends should be exerted to
  the utmost of my power to promote in every way the interests of the
  Institution.


  I remain,

  Sir,

  Yours faithfully,

  H. V. Y.


  ----


  _Applying to a Friend for a Recommendation by a Young Man desirous
  of obtaining an Appointment._


  Chelsea, May 14th, 187--

  DEAR SIR,


  As you have known me for very many years, and as I am at present
  endeavouring to obtain an appointment with Messrs. L----g and
  L----g, may I take the liberty of asking you to give me a
  recommendation to them? You know that I have always borne an upright
  and unblemished character, and that while under your superintendence
  I was always attentive to my duties, and I believe that I obtained
  your confidence. Trusting you will comply with my request,


  I remain,

  Dear Sir,

  Yours respectfully,

  H. P. K.


  ----


  _An Application for a Situation in the Police._


  Sevenoaks, February 12th, 187--

  SIR,


  Having served with you for seven years in the --th Foot, during
  which time I was employed in situations of trust, and hearing now
  that you have great influence with the Commissioners of the Police
  Force of the City of London, may I take the liberty of asking you to
  assist me in obtaining an appointment in the Force? I am
  twenty-eight years of age, five feet ten inches in height, strong
  and healthy, and carried away many prizes at our regimental games.


  I remain, Sir,

  Yours most respectfully,

  H. J. I.,

  Late Sergeant 199th Foot.

  Colonel ----, Belgrave Square.


  ----


  _From a Person desirous of Employment as a Manager of a Wholesale or
  Retail Business._


  Shepherd's Bush, April 5th, 187--

  GENTLEMEN,


  I beg to forward a strong recommendation from Messrs. C---- and
  G---- for the post of manager of your [retail or wholesale] business.
  For some years previous to the late war I was employed by Messrs.
  ---- and ----, and was selected by their French correspondents to
  manage a branch establishment at B----, which is now progressing
  most satisfactorily. I am a good correspondent in French and Italian
  and German, and understand the business well in all its branches.

  Trusting that you will favourably consider my friend's
  recommendation,


  I remain, Gentlemen,

  Yours faithfully,


  ----


  _Reply to an Application relating to an Advertisement._


  420, Princes Street, London.

  SIR,


  In reply to yours respecting the advertisement in yesterday's
  _Times_, the appointment referred to was to fill up a vacancy in the
  Board of an established Brewery Company, "limited," and one which
  has the prospect of more than ordinary success. All the parties
  connected with it are of the highest respectability. ---- pounds are
  required to be invested in paid-up shares, and the remuneration of a
  director would probably be L---- per annum. There is one appointment
  also connected with this, worth L---- per annum; but the individual
  who takes this is expected to introduce L---- on share or loan
  capital. Should this be likely to suit you, please make an
  appointment for an early interview.


  Yours faithfully,


  ----


  _A Book-keeper and Accountant applying for Employment._


  Hampton, February 1st, 187--

  SIR,


  My late employer, Mr. ----, having relinquished business, and
  hearing that you required a book-keeper, I venture to apply for the
  situation. For many years I have had great business experience,
  having been entrusted with matters of great responsibility. I am a
  good accountant, and can speak and write German, French, and Italian
  fluently. Soliciting the favour of a reply,


  I remain, Sir,

  Yours faithfully,


  ----


  _Application for Employment in an Auctioneer's and Estate Agent's
  Office._


  Swansea, July 1st, 187--

  GENTLEMEN,


  Having lately been engaged in the office of S---- and Co.,
  auctioneers and surveyors in B----, and wishing to remove to London,
  where I have some very influential friends, I write to ascertain if
  you have a vacancy in your office. The whole control of the business
  here was left in my hands. I am an experienced surveyor, and can
  prepare particulars of sale, plans, reports, catalogues,
  advertisements, &c.; and am able to conduct the routine of business,
  both in and out of doors. I can refer you to persons in the City
  should you favour me with a reply.


  I remain, Sir,

  Yours respectfully,


  ----


  _A Person desirous of entering into Partnership in a Lucrative
  Profession._


  Ladbroke Terrace, May 1st, 187--

  SIR,


  Having seen that Mr. B---- has retired from your firm, I beg to
  introduce to your notice a friend of mine, who wishes to invest
  about 2000_l._ in a lucrative business. I have pointed out to him
  what a well established house yours is, and how the business could
  be readily increased by the assistance of an energetic partner. He
  is a man of education, has a great turn for business, and has
  travelled abroad. He is about thirty years of age, and can give you
  the most unexceptionable references. If you can call on me I will
  introduce him to you.


  Yours truly,


  ----


  _An Estate Agent, relative to a House of which his Client is anxious
  to Dispose._


  Salisbury, February 14th, 187--

  _Re Woodside._

  DEAR SIR,


  We have been expecting to hear from you _re_ the above, giving us
  instructions as to whether we shall put it up in the Mart this
  spring or not. If it is still your intention to do so, may we ask
  that you will kindly let us know at once, as we will then
  immediately get our bills out, and have them posted about, as this
  is generally requisite a month or two before the sale, so as to have
  it well advertised.

  If you would kindly favour us with a call, we shall be glad to
  confer with you upon the subject.

  We may mention we are expecting to have several other estates for
  sale by auction in the spring.

  An early call or reply would greatly oblige,


  Your most obedient servant,

  H. & Co.


  ----


  _From an Agent who has been engaged in endeavouring to arrange a
  matter of importance, applying for Remuneration._


  189, Trafalgar Square, September 14th, 187--

  DEAR MADAM,


  You will of course have observed, by the announcement in the
  newspapers of this day's date, that the business we have been so
  anxious about is settled. I do not wish to enlarge on my own humble
  services in the cause; but I am sure you will admit that if a
  professional gentleman had been employed, the advice and services I
  have rendered during the last few years would have been made into a
  very lengthy bill, far exceeding the amount you promised me,
  whatever the issue of the negotiations might be. I am well assured
  that I am in good hands, however, and had I been called upon to
  render ten times the required services and advice, you would have
  found me as ready and willing as I have been. Your kind favour of
  the --ult., enclosing cheque, was duly received. I need not say how
  glad I shall be to hear again from you at your earliest convenience.


  I remain,

  Dear Madam,

  Yours very faithfully,

  ERASMUS JACKSON.


  ----


  _Letter from a Traveller at Manchester, to his Employers in London._


  Manchester, January 18th, 187--

  DEAR SIRS,


  During the week very little change has taken place in prices quoted
  in my last. Cotton was a shade better on Monday, which caused
  sellers of yarn and cloth in this market to ask rather more in some
  instances; but the improvement was quite evanescent. The market,
  however, has continued steady. Some buyers have made attempts to
  operate at rather lower prices, and offers have been freely made at
  1/8_d._ to 1/4_d._ per lb. for yarns, but the offers have only been
  made in exceptional cases. For goods of all descriptions,
  notwithstanding some discouraging accounts from abroad, very
  considerable contracts for distant delivery in point of time could
  have been secured by making a very slight concession.

  Madapollams, jaconets, and mulls are not in active request, but
  maintain last week's values. Printers T cloths and domestics meet
  with a fair consumptive demand, and orders can only be placed at the
  prices of Tuesday. Large importations of cotton, and lower prices,
  are causing buyers to operate cautiously, both in yarn and cloth. I
  leave this to-morrow for MacClesfield.


  I remain, Gentlemen,

  Yours obediently,


  ----


  _Relative to an Advertisement, requesting a copy._


  Wareham, June 15th, 187-

  DEAR SIR,


  I have the pleasure of forwarding you, on the fly-leaf, a copy of
  the order for the advertisement. We trust it was in conformity with
  your wishes.


  Yours respectfully,

  H. M. B----.


  ----


  _Application for a Debt some time owing_.


  Windsor Buildings, May 14th, 187-

  MADAM,


  Mr. W. C. Durnford has placed his book debts in my hands to collect,
  and I shall be obliged by the payment of 1_l._ 18_s._ 6_d._, for
  which I find you are his debtor.


  I am, Madam,

  Your obedient servant,

  J. I----.


  ----


  _Application for an outstanding Account._


  London, May 4th, 187--

  Mrs. ----,

  MADAM,


  We beg to inform you that we are instructed by Messrs. B----n and
  C----n, of Duncan Street, who are desirous of clearing off several
  outstanding accounts which are considerably overdue, to make
  application to you for payment of an amount of L-- 18_s._ 4_d._ for
  articles supplied in July, 1868, and January, 1869; and to
  facilitate the next balancing of books, we ask you to kindly make it
  convenient to favour us with a cheque for the amount before the 30th
  inst.


  We are, Madam,

  Yours faithfully,

  H. F. & Co.


  ----


  _Applying for an Account, and furnishing particulars._


  Streatham, June 13th, 187--

  DEAR SIR,


  On the other side I hand you particulars of Mrs. Soames' account,
  for which please send me cheque.


  Yours truly,

  W. W.
  _pro_ P. F. C.


  ----


  _A Gentleman's Servant, applying for a Situation._


  Praetland Terrace, March 1st, 187--

  "_Valet Wanted._"

  SIR,


  In reply to an advertisement in yesterday's _Daily Telegraph_,
  headed as above, I beg to offer myself for the situation.

  For six years and a half I lived with the late General Aslett in
  that capacity; on his death the establishment was reduced, and I
  received my dismissal.

  I enclose a copy of my character from my previous masters, and also
  one from the proprietor of the Great Northern Hotel, who has known
  me for many years. I am unmarried, 5ft. 10in. in height, and
  twenty-eight years of age.


  I remain, Sir,

  Your most obedient humble servant,

  JAMES FIELD.


  ----


  _From a Coachman, requiring a place._


  Croydon, October 2nd.

  SIR,


  Having heard that you are in want of a coachman, I respectfully beg
  to offer myself for the situation.

  I have lived in my last place with J. G----, Esq., who will, I am
  sure give me a good character.


  I remain, Sir,

  Your obedient servant,

  JOHN JAMES.


  ----


  _Reply._


  Beech Park, October 4th.

  JOHN JAMES,


  I have received your application for my coachman's place, and should
  be glad to know of how many horses you had the care at Mr. ----'s;
  whether you had a groom under you; and if you can drive in London as
  well as in the country.

  Let me know also if you are a married man, and, if so, whether you
  have a family.


  ROBERT BRUCE.


  ----


  _Coachman's Reply._


  Croydon, October 6th.

  SIR,


  I had the care of three horses at Mr. ----, and he allowed me
  assistance in the stable.

  I am a married man and have five children. I have been used to drive
  in London during the season. If you should be pleased to engage me,
  I shall endeavour to do my best to serve you.


  I am, Sir,

  Your obedient servant,

  JOHN JAMES.


  ----


  _Applying for a Situation as a Gardener._


  Snowdrop Cottage, June 1st, 187--

  SIR,


  Understanding that there will be a vacancy shortly in your
  establishment for a gardener, I respectfully beg to offer myself for
  the place. From boyhood I have been under the best of gardeners. I
  served my apprenticeship with, and have been from time to time
  improving myself under the direction of one of the most experienced
  landscape gardeners employed in the Crystal Palace Gardens. I
  enclose you a copy of the opinion formed of my capabilities by those
  under whom I placed myself, and assure you my whole time and study
  shall be devoted to your service.


  I remain,

  Yours obediently,

  E. GARDNER.


  ----


  _A Gentleman ordering a Set of Harness from a Saddler._


  Edisbury Place, February 4th, 187--

  SIR,


  I send my coachman to consult with you as to the style and quality
  of a new set of double harness, which I shall shortly require. My
  own idea is that harness cannot be too light looking. I have also a
  great objection to a large amount of plating. My coachman will tell
  you the size of the horses; and please let me know by him the very
  lowest price.


  Yours obediently,

  JAMES HEATON.


  ----


  _Saddler, in reply._


  3, Tanning Road, February 1st, 187--

  SIR,


  Many thanks for your esteemed communication. From the description
  given by your coachman of the double harness required, I think I can
  supply you to your satisfaction for the sum of 24_l._, and
  everything will be of the best quality. Trusting that you will be
  satisfied with the quality and character of the goods,


  I remain,

  Sir,

  Your humble obedient servant,

  JOSEPH TANNER.


  ----


  _Gentleman in reply, objecting to Price._


  Edisbury Place, February, 187--

  SIR,


  On my return I was much surprised to find that your prices were so
  very much above the sum I proposed to expend for a set of double
  harness: however, I will consider the matter. A friend of mine who
  lately ordered a set of harness much the same as that which my
  coachman described to you, assures me that the charge for it was
  between 5_l._ and 6_l._ less. I will see you on the subject on my
  return from Rome.


  Yours obediently,

  JAMES HEATON.

  Mr. ----


  ----


  _Saddler, in reply._


  3, Tanning Road, February 1st, 187--

  SIR,


  As I am sorry at any time to lose custom, I take the liberty of
  requesting you to defer your decision until your return, and if you
  will then favour me with a call I think I can show you sets of
  harness at a price that you will find moderate. I enclose you a
  letter which I have received from a coachman, from which you will be
  able to judge for yourself of the pressure put upon us by servants.


  I remain,

  Sir,

  Yours respectfully,

  JOSEPH TANNER.

  James Heaton, Esq.


  ----


  _Requesting the Renewal of a Bill._


  Tipnor, February 4th, 187--

  DEAR SIRS,


  Having had great difficulty in collecting my accounts during the
  last half year (although I have strict assurances that they will
  all, or nearly all, be settled by the end of this month), I find I
  am unable to meet in full my acceptance to you for 150_l._ 14_s._
  2_d._ Would you oblige me by holding it to the end of this month? I
  shall then be prepared to meet the same. An early reply will oblige,


  Yours truly,

  Messrs. Farren, Johnson, and Styles.




  COMMERCIAL FORMS.


  _Form of Cheque to "Bearer."_


  London, Dec. 8th, 18--

  To the London Joint-Stock Bank, Chancery Lane Branch.


  Pay to ---- or bearer, One Hundred pounds.


  L100.     T. ROBINSON.


  ----


  _Form of Cheque to "Order."_


  London, Dec. 8th, 18--

  To the London Joint-Stock Bank, Chancery Lane Branch.


  Pay to ---- or order, One Hundred pounds.


  L100. T. ROBINSON.


  This form will require, previous to payment, the endorsement of the
  party to whom it is made payable.


  ----


  _Form of an Ordinary Bill of Exchange._


  London, May 1st, 18--

  L100.


  Three Months after date, pay to me or my order One Hundred pounds.
  Value received.


  T. ROBINSON.

  To Mr. Henry Jones, Liverpool.


  To make this a negotiable document, it has to be accepted by being
  signed across the face by the party on whom it is drawn, and
  endorsed on the back by the drawer.

  This admits of the following change, according to circumstances:
  instead of "three months after date," it may be "at sight," or at
  such a time "after sight," or at such a specified time, or "on
  demand;" and the instruction to pay may be "to A. B. or order."


  ----


  _Form of a Promissory Note._


  L100. London, July 1st, 18--


  Three Months after date, I promise to pay to Mr. Henry Jones, or
  order, One Hundred pounds, for value received.


  T. ROBINSON.

  Payable at The London Joint-Stock Bank, Chancery Lane Branch.


  To make this a negotiable document, it has to be endorsed by being
  signed across the back by the party to whom it is made payable.


  ----


  _Form of a Foreign Bill of Exchange._


  L100. Paris, June 1st, 18--


  Sixty days after sight of this First of Exchange (Second and Third
  unpaid) pay to the order of Messrs. Jones and Robinson, One Hundred
  pounds sterling, value received; and charge to account, with or
  without advice of


  WILLIAM SMITH.

  To Mr. Thomas Kelley, Manchester. Payable in London.


  The naming of the payee admits of the same variations as are
  exhibited in an ordinary Bill of Exchange. The time of payment may
  be, in like manner, variously expressed. The term "usance" is
  sometimes employed to express the period of running in foreign
  bills. It means a certain time fixed by custom as between any two
  places, and the period covered by a usance will therefore depend on
  the places of drawing and payment.


  ----


  _Form of Ordinary Receipt._


  London, May 2nd, 18--


  Received of Mr. John Frost, Twenty-nine pounds twelve shillings and
  sixpence.


  L29 12_s._ 6_d._ C. CUTHBERT.


  N.B.--All receipts for sums of Two pounds and upwards require to
  have a receipt stamp affixed to them, which stamp should be
  cancelled by being written across. The penalty for evading this law
  is 50_l._


  ----


  _Form of Receipt for Rent._


  London, August 18th, 18--


  Received of A. Wigram, Esq., Fifteen pounds, being one quarter's
  rent due on Midsummer Day last, for the premises occupied by him at
  No. 14, South Rupert Street, W.C.


  L15 0_s._ 0_d._       T. PHILLIPS.


  ----


  _Form of Agreement for Taking a House._

  Memorandum of an undertaking entered into this ---- day of ----,
  18--, between A. B. of ----, and C. D. of ----, as follows:--

  The said A. B. doth hereby let unto the said C. D. a dwelling-house,
  situate in the parish of ----, for the term of one year certain, and
  so on from year to year, and so on until half a year's notice to
  quit be given by or to either party, at the yearly rent of L----,
  payable quarterly; the tenancy to commence at ---- day next.

  And the said A. B. doth undertake to pay the land-tax, the
  property-tax, and the sewer-rate, and to keep the said house in all
  necessary repairs, so long as the said C. D. shall continue therein.
  And the said C. D. doth undertake to take the said house of A. B.
  for and at the before-mentioned term and rent, and pay all taxes
  except those on land or property and the sewer-rate, and to abide by
  the other conditions aforesaid.

  Witness our hands the day and year aforesaid.


  A. B. Witness E. F. C. D.


  [N.B.--Premises are sometimes let for a term of years, or upon other
  conditions different from those specified above; in such cases the
  agreement must, of course, be worded conformably.]


  ----


  _Form of Notice to Quit, from a Tenant to Landlord._


  SIR,


  I hereby give you notice that on or before the ---- day of ----next,
  I shall quit and deliver up possession of the house and premises I
  now hold of you, situate at ----, in the parish of ----, in the
  county of ----.

  Dated this ---- day of ----, 18--.


  Witness, K. I. G. H.

  To Mr. L. M.


  ----


  _Form of Notice to Quit, from Landlord to Tenant._


  SIR,


  I hereby give you notice to quit the house and appurtenances,
  situate at No. ----, which you now hold of me, on or before
  ---- next.

  Dated ----, 18--.


  Signed N. O. (Landlord).

  To Mr. P. Q.


  ----


  _Form of Will._

  THIS is the last Will and Testament of A. B., of No. ---- Street,
  ----. I hereby give and devise to my wife, Jane B., her heirs,
  executors, and administrators, for her and their own use and
  benefit, absolutely and for ever, all my estate and effects, both
  real and personal, whatsoever and wheresoever, and of what nature
  and quality soever, and I hereby appoint her, the said Jane B., sole
  executrix of this my Will. In witness whereof I have hereunto set my
  hand this ----day of ----, one thousand eight hundred and ----.


  A. B.


  Signed by the said A. B., in the presence of us, present at the same
  time, who in his presence and in the presence of each other, attest
  and subscribe our names as witnesses hereto.

  [N.B.--The above is a simple form of Will. They can, of course, be
  made in various ways, but in every case care should be taken that
  the persons mentioned in the Will should be fully and properly
  designated, and that the testator's intentions be stated in language
  as clear and precise as possible.]


  ----


  _Form of Bill of Sale._

  KNOW all men by these presents, that I, A. B., of ----, for and in
  consideration of the sum of ----, in hand, paid, at and before the
  sealing and delivery hereof, by C. D., of ----, the receipt whereof
  I do hereby acknowledge, have bargained and sold, and by these
  presents do bargain and sell unto the said C. D., all the goods,
  household stuff, and implements of household, and all other goods
  whatsoever mentioned in the schedule hereunto annexed, now remaining
  and being in ----. To have and to hold all and singular the goods,
  household stuff, and implements of household, and every of them by
  these presents, bargained and sold unto the said C. D., his
  executors, administrators, and assigns for ever, and I, the said A.
  B., for myself, my executors, and administrators, all and singular,
  of the said goods, unto the said C. D., his executors and
  administrators and assigns, and against all and every other person
  and persons whatsoever, shall and will warrant and for ever defend
  by these presents, of which goods I, the said A. B., have put the
  said C. D., in possession, by delivering him one silver candelabrum,
  &c., on the sealing hereof; in witness whereof I have hereunto put
  my hand and seal this ---- day of ----, in the year of our Lord one
  thousand eight hundred and ----


  A. B.

  Signed, sealed, and delivered, } C. D.
          in the presence of us, } E. F.




  DIRECTIONS FOR ADDRESSING PERSONS OF RANK, &c.


  _1. In Letters or Conversation._
  _2. The Directions of Letters._


  THE ROYAL FAMILY.


  The QUEEN--

  1. Madam; Most Gracious Sovereign; May it please your Majesty.

  2. To the Queen's Most Excellent Majesty.


  The Sons and Daughters, Brothers and Sisters of Sovereigns--

  1. Sir, or Madam, May it please your Royal Highness.

  2. To His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales.

  To Her Royal Highness the Duchess of Cambridge.


  OTHER BRANCHES OF THE ROYAL FAMILY.


  1. Sir, or Madam, May it please your Highness.

  2. To His Royal Highness the Duke of Cambridge; or, To Her Royal
  Highness the Princess Mary of Teck.


  THE NOBILITY.


  A Duke, or Duchess--

  1. My Lord Duke, or Madam, May it please your Grace.

  2. To His Grace the Duke of Bedford; or, To Her Grace the Duchess of
  Bedford.


  A Marquis, or Marchioness--

  1. My Lord, or Madam, May it please your Lordship, or, May it please
  your Ladyship.

  2. To the Most Noble the Marquis, or Marchioness, of Westminster.


  An Earl or Countess--the same.

  To the Right Honourable the Earl, or Countess, of Shrewsbury.


  A Viscount or Viscountess--

  1. My Lord, or Madam, May it please your Lordship, or, May it please
  your Ladyship.

  2. To the Right Honourable Viscount, or Viscountess, Lifford.


  A Baron or Baroness--the same.

  To the Right Honourable, the Lord Wensleydale, or The Lady St. John.

  The widow of a Nobleman is addressed in the same style, with the
  introduction of the word Dowager in the Superscription of her
  letters.

  To the Right Hon. the Dowager Countess of Chesterfield.

  The Sons of Dukes and Marquises, and the eldest Sons of Earls, have,
  by courtesy, the titles of Lord and Right Honourable; and all the
  Daughters have those of a Lady and Right Honourable.

  The younger Sons of Earls, and the Sons and Daughters of Viscounts
  and Barons, are styled Honourable.


  OFFICIAL MEMBERS OF THE STATE.


  A Member of Her Majesty's Most Hon. Privy Council--

  1. Sir, or My Lord, Right Honourable Sir, or My Lord, as the case
  may require.

  2. To the Right Honourable ----,[1] Her Majesty's Principal
  Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

  [1] Here write the name, and specify the title or rank of the person
      addressed, as "The Right Honourable the Earl of Winchelsea."


  AMBASSADORS AND GOVERNORS UNDER HER MAJESTY.


  1. Sir, or My Lord, as the case may be; May it please your
  Excellency.

  2. To his Excellency the French (or other) Ambassador.

  3. To his Excellency ----,[2] Lieutenant General, and General
  Governor of that part of the United Kingdom called Ireland.

  [2] Here write the name, and specify the title or rank of the person
      addressed, as "The Right Honourable the Earl of Winchelsea."


  JUDGES.


  1. My Lord, May it please your Lordship.

  2. To the Right Honourable ----, Lord Chief Justice of England.

  The Lord Mayor of London, York, or Dublin, and the Lord Provost of
  Edinburgh, during office--the same.

  1. My Lord, May it please your Lordship.

  2. To the Right Honourable ----, Lord Mayor of London. To the Right
  Honourable ----, Lord Provost of Edinburgh.

  The Lord Provost of every other town in Scotland is styled
  Honourable.

  The Mayors of all Corporations (excepting the preceding Lord
  Mayors), and the Sheriffs, Aldermen, and the Recorder of London, are
  addressed Right Worshipful; and the Aldermen and Recorders of other
  Corporations, and the Justices of the Peace, Worshipful.


  THE PARLIAMENT.


  House of Peers--

  1. My Lords, May it please your Lordships.

  2. To the Right Honourable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in
  Parliament assembled.


  House of Commons--

  1. May it please your Honourable House.

  2. To the Honourable the Commons of the United Kingdom of Great
  Britain and Ireland.


  The Speaker of the House of Commons--

  1. Sir, or Mr. Speaker.

  2. To the Right Honourable ----, the Speaker of the House of
  Commons.


  A Member of the House of Commons not ennobled--

  1. Sir.

  2. To Thomas Hughes, Esq., M.P.


  THE CLERGY.


  An Archbishop--

  1. My Lord, May it please your Grace.

  2. To his Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury; or, To the Most
  Reverend Father in God, ----,[3] Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

  [3] Here write the Christian but not the surname.

  A Bishop--

  1. My Lord, May it please your Lordship.

  2. The Right Reverend the Bishop of London.

  3. To the Right Reverend Father in God, ----,[4] Lord Bishop of
  Peterboro'.

  [4] Here write the Christian but not the surname.

  A Dean--

  1. Reverend Sir.

  2. To the Very Reverend Dr. ----, Dean of Westminster.


  An Archdeacon--

  The Venerable the Archdeacon of ----.

  Chancellors are addressed in the same manner.

  The rest of the Clergy--

  1. Sir,--Reverend Sir.

  2. To the Rev. Dr Campbell.

  To the Rev. J. Jones; or, to the Rev. Mr. Wilson, &c.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Gentleman's Model Letter-writer, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GENTLEMAN'S MODEL ***

***** This file should be named 38235.txt or 38235.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/2/3/38235/

Produced by Delphine Lettau, Matthew Wheaton and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
