The Project Gutenberg EBook of Cornish Catches, by Bernard Moore

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Cornish Catches
       and Other Verses

Author: Bernard Moore

Release Date: January 13, 2012 [EBook #38565]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CORNISH CATCHES ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Stephanie McKee and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









    CORNISH CATCHES




AUTHOR'S NOTE.


The Author begs to thank the Editors of the following papers for their
courtesy in allowing him to reprint some of the poems in this book:--The
_Academy_, _Country Life_, _Fry's Magazine_, the _Grand Magazine_, the
_Sphere_, _T.P's Magazine_, the _Vineyard_, the _Windsor Magazine_, the
_Western Morning News_, and the _Westminster Gazette_.


_Hutton, Advertiser Press, Ormskirk._




    CORNISH CATCHES

    AND OTHER VERSES

    BY

    BERNARD MOORE

    [Illustration]

    LONDON

    ERSKINE MACDONALD

    1914




TO MY MOTHER.




CONTENTS


    PAGE

    Well, there 'tis                    9

    Gardens                            10

    Grocery                            12

    Eddication                         14

    Jenny                              16

    In the Kittereen                   17

    Maids                              18

    Cap'n John                         19

    Dolly Pentreath                    20

    Sunday                             22

    Granfer's Proverbs                 24

    Seining Song                       25

    How be'ee, me deear?               26

    What have'ee catched?              27

    A Mevagissey Haul                  28

    Dicky                              30

    The Old Fisherman's Lament         31

    A Looe Lay                         32

    On the Kay                         33

    Riches                             34

    A Fireside Spell                   35

    Cornish Comfort                    36

    I mind me                          37

    Sure 'nuff                         38

    The Garment of Time                40

    In a Garden                        41

    Sorrow's Courage                   42

    A Choosing                         43

    Star Signs                         44

    The Old Knight's Song              45

    Fealty                             47

    Treasure Trove                     48

    Roses and Rue                      49

    Definitions                        50

    Blue Sky                           51

    Shadows                            52

    When I was a Lad                   53

    A Call                             55

    The Return                         56

    In the Bay                         58

    Sea Foam                           59

    Echoes                             60

    A Ballade of Cornwall              61

    The Fisherman's Prayer             63




WELL, THERE 'TIS


    Well, there 'tis. You wakes up cryin' an' callin',
      You'm cold an' hungered, an' skeered o' the turble dark;
    It feels most like a gert black cloud's a fallin'
      To crunch you to nothin', an' leave you smuttered an' stark.
    But a kind hand comes when the gert black clouds would drownd you,
      An' a warm breast holds you tight to cuddle an' kiss,
    An' you know that the world o' Love be all around you.
                Well! there 'tis.

    Then you grows a bit, and you finds a mort o' pleasure
      In the rush o' the waves an' the roarin' wind in the sky;
    An' you plays your games at Pirates seekin' treasure,
      Or Penny-come-quick when the Breton Boys go by.
    An' you don't much trouble at difrent kinds o' weather,
      If 'tis sunny 'tis sunny, but rain won't make you miss
    The chance to trample away thro' the moorland heather;
                Well! there 'tis.

    But you keeps on growin', an' then you begin in a fashion
      To want some things you'd never a thought on before;
    An' you sees some eyes be blue, an' you gets a passion
      For jest a very perticlar cottage door.
    An' you don't feel tired at the end o' the day o' toilin'
      So long as it ends with the sound an' song of a kiss,
    So long as it ends with arms round you coilin';
                Well! there 'tis.

    Then you grows old, an' at last you falls on sleepin'.
      Do you count you'll be all alone in the turble dark?
    Do you think you'll be left to the sound o' wailin' an' weepin'
      Lonely an' cold in the cloam, unmothered an' stark?
    When you was a baby, helpless an' cryin' an' callin'
      Didn' the kind arms take, an' the warm lips kiss?
    An' won't there be Arms at last, to save you from fallin'?
                Well! there 'tis.




GARDENS


    Passun he've a garden, 'tis trim an' nate an' vitty,
      He'm mortal proud o' growin' things that's turble hard to grow;
    He'm mighty fond of orchises an' mazed for pellygomiuns,
      An' calls 'em all furrin' names us don't belong to know.

    Squire, he have a garden, a gert an' gorjus garden,
      With hollyhocks a standin' like soljers in the sun;
    He likes tremenjus peonies, an' roses crowdin' arches,
      An' thinks as what the passun grows the whishtest sort o' fun.

    Feyther have a garden, but don't run much to flowers,
      For he've to think o' tatties, an' useful sort o' things;
    His cabbages be famous, an' his collyflowers a wonder,
      An' you should see the runners when they'm scarlet on the strings!

    But I've a finer garden than the squire or the passun;
      'Tis all along the hedgerows, an' all about the lanes;
    It stretches up the hillside an' spreads acrost the moorland,
      'Tis sweet with Cornish sunshine an' green with Cornish rains.

    There's scent of honeysuckle shakin' sweet along the sunshine,
      An' ragged robins sprinklin' scarlet stars among the grass,
    An' foxgloves, with a peal o' bells a swingin' in the steeple,
      A ringin' fairy music to the breezes as they pass.

    An' where the lanes climb up along, an' break upon the moorland,
      The heather weaves a carpet all acrost the purple hills;
    An' gorse gleams in the sunshine like a thousand burnin' bushes,
      An' birds shout happy answers to the ripplin' o' the rills.

    So squire may keep his garden, an' his gardeners a diggin',
      An' passun's clanely welcome to the flowers he counts so fine,
    (I won't say nort o' feyther's, for his tatties be so mealy),
      But the bestest of all gardens is the garden that is mine.




GROCERY


    John Pengelly be a clever man,
      An' he keeps a grocery store;
    He've got a seat on the Burryin' Board,
      An' a sow as turns three score;
    On Sunday night he holds the plate
      An' on Thursday shuts at four.

    He talks to Passon on clover crops,
      An' Farmer Hain on Sin;
    An' keeps the Parish Register,
      An' a dog that isn' thin;
    An' wears a watch-chain on his chest,
      An' a Moses beard on his chin.

    He allays takes the rhubarb prize
      At the Flower Show every year;
    An' if 'ee mind to order it
      He'll get 'ee Bottled Beer;
    (Though some as don't agree with that)
      Besides it's rather dear.

    Two different kinds of lard he sells,
      But awnly one of tay;
    An' he've a yaller oilskin coat
      He hopes to sell some day,
    But the awnly man it might have fit
      Was drownded out to say.

    His matches hang in a cabbage net,
      An' his onions hang in strings;
    An' allays at the Church Bazaar
      He sells the Hooplar rings;
    An' if us get a concert up
      An' there's no one else, _he_ sings.

    So be you'm seekin' clever men,
      Come down along o' we;
    We'll show 'ee John Pengelly then
      Behind his grocery;
    An' when you taste his peppermints,
      Sure 'nuff, tis mazed you'll be.




EDDICATION


    Feyther sez as "Larnin' be the proper trade for boys,"
    An' so us have to go to school, an' dursn't make a noise,
    But jest sits on a form an' hears what schoolmaister do say,
    An' all the time we'm thinkin' how the boats go in the bay.

    There's different kinds o' larnin', an' there's some I can't abide,
    They'm worse than swimmin' round the Main at ebbin' o' the tide.
    I likes the tales o' travels an' at readin' do be praised,
    An' I'm dacent doin' Adders, but Goseinters send me mazed.

    The Bible stories baint so bad excep' the fat head calf,
    An' when schoolmaister tells of 'ee I allays wants to laugh;
    Our Kitty likes the donkeys as was found by Sunno Kish,
    But I likes best the tale about Ole Peter an' the fish.

    Schoolmaister knaws a mort o' things as baint a bit o' use;
    I've heered un tell the biggest boys about high potty mews;
    But if he had to earn his bread, the same as feyther do,
    I count he'd soon belong to know it wasn' much he knew.

    One day he gave a sum about a herrin' an' a half,
    An' sez as how the boys was rude when they began to laugh;
    He must a been a bufflehead to think as people bought
    _Half_ herrins, when we'm bringin' 'em by thousans into port.

    I'm allays sittin' thinkin' when he'm talkin' to the board,
    About the many things there be a boy can larn aboard;
    There's sheets to haul an' gear to staw an' reefs to take an' tie,
    An' wind to watch acomin' in the corner of your eye.

    Now if they larned us some o' these, or how to bend a hook,
    'Twould be a darned sight usefuller than rubbige in a book;
    But what's the good o' larnin' how to hold a scriggley pen,
    An' spell a lot of orkard words, an' say to ten times ten?

    'Tis little use to grumble when 'ee have to keep the rules,
    An' jest so long as there be boys, I count there must be schools;
    An' tho' they'm good for larnin' if 'ee awnly knaws the way,
    I'd sooner be a whifflin' arter mack'rel in the bay.




JENNY


    When Jenny goes a milkin' in the dewy time o' morn
    I allays be contrivin' to be callin' at the farm,
    For her cheeks be red as roses an' her hair like rippled corn,
    An' I be fairly mazed to kiss the dimple on her arm.

      Jenny, Jenny, won't 'ee let me love 'ee? You'm brighter far
      than any star That's shinin' up above 'ee. Sartin sure, you
      make me mazed, Iss, me deear, a whist an' crazed; Jenny, Jenny,
      won't 'ee let me love 'ee?

    When Jenny goes to Fairin' with blue ribbons in her hair,
    I count the Queen of England never looks a half as sweet,
    An' when she'm in the Country dance no other maids be there,
    For I never stops a glazin' at the twinkle of her feet.

      Jenny, Jenny, won't 'ee let me love 'ee?

        Aw----But!!!

    When Jenny goes to Mittin' House dressed in her Sunday clo'es
    She looks so like a hangell in her little pew apart,
    That when I try to sing the hymns my throttle seems to close,
    An' I cussn't hear the sermon for the beatin' of my heart.

     Jenny, Jenny, won't 'ee let me love 'ee? You'm brighter far
     than any star That's shinin' up above 'ee; Sartin sure, you
     make me mazed, Iss, me deear, a whisht an' crazed; Jenny,
     Jenny, won't 'ee let me love 'ee?




IN THE KITTEREEN (Kittereen: Cornish for a covered cart).


    Jenny an' me in the Kittereen
      Drove to Callington Fair;
    There wasn' much more than a foot between
    Jenny an' me in the Kittereen
    For both of us was just thirteen,
      An' of course us didn' care.

    Jenny an' me in the Kittereen
      Drove from Callington Fair;
    There wasn' much more than an inch between
    Jenny an' me in the Kittereen
    For both of us was just fifteen
      With a packet of pops to share.

    Jenny an' me in the Kittereen
      Drove to Callington Fair;
    There wasn' much less than a yard between
    Jenny an' me in the Kittereen
    For both of us was just seventeen
      An' both knew the other was there.

    Jenny an' me in the Kittereen
      Drove from Callington Fair;
    There was very much less than an inch between
    Jenny an' me in the Kittereen
    For wasn' we both of us turned nineteen?
      An' wasn' there Love to share?




MAIDS


    I've knawed a many o' Devon maids with cheeks merry an' red,
    They'm pleasant an' 'ansum single, an' homely an' cosy wed;
    But I shan't marry a Devon maid; I reckon I'd rather be dead.

    I've seed a many o' London maids abroad in London Town;
    They'm larky an' flittery single, but marryin' calms 'em down;
    But I shan't marry a London maid; I reckon I'd rather drown.

    For I have knawed the Cornish maids, an' like 'em best of any.
    So take the London an' Devon maids, they'm goin' at two a penny;
    An' I shan't marry nobody else, for I be tokened to Jenny.




CAP'N JOHN


    Cap'n John has been to Frisky,
      Injy an' Australy too;
    Now he runs a lug-an'-mizzen
      Arter Pilchers out o' Looe,
          Iss, he do.

    Cap'n John was braave an' slippey
      Till the say catched hold of he;
    Now he'm tanned an' tough an' wrinkled,
      Simming like mohogany.
          Iss, he be.

    Cap'n John baint smurt an' 'ansum,
      Like a claned up Sarvice Coor;
    Stiff hair all aroun' his niddick
      Makes him like a hedgaboor.
          Iss, be Gor!

    Cap'n John don't boast o' beauty,
      Beauty don't set down with tar;
    But he've got a pair o' patches
      Shows how dacent patches are.
          Iss, with tar.

    Cap'n John thinks books is rubbige;
      Sez that printin' spoils his eyes;
    But he reads the book o' weather
      Written in the say an' skies;
          Iss, he's wise.

    Cap'n John, us looks towards 'ee,
      Wish 'ee luck when shuttin' seine,
    Wish 'ee tummals at the jowstin',
      Wish 'ee out an' home again.
    Clink you'm cider at the call,
          "Cap'n John, an' One an' All."




DOLLY PENTREATH


    Dolly Pentreath is dead an' gone, her stone stands up to Paul;
    But Dolly Pentreath her still lives on in the hearts of One and All.
    Her smoked an' snuffed, an' the cusses her knowed was mortal hard to
        bate,
    But her carried her creel like a Mousehole maid, an' allays selled
        out her cate.

    Her wern't afeerd at livin' alone, an' many a tale is told,
    As shows as how her face was brass, but her heart was true as gold.
    One day a sailor had tooked his leave afore his leave was given,
    An' knowed if they catched him the yard arm rope would show him the
        way to Heaven,

    So he scatted to Dolly, an' jest in time her thought of the chimley
         wide,
    An' her collared him hold by the slack of his breeks an' shoved him
        up inside.
    Cussin' an' fussin' they searchers came, but awnly Dolly they sees,
    Washin' her feet in her old oak keeve, with her petticoat up to her
        knees.

    An' didn' her give them a tang o' tongue, an' didn' her cuss them
        sweet,
    For thinkin' her'd let a man bide there an' see her washin' her feet?
    But her called the loudest cusses of all, an' scraiched like a rat
        at a stoat,
    When the sailor gave a chokely cough for the fuzzen smoke in his
        throat.

    The storm her raised drove the buffleheads out a grumpling into the
        street,
    An' the sailor washed hisself in the keeve where Dolly had washed
        her feet.

           *       *       *       *       *

    Dolly Pentreath is dead an' gone, her stone stands up to Paul;
    But Dolly Pentreath her still lives on in the hearts of One and All.




SUNDAY IN THE CORNISH PORT


    There b'aint no fishin' in the bay,
    The boats be moored 'longside the kay,
    With sails reefed in an' stawed away,
      An' all so calm an' still--
    Excep' the ripple o' the tide,
    An' gulls awheelin' up 'longside
    The clifts, to where the Church do bide
      Atop the Flag-staff Hill.

    Above the Slip where boats be moored
    The cottage doors be set abroad,
    An' singin' voices praise the Lord
      For mercies which endure;
    An' happy childer in the street,
    Dressed all so vitty, clane, an' neat,
    Puts somethin' in the music sweet
      It didn' had before.

    Now every fisherman be dressed
    In shiny suit o' black for best,
    As fittin' to the Day o' Rest,
      An' sign o' Death to Sin;
    The jerseys in the lockers bide,
    For Sunday knaws its proper pride,
    An' likes to show a clane outside
      To match the heart within.

    Mid mornin', Church bell clangs a call.
    An' some don't take no heed at all,
    But some goes up the hill to Paul,
      An' some to Chapel goes;
    Whilst some strolls down upon the kay,
    An' sits an' spits into the say;
    But all the same, they knaws the Day,
      An' doesn' dirt their clo'es.

    But whether Church be right or b'aint,
    Or Mittin' Houses make'ee faint,
    Or whether you'm a solemn saint
      Or jest a cheerful sinner,
    For sartin, not so long by noon,
    You'll all be playin' the same tune
    Wi' knife an' fork an' mebbe spoon,
      Asettin' down to dinner.

    Then mos'ly us do strawl away
    Along the clifts that line the bay,
    Though some prefers a dish o' tay
      An' snooze along the settle;
    But whether we'm been far or near,
    We'm never losted, don't 'ee fear.
    We'm allays home in time to hear
      The singin' o' the kettle.

    An' when the Sun, a lantern red
    Asinkin' at the World's mast-head,
    Goes down, then us goes home to bed:
      An' so us ends the Sunday.
    For Sunday 'tis the Day o' days,
    When all the fish do as 'em plaise,
    While in the little port we prays
      A banger catch for Monday.




GRANFER'S PROVERBS


    Granfer sits in the winder an' looks acrost the bay;
    Sure 'nuff he thinks a mort o' things tho' 'tis little he has to say.
    'Tis time he came to his moorin's an' heaved his gear ashore,
    For the sea is a bit too chancy for a man gone eighty-four.

    He've catched a plenty of wisdom in the net inside his head,
    An' often us be tellin' of the clever things he've said.
    They'm cleverer nor things you read in books an' papers too,
    Because he dosn' make 'em up, but awnly knaws they'm true.

    He've good advice for sailor lads who musn't come to grief:
    "Don't try to shine you'm centrebit by cuts acrost the reef.
    Don't make you'm mainsail fast an' look for mermaids on the lew,
    An' don't take cider kegs aboard because they spile the view."

    He've good advice for all the maids whom lookin' arter lads:
    "If you baint catchin' mackerel then be content with skads;
    An' if you've tried the seinin' an' the fishes won't be took,
    Just get a dacent bit o' bait, an' drop a line an' hook."

    He've good advice for husbands, which he tells them all alone:
    "Go suant comin' into port an' watch the weather cone;
    Jest keep your hellum stiddy if there's tokens of a squall--
    Cross words is nigh as useless as a porpus in the trawl."

    He've good advice for housewives but he keeps it to hisself:
    For he knows they awnly puts it with the jowds upon the shelf;
    His wisest words to women be the words he doesn' say,
    For he jest sits in the winder an' looks acrost the bay.




A CORNISH SEINING SONG


    The Huer is up on the cliff, me deears,
      Glazing out to say;
    Slip youm moorin's and ship youm gears,
      There's Pilchers in the Bay;
    Lift youm faistins on muggoty pie.
      Down along an' away.

    'Tisn the time for maids, me deears,
      Don't 'ee be duffed by they;
    There's lashins o' time to taise their ears
      An' maze 'em wi' fal-de-lay.
    They'll wait till arter the Pilcher's catched,
      Down along an' away.

    Us'll be shuttin' soon, me deears,
      There's purple on the say,
    An' jowstin' this arternoon, me deears,
      When us comes back to kay.
    Who's for a banger, a bender haul
      Down along an' away?

    Pilchers is budiful fried, me deears,
      Or baked in a bussa o' clay,
    So sterry away wi' the tide, me deears,
      For Pilchers in the Bay.
    Slip youm moorin's an' ship youm gears,
      Down along an' away!




"HOW BE'EE, ME DEEAR?"

(The Cornish Greeting).


    "How be'ee, me deear?" I heard her say,
    But I was foached to be far away,
    For the breeze was braave an' the boat in the bay,
      An' Granny was old an' grey.

    I didn' turn back to say "Good-bye,"
    For slottery weather was in the sky,
    The anchor was up an' the punt stood by,
      Yet Granny was old an' grey!

    Far I sailed, an' didn' I cast
    Many a look at the old times past?
    The lil' grey port as I saw it last?
      An' Granny old an' grey?

    At last I came from the yowlin' main,
    Guessin' to see the place again
    Jest as it was, as nate an' plain,
      An' Granny old an' grey.

    Why didn' I seed the end was nigh?
    Why didn' I bide to say "Good-bye?"
    It's too late now to make reply,
      Granny is gone away.

    But someday beyond the farthest tide,
    At last I shall safely at anchor ride,
    An' I shall be hailed as I come 'longside,
      "How be'ee, me deear?"




"WHAT HAVE'EE CATCHED?"


    "What have'ee catched, lil' lad on the shore?"
    "Shrimps an' a crayfish out o' the pool,
    An' a tinful o' lugworms, a tidy score,
    To scrig on the night lines after school."

    "What have'ee catched, lil' maid in the lane?"
    "The scent o' the thyme an' the cheep of a bird,
    An' the sound of a song that is joy an' pain,
    But the sweetest song as ever I heard."

    "What have'ee catched, strong man from the say?"
    "A seineful o' pilchers, a sailful o' foam,
    An' a twenty-knot breeze from the nor'rard away,
    That drove me a-scuddin' an' rollickin' home."

    "What have'ee catched, good dame by the door?"
    "A lil' brown sail comin' with the tide,
    That's bringin' back peace to my heart once more,
    An' my man again to the chimley side."




A MEVAGISSEY HAUL

(A million pilchards, August 6th, 1912).


    A Sou' Sou' West was blowin' up to more than half a gale,
      An' a prutty bit o' billow talked ashore,
    But there baint no use for seiners as be afeared to sail,
      When the catches have been runnin' light an' poor,
              So we plugged out oar to oar.
        Out along from old Mevagissey,--
        Beatin' out from old Mevagissey,--
        With a sky full o' scud blowin' over us,
        An' a stiddy brazzle plonkin' at the bow.

    We shut the seine, an' watched the lights a dancin' green an' red,
      An' wallowed first to starboard, then to port,
    Until the dimsey touched the West, an' we was slowin' dead,
      An' then we knawed 'twas tummals we had caught,
              For the corks was bobbin' short.
        Out along from old Mevagissey,--
        Low lay old Mevagissey,--
        When the grey dawn showed the shadows over us,
        An' the brazzle came alippin' at the bow.

    We lugged the silver net aboard until the bilge was hid,
      For crates was little use for such a haul,
    An' then we let the main-sheet go, an' home along we slid,
      With the hellum nearly buried in a squall,
              But we didn' care at all.
        For it was home along to old Mevagissey,
        Back along to old Mevagissey,
        With the dangers of the night blown over us,
        An' A MILLION PILCHERS slitherin' below.

    We tacked into the harbour with the ground-say grindin' hard,
      An' we bumped to berth at last 'longside the quay,
    Which was chockered up with barrels so you couldn' step a yard,
      When we brought our shinin' harvest from the say:--
            Now 'tis salt an' stawed away.
        An' we'm home along in old Mevagissey,
          Home again in old Mevagissey,
        With the cloud o' winter care blown over us,
          Whatever winter winds may blow.




DICKY


    A year agone, a year agone, our Dicky sailed away;
    A blue light danced about his eyes like sunshine on the bay,
    He whissled passin' down along, his heart was glad an' gay,
    A year agone, a year agone, when Dicky sailed away.

    A year agone! a year agone! The time do speed so fast,
    It scairce do seem a year agone we saw our Dicky last;
    It seems as if his steps must come aclatterin' to the door,
    An' he be claimin' payment with his breakfast for the score.

    He loved the lanes in springtime an' he loved them at the fall,
    But when the honeysuckle bloomed he loved them best of all;
    I mind me how he had a sprig stuck in his cap that day,
    A year agone, a year agone, when Dicky sailed away.

    There wasn' lad was handier at stawin' of a sail,
    There wasn' lad was cheerfuller at stemmin' through a gale,
    There wasn' lad was heartier at fishin' or at play,
    A year agone, a year agone, when Dicky sailed away.

    A many ships come into port along the flowin' tide,
    A many lads come home again an' safe in harbour ride,
    But all in vain we watch for one, an' all in vain we pray.

           *       *       *       *       *

    A year agone, a year agone, our Dicky sailed away!




THE OLD FISHERMAN'S LAMENT


    'Tis well an' fine for the steam-trawler to sweep the floor of the say,
    But 'tis turble hard for the fisherman as awnly sails the Bay,
    For the fish gets scaircer an' scaircer an' hardly ait at all,
    An' what's to be catched with the seinin' be barely wuth the haul.

    Us used to count on the herrin's to buy us Chris'mus cheer,
    But the catch runs lighter an' lighter, an' pervisions be allays dear,
    An' what us gets in the crab-pots that don't take long to sell,
    Especial when most of the pots be gone on a long ground swell.

    'Tis a whisht poor life for a lad to lead, an' mos'ly they wont abide,
    But sterry away to the furrin' ports athurt a keenly tide,
    An' us be left, all lone an' long, to moil as best us may,
    While the clankin' trawler steams along, an' sweeps the floor of
        the say.




A LOOE LAY


    Ole Sammy took fish from Downderry to Looe;
    Jest the darnedest thing that Ole Sammy could do;
    An' nobody knawed what Ole Sammy was thinkin'
    For when he got there the fish was a stinkin'.

    He cried them in stores an' he cried them in housen,
    But no one would have them at tuppence a thousan';
    He cried them in Fore Street an' then on the Pier,
    But folks said as "Nothin' was tuppence too dear."

    Sure awnly a saftie would ever be carin'
    To pay for the fish when they'd had such a airin'!
    An' any regreater deserve to be stranded
    For carryin' fish to the port where they'm landed!

    So Sammy went homeways from Looe to Downderry,
    An' on to Torpoint an' acrost by the ferry,
    An' up along Plymouth, remarkable flish,
    He selled out to wance all his basket of fish.

    'Tis sartin that 'tis, an' can't be no 'tisser,
    Us knaws fish an' fish from the Rame to the Lizzer;
    What's hansun for Devon for us doesn' do,
    So don't 'ee be carryin' fish into Looe.




ON THE KAY (QUAY).


    As I was bendin' a hook one day
    A furriner* strawled along the kay.

    His cheeks was white as gannet's wing,
    An' he looked a whisht an' wakely thing.

    His clo'es was nate an' spickety span,
    But I sez to meself "Now there's a man!"

    An' I sez to meself "Now look at his legs,
    They'm like a couple o' crabpot pegs."

    An' I sez to meself "A bit of a squall
    Would blow his bones to the end of all."

    An' I sez--but I didn' had time to say
    For a scraitch went up from the end o' the kay,

    Where a cheeld was aswingin' jest afore,
    An' now there wasn' no cheeld no more,

    Then a'most afore I could see him go,
    That furriner sprang in the say below.

    He couldn' swim much, but he keeped afloat
    Jest while I tumbled into the boat,

    An' I hooked him up an' lugged him aboard,
    An' he had that cheeld clipped tight as cord.

    He trembled an' shook, he was wake an' white,
    But he awnly sez "Is the kid alright?"

    Sure 'nuff, an' he simmed to understand
    When I gived him a hearty shake o' the hand.

    I started abendin' the hook agen,
    An' I sez "There's different looks to men,

    Braave hearts in whisht poor bodies bide,
    An' looks don't count to what's inside."

        [Footnote *: To Cornishmen, non-Cornish are "furriners."]




RICHES


    Miss Tregear be a whisht poor woman,
      With her big fine house an' her carriage an' pair;
    Her keeps four maids, not countin' the tweeny,
      An' another especial to do her hair.

    Ruth Penwarne be a braave rich woman;
      Her lives in a cottage with a warpley door;
    Her've got four childer, not countin' the baby,
      An' there baint no tellin' but her might have more.

    Miss Tregear have a room for dinin',
      An' a room for drawin', where her doesn' draw,
    An' a room where books be shut in cupboards,
      An' others us don't knaw what they'm for.

    Ruth Penwarne have a little linhay,
      An' there her washes when the rain be nigh,
    But when 'tis sunny her goes in the garden,
      An' spreads her clo'es on the fuzzen to dry.

    Miss Tregear have a pile o' carpets;
      Her be frit of a moth or a speck o' dust;
    Her be feared that the sun will spile her curtains,
      An' the damp will make her fire-irons rust.

    Ruth Penwarne have a fine stone kitchen;
      An' two rooms aloft as be crammed with beds;
    Her don't have carpets, so they can't get dirty,
      An' her soon clanes up where the childer treads.

    Miss Tregear have a face that's lonely;
      Her be often sad, tho' her can't tell why;
    Her be allays asayin there's nothin' doin',
      An' thinks how slow all the days go by.

    Ruth Penwarne haven't time for thinkin',
      With makin' an' mendin' an' scrubbin' too,
    An' sartin sure, she'm a braave rich woman,
      With childer an' home an' her work to do.




A FIRESIDE SPELL


    "I've spanked young Tom an' sent him to bed, an' I reckon it sarves
        him right;
    For 'tisn no use asayin' things when the rope's end baint in sight,
    An' he shouldn' go steerin' out along when the tide is runnin' away,
    I've telled him afore; I cussn't keep on atellin' him every day."

    "Now when I was a boy--" "Iss, when you was a boy, you was jest
        such a scalliant too,
    All'ays athinkin' o' darin' things as you didn' belong to do.
    Climbin' they clifts for saygulls' eggs or clambering ower the crags
    An' heavin' tuffs at the cormorants, an' shyin' stones at the shags."

    "But when I was a boy--" "Iss, when you was a boy you worried you'm
        mother a mort,
    I mind how'ee tried to swim out to the Point, an' how in the race'ee
        was caught;
    I know they had dared'ee at doin' their dags, but dags didn' keep'ee
        afloat,
    An' the say 'ud have catched'ee that mornin', sure 'nuff, if they
        hadn' raced out with the boat."

    "Well, mebbe I was jest sich a limb, as'ee says, an' all'ays full
        sail for a game,
    An' I reckon as boys will be boys when they'm boys, but grows into
        men what are tame,
    An' when Tom is a feyther alarnin' _his_ son to feel the weight of
        _his_ hand,
    Mebbe he'll fergive me for spankin' him now, an' remember, an'
        understand."




CORNISH COMFORT


    "Don't 'ee cry, lil' maid, 'tis awnly a broken bussa;
    The jowds won't mend, best lave the attle abide.
    There's tummals o' bussas left, an' it might be wusser."
                But the lil' maid cried.

    "Don't 'ee cry, li'l maid. If fellows gets changy and chancy,
    Tomorrow a braaver will come than the totle who stepped.
    Floshed milk baint no use, an' it isn' wuth scrowlin', I fancy."
                Still the lil' maid wept.

    "Don't 'ee cry, li'l maid--Iss, the Say be a terrible net,
    An' 'tis wearisome waitin' a meetin' beyont the Big Tide;
    Jest try to catch sleep on you'm pellaw, mebbe you'll forget."
                Still the lil' maid cried.

    "Don't 'ee cry did un say? Well, youm feyther jest wanted to cheer'ee,
    But men doesn' knaw where the best cup o' comfort is kept.
    Cuddle down; cry it out on you'm own mother's bosom, me dearie."
                Then the lil' maid slept.




"I MIND ME"


    I mind me of the cottage where I used to bide
    Just above the harbour on the steep hill-side;
    Cobbled was the cause'y to the jasmined door
    That looked into the kitchen with the grey stone floor.

    I mind me of the dresser with the chainy white,
    An' the gurt big Bible as was read aSunday night;
    An' the old cloam tay-pot with the broken spout
    As wanted suant dealin' at the pourin' out.

    I mind the quiet mornin's an' the tickin' o' the clock,
    An' the brath upon the brandiss in the steamin' crock;
    An' the goin' of the shadows an' the comin' of the day,
    An' the startin' in the dimsey for the fishin' in the bay.

    I mind me of the night-times an' wind whisslin' drear,
    An' the scraitchin' o' the shingle when I couldn' slape for fear;
    An' the groanin' gropin' darkness with norra gleam nor star,
    An' the boom of the billows on the harbour bar.

    But the cosy chimley corner, I mind it best of all,
    With the smell of tatie pasties from the oven in the wall,
    An' the crackle of the fuzzen with the billies on the blow,
    An' the ring o' ruddy faces in the hearth-fire glow.

    The cottage still is lookin' from the hill across the bay;
    Above the cobbled cause'y swings the jasmine spray;
    But the gleam o' ruddy faces an' the hearth-fire glow
    Went out in the darkness long long ago.




"SURE 'NUFF"


    Sure 'nuff, 'twas good when I was a lad
      To be in a boat in the bay;
    To whiffle the mack'rel, hook the chad,
      And haul at the nets away;
    'Twas good to feel the wind in my face,
      An' scud through a tumble o' foam,
    An' see far off the twinklin' lights
      Of the lil' grey port, an' home.
    An' 'twas good to climb in the craggy clifts
      Where the guillemot raired her brood,
    An' go with a laugh in the heart all day;
      Sure 'nuff, 'twas good!

    Sure 'nuff, 'twas good when I wandered away,
      An' saw that the world was wide,
    In the wunnerful lands beyont the say,
      An' the ports where the big ships ride.
    'Twas good to meet men who could strive an' seek,
      An' didn' knaw nort o' fear,
    An' hail 'em a word in passin' by,
      An' answer 'em back with a cheer.
    'Twas good to be sailin' the way o' the world,
      An' standin' where strong men stood,
    An' counted awhile as a man among men;
      Sure 'nuff, 'twas good!

    Sure 'nuff, 'tis good, with voyagin' done,
      To be anchored in port at last,
    An' watch the boys go, one by one,
      As I did in days long past;
    'Tis good to set in the cottage door,
      An' gaze at the sky an' say,
    An' knaw that I fared on the flood tide once,
      Now 'tis fallin' away;
    An' 'tis good to have time to make ready to sail
      On the voyage that leads to rest;
    An' I trust a Pilot Who will not fail.
      Sure 'nuff, 'tis best!




II.




THE GARMENT OF TIME


    The giant Image of Eternal Time
      Sits throned amidst the Infinite of Space;
    And through the aeons, passing chime by chime,
              Heeds not our Race.

    Meanwhile we weave upon his robes' array
      Embroideries of doubts and hopes and fears,
    The golden threads of laughter by the way,
              Grey threads of tears.

    Careless sits Time of garment grey or gold,
      Although our passionate labours never cease
    Till weaving hands are weary and we grow old.
              And pass to peace.

    And who that gazes on that garb of Time
      Shall in the far light of a distant day
    Catch aught of colour of song or rune of rhyme?
              Shall all be grey?

    Yet till the end fall--and the day close,
      Let me weave in the web of pain and the woof of tears
    The colour of sun-bright seas and the red of the rose,
              In my Loom of Years.




IN A GARDEN


    A twilight peace droops tenderly,
    The discords of the day depart,
    And through the hush there comes to be
    A harmony within the heart;
      And waking to the quivering strings
      Spirits are touched to finer things.

    Sweet hand-fast silences of eve,
    When love's supremest note is heard
    In symphonies the spirits weave
    Beyond the need of mortal word,
      O! may we keep your music when
      We pace the noisy haunts of men.

    Give us the strength for daily stress
    Of toil about the busy world;
    Give us a balm to bitterness
    From wounds when cruel shafts are hurled;
      And give us courage in a sense
      Of Love's divine omnipotence.

    For Life can never lonely be
    Since Love has broken all the bars
    That stayed the soul from unity
    With Heaven and its ten thousand stars,
      Whose music falls sublimely grand
      Through silences of hand in hand.




SORROW'S COURAGE


    I have loved Beauty. I have seen the sun
      Flash snowy mountain tops to shimmer of gold;
    I have heard songs where little waters run
      Chiming with music that the stars have rolled.

    I have loved Beauty. I have seen the sea
      Fringe with its silver all the golden shore;
    Have heard it crooning music ceaselessly
      To ancient tunes frayed from the tempest's roar.

    I have loved Beauty. I have seen a smile
      Shine from sweet eyes, fair as the sea's own blue,
    Whose magic lashes seemed to lift awhile
      To send a kindly comrade spirit through.

    I have loved Beauty. But nor sun nor sea
      Nor stars have charactered God's chiefest grace;
    Beyond all other things there beacons me
      The star-led pilgrim courage of your face.




A CHOOSING


    Under the turf the blind mole creeps,
      And moulds the mounds of molehill kind.
    Above, the skylark soars and sweeps,
      The song is swept upon the wind.

    To-morrow's eyes the mounds may see;
      To-morrow they will mark the plain.
    But none shall hear the ecstasy
      Of song, that cannot be again.

    Well built, old mole! A little heap
      To linger to a later day!
    Something to show you once did creep
      In darkness through your earthy way.

    Yet with the lark's glad song of Love
      May mine on wandering winds be hurled,
    In happy regions far above
      The dull mad molehills of the world.

    Still let my song be all in all,
      Though Earth-born discords soon destroy,
    And on no mortal ear may fall
      The music of immortal joy.

    Break, Spirit, break to boundless things
      Beyond the molehill and the clod,
    And catch the glory of the strings
      That tune the harmonies of God.




STAR SIGNS


    Primal swirl of the Chaos, out of your nebulous Night
      Eddied the primal tides, as the Mind of God decreed,
    And the Word of the ultimate Source spake forth "Let there be Light,"
      And all the Firmament blazed with the dust of the star-sown seed.

    Strong and stately and splendid, thronging the limitless spaces.
      Ye are the silver signs to a House not made with hands;
    Ye are the Mystic Scroll, where the Mighty Maker traces
      Thoughts that the passionate poet dimly understands.

    Day, with its drouth and drosses, shrivels our fragile souls,
      And, witched with its transient gauds, to the perilous earth we
          cling,
    But ever the tender night its infinite page unrolls,
      And the star-led mind aspires to the Throne of the star-robed King.




THE OLD KNIGHT'S SONG


    My lady lives afar in the fair white tower
      Hid, like a nest, high among branches swaying.
    "Peaceful thoughts be her portion, dreams her dower,"
          Here am I on my knees, praying.

    To the Winds of the World from the hills and the sea far blowing,
      That they carry their strength to her heart for sorrow's staying,
    That they bring clear hopes and the gladness of freedom flowing,
          Here am I on my knees, praying.

    To the Lamp of Day, that the aureate beauty breaking
      Find answering smiles in her eyes for the fair displaying
    Of colour of gold on the way my Lady is taking,
          Here am I on my knees, praying.

    To the sentinel Stars through the infinite spaces sweeping,
      Guarding the night, and terrors of darkness slaying,
    That they bring sweet Peace to the dreams of my Lady sleeping,
          Here am I, on my knees praying.

    But my casque is rusted with Time, and my breastplate battered,
      My hauberk worn with ancient fighting and fraying;
    Dull is my shield, my banner faded and tattered.
          Here am I on my knees, praying.

    Here at an outpost, here is my patrol duty:
      My Lady's train is for Knights of a fair arraying;
    Only from far may I guard her, loving her beauty:
          Here am I on my knees, praying.

    Wandering lights have I followed, the one Light questing,
      I have wearied through difficult paths and long delaying;
    Perilous peaks have I scaled with feet unresting;
          Here I am on my knees, praying.

    Star-like my Lady shines in her fair white tower.
      "Let nothing come nigh her to lead to her joy's betraying,
    No cloud dull aught of the golden dreams, her dower."
          Here am I on my knees, praying.




FEALTY


    When my Lady hath Pleasure and friends to spare,
      And riot of roses strewed in her path of days,
    And laughter ringing carillons into the air,
      She needs not me; I travel the lonely ways.

    When my Lady hath Youth uplifting a song
      Like the twitter of birds in a springtime hawthorn bough,
    And round her the notes of a merry-mad music throng,
      She needs not me; my music is sad and low.

    But when my Lady hath Sorrow to stress her heart,
      And Pain brings up to her eyes the ghosts of fear,
    And the music of Youth, and Laughter and Joy depart,
      Then she will need me: and lo! am I not here?

    Here I stand at the gateway and vigil keep,
      Waiting the summoning sob or the calling sigh;
    Swift to assuage her tears should my Lady weep;
      Happy if sorrow for ever may pass her by.




TREASURE TROVE


    You did not know that, gazing on your face,
      I took its Beauty to my heart for ever,
    Where it illumines every day with grace,
        Though Time and tides may sever.

    You did not know that, looking in your eyes,
      I found their Truth, beyond all need for speaking,
    And knew their gentleness a paradise
        Worth all a wide world's seeking.

    You did not know that every word you spoke
      Told me the Courage in your heart abiding,
    And bade me watch, where through the cloud-rifts broke
        One steady star for guiding.

    You did not know. But in my heart I know,
      The Beauty, Truth, and Courage that enfold you:
    And when we part I do not let you go:
        Thus in my heart I hold you.




ROSES AND RUE


    You gave me roses, you have given me Rue.
      Yet to the Roses memoried fragrance clings,
    And in their faded petals I renew
      The first fresh grace of unforgotten things.

    God give you Roses all along the way.
      So will I wear contentedly the Rue;
    And when I greet you with a smile, I pray
      Shade of my sorrow never fall on you.




DOGMA


    Reason's unreasoned castle of defence
      With turrets towering into far-off skies,
    Whose superstructure, solid and immense,
      Is built on shadows and on mysteries.




CREED


    Not with light straws, swift swept upon the stream,
      Not with light foam, blown up along the shore,
    In calm unmeasured deeps my jewels gleam,
      Hid in my heart of hearts for evermore.




RELIGION


    The one cool joy of all life's broiling day;
      The one sweet star that gleams where saints have trod;
    The one clear stream beside the dusty way
                      That leads to God.




PIETY


    A quiet garment for eternal wear,
      Designed above frail fashion's mortal dress,
    Worked with a web of faith, a woof of prayer,
      Coloured with love and fair with gentleness.




BLUE SKY

(From the French of Marcel Doran).


    O! weary waste of shoreless blue
      Where weary wing may never rest!
    O! awful brightness burning through
      The barrier of the gate of rest!
        My spirit longs to reach the strand
        Of sorrow-soothing shadowland.

    But what can this poor spirit wear
      To hide the naked wounds, pain-kissed
    Beneath the searching, ceaseless glare
      Of cloudless burning amethyst?
        Where can the sad grey spirit fly
        The unrelenting agony?

    O! for some shadow-haunted stream
      Where tired eyes might fall asleep,
    And in the peace of darkling dream
      See Sorrow's pageant homeward creep,
        Feel angel hands with white caress
        Soothe eyelids dark with heaviness!

    O! for some minster where the balm
      Of cooling touch my wounds might heal;
    Where always dwells a Sabbath calm,
      Made sweeter by the solemn peal
        Of bells, that trembling fill the air
        With noble notes of perfect prayer!




SHADOWS


    Shadows, the pale grey wings of night,
          Sweep over the sky,
      And low in the west the lingering light
          Wanes--like a sigh
      From the fervent heart of the day
          Passing away:
              Then afar
              Shineth a star.

    Shadows, the pale grey wings of Death,
          Sweep over my heart;
      And far in the dark a voice calleth,
          "Come ye, depart."
      There lingers no light from the day
          Passing away,
              But afar
              Shineth a Star!




WHEN I WAS A LAD


    When I was a lad in Petherick
      I often lay me down
    And built a beautiful city
      And called it London Town.
    I filled its streets with heroes
      Beautiful strong and wise,
    Men who were kings and princes,
      Women with kindly eyes.
    I spent the gold of the charlock
      For paving the city street;
    I saw bright flags awaving
      Over the billowing wheat;
    And loud in the brown bee's buzzing
      I heard the far-off hum
    Of the mart and the busy merchants,
      And the wharves where the big ships come.
    When I was a lad in Petherick
      I often lay me down,
    And built this wonderful city,
      And called it London Town.

           *       *       *       *       *

    Now I'm a man in London--
      Golden dreams I had
    Of a golden city of London
      Long since when I was a lad.
    Here on the long grey pavement
      I seek that city still
    But there isn't much gold in Fleet Street,
      Or glamour on Ludgate Hill.
    For the hurrying men look haggard,
      And the women have weary eyes,
    And the voices of pale-faced children
      Mingle in fretful cries.

    There's gold in the field of charlock,
      There's gold on the billowing wheat,
    And the bee sucks golden honey
      In lanes where the flowers are sweet.
    And small ships sail in the distance
      To a golden bourne in the west,
    And the gentle peace of twilight
      Is the purest gold of rest.

           *       *       *       *       *

    Dreams of the man in London!
      Useless dreams and sad,
    Of the far-off village of Petherick
      And the far-off Cornish lad.




A CALL


    Let us go out to the Garden of Pan, and hear what the Pipes are
        playing;
    Let us go out where the ancient hills mother the rivers that run to
        the sea;
    Let us go out where the wind wanders, tuning amid the trees
        swaying,
    Let us go out to the wider world where the thoughts of men are free.

    There on the hills the eye may see the changeless Beauty changing
    On sun-splashed grass and wavering corn, verdant valley and rolling
        down,
    Clouds steal up from a far-off tryst, like Titans into battalions
        ranging,
    And the splendid Sun-god marching on to crown the world with a
        golden crown.

    Here in the City the voices are hoarse. Here is calling and crying,
    Lust and longing for pride of place, vanity, pomp, and the strain of
         strife;
    Here in the City sobs arise from the battered hosts of the falling
        and dying,
    Who know not Peace, nor the End of Peace; who know not Life, nor the
         End of Life.

    Let us away from the webbed town-tangle, where monstrous Mammon is
        reigning
    Over the small cheap souls of slaves, sudden to cringe and swift to
        serve;
    Let us go out from the clanging Gates, the squalour of strife and the
        sordid straining,
    Let us go out by the open road with feet that falter not nor swerve.

    Come! and away to the Garden of Pan, and hear what the Pipes are
        playing!
    Hark to the Voice of a splendid Peace calling from hill and river
        and sea!
    Come! and away to the old Earth Mother, giver of gifts without the
        praying,
    There, in the hills Her throne is set, and the thoughts of men are
        free.




THE RETURN


    I must go down to the little grey port that watches the western sea,
    And wander again in the winding street that climbs the windy hill,
    There I shall find in a jasmined porch a door set wide for me,
            There I shall have my will.

    For a little window looks out by day on a blue unsleeping tide,
    Where brown-sailed boats sweep up and down for the harvest of the deep;
    And nightly beacons a twinkling light to wanderers scattered wide,
            And guides them home to sleep.

    And the flowing tide comes flooding in and chants around the quay
    A roaring song from the Ocean's heart of the lands that are fair and
        far;
    And the ebbing tide goes sobbing out, murmuring wistfully
            Over the harbour bar.

    There I shall stand among men who are strong with the strength of
        the wind and the wave,
    And hold simple talk with men who are wise with the wisdom of sky
        and sea;
    There I shall find in a patient endurance the sure-set faith of the
        brave,
            There shall my heart be free.




IN THE BAY


    The schooner swells its sails for the far-off seas,
      The steamer pounds proudly far away,
    But I'd sooner be ascudding in a ten-knot breeze
      In my little lug and mizzen in the bay.

    The schooner sings the wind's song from Bristol to Brazil,
      The steamer knows the whole World's way,
    But I can see a cottage on a windy hill
      From my little lug and mizzen in the bay.

    The schooner's up to hatches with her pig-iron, coal, and mud,
      The steamer, plugged with cargo, heaves away,
    But I can whiffle mackerel as through the waves I scud
      In my little lug and mizzen in the bay.

    O! living in a schooner is like living in a tree,
      And a steamer's like a big hotel to-day,
    If I had my choice of sailing, I know I'd soonest be
      In my little lug and mizzen in the bay.




SEA-FOAM


    The once-flashed beauty borne on a breaking wave
      Dies to a requiem sung on the sounding shore;
    Beyond all reach of mortal power to save
      In spray-crowned glory it passes for evermore.

    Would that the heart could capture and hold and keep
      The glory of beauty, sped in a moment's space!
    Could fix for ever the splendour and strength and sweep
      Of the wind-wild wave, in its riotous rapturous race!

    Brave brief hopes, are you not sped as the wave--
      Sped to a requiem sighed on a wreck-strewn shore?
    While memory murmurs in dreams that you once were brave,
      And sadness softly sighs that you are no more.




ECHOES


    By the way of blowing roses, in the laughter-laden years,
      Happy lads and lightsome lasses tripped the song-sweet lanes with me;
    Gladness woke the hillside echoes in the sound of ringing cheers,
      Rapture rippled on the breezes sweeping from the rippled sea.

    Happy lads have left the hillside for a bourne beyond the bay,
      Lightsome lasses know not laughter hid beneath enduring stone;
    Echoes of a strangled sorrow in the sea mist far away,
      Haunt the lanes where song is silent and the roses all are blown.




A BALLADE OF CORNWALL


    Westward where the latest sunbeam lingers on the brow of night,
      Lies a land of old romance enshrined in amethystine sea,
    Where from cairn and cromlech come, to eyes illumed by subtle sight,
      Fays and pixies, sprites and gnomes, in pomp of faery pageantry.
      Shining forms of ghostly knights, and dream-like dames of chivalry
    Gleam among the gorse and furze, and pace the reedy valleys low,
    Moving through a magic mist amid the days of long ago--
      Knights and ladies living still in trusted legendary lore
    Lilt their lovelorn lays or speed their clamorous challenge to the foe
      In the land where ceaseless surges smite the crag-crowned
         rock-strewn shore.

    Gauntly glooms Tintagel Castle from its frowning, dizzy height,
      Where the fair Iseult is crooning happy songs in thoughtless glee;
    Softly falls the creeping footstep, sudden flash the sparks of spite,
      Lifeless lies the love-led Tristram lowly at his lady's knee,
      Past the stress of wandering sorrow, past the philtred esctasy.
    Then there breaks the sound of slaughter, clanging blow on clanging
        blow,
    Clash of brand and crash of axe, while shrieks shrill up from deeps
        below,
      Where the sea's majestic music mixes with the mortal roar.
    Still the ghostly field engages, still the tides of battle flow
      In the land where ceaseless surges smite the crag-crowned
        rock-strewn shore.

    Down the rugged slopes of Rough Tor ancient heroes armour dight,
      Charge across the bridge of slaughter where the mist hangs heavily.
    There the brand Excalibur goes flashing through the last dim fight
      Wielded by the stainless king who fighting falls his wierd to dree.
      Then across the mere there come a silent, shadowy, queenly, three,
    Golden crowned, who bear him off with bitter tears of quenchless woe
    Unto valleyed Avilon, where falls not rain, nor hail, nor snow,
      Nor the faith unfaithful brings a dolorous doom for ever-more.
    Still across the dream lit waters moves the stately shadow show
      In the land where ceaseless surges smite the crag-crowned
        rock-strewn shore.


_ENVOI_


    Friend, these smiling buds of fancy you may gather as you go.
    Still the fairy bells are ringing in the evening's afterglow;
    Still the questing knights adventure over mountain, stream, and moor;
    All the ancient splendid beauty understanding hearts may know
    In the land where ceaseless surges smite the crag-crowned
        rock-strewn shore.




THE FISHERMAN'S PRAYER


    Pray God, hear our prayer;
    Keep us in Thy calm of care;
    Lead us where the haul be good,
    So our fishing find us food;
    Give us strength our nets to haul
    And safe to harbour bring us all.

    Pray God, Whose Son did know
    Fishermen and sea below,
    And Who calmed the tempest when
    Terror came to fishermen,
    Hear us when for help we call,
    And safe to harbour bring us all.

    Pray God, Who made the sea,
    Hear the fishers' prayer to Thee.
    Steer us clear of shoal and reef,
    So our boat may bear no grief;
    Bear us up through storm and squall,
    And safe to harbour bring us all.

    Pray God, Who shines afar
    Like a friendly pilot star,
    Help us set our course aright
    By Thy Holy Beacon Light,
    For the Port where live the blest,
    And in Thy Harbour give us rest.




DISTINCTIVE NEW POETRY

The notable nature of the Erskine Macdonald books may be gauged from the
following current list:


Cor Cordium

     A Book of Love Poems. By Alfred Williams. Large 8vo, cloth, 3s.
     6d. net.


Nature and other Poems

     By Alfred Williams (Author of "Songs in Wiltshire.") Large 8vo,
     cloth, 5s. net.

_The price of "Songs in Wiltshire," (published at 5s.) has been advanced
to 7s. 6d. net. "Poems in Wiltshire" has gone out of print._

_The Times._--"Wonder and astonishment are great words with great
associations. But there are few men living in England today of whom they
can be more fairly used, in their most exact and literal sense, than of
Mr. Alfred Williams...."

_The Observer._--"Those who love poetry look out for the work of Alfred
Williams. His poems have the fragrance and simplicity that come from a
strong, sincere mind that is in close touch with nature."


Enchantments

     By John Gurdon (Author of "Erinna," "Dramatic Lyrics," etc.)
     Large crown 8vo, cloth, 2s. 6d. net.

_The Times._--"Finely-coloured nature pictures or eloquent expressions
of passionate emotion, with a recurrent note of melancholy."

_Manchester Guardian._--"Mr. Gurdon's verses are always accomplished,
their rhythm is extremely sensitive and well sustained, their imagery
vivid and harmonious."

_The Outlook._--"There is no mistaking who are Mr. Gurdon's masters. He
has spent his days and nights with Swinburne and Keats, and learnt from
them the intoxication of fine rhythms and passionate phrases.... Through
all the verses in this little volume there is that thing which only the
real poets have--a sense of freedom in verse and a great joy in writing
it."


ERSKINE MACDONALD, London, W.C.




Transcriber's Note:

Punctuation has been normalized. Italics have been denoted using
underscores, and small capitals have been replaced by capitals in this
text version.

This book contains dialect.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Cornish Catches, by Bernard Moore

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CORNISH CATCHES ***

***** This file should be named 38565.txt or 38565.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/5/6/38565/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Stephanie McKee and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
